 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CYBERSECURITY  
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  
TOOLKIT 
How to Build a Strong Cybersecurity Workforce 

 

Updated November 2016 

WHAT IS CYBERSECURITY? 

 

Cybersecurity refers to the technologies and techniques used to protect information and 
systems from being stolen, compromised or attacked. This includes unauthorized or criminal 
use of electronic data, attacks on networks and computers, and viruses and malicious 
codes. Cybersecurity is a national priority and critical to the well-being of all organizations. 
Start building your cybersecurity workforce today. Together, we can build a skilled and cyber- 
capable workforce to meet the cybersecurity challenges of the future.  

 

ABOUT PLANNING YOUR CYBERSECURITY 
WORKFORCE 

 

Cybersecurity professionals have unique skills, are in short supply, and are vital to our 
nation’s security. As a result, competition for talent is fierce and establishing a strong team 
is essential. This requires organizations to tailor how they plan for their cybersecurity 
workforce so they have the right people in the right positions. The Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) is committed to strengthening the workforce to help ensure we have skilled 
cybersecurity workers today and a strong pipeline of future cybersecurity leaders. 
This kit will help you strengthen your organization through tools to help you understand your 
organization’s cybersecurity workforce risks and take inventory of your workforce, templates 
to create your own cybersecurity career paths, and resources to recruit and retain top 
cybersecurity talent. Before getting started, familiarize yourself with key cybersecurity 
workforce design concepts and best practices:  
Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Diagnostic  
 
Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model 
 
Best Practices for Planning a Cybersecurity 
Workforce 
 

National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework 
 
DHS CMSI PushButtonPD™ Tool 
 
Cybersecurity Training Catalog 
 

 

HOW TO USE THE TOOLKIT 

 

This kit has the resources and information you need to plan, build, and advance your 
cybersecurity workforce. How you use this toolkit is up to you: use the kit to start 
conversations with managers about building their cybersecurity teams, talk with employees 
about professional development, and/or integrate the concepts found in this toolkit into 
strategic planning efforts for future staffing needs. This kit is meant for Leaders and 
Program/Function Managers in large government and private organizations, including 
Human Resources, Information Security, Risk Management, Information Technology and 
Cybersecurity. For more information email niccs@hq.dhs.gov. 

 

1 

WHAT’S INSIDE? 

 

This kit has a number of tools to help you build your cybersecurity workforce. All of the 
content can be found online at https://niccs.us-cert.gov/. Adapt the content for your 
organization’s specific cybersecurity needs. 
 
 

 

Assess Your Organization’s Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Readiness 
I need to determine how ready my organization is to conduct cybersecurity workforce 
planning. 
 

 

How to Plan for your Cybersecurity Team 
I need to determine my cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance. 
I need help inventorying my cybersecurity workforce. 
I need to determine and address my cybersecurity workforce gaps. 
 

 

What Should a Cybersecurity Team Look Like?  
I need a better understanding of the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework. 
I need to create a cybersecurity position description. 
I need help identifying traits of high-performing cyber professionals. 
I need guidance for how to recruit cyber talent. 
 

 

Develop Your People 
I need help creating cybersecurity career paths. 
I need tips for retaining cyber staff at every level. 
I need suggestions for professional development opportunities for my cyber workforce. 

 

2 

P 
R 
E 
P 
A 
R 
E 

ASSESS YOUR ORGANIZATION’S 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE PLANNING 
READINESS 

 
A first step in preparing to build your cybersecurity workforce is having a shared vision for 
organizing your cybersecurity workforce against cybersecurity work. Having a common 
understanding supports leaders in responding to changing environments – giving you data 
to better adjust resources, see patterns of work, and highlight areas of potential risk. This 
is especially important in the ever-changing environment of cybersecurity.  
To understand your organization’s readiness to begin assessing your cybersecurity 
workforce, explore the Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability Maturity Model (CMM). 
The CMM is a self-evaluation tool to help organizations evaluate the maturity of their 
cybersecurity workforce planning capability.  
 

 

 
How Mature is Your Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability? 
 
Each organization is unique. Some may not need their workforce planning capability to 
reach the Optimizing state. The CMM helps you identify with one of these levels and 
determine where to best apply your organization’s planning resources: 

Workforce Planning Maturity Levels 

 
LIMITED 

The most basic level, with a 
cybersecurity workforce 
planning capability in its 
infancy. For example, this 
organization may have 
limited established 
processes, lack of clear 
planning guidance, and 
limited data and analysis 
methods. 

 

PROGRESSING 
This level indicates some 
aspects of cybersecurity 
workforce planning 
throughout the organization 
that have started to perform 
and establish some 
infrastructure to support 
planning efforts. 

 

OPTIMIZING 

The highest level of maturity, 
indicates workforce planning 
capabilities that are fully 
developed, are integrated 
with other business 
processes, and can support 
different levels of workforce 
and workload analysis. 

3 

 

 

P 
L 
A 
N 

HOW TO PLAN FOR YOUR CYBERSECURITY 
TEAM 

 
Your organization must ensure protection against threats to information systems. 
Unchecked risk puts any organization in jeopardy. Security breaches are often caused not 
by breakdown in technology, but by breakdown in organizational structure or workforce. 
To plan for protection, you need a good understanding of your current cybersecurity 
workforce as well as a strategy for the structure and management of that workforce for 
the future.  
Below are the first five (5) steps to start planning for your cybersecurity team, including 
developing an inventory of your current cybersecurity workforce, understanding workload 
and staffing levels, and beginning to address any gaps. 
1.  Explore Your Cybersecurity Risks: Gain foundational knowledge about your 

cybersecurity workforce risk and the extent to which your organization can tolerate 
the potential outcomes. Increased risk places greater demands on your workforce 
and drives much of your future cybersecurity workforce needs.  
 
To help identify your general cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance, and tailor 
your cybersecurity workforce planning to better predict future need, use the 
Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Diagnostic. Separate sections for government and 
private organizations are included. While the Diagnostic will help identify general 
cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance (i.e. your risk profile), it is not a 
substitute for in-depth, organization-specific risk assessment and analysis in 
collaboration with leadership, human capital experts and cybersecurity managers.  
 

 

 

2.  Inventory Your Cybersecurity Workforce: Work with your cybersecurity managers to 

quantify the size of your cybersecurity team, number of vacancies, identify the team’s 
skills, and capture the activities they perform.  
 

→  Government organizations – Access the Office of Personnel Management’s 

(OPM) Information Technology Workforce Assessment for Cybersecurity 
(ITWAC) Summary Report to see a count of staff performing cybersecurity 
work, as well as training needs and workforce demographics (e.g., proficiency 
levels, background).  

→  Private organizations – A tool to help inventory your cybersecurity workforce is 

forthcoming. This toolkit will be updated to provide this tool. 

4 

 

 

P 
L 
A 
N 

Use the results as a baseline to understand the current state of your organization’s 
cybersecurity workforce. Refresh your workforce analysis on an annual basis.  
 
As you take inventory of your cybersecurity staff skills, also consider the following 
recommended characteristics of high-performing cybersecurity teams. Use these 
characteristics as an additional guide to determine current and future staffing needs. 

Agile: Attacks 
can emerge at 

any time -

teams must be 
ready to change 

course and 

solve problems 

quickly.

Multifunctional: 

Teams need 

diverse 

knowledge and 
skills to perform 
many activities.

Dynamic: To 
respond to new 
threats, teams 
need to always 
learn new skills 

and 

methodologies 

to secure 
systems.

Flexible: Strong 
teams can shift 

priorities to 
meet the 

challenge of the 

day.

Informal: Cyber 

teams favor 
flexible work 
hours and 

shifting duties 

to remain 

engaged and on 

top of their 

game.

 
3.  Determine Any Gaps: Evaluate your organization’s risk profile and workforce planning 

Characteristics of High-Performing Cybersecurity Teams 

 

 

recommendations from step 1 (Workforce Planning Diagnostic) against your 
workforce inventory in step 2 to begin to determine future needs and close gaps. For 
example:  

  List the skills needed to meet your team’s workload and the types/number of 

professionals you need to develop internally or recruit externally 

  Determine hiring targets for vacancies and initiate recruiting (see Build 

section for cybersecurity-specific tips) 

 

4.  Address the Gaps: Below are examples of steps you can take to address the gaps 

identified in your organization’s cybersecurity workforce inventory. 

  Consider adjusting the mix of positions and skills that make up your 

cybersecurity workforce 

  Search the NICCS Training Catalog to identify training for your workforce:  

  

  Determine if you can assign additional job duties to existing staff 
  Develop a program to create future cybersecurity leaders 
  Convene an internal panel of decision makers. Consider including: 

o  Senior leaders 
o  Financial and budgetary representatives 
o  Human capital experts 
o  Cybersecurity managers 

  Consider aligning the workforce planning process to your organization’s 

budgetary process to ensure funding for cybersecurity positions 
 

5.  Review and Update: Once you have completed the first four steps, revisit the CMM in 
the Prepare section to determine additional ways to further your planning capability. 

 

5 

B
U 
I 
L 
D 

WHAT SHOULD A CYBERSECURITY TEAM 
LOOK LIKE? 

Framework? 

What is the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce 

The Workforce Framework is the foundation 
for all cyber workforce development activities 
and was created to increase the size and 
capability of the U.S. cybersecurity workforce. 

 
One way to ensure you have the right 
cybersecurity team is to align to current 
national standards. The NICE Cybersecurity 
Workforce Framework (Workforce 
Framework) is the standard for defining 
your cybersecurity workforce. Align position 
descriptions, job duties, and skill 
requirements to the Workforce Framework 
to operate successfully. For example, you 
can use Specialty Area definitions, as well 
as Tasks and Knowledge, Skills and Abilities 
(KSAs), to develop position descriptions and 
establish competency models. 
An updated version of the Workforce Framework will be released in 2017 as Special 
Publication 800-181 by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). It will 
include a new layer of specificity – Work Roles – which will provide lists of KSAs that roles 
must have in order to perform a specific set of Tasks. 50+ Work Roles will be organized 
under Specialty Areas. With this addition, organizations will more easily be able to align 
positions to the Workforce Framework. 

• Organizes cybersecurity work into 7 
Categories and 33 Specialty Areas 
Identifies the Tasks and Knowledge, Skills, 
and Abilities (KSAs) required to complete 
cyber work 

•

1.  Explore the Workforce Framework.   

 

 

2.  Align your Cybersecurity Workforce to National Standards: Understand how each 

position aligns to the Workforce Framework to uncover potential skill gaps. 

o  Choose from the Work Roles (found in the Workforce Framework) for each 
o  Compare current tasks performed to additional tasks recommended for each 

position that performs cybersecurity work  

    

Specialty Area 

 

 

3.  Use the DHS CMSI PushButtonPD™ Tool to create custom cyber-specific positions for 

your organization.  
 
Federal organizations can use the DHS CMSI PushButtonPD™ Tool to quickly draft a 
federal employee Position Description (PD) without extensive training or prior 

 

6 

knowledge of position classification. This tool creates a robust hiring package that 
can easily be integrated into existing agency HR processes.  
 

 

 
Non-Federal organizations can use the following template to populate the highlighted 
fields with information that meets the needs of your organization (you can find 
Specialty Areas and Task examples in the Workforce Framework). 

 
Position Title 
Primary Specialty Area(s)  
Secondary Specialty Area(s)  

[Fill in Position Title] 
[Fill in Specialty Area(s)]  
[Fill in Specialty Area(s)]  

Current Tasks Performed (i.e., specific job duties)  

Additional Tasks recommended by Specialty Area  

 
 

 

What to Look for in High-Performing Cybersecurity Professionals 
 
Another important part of building a cybersecurity team is knowing the unique 
characteristics you want to add to your team. Whether your organization is looking to hire 
one cybersecurity professional or build a whole team, understanding what makes a 
cybersecurity professional tick is important to attracting - and keeping - the right team. 
The table below features many of the traits of top cybersecurity professionals. (Also refer 
to the list on page five of this kit for high-performing team characteristics).  
Review this table and consider if individuals on your team with skills from the Workforce 
Framework also have these traits; how might they expand their skills to fill your need?  
Also, think about how you might change your approach to attracting cybersecurity 
professionals to better identify individuals with these attributes.  
For example, use these questions to interview candidates for your cybersecurity team. 

7 

B
U 
I 
L 
D 

 

 

 

 
 

 

B
U 
I 
L 
D 

 

 
How to Recruit Top Cybersecurity Talent 
 
Use the Cybersecurity Recruitment Activity Checklist to build a cybersecurity workforce 
that meets the needs of your organization.   
 

 

Cybersecurity Recruitment Activity Checklist 
 
Use the checklist to recruit top cybersecurity talent.   

IDENTIFY VACANT POSITION(S)  

  Work with hiring managers and workforce planners to determine cybersecurity 

recruiting needs  

  Identify cybersecurity-specific hiring flexibilities (e.g., hiring bonuses)  
  Use the workforce planning tools and cybersecurity traits profiles included in this 

toolkit to identify target population characteristics, work preferences, technical 
background, and current cybersecurity trends to increase job interest 

EVALUATE POTENTIAL SOURCES FOR THE TALENT PIPELINE 

  Create a comprehensive list of current and potential recruiting alliances that align with 

organizational goals and resources (e.g., Centers of Academic Excellence (CAEs)), 
colleges, universities, cybersecurity competitions, and Veterans transition programs) 
  Prioritize where and how to recruit cybersecurity professionals (e.g. online job search 

engines, hackathons, cyber competitions, personal referrals, social media)  

  Identify current cybersecurity employees who can engage with potential candidates at 

recruiting events (e.g., job fairs, campus recruiting events)  

 

8 

  Establish an employee referral program to recruit talented and trusted cybersecurity 

professionals from your cybersecurity employees’ personal networks (e.g., 
colleges/universities, alma maters, professional associations)  

DEVELOP MARKETING STRATEGY & MATERIALS  

  Develop a list of advantages and benefits of the position(s) and your organization (i.e., 
selling points) to incorporate into outreach efforts and materials. Think about the trait 
profiles on the previous page to appeal to the best talent  

  Highlight key technology, tools, and IT capabilities to attract the right cybersecurity 

talent for your organization’s specific risk profile from page four of this kit 

  Develop materials (e.g., slick sheets, job announcements, social media messages)   
  Consider using interactive communication tools, such as social media (e.g., Twitter), 

that live where cybersecurity professionals do – the internet – to recruit  

  Schedule and announce interaction opportunities (e.g. webinars, live Tweeting) 

SELECT AND HIRE 

  Use the cybersecurity trait profiles and interview questions provided in this toolkit to 

evaluate non-technical characteristics of cybersecurity professionals  

  If a decision to hire candidate is made, create a competitive offer package to attract 

top cybersecurity talent, considering the development items in the next section 

 

9 

B
U 
I 
L 
D 

 

 

Develop Your People 
 
Retain Staff at Every Level 
 
Whether entry level, mid-career or seasoned cybersecurity professionals, here are some 
simple steps you can take to recognize, develop and retain staff at every level. Use the 
profiles below as a guide to understand which of the steps outlined in the Advance 
section will best support the specific type of cybersecurity professional your organization 
is looking to recruit and retain.  

 

Entry-Level Cyber 

Professional 

Mid-Career Cyber 

Professional 

Seasoned or Executive 

Cyber Professional 

•  College, graduate, post-

•  Professionals with 

•  Demonstrated cyber 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

graduate, and career 
changers new to 
cybersecurity.  
Focused on learning cyber 
technical skillset and job 
requisites, acclimating to 
organizational environment, 
establishing support 
network, and gaining work 
experience. 

• 

 

 

Tips to Retain Entry-Level Staff  
  Foster an environment 

where diverse perspectives 
are welcome 

  Encourage two-way dialogue 

for open communication 

  Provide frequent feedback 

on job performance 

  Ensure that cyber 

professionals have quality 
supervision and mentorship 

  Provide opportunities to 

acquire new skills through 
established training, 
challenging job 
assignments, and career 
pathing 

 

  Recognize staff for strong 

work performance 

previous cyber related 
experience and skills.  
Focused on shaping 
career path and 
advancing technical 
skillset through job 
rotations, certifications, 
developing technology, 
and supervisory 
opportunities.  

• 

 

expertise and progressive 
leadership experience. 
Focused on expanding 
technical expertise, making 
contributions to technical 
domain and broader cyber 
security community, and 
leadership development. 

• 

 

 

 

 

 

Tips to Retain Mid-Career 
Staff  
  Emphasize work-life 
balance; encourage 
taking time to pursue 
activities and interests  
  Provide opportunities to 
obtain advanced training 
and certifications 

  Allow information sharing 

within the organization 
and professional forums 

  Offer challenging job 

assignments 
Include employees in 
decision making and 
innovation 
Implement reward 
programs  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

Tips to Retain Executive Staff  
  Provide advanced training 

and development 
opportunities 
  Create tailored 

development plans that 
identify leadership 
competencies and areas 
for development 

  Recognize leaders for their 

successes and 
accomplishments 

  Consider performance and 

loyalty-based bonuses to 
retain staff 

  Promote cyber executives 

to develop intellectual 
capital and create 
information sharing 
mechanisms 

10 

 

Help Your Staff Navigate Cybersecurity Careers 
 
Once you have the cybersecurity team you need inside your organization, it is equally 
important to take measures to grow and keep that staff. According to the September 
2016 State of Cyber Security Professional Careers, approximately 46% of respondents 
(cybersecurity professionals) reported that they were solicited for jobs at other companies 
at least once per week. It’s important that HR professionals and cybersecurity managers 
work together to retain cybersecurity professionals, and help staff develop career paths 
inside your organization. Develop and share career paths with employees to help staff 
identify their proficiency levels and advance in their chosen paths. 
Here are three (3) steps you can take to start building your organization’s cybersecurity 
career path. 
Step 1 – Familiarize yourself with proficiency levels and review sample career paths. 

Sample Proficiency Levels 

BEGINNER 

INTERMEDIATE 

SENIOR/EXPERT 

Ability to apply basic 
knowledge and skills in 

simple work situations with 
specific instructions and/or 

guidance 

 

 

Ability to apply knowledge and 
skills in straightforward, routine 

work situations with limited 

need for direction 

 

 

 

Ability to apply advanced 
knowledge and skills in 

complex, difficult, or novel work 
situations; is an acknowledged 

authority, advisor, or key 
resource in a given topic 

 

Sample Career Paths 

Suggested Experience & 

Credentials 

 
Bachelor’s Degree from an 
accredited program in a 
Computer Science-related 
field 

OR 

2 years relevant work 
experience 
 

CAREER PATH: BEGINNER LEVEL 

Sample KSAs / Skills  

 
Sample KSAs 

•  Vulnerabilities Assessment 

o  Skill in the use of penetration 
testing tools and techniques 
•  Information Security/Assurance 

o  Skill in performing damage 

assessments 

 
Sample Non-Technical Skills 

•  Critical Thinking & Analytical 

Skills 

•  Written & Oral Communication 

Suggested Training & 
Development Activities 

 
Sample Development 
Activities 

•  University Programs 
(e.g., George Mason 
University; Stevens 
Institute of Technology; 
Carnegie Mellon 
University) 

•  Government agency 

courses (e.g., IRM-NDU, 
NSA, DoD, Department 
of State DSTC, DHS 
certifications) 

11 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 

 

 

CAREER PATH: INTERMEDIATE LEVEL 

Sample KSAs / Skills 

Suggested Training & 
Development Activities 

 
*No UMUC or SANS courses 
considered map to this 
specialty area at the Full 
Performance level 
 
Sample Development Activities 
•  University Programs (e.g., 
George Mason University; 
Stevens Institute of 
Technology; Carnegie 
Mellon University) 

•  Formal training 

programs/seminars (e.g., 
GIAC-Auditing Networks, 
Perimeters & Systems) 

•  Government agency 

courses (e.g., IRM-NDU, 
NSA, DoD, Department of 
State DSTC, DHS 
certifications) 

•  Joint Duty Assignments 

Suggested Experience & 

Credentials 

 
Bachelor’s Degree from an 
accredited program in a 
Computer Science-related 
field plus 3 years of relevant 
work experience; 
OR 

6 years relevant work 
experience 
 
Possession and 
demonstrated application of 
relevant certifications (as 
determined by the 
department/agency): 
 
Information systems security 
certifications (e.g., (ISC)2 
CSSLP and CISSP, various 
SANS certifications, EnCase 
Cybersecurity suite, GIAC 
Security Essentials 
Certification (GSEC), and 
relevant programming 
languages) 

 
Sample KSAs 

•  Vulnerabilities Assessment 

o  Ability to identify 

systemic security issues 
based on the analysis of 
vulnerability and 
configuration data 
o  Skill in the use of 

penetration testing tools 
and techniques 

•  Information 

Security/Assurance 
o  Skill in performing 

damage assessments 

•  Computer Network Defense 

o  Skill in detecting host 

and network-based 
intrusions  
 

Sample Non-Technical Skills 

•  Critical Thinking & 

Analytical Skills 
•  Written & Oral 

Communication 

 

12 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 

 

 

 

 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 

Suggested Experience & 

Credentials 

 
Master’s Degree from an 
accredited program in a 
Computer Science-related 
field plus 5 years of relevant 
work experience; 
OR 

Bachelor’s degree plus 10 
years relevant work 
experience and project 
management experience 
 
Possession and 
demonstrated application of 
relevant certifications (as 
determined by the 
department/agency): 

 

PMP, Information systems 
security certifications (e.g., 
(ISC)2 CSSLP and CISSP, 
various SANS certs, EnCase 
Cybersecurity suite, GIAC 
Security Essentials 
Certification (GSEC), ISACA 
Certified Information Security 
Manager Certification (CISM), 
Security Certified Network 
Professional (SCNP), 
IT/Business Systems Audit 
certifications (e.g., CISA, 
GSNA), and relevant 
programming languages) 

• 

 

 

 

CAREER PATH: SENIOR/EXPERT LEVEL 

Sample KSAs / Skills 

 
Sample KSAs 

•  Vulnerabilities 

Assessment 
o  Ability to identify 
systemic security 
issues based on the 
analysis of 
vulnerability and 
configuration data 

o  Knowledge of 

application 
vulnerabilities 

o  Skill in the use of 

penetration testing 
tools and techniques 

•  Information 

Security/Assurance 
o  Skill in performing 

damage assessments 

•  Computer Network 

Defense 
o  Skill in mimicking 
threat behaviors 

o  Skill in detecting host 

and network-based 
intrusions via intrusion 
detection technologies 
(e.g., Snort) 

 
Sample Non-Technical Skills 

•  Critical Thinking & 

Analytical Skills 

•  Attention to Detail 
•  Creative Problem Solving 
•  Written & Oral 

Communication 
•  Project/Program 

Management 

•  Leadership & People 

Management 
Influencing/Negotiating 
 

Suggested Training & 
Development Activities 

 
Training – UMUC 

• 

INFA660 Security Policy, 
Ethics and the Legal 
Environment 

 
Sample Development Activities 
•  University Programs (e.g., 
George Mason University; 
Stevens Institute of 
Technology; Carnegie 
Mellon University) 

•  Formal training 

programs/seminars (e.g., 
GIAC-Auditing Networks, 
Perimeters & Systems) 

•  Participation in community 
organizations and working 
groups (e.g., Federal 
Information Systems 
Security Educators 
Association (FISSEA), 
Information Systems 
Security Association (ISSA)) 

•  Joint Duty Assignments 
•  Participation in 

professional associations, 
communities, practice or 
network groups in the field 
to share best practices, 
trends 

•  Developing white papers 

and policies 

•  Participating in 

professional coaching 
sessions, particularly for 
general competencies 

•  Participation in security and 
cyber relevant conferences 
(i.e. BlackHat, Defcon, 
Shmoocon, RSA, CANSEC 
West, others) 

 

13 

Step 2 – Use the following template to create custom cybersecurity-specific career paths 
for your organization. Populate the highlighted fields with information that meets the 
needs of your organization (KSAs can be found in the Workforce Framework) 

 

Suggested Experience & 

Credentials 

[DEGREE] from [PROGRAM 
TYPE] (plus) [YEARS] relevant 
work experience; 
OR 

[YEARS] relevant work 
experience 
 
Possession and 
demonstrated application of 
relevant certifications (as 
determined by the 
department/agency): 
 
[CERTIFICATIONS] and/or 
relevant programming 
languages 

 

CAREER PATH: [LEVEL] 

Suggested KSAs / Skills * 

 
KSAs 

•  [KSA] 
•  [KSA] 
•  [KSA] 
•  [KSA] 
•  [KSA] 
•  [KSA] 

 
Non-Technical Skills 

•  [Varied based on level; 
e.g., communications, 
ability to listen and ask 
meaningful questions, 
skill in managing staff, 
skill in mentoring, 
strategic thinking] 

Suggested Training & 
Development Activities 

 
Training 

•  [COURSE] 

 
Sample Development Activities 
•  [UNIVERSITY PROGRAMS]  
•  [FORMAL TRAINING 

PROGRAMS/SEMINARS] 
•  [GOVERNMENT AGENCY 

COURSES]  
•  [ACTIVITY] 
•  [ACTIVITY] 

* KSAs are found in the Workforce Framework; Non-technical skills are not cyber-specific – each 
organization will need to decide which non-technical skills are valued in their workforce. Existing 
organizational competency models commonly list non-technical skills. 
 

Step 3 – Share career paths with cybersecurity managers and staff. Communications 
channels might include: 

Internal websites 

• 
•  Employee communications 
•  Annual reviews 

 

Professional Growth Opportunities for Your Cybersecurity Staff  
 
In addition to career paths, your organization can provide a variety of professional growth 
opportunities to attract, engage, and retain cybersecurity professionals. Offering staff 
opportunities to think outside-the-box, solve complex cybersecurity challenges, and learn 
new cybersecurity skills may increase job satisfaction and improve retention. These 
opportunities also enable your staff to develop their skills for the quickly-evolving field of 
cybersecurity.  

14 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 

 

 

A
D
V
A
N
C 
E 

SUPPLY AND 
DEMAND 

TRAINING 

CERTIFICATIONS 

SHADOWING 

•  Visit cyberseek.org to learn more about the supply and demand of 

cybersecurity workers in your community 

•  Uncover additional market dynamics like in-demand skills and 

credentials, average salaries, and number of job openings 
•  Encourage staff to explore common cybersecurity roles and 

transition opportunities  

•  Direct all cybersecurity staff to more than 3,000 cyber training 
courses on the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and 
Studies (NICCS) Training Catalog  

•  Government cybersecurity staff and veterans also have access to 

free courses through the Federal Virtual Training Environment 
(FedVTE) - Post the following FedVTE Flyer in your workplace 

•  Federal employees can also receive free, instructor-led, virtual 

training through FedVTE Live! 

•  Earning certifications enables staff to stay current on in-demand 

skills and become leaders in the cybersecurity field 

•  Example Certifications: 

o  CompTIA SECURITY+ 
o  Certified Information Systems Security Professional  
o  GIAC Security Essentials (GSEC) 

•  Staff gain on-the-job experience for a desired position  
•  Encourage staff to connect with cybersecurity colleagues; 

shadowing is a great way to network and learn from others  

MENTORING 

•  Encourage cybersecurity staff to establish mentoring relationships 

to learn from seasoned cybersecurity professionals  

CONFERENCES & 
PROFESSIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 

CYBERSECURITY 
AWARENESS 

TOP 

CYBERSECURITY 

SCHOOLS 

•  Employees can stay up-to-date with developments in the field and 

network with fellow cybersecurity professionals 

•  Example Conferences: 

o  NICE Conference & Expo 
o  RSA Security Conference  
o  NSA Information Assurance Symposium  
o 
Information Systems Security Association 

•  Example Professional Organization: 

Stop.Think.Connect.™  
•  National public awareness campaign aimed at increasing the 

understanding of cybersecurity threats and empowering all 
Americans to be safer and more secure online. Resources are 
available at www.dhs.gov/stopthinkconnect  

•  October is National Cyber Security Awareness Month. Learn more 

at www.dhs.gov/national-cyber-security-awareness-month  

•  Centers of Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cyber Defense: DHS/NSA 

designated over 230 institutions where employees can pursue 
degrees 

•  For more information visit the CAE Site or email 

askCAEIAE@nsa.gov 

•  The Scholarship for Service (SFS) provides funding to full-time 
students in exchange for government service. Learn more here 

 

15 

 

TELL US WHAT YOU THINK 

 
The field of cybersecurity is ever-changing. If you have ideas on additional resources that will 
help you plan for, build, and advance your cybersecurity workforce, please email us at 
niccs@hq.dhs.gov. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

