CYBERSECURITY GAMES: BUILDING TOMORROW’S WORKFORCE

2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper is made possible by the efforts, support and participation 
of numerous experts and thought leaders on the subject of 
cybersecurity competitions. It is responsive to the strategic goals of 
the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) led by the 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST).  The need for 
this paper was identified by the Competitions subgroup of the NICE 
Working Group (NICEWG) which has been established to provide 
a mechanism in which public and private sector participants can 
develop concepts, design strategies, and pursue actions that advance 
cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development. The 
paper was written and published by the team at Katzcy Consulting.

© Copyright 2016 Katzcy Consulting.  

For more information or access to speakers, please contact 
info@katzcy.com.

3

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAcknowledgments 

A Note About NIST NICE, its Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, 
and the NICE Working Group Competitions Subgroup

Introduction 

Competitions: An Overview 

Why Competitions? 

The Many Faces of Cyber Competitions 

Technical Skills vs. Soft Skills 

Individual vs. Team Skills (and mixed-gender teams) 

Offense vs. Defense 

Private vs. Public 

Short-Term vs. Long-Term Workforce Needs 

Workforce Development vs. Extracurricular Activity 

Teachers vs. Students 

Standardization vs. the Speed of Creativity 

Tools 
Scenarios 
Resources 
Performance Measurement 
Taxonomy 

Fun and Games vs. Means to an End 

Recommendations 

Appendices

Appendix 1: Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders 

Appendix 2: Cyber Competitions List 

Appendix 3: Contributors 

3

6 

7

10

11

12

14

15

16

17

18

20

21

23
23
23
23
23
24

24

27

30

34

37

4

TABLE OF CONTENTSAmong the diverse opinions offered 
by this paper’s contributors, 
a consensus emerged: the current 
and projected workforce needs must 
be met not only by training more 
cybersecurity personnel, but also 
by raising the bar on their skills, 
aptitude and ability to collaborate.  
Cybersecurity competitions can play 
a critical role in this mandate.

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

5
5

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceA NOTE ABOUT NIST NICE, ITS 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE FRAMEWORK, 
AND THE NICE WORKING GROUP 
COMPETITIONS SUBGROUP

The National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) is a non-regulatory agency 
of the United States Department of Commerce. Its mandate is to promote innovation 
and industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science, standards and 
technology for the enhancement of economic security and quality of life. The National 
Initiative for Cyber Education (NICE), led by NIST, is a partnership between government, 
academia, and the private sector focused on cybersecurity education, training, and 
workforce development. The mission of NICE is to energize and promote a robust network 
and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development. NICE 
fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and industry partners to 
build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and bring leadership 
and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping to keep our 
Nation secure, and provide leadership.

NICE (http://csrc.nist.gov/nice/nicewg/index.html) brings together public and private 
sector participants to develop concepts, design strategies and pursue actions that advance 
cybersecurity education, training and workforce development. Within the Working 
Group, subgroups focus on specific topics. The Competitions subgroup is responsible for 
conceiving this 
paper and encouraging all contributions.

The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (a.k.a. the NICE Framework and NIST Special 
Publication 800-181) provides a blueprint to categorize, organize and describe cybersecurity 
work into specialty areas and work roles that include specific tasks and knowledge, skills 
and abilities (KSAs). The CWF provides a common lexicon to discuss cybersecurity positions 
and roles. It provides a common language to speak about cybersecurity work roles and 
positions/jobs, and is a reference to help define professional requirements in cybersecurity.

The NICE Framework organizes cybersecurity work into seven high-level 
task categories:

• Securely Provision
• Analyze
• Operate and Maintain
• Oversee and Govern
• Collect and Operate
• Protect and Defend
• Investigate

As this paper explores themes and priorities for developing cybersecurity skills, the NICE 
Framework provides a starting-point for creating taxonomy and encouraging standardization 
that will accelerate growth and expansion.

6

INTRODUCTION

Whether hacking critical infrastructure like utilities and financial institutions, disrupting 
political campaigns, stealing intellectual property, or robbing citizens of their identities and 
sense of security, cyber attackers pose an enormous threat to the American way of life. To 
defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats, the 
US National Security Strategy is predicated on expanding the skilled workforce to perform 
duties relating to information security. 

A significant shortfall exists between the number of workers with cybersecurity defense skills 
and the number of open job requisitions, in both private enterprise and government. The 
federal government faces the greatest challenge with 83% of hiring managers struggling to 
find and employ qualified candidates.1  For commercial enterprises, a skilled workforce is 
imperative; yet experts forecast a demand for 6 million cyber workers by 2019 and a shortfall 
of 1.5 million.2  

To produce this paper, the NIST NICE Subcommittee for Competitions interviewed more 
than 25 thought leaders from government agencies, defense contractors, other private 
industry entities and academia.  All participants are actively engaged in cybersecurity. They 
shared their perspectives on this looming issue and the role that cyber competitions might 
play in raising awareness, enhancing education, attracting capable resources to the field, 
and addressing the skills gap.3  The interviews sought to understand:

• How effective are current competitions at all levels — secondary, university and 
professional — at developing and demonstrating skills, generating awareness and a pipeline 
of current and future professionals in the cyber defense field?

• What are the challenges and opportunities for expanding competitions beyond current 

levels to reach larger audiences, generate more skilled resources, and elevate the skill 
levels of the cyber defenders in the workplace?

• Who might take the lead in elevating the scope of competitions across government, 

academia and private industry?

This paper’s stakeholders contributed diverse and sometimes contrasting opinions about the 
priorities in each of the above areas. The body of this paper details those diverse opinions, 
addressing such questions as:  

• Are technical skills or soft skills more important in producing a strong cyber defense?
• Does skilled cyber defense require individual or group effort?  
• Should cyber training and competitions emphasize offense, defense or both?
• Does the responsibility for addressing the workforce shortage and skills gap fall primarily 

to public agencies or private industry?

• How should investments in education prioritize between short-term and long-term 

workforce requirements?

• When does standardization of the competition and education process enable scale, and 

when does it hinder the creativity and agility needed in a rapidly shifting area?

1. http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR400/RR430/RAND_RR430.pdf, page 28.
2. http://www.csoonline.com/article/2953258/it-careers/cybersecurity-job-market-figures-2015-to-2019-indicate-severe-workforce-shortage.html.
3. For the biographies of experts interviewed for this paper, please refer to page 37.

7

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThis paper explores whether competitions — as games or as tools for skills development — 
might be improved through standardization and through an expansion of the competitive 
arena.  The downside of standardization is that it could slow the pace of growth.  However, 
if left to develop at an organic pace, the competitions area — and other aspects of cyber 
education — may never sufficiently address the intensified needs of the cyber workforce in 
the short and long term.  

Among the diverse opinions expressed, one core belief was shared by virtually every 
stakeholder: the cyber workforce shortage is so critical that it demands an artificial 
injection, an impetus, to attract greater interest and participation that will accelerate skills 
development. The arena of cyber competitions can serve as a significant contributor.  Cyber 
gaming appeals to younger generations, representing both immediate and future cyber 
workforces.  An organized collaboration among key stakeholders can:

• Raise public awareness of the world of cyber competition.
• Exponentially multiply the number of cyber games, sponsors and participants.
• Inform and restructure academic curricula.
• Transform and popularize specific cyber training strategies.
• Aid recruiters in identifying talent.

Cyber competitions, while not alone in these endeavors, are highly effective way of 
developing skills by providing hands-on experience in simulated, real-world situations.  What 
makes these competitions unique is that the social and gaming aspects of the playing field 
incentivize participants to be at their most innovative and productive.

When discussing the standardization of cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made 
comparisons to sports.  To the uninitiated, cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made 
comparisons to their athletic counterparts. There are few cyber stadiums,4 few superstar 
players with recognizable names and faces beyond this specific realm,5 no cheerleaders, no 
endorsement contracts, and no standard rules of the game. Yet, the essence of competition 
is the same: participants strive to be the best, to excel by recognizing and focusing their 
talents and to develop winning strategies.  Professionalizing cyber competitions can mirror 
the common structure used by the thousands of sports leagues in the US today.  They all rely 
upon common characteristics for breadth and scale:  rules, team roles, organized games, 
audiences and fans, awards, marketing, and funding through sponsorships and advertisers.  
The main difference between cyber and athletic competitions underscores the importance of 
this white paper:  a real-world cyber arena exists, where bad actors with malicious intent are 
inflicting damage upon individuals, corporations and nations.

For students, competitions are held at the middle school, high school and collegiate levels 
and complement classroom teaching and laboratory assignments with hands-on work in a 
social/gaming environment that fosters learning in entirely different ways. Parents, teachers 
and other mentors introduce children to the competitions so that students will hone their 
abilities, learn teamwork, and have fun while exploring avenues for applying their talents in 
the future.  

4. The National Cyber League http://www.nationalcyberleague.org/ is an example where stadium-like environments have been created.
5. We acknowledge that cyber competition superstars do exist today.

8

For cyber professionals in the private sector, competitions are used to develop and 
demonstrate skills, to evaluate job candidate abilities, to increase awareness among 
business leaders, and to boost morale and therefore productivity.

For industry and certification bodies, competitions are increasingly seen as relevant work 
experience for recertification. 

For governments, competitions are a vital element of generating the skills needed to 
defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats; 
competitions also strongly complement the other tabletop war games used in training. 
On the global level, the subject of cyber threats is increasingly the subject of national 
policy and regulation.  Investments are being made to encourage collaboration among all 
stakeholders to develop and expand the workforce, and to that end, there are a growing 
number of cyber competitions where nations compete against each other to develop a 
workforce, and to demonstrate skills and share knowledge (e.g., at the EC-Council’s Hacker 
Halted).

And for the cybersecurity field in general, competitions provide an arena to foster 
innovation:  innovation in tactics and techniques, both offensive and defensive, where 
learning is shared and drives the advancement of processes, technology, knowledge and 
skills among the competitors.

The opinions, case studies and anecdotes captured for this white paper suggest that 
cybersecurity competitions are an effective way to raise awareness, develop and 
demonstrate skills, and deliver an able pool of human resources for recruitment into 
government or private sector jobs.  The social and gaming aspects are seen as particularly 
compelling for up-and-coming generations of potential workers, and the stakeholders 
participating in this white paper yearn for cyber competition to achieve what sports 
leagues have with publicity, followership, sponsorship and participation.  They wonder 
how all aspects of an athletic league, like baseball or football, could be adapted and 
utilized to both accelerate and broaden the adoption of cyber competitions.  This paper 
makes recommendations on not only continuing but also fast-tracking this discussion, and 
expanding it to include all 
interested parties.

9

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCOMPETITIONS: AN OVERVIEW

Cyber competitions have been around for over two decades.  Mr. Jeff Moss, the founder 
of DEFCON, created the inaugural event in 1993 to bring together knowledgeable BBS 
(bulletin board system) hackers to speak, practice and share hacking skills.6  Shortly after, 
this initiative attracted participation from industry and law enforcement in the hopes of 
developing better cyber defensive tactics and strategies. 

Cyber competitions today come in a few different flavors.  Many are events where 
individuals or teams play defense or offense to protect or attack assets in an Internet-
connected computer network, or to solve forensic or other cyber-related challenges.  

• “Capture the Flag” (CTF) competitions can involve Jeopardy-style questions or hands-on 

offensive-defensive activity on a network.7  
-   In a Jeopardy-style CTF, teams are scored and advance by answering questions on 
topics in various cyber categories including cryptography, steganography, physical 
security, forensics and scanning.  

-   In offensive-defensive CTF, while battling competitors, players endeavor simultaneously 
or alternately to defend their assets and infiltrate their opponents’ network to assets to 
reach their objective.

• Operational competitions evaluate teams and award points not only in the technical areas 
of defending a network and maintaining continual service, but also in business challenges 
related to an IT security job function (e.g., researching technology or presenting to 
management).  In these types of competitions, a “red team” of expert volunteers perform 
as hackers, and attempt to break into the network and disrupt service.

• Forensics competitions task students to solve forensic challenges either in a standalone 

event (see https://cyberforensicschallenge.com/) or as part of a larger cyber competition.    

• A research paper competition sponsored by the “National Security Agency Science and 

Security Program” recognizes the best scientific cybersecurity paper from the previous 
calendar year published in a peer review journal or presented at a conference.  Described 
by Dr. Adam Tagert, director: for four years, this initiative has recognized researchers 
who have demonstrated lasting impact to the science of cybersecurity.  The competition 
promotes the validity of their research and encourages more quality research in this field. 

• Policy cyber competitions, such as the Atlantic Council’s Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge, 
provide an opportunity for students across academic disciplines to interact and compete 
to achieve a deeper understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis 
and conflict. Using an interactive learning experience with a competitive scenario, exercise 
teams respond to a realistic, evolving cyber attack and analyze the threat it poses to 
national, international and private sector interests.

Competitions may be executed in controlled8 environments under the supervision of cyber 
experts from academia, government and private industry who construct the playing field 
ecosystem, design the scenarios, and usually act as the attackers and role play characters 

6. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lg6bQMTjHCE.
7. http://blogs.cisco.com/perspectives/cyber-security-capture-the-flag-ctf-what-is-it.
8. https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/111/hres1244/text .

10

during the simulation to best approximate real-world business, government and strategic 
situations.

Competitions can be conducted entirely online, but the most common type of competition 
discussed by our stakeholders is a team competition, played in rounds, in live environments 
where competitors, organizers, judges, educators and sponsors are present. Most 
competitions score competitors as teams, but a limited few also score individual contributions. 

Competitions come from many sources: the brainchild of a single individual or the work 
of a large, organized group.  Their operating budgets are either self-funded or financed 
by corporate sponsors and government grants.  Appendix 2 includes a list of the many 
competitions discussed by this paper’s contributors.

“On the playing field, as 
in the Security Operations 
Center, skills matter. But trust, 
communication and teamwork 
matter more. Cyber sports teach 
security professionals to think 
critically and creatively about 
offense and defense, about the 
measures and counter-measures 
associated with every move.”

Jessica Gulick, CEO, 
KATZCY Consulting

WHY COMPETITIONS?

Sports — participatory contests of strength, skill and speed — have long 
been used as metaphors for life’s contests. Analogies from the sports 
world are often used to inform everyday discussions on topics from 
business to education to politics.  “Monday morning quarterbacking,” 
“knocked it out of the park,” “full court press” and so on — the language 
of athletic competitions has invaded the lexicon of everyday life in 
America.

Competition makes for great storytelling. Conflict is universally 
understood, and tension and interest are created as athletes and 
spectators eagerly await the outcome of the contests, equally ready to 
laud the winners and criticize the losers. There’s a common desire to 
prevail and learn from the contests, uncovering the reasons behind a 
defeat and understanding the strategies that led to a win.

Sports like baseball, soccer and football have taken the competitive 
structure to new levels.. Youth leagues allow kids to participate in 
games, learning the fundamental skills, strategies and teamwork 
required to compete more effectively at higher levels. Competitions 
held at the middle school, high school and collegiate levels provide 
further opportunities for individuals to get involved, allowing thousands 
of young adults to try their hand at these sports and for fans of all ages 
to engage as they cheer on their hometown favorites. At the pinnacle 
of these competitive structures is the professional leagues and their 
championship games. For example, the National Football League’s 
Super Bowl is a sporting event unlike any other. At this culminating 
moment of the season, the Super Bowl pits two teams of elite athletes 
against each other, with their heroic exploits broadcast internationally, 

11

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforcewhile celebrations are thrown in homes across the country as many Americans gather to 
watch the game. And sponsors pay premiums.

Cyber competitions generally tap into this tradition of pitting one side against the other. 
Youth competitions offer participants a chance to learn the fundamentals of cybersecurity in 
a fun, engaging format and provide an entry point into the professional workforce.

Competitions provide a valuable learning opportunity for participants, regardless of skill 
level. “Cyber as a sport” is a growing trend in high schools; the number of high school 
teams that participated in the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot doubled in a two-year 
period from over 2,200 in 2014 to over 4,000 in 2016.9  Educators increasingly recognize 
cyber competitions demonstrate and develop planning, leadership, collaboration and 
communication skills and offer a compelling alternative for students of all ages who are less 
likely to compete or excel at physical sports. 

Finally, the safety, security and enjoyment aspects of competitions should not be 
overlooked.  When practicing both offensive and defensive maneuvers in a typical 
competition environment, players are encouraged to practice and hone cybersecurity 
skills in a controlled, real-world environment where no harm can come to the competitors. 
Moreover, cyber competitions are enjoyed as a forum for networking, team building, and 
information sharing.

THE MANY FACES OF CYBER COMPETITIONS

In today’s advanced societies, many youth have never experienced a world without 
computers, cellphones and other Internet-enabled devices. And whether they enjoy Candy 
Crush Saga or multiplayer games, according to one estimate, the average “21-year-old has 
spent 10,000 hours gaming  —  about the same amount of time he’s spent in school from 
5th to 12th grade.”10

Clearly, the social and gaming aspects of competitions are particularly compelling to up-
and-coming generations of young people, which qualifies cyber sports as a particularly 
valuable tool in cyber workforce development.  It makes sense to consider how the 
standardization and professionalization of athletic competitions at all levels have broadened 
popular appeal, reach and participation.  How can a similar approach accelerate the growth 
of cyber competitions in terms of number, size, reach and stature? However, the stakeholder 
community is at odds over how best to address the cybersecurity workforce shortage.  As 
cyber competitions grow and evolve around the world in an effort to keep pace with market 
changes, their relative novelty and expanding adoption create a study of contrasts. The 
following sections describe key topics where our cyber competition experts held differing 
opinions on cybersecurity, competitions and the way forward for each.

9.  The number of teams registered in 2016 has reached record levels, as reflected in 

http://www.uscyberpatriot.org/Documents/CP-IX%20Current%20Registered%20Teams.pdf.

10.   https://hbr.org/2011/12/millennials-are-playing-with-y.

12

LEADERSHIP, TEAMWORK, 
COMMUNICATION AND CONFIDENCE

Our contributors listed many skills than can be developed through 
cyber competitions. Leadership, teamwork and communication 
were most frequently cited. Increased self-confidence was another 
important benefit.

“The teams who perform well assign roles to team members. One 
member might focus on firewall and intrusion detection systems. 
One person might build operating systems and harden them... 
But frankly, we’re looking for leadership: who is leading, motivating, 
helping them overcome when they’re ready to quit, because they’ve 
been hacked.”

Joe Krull, Security Principal Director, Accenture

Communication is essential “to make very compelling arguments 
as to why certain issues are important, and to determine who can 
identify consequences, who can make decisions for prioritization 
and the like.”

Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity 
and Communications, Department of Homeland Security (DHS)

Competition builds “self-driven research skills — in these 
competitions. You’ve got to have the initiative and go out and look 
for things…find out how to use an exploit to help the team… or run 
a command. Ultimately, it’s a confidence builder.”

Lisa Jiggetts, CEO, Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

13
13

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTECHNICAL SKILLS VS. SOFT SKILLS

Skills development is acknowledged to be a critical outcome for cyber competitors.  Many 
contributors in this white paper cited the importance of teamwork and soft skills as much as 
they emphasized technical skills improvement. People often assume competitors in today’s 
competitions, and most cyber professionals in the workforce, should be technically trained.  
Computer science and computer engineering are anecdotally the most desired majors 
for college students being recruited into the cybersecurity workforce.  There are strong 
viewpoints that cyber competitors and cybersecurity professionals alike must have at least 
a basic knowledge of “how things work,” including networks, threats and malware.  This 
technical emphasis explains the predominant presence of computer science and computer 
engineering students at cyber competitions, relative to other disciplines.

But the soft skills of leadership, communication (translating technical subjects into business 
terms), critical/analytic thinking, teamwork, and creativity were frequently identified as 
desirable characteristics in a cybersecurity role.  Several anecdotes from competition 
observers consistently described team formation, team dynamics, leadership and 
collaborative problem-solving as characteristics in high demand.  Recruiters confirm that 
these traits lead to job offers being extended to competitors, often during the competitions.  

The need for both hard and soft skills in the workforce is well established and extends to 
the NICE Framework and to certification organizations.  As (ISC)2’s Dan Waddell, regional 
managing director for the North America region, observes “If you put [all certification 
bodies] in one room and map our certifications to the NICE Framework, it covers the gamut.  
It covers hard-core technical skills, but also softer leadership/managerial skills, as well. You 
need a blend.” 

Although, says Laurin Buchanan, principal investigator at Secure Decisions, “(Competitions 
remain) focused on high school and college level students, who may or may not be studying 
computer science and computer engineering — which, from my point of view, is entirely 
useless to hire someone as a cybersecurity engineer. They don’t understand networks; they 
don’t understand threats and malware.” 

Both technical and soft skills are observable in a competition, as Rodney Petersen, director 
of NICE, notes: “When I walk around the competitions and observe, I quickly notice the 
teamwork and how small groups of people are working together.  I pick up on non-verbal 
behavior, leadership skills.  From monitoring the activity, you can ascertain someone’s 
technical proficiency, and then their speaking ability, as it comes up in the competition. 
And employers can do the same thing by walking around and observing them.”

Cyber education, of which competitions are a critical part, is often associated with or 
compared to STEM (or STEAM) education (science, technology, engineering, art and math).  
Whether this association helps or harms the goal of strengthening and expanding cyber-
skills education is unclear.  If soft skills are equally as important to a cyber practitioner as 
technical skills, then a STEM-like approach and STEM-like programs may be insufficient. It 
has been argued that the present impetus for expanding cyber education is more critical — 
the defense of our nation, our industries and our citizens — than the concerns that previously 
sparked an emphasis on STEM education — a declining position in technology skills on the 
global stage.  Therefore, cyber education must be addressed and deployed more rapidly 
and more widely than STEM.

14

INDIVIDUAL VS. TEAM SKILLS 
(AND MIXED-GENDER TEAMS)

There are differing opinions and genuine contradictions about the role of the individual 
versus the role of the team in the world of cyber competitions and the broader subject 
of the cyber workforce.  Competitions are widely recognized as a source for cyber talent: 
nurturing future talent in the long term, and proving a hiring source in the now.  

While an employee is hired, evaluated and progresses through his or her career as an 
individual, cybersecurity professionals in the workplace are overwhelmingly expected to 
contribute as a team.  The soft skills associated with teamwork and contributing to a broader 
business environment are mentioned as frequently as the individual’s technical skills.

One of our contributors posited that the white knight or the lone cyber warrior, may be an 
image conjured up by Hollywood (e.g., as seen, in the television program NCIS). However, 
other contributors were quick to point out that security training and certification programs 
focused on the individual could reinforce the notion of being an army of one.  In contrast, 
Mike Cameron, director of business development at Leidos, reminds us, “If you look at 
the cyber competitions, the ability to succeed is driven not just by individual skills, but 
how well they communicate as a team to deploy those software skills and team behaviors 
and function. You’re not just training, but you’re doing workforce development: you are 
developing teams as well as people.”

With no end in sight to the skills shortage, developing and testing team skills in real-world 
scenarios appears imperative. Evaluating individual skills and overcoming challenges 
of scoring (discussed in a later section), stem from the inherent nature of cybersecurity, 
requiring both individual warriors and well-coordinated teams. 

A note on gender and education:  one contributor relayed a particularly 
poignant anecdote about high-school-aged girls who participated in an 
all-girls robotics competition. Upon completion, the young women were 
invited to participate in a cyber competition and were asked to choose 
between a mixed-gender competition and an all-girls competition. One 
responded that if she had been asked before the robot program, she 
would have chosen to be on a team with all girls. But now that the team 
had proven what they could do, they had confidence and would choose 
to be in a mixed group. 

Women are gaining ground in the cyber arena, including in 
competitions; 2016’s Brigham Young University team at the National 
Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) notably included four 
female members.11  Teamwork, the soft skills that come with it, and 
targeted outreach to girls and women, are all necessary considerations 
for expanding the cyber competition arena, and workforce.

“There are no 
lone eagles; this is 
a team sport.”

Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary, Cybersecurity and 
Communications, DHS

11.  http://fortune.com/2016/04/27/mormon-women-cybersecurity/.

15

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceOFFENSE VS. DEFENSE

Whether cyber education and cyber competitions should include offensive skills — the role 
of the attacker or hacker — is contentious subjects.  Most of the contributors who organize 
and/or sponsor secondary school and collegiate competitions believe that the scope of the 
game should be limited to defensive capabilities.  

In the era of WikiLeaks and state-sponsored hacking, some stakeholders feel it is too 
much to expect competitions to teach the complex ethical issues of hacking alongside the 
technical and soft skills required of a cybersecurity practitioner. And there is a lingering bias 
that practicing offensive skills encourages the wrong talents. 

This stance, however, runs counter to the beliefs of some stakeholders who consider the 
cyber arena to be a battleground.  In warfare, understanding offensive techniques is more 
important than completing technical challenges that merely pit software against software.  
And as real-world cyber threats become increasingly sophisticated, the need to “get into the 
enemy’s mind” intensifies.  This skill is best developed by walking in the enemy’s shoes and 
learning offensive methods.

“Being able to look at your defensive position as an attacker, through 
an attacker’s eyes, is critical,” says Pete Clay, principal of Zeneth 
Technology Partners. “From my background, a military point of view, 
my ability to attack has informed my ability to defend. The teams 
should switch sides; the team that attacks should be on the blue side 
and defend in the next scenario.  The ultimate goal is not just to teach 
a tactic, which has limited applications in the market.  But teaching 
the tactic and then the defensive techniques to stop bad things from 
happening, teaching how to orchestrate and use the defenders’ tools to 
prevent bad things from happen(ing) - this is critical.”

There are pragmatic reasons for allowing competitors to play both sides. 
Jenn Henley, director of security at Facebook, points out, “If you’ve 
learned something in a book, by the time you’ve graduated and put 
it in practice, threat actors and models have changed.  Where these 
competitions are so valuable  —  they force students to use critical 
thinking, take foundational skills and put them in practice.  It allows 
them to practice both offensive and defensive [techniques]. Forces them 
to think as an attacker and a defender. And you can’t get that from a 
book, or in a classroom.”

“Playing a part on the blue 
team in information security 
can, to a very small degree, be 
compared to the lot of a hapless 
soldier. The soldier is told to 
guard a certain hill and to keep 
it at all costs. However, he is 
not told who his enemy may 
be, what they look like, where 
they are coming from, or when 
(or how) they are likely to strike. 
To ride this analogous horse a 
bit further, the soldier is given 
a hand-me-down rifle with only 
a few rounds of ammunition 
to fulfill his task. It seems a bit 
unfair really; even the American 
Revolution got Paul Revere.” 

Verizon’s 2016 Breach 
Investigations Report

16

PRIVATE VS. PUBLIC

Not surprisingly, during their interviews, many interviewees made 
an association between patriotism and cybersecurity. In fact, today’s 
cyber competitions draw significant investment and attention from the 
military services and defense industry. Mike Cameron points out, “The 
cyber competition community is usually at the nexus of government 
organizations, academia and professional organizations like the Air Force 
Association and others.”  

Public sector funds have helped to jump-start programs, providing seed 
money to stimulate interest in competitions. The most significant 
backers of some of the largest competitions, like CyberPatriot and 
NCCDC, are defense-related organizations or government agencies: 
the Armed Forces Association, DHS, NSA, Northrop Grumman, and 
Raytheon, to name just a few.  

“Northrup Grumman has taken the lead, put many millions of dollars 
into Cyber Patriot, even though there is no guarantee that the 
(participants), will work for Northrup Grumman.  (Company leaders) 
have made a commitment that this is important for our country and 
our company and our workforce.” 
Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer 
Information Systems, California State Polytechnic University

Yet, because 95% of US critical infrastructure is in the hands of private 
industry, it is private industry that has the most to gain in developing 
a skilled cyber workforce.12 gain (or lose) in (not) developing..workforce. 
In competitions that have scaled dramatically, like CyberPatriot and 
CCDC, most of their funding is private rather than public.

It is widely accepted that private industry faces a real need for highly-
skilled cyber employees.  To create a labor supply that can meet this 
demand, most companies will require a business case for investment.  
That investment strategy may include:

• Sponsoring competitions to increase size and scope, and to expand 

outreach to students/competitors.

• Providing cyber expertise to competition organizers, helping them 

develop scenarios, offering staff as coaches and mentors, and staffing 
the red/white teams, etc.

• Developing technology to enable competitions to scale, working to 

develop standard taxonomy and process.

• Raising awareness in their communities and among their clientele — 

and the public in general — about the subject of cybersecurity.

“The US Cyber Challenge 
focuses on the national level, 
to elevate the defense of our 
companies, governments 
and institutions and citizens 
and ensure their private 
and personal information 
doesn’t  get into the hands 
of people who will use it in 
a malicious way.” 

Karen Evans, 
KE&T Partners, CyberCompEx.org

12.  See page 18, section titled “Short-Term vs. Long Term Workforce Needs” for a discussion of the workforce needs.

17

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThe private sector typically considers return on investment when making decisions, and a 
cybersecurity business case will seek to quantify the impact of investing in defensive skills. 
Business cases usually take into consideration:

• The effectiveness of marketing to increase brand awareness.
• The goodwill generated by associating with the education sector on a topic of critical 

importance to national defense.

• Investment in and availability of a large pool of highly-trained resources at a fair price 

point.

This paper’s contributors generally believe that scale occurs when the private sector 
gets involved. New technologies may be developed with government seed-funding, 
but expansion, adoption and maturity is almost always the result of private investment.  
In the long run, for cyber competitions, the contributors all agree that the needs and 
involvement of private industry will ultimately elevate the game to the benefit of private 
and public enterprises alike.  This factor reinforces the importance of ongoing 
conversations and collaborations among all cybersecurity stakeholders.

SHORT-TERM VS. LONG-TERM 
WORKFORCE NEEDS

When discussing the role that competitions play in secondary and higher 
education, and in preparing competitors for careers in cybersecurity, it 
becomes apparent that there are different needs and expectations in the 
short term versus the long term.

• Over 1.5 million cybersecurity jobs will be unfilled in the US by 2020.13
• A leading Internet-based company reported to the NICE Working 
Group that thousands of candidates apply for every open software 
engineering position posted; yet due to the scarcity of skilled 
personnel, it takes 8-12 months to hire one cybersecurity professional 
(in an environment with 125 open requisitions).

Re-designing the education system to develop the pipeline for the 
cybersecurity workforce is a long-term option. The required approach 
may differ from STEM. STEM is a response to a the gradual US decline 
in the global economy.  Cybersecurity skills are needed to face real, 
current threats of attack on our nation, our citizens and our industries. 

“I tell people; if you 
want to be a security 
professional and want 
to wear a suit and tie 
every day, there is a 
place for you. If you 
want to have purple 
hair and sit in a 
corner and not talk 
to anyone, there’s a 
place for you too.”

Jenn Henley, Director of Security, 
Facebook

13.  http://www.boston.com/jobs/jobs-news/2015/12/08/all-those-scary-hacks-are-creating-a-lot-of-demand-for-certain-computer-experts.

18

“I remember when we were doing this for electrical engineers in the 1980s. We had 
a ‘war for talent’ long before the term was coined.  In every case, the demand got 
met; universities changed their curriculum to educate more people; practical/tactical 
organizations like SANS began to do it; pay in the field was so much more that people 
shifted. In every other case, sooner or later, it got met.” 
Jim Michaud, Director, CyberTalent Solutions, The SANS Institute

To address the immediate and short-term demand, most agree that other tactics are 
required.  Tactics might include:

• Raising awareness of the need to attract skilled personnel to the field, and not necessarily 
technically-trained people.  As Laurin Buchanan says,  “If you’ve found a problem, but you 
cannot communicate to your manager/CIO/CEO the potential meaning and impact, then 
having found it will do no good. I find that many technically-skilled people are not very 
good at communicating in plain language, in simple easy-to-understand terms, 
what is going on.”

• Expanding professional competitions to develop skills and redeploy resources where 

they are needed.  This opportunity benefits people who are re-entering the workforce or 
changing careers mid-stream; and based on the statistics cited above, the cybersecurity 
field represents a “growth industry”, while other traditional job functions are on the 
decline.  

• Creating training programs to address the need at a national level, and consider options 

for engaging a diverse workforce, including training women and veterans, and offering 
flexible working conditions.  Jim Michaud notes that Alan Paller, president of SANS, makes 
an analogy between the deficit of InfoSec professionals and the risk to the world and the 
deficit of pilots before WWII.  He points out that, “You do not go to a four-year university 
in order to learn how to fly an airplane … you go to a flight school. A lot of SANS courses 
and competitions are like flight schools. Before WWII, we needed 20 times the number of 
pilots, and we set up 22 flight schools around the country.”

• Generating interest and enthusiasm among people with the skills, knowledge, or aptitude, 

to fill cyber positions.  To target young people, make cyber “cool” and accessible.  For 
career-age people, increase cyber-awareness and education in ‘mainstream’ courses of 
study (e.g., top MBA programs).  As Jim Michaud comments, “HR professionals have 
learned from STEM that if we generate interest and awareness early, we can ultimately 
increase people in the field. In cyber, that’s important, but not enough, and will take too 
long.  Our view is, converting people mid-career from other fields through assessment 
tools and taking them through our program is important in the short run. Middle schoolers 
don’t have careers for 10 years, and we need to address the problem NOW.”

19

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceStackSmash is one example 
of a professional cyber 
competition.  GE’s annual 
IT security hackathon 
provides a gateway to 
cybersecurity at GE.  By 
engaging professionals 
from IT functions to explore 
the limits of innovation for 
real-world security issues, 
GE has seen tremendous 
value in imaginative thinking 
and new tools as well as the 
by-products of enabling 
collaboration and building 
cross-business relationships.

WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT VS. 
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITY

Competitions not only have a place as extracurricular activities for 
students, but also as workforce development tools for current and 
advancing professionals. Since much of the interviewee discussion 
focused on raising awareness in schools of cybersecurity as a subject, a 
skill set and as a career. This section regarding workforce development 
is a natural extension of the previous short-term versus long-term 
debate.  Increasing student involvement in cybersecurity is an important 
long-term strategy, but there are significant short-term needs that must 
be addressed as well.  There is a groundswell of support for professional 
competitions to enhance the skills of practicing professionals.  However, 
if professional competitions are going to be accepted as tools to train 
and develop practitioners in the field, then stakes have to be higher 
than professional bragging rights.

In his ieee paper, Dr. Gregory White, Director for Infrastructure 
Assurance and Security at the University of Texas, references Microsoft’s 
Senior Technology Officer Lewis Shepherd’s 201014 webcast, Hiring the 
Next Generation of Cyber Professionals in Government.  White explains 
the concern that government agencies, like DHS and NSA, were hiring 
virtually all the available qualified professionals, leaving private industry 
to scramble. Foreshadowing today’s crisis, Shepherd asked, “How do we 
train and retrain, and do ‘long training,’ with our current generation of 
professionals?”  

Competitions can serve to earn certification credits for participants. 
Certs, like the CISSP and others, require ongoing coursework to 
maintain their status. Today, credits can be issued manually, but 
standardizing their issuance should be considered.  Businesses can also 
incorporate competitions into workforce development and standard 
operating procedures. 

As Nasrin Rezai, global CISO of GE Capital explains, “Not only in cyber 
but in other parts of the company, there are a lot of competition-style 
ways of promoting new idea generation. Sometimes organizations do 
it [competitions] one-off, or it isn’t a part of their development and 
workforce planning strategy. We see it as a component of our workforce 
development. Annually, one business takes the sponsorship; we jointly 
share cost, and we make it happen. The challenge becomes when you 
consider it a side job, interest or hobby of the group, instead of a critical 
component of learning and development.”

14.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwlkcC5KMvA.

20

Another professional 
development competition is 
GhostRed.  This homegrown 
capture-the-flag competition, 
has expanded organically 
within GE over the past 
five years. What started as 
a volunteer-driven effort to 
excite and connect students 
with hands-on cybersecurity 
experiences, has now 
become a formalized GE 
program designed to recruit 
top talent into the company.

TEACHERS VS. STUDENTS

The interviewees frequently discussed a shortcoming in the education system: students 
are not generally aware of cybersecurity as a field of study or as a career path.  This gap in 
student awareness is matched by the shortfall in adults — parents and educators — who are 
aware and skilled to them.  Today’s first graders are proficient in the use of smart phones 
and tablets because these devices have been in existence and widely available since their 
birth. The probability that they know more than their teachers and parents about the use of 
tablets, because this technology is high.

In this situation, attention is needed to train educators, parents, coaches and the wider 
education complex on awareness about cybersecurity.  In the typical business environment 
today, senior executives and boards of directors are largely unaware of the threats their 
companies face, their need to defend them, and how to do so.  Education and training is 
critical at these levels as well. 

Changing the education system is not easy to do; many school systems are risk-averse 
and hold numerous, competing priorities.  But if education is about teaching critical skills, 
Laurin Buchanan suggests “(We must) graduate useful, intelligent members of society and 
workforce; and we haven’t done that with cyber.” 

Many interviewees made comparisons to their own high school curricula in their analogies 
to today’s need for cybersecurity education: health class and hygiene, physical education, 
driver’s education, home economics and trade/manufacturing-related courses were widely 
taught, because they were considered critical life skills. These interviewees asserted that the 
current prevalence of technology and related threats indicates that cybersecurity education 
can be viewed on equal footing with other subjects taught in schools. Training educators on 
cybersecurity issues can be made a higher priority; just as driver education instructors are 
expected to have a driver’s license, all educators can be expected to have a general working 
knowledge of cybersecurity. 

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

21

“I think cyber education is about teaching 
how things actually work. You need to 
understand how the Internet works and 
how packets work. For many people the 
computer is more of a black box than their 
car. They know their car needs gas, that it 
needs maintenance; there are inspections; 
they need a driver’s license. They can drive 
around (in) this big, scary thing, because 
safeguards have already been established.

But the computer, and the amount of 
damage that can be done to a person’s 
reputation and identity — people don’t 
get it.  Cyber education needs to be about 
explaining how the Internet and networks 
work; this needs to begin as early as 
elementary school.” 

Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator 
Applied Visions, Inc.,  
a division of Secure Decisions 

22
22

STANDARDIZATION VS. 
THE SPEED OF CREATIVITY

The subject of standardization in the realm of cybersecurity and 
competitions was not greeted with much enthusiasm by interviewees.  
In an arena where speed, adaptability and creativity are core defining 
tenets, there is resistance to adopt standards that may encumber 
innovation. There is great reluctance to overlay the process of 
proposing, developing, agreeing upon and adopting standards.  But 
when discussing creating, executing and expanding competitions, 
several areas were identified where a standard approach would be 
beneficial to deliver economies of scale in an environment of scarcity.

Areas for standardization and collaboration across competitions include:

Tools
Competitions involve labor intense processes for injecting actions into 
game play, tracking competitor progress, and scoring individual and 
team performance. Interviewees recommended automated solutions: 
Facebook’s Capture the Flag platform, Leidos’s Cyber NXUS,  GE’s 
GhostRed,  the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot competition engine, 
and Secure Decisions’ Comic-BEE, a “choose your own adventure story” 
platform).

Scenarios
Competitions continuously require new scenarios to challenge the 
participants, especially returning participants.  Collaborating on scenario 
development and developing standard taxonomy were identified to 
mitigate this challenge.15

Resources
Effective and challenging events are resource-intensive. Cyber 
experts develop and run the game, and may participate as red teams. 
Scaling and expanding competitions must address staffing needs, to 
consolidate and centralize staff or knowledge.

Performance Measurement
Several interviewees noted the challenge in comparing the scores or 
results of one competition to another, and more so, comparing the 
achievements of one competitor to another.  This issue was raised 
most often when discussing the hiring process, and what impression 
is made when an applicant lists competitions on his or her resume.  
CyberCompEx.org has taken great strides to map competitive activity to 
skills within the current field of competitions.

“Everyone gets excited about 
competitions and wants one 
of their own; but it’s a matter 
of scaling up with a ‘force 
multiplier’ and expanding the 
reach. There is a cost associated 
with the competitive platforms 
and engines. They take time, 
money and people to develop 
and update them. If you’ve ever 
had to manage the logistics for 
one of these events, you know 
what it takes to do it.” 

Dan Waddell, 
Regional Managing Director, 
North America Region, 
(ISC)², Inc.

15.  Bryan Fite, global account CISO for British Telecom, mentions a Scenario Development Language (SDL).

23

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTaxonomy
A dominant theme throughout the interviews was the need to standardize the taxonomy  —  
the roles and definitions  —  in the cybersecurity workforce, both for competitions and in a 
professional environment. A human capital perspective was often repeated: establish better-
defined team roles that can be commonly understood across organizational and industry 
boundaries.  There were also frequent analogies to sports, with their rulebooks and roles: 
a football team has a quarterback, defensive linemen, receivers, tackles, as well as a trained, 
focused and dedicated coaching staff.

FUN AND GAMES VS. MEANS 
TO AN END

Among all other objectives, cyber competitions are games intended 
to be enjoyed by the participants.  While interviewees assign a high 
entertainment value to cyber competitions, a non-expert audience may 
likely disagree, which is one of the primary barriers when discussing 
cyber competitions as a competitive sport.  The fun comes from meeting 
the challenge, learning new skills, working on a team, socializing with 
competitors and sponsors, and achieving success. 

Gamification, applying rules, engaging teams, and scoring are widely 
accepted as effective methods for attracting younger generations 
(tomorrow’s workforce).  But a stronger argument for gamification of 
the cybersecurity arena might be that those competitive elements — 
process, teamwork and results — are precisely what it takes to construct 
an effective cyber workforce.

To set student competitions apart from classroom learning or lab work, 
it is important to maintain a safe competition environment and remove 
the pressure of performing that can come with scoring (the equivalent 
of being graded for classroom learning).  Davina Pruitt-Mentle, lead for 
the NICE’s Academic Engagement at NIST, says competitions “allow 
students to engage in an informal, non-threatening way, unlike in the 
classroom where they are graded.  If we insist on scoring them, we will 
turn off some kids, because it takes them out of their comfort zone and 
away from the idea that they are just going out and having fun.”

“GE actively participates and 
sponsors numerous high school 
and college outreach programs 
to raise awareness and create 
interest and excitement in 
technology; and several are 
focused on girls.  After one 
competition for girls, we 
asked the participants if they 
wanted to continue in girls-
only programs or go to co-ed 
programs.  They responded:  
“Before this activity, I would 
have told you I preferred girls-
only teams. But now that I’ve 
done this and known what 
I’m doing, I would choose to 
be in a mixed team.”  This 
response is precisely what GE 
wants to achieve for the girls: to 
build their confidence in their 
knowledge and skills, so that 
they are comfortable working 
in technical areas in a mixed 
group.”

Nasrin Rezai, Global Chief 
Information Security Officer 
GE Capital & GE Digital Security 
Governance, Tech Risk and 
M&A

24

And by making the games fun, cyber competitions are viewed by many 
as a channel for other endeavors:  attracting students to STEM fields, 
and stimulating creative thinking and innovation through intellectual 
problem-solving.  Clearly STEM education is critical to national security, 
as the 21st Century Science, Technology and Innovation Initiative for 
America’s National Security report from May 2016 asserts;16 cyber 
competitions are compelling method of attracting students to STEM.   

However, competitions are not just about education and learning.  
Nasrin Rezai says, “We think that gaming/cyber competition is a key 
component of learning, education, and recruiting.” Competitions, 
especially at the collegiate and professional levels, are ideally suited for 
individual competitors to demonstrate skills and for hiring managers in 
the government, defense sector and private industry to most effectively 
identify the best resources with the best skills.  There were plentiful 
anecdotes in the interviews about jobs being offered to competitors 
at collegiate competitions.  In 2009, Boeing, one of the sponsors of 
the Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC), 
hired the entire team from Cal Poly Pomona on the spot.  In 2010, 
one particular competitor was pursued by multiple sponsors on the 
morning of the final day; they were too late  —  he was offered a job 
over breakfast.  These examples suggest that competitions might be 
considered auditions for potential cybersecurity professionals.

Interviews explored whether two concepts  —  the game itself and a tool 
for skills development, assessment and recruiting — could be improved 
by standardizing and expanding the competitive arena.  Competitions 
have been significant growth, with up to 40% increase in participants 
over the past few years.  Over the past few years, participants in 
competitions have increased by 40%. Is a standardized approach 
unnecessary? Or does the lack of a trained workforce and the rapid 
advancement of technology justify intervention?

Consideration has been given to whether competitions can count 
towards cybersecurity professional certification.  Dan Waddell 
from (ISC)2 indicated that currently, a manual calculation process 
determines whether a candidate’s participation and performance in 
a cyber competition can contribute to the professional development 
component of maintaining CISSP certification.  Expanding competitions, 
particularly at the professional level, and advancing consistency in 
their processes and measurement, would facilitate organizations like 
(ISC)2 accepting them as valuable skills development tools and as a 
part of the certification process.  More professionals would participate 
in competitions improving their skills — to achieve and maintain their 
certification. 

“The Women’s Society of 
Cyberjutsu is committed to 
providing women professionals 
with opportunities to develop 
and enhance their skills in the 
field.  Through competitions, 
our members learn 
communication and leadership, 
along with the technical 
and system administration 
foundations that are required.  
By being a team member, you 
are both self-driven and on 
a fast track.  It’s a confidence 
builder.” 

Lisa Jiggets, CEO, Women’s 
Society of Cyberjutsu

16.  https://www.whitehouse.gov//sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/NSTC/national_security_s_and_t_strategy.pdf.
17.  As cited by Bernie Skoch.

25

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceEnvisioning the potential reach, structure and impact that cyber competitions might have, 
several stakeholders rely on the sports league analogies.  Sports leagues, for example 
football leagues, have:

• Standard rule books (with age-appropriate adaptations as needed). 
• Defined roles and responsibilities on a team.
• Organized events at multiple levels from Pop Warner to the NFL.
• Booster clubs and leagues.
• Sponsorships and television rights.
• Recognition for teams and individuals, like  Heisman Trophies and Super Bowl rings.
• Large, passionate audiences and fans.

These attributes work in concert to elevate awareness of and passion for the sport, and 
attract athletes to the sport from a very early age.  Apart from the love of the game, an 
athelete’s prospect of making a career from the sport is limited.  The numbers tell the story: 
There are approximately 1 million high school football players in the US18 and under 2,000 
players in the NFL.

This is not the case in the cybersecurity arena.  With 2 million jobs waiting to be filled, 
the prospects for young cyber athletes to find employment (after study, practice, and 
demonstrating his or her abilities) are on the playing field, are great.

Cyber competitions are ideally suited for co-ed play.  While female competitors are still in 
the minority (only seven out of 80 competitors at this year’s NCCDC were women), several 
programs and sponsors are focused on bringing women into the arena.  The growing 
emphasis on the soft skills of leadership and communication is viewed as an opportunity 
to attract women of all ages, especially women already in the workforce looking to make a 
career change.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The opinions and narratives of interviewees reflect different approaches and varying 
priorities regarding:

• Cybersecurity skills development
• Offensive and defensive roles 
• Awareness, education and workforce development

The opportunity of competitions—to raise awareness, develop skills, and build a pipeline 
of cyber professionals — encourage a national dialogue of stakeholders from diverse 
constituencies:

• Founders and long-standing sponsors of the leading competitions in the US, such as 
CCDC, CyberPatriot, the US Cyber Challenge, Day-Con, the Atlantic Council Policy 
Challenge, DEFCON and others.

18.  http://www.cnsnews.com/news/article/terence-p-jeffrey/football-top-sport-us-1088158-high-school-players.

26

• Government agencies responsible for developing cyber skills, 

including the NSA, DHS and the Department of Education.

• Education systems at the federal, state and school district levels.
• Defense contractors who significantly invest in competitions, for skills 

development and recruiting.

• Private industry, which faces a skills shortage and is well-situated to 
develop and distribute tools to enable competitions and accelerate 
product development and differentiation using competitions as a 
proving ground.

The objectives of this larger dialog should:

Agree upon areas where collaboration and standardization 
can facilitate expansion to a larger audience across geographies, 
age groups, school districts, and public and private enterprises  
without dampening the creativity and innovation paramount 
to keeping pace with the attackers.  

“If you impose structure — a 
taxonomy, an environment 
— it is much easier to roll out 
competitions across the USA 
and beyond. But you also put 
on handcuffs; what is unique 
about the cybersecurity industry 
is that people think differently.  
This is how they find the unique 
vulnerabilities in systems.  
They don’t go after things in a 
structured manner.  A vast majority 
of cyber experts are self-taught.  
So we need a structure that can 
be replicated; but we must ensure 
there is enough variance to allow 
‘out of the box’ thinking.” 

1

2

3

Explore how shared investment in technology and process can 
both compensate for and develop areas of competition that are 
otherwise limited by resources (people) and sponsors (funding).

Tony Cole, Vice President and 
Global Government CTO,
FireEye, Inc.

Accelerate the advancement of the following aspects of 
competitions as well as the cybersecurity workforce as a whole:

Standardizing 
performance 
measurement at 
the individual and 
team level across 
competitions

“It’s great that everyone wants more cyber competitions, but without 
‘division rules’ it makes it difficult to judge the relative value of one 
competition versus another.  Without knowing whether the A team from 
one competition is as good as the A team from another, it isn’t an effective 
hiring guide.” 

Bobbie Stempfley, Director of Cyber Strategy Implementation, 
the MITRE Corporation

“The goals of the NIST NICE Working Group competitions subgroup are 
in sync with industry: to advance and identify skilled people ready to fill 
the growing needs of the workforce. The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce 
Framework is a great place to start to begin to understand the relationships 
between competitions that develop proficiencies in cybersecurity knowledge 
skills and abilities and employers who value those knowledge, skills and 
abilities tie to perform vital tasks in cybersecurity work roles.”

Bill Newhouse, Deputy Director, National Initiative for Cyber Security 
Education (NICE)

Aligning 
competitions 
with the NIST 
Framework

27

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDeveloping and 
sharing competitive 
platforms

“Until you’ve done one, you don’t know how critical and how difficult 
it is getting the competition environment working.  You need a willing 
partner, usually a college or university, to host and deliver the resource-
intensive tasks of providing working computers, a functional wireless 
network, enough bandwidth from the ISP, and so on.”

Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer Information 
Systems at Cal Poly Pomona./Co-Chair NICE Working Group 
Competions SubGroup

“From my military background, I know that my ability to attack informed 
my ability to defend. You can’t only teach defensive tactics that have 
limited application in the broader marketplace. But teaching attack 
methods alongside defensive techniques will enable your teams to better 
prevent bad things from happening.”

Pete Clay, Principal, Zeneth Tech Partners

Developing 
offensive 
and defensive 
scenarios

Defining roles and 
responsibilities 
within a team 
of competitors  
or professionals

“Security is a very broad field ranging from  policies, standards and 
compliance to software engineering and application security.  We are 
now focused on defining and communicating the variety of security 
roles and how and where they fit into our corporate environment.  
There isn’t a single path into security: there are different skills and 
techniques and tools to advance a career down a desired path.” 

Jenn Henley, Director of Security, Facebook

“It’s important to understand what is age-appropriate, train the educators, 
and give them the tools to teach.  A good analogy for teaching 
cybersecurity is teaching health; we teach children about hygiene, bacteria 
and germs first and then move on to more advanced topics in the higher 
grades.  They need to understand the risk to their personal health and the 
risk to their cyber health.”

Dan Manson, CPP/Co-chair NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup

Training the 
trainers to 
enhance 
educator skills

28

Raising awareness 
among students, 
educators, mentors 
and parents on the 
career opportunities 
for cyber 
professionals

“Kids don’t say ‘I want to work in the medical profession when I  
grow up.’ They say ‘I want to be a doctor, a nurse, a sonogram 
technician, an EMT.’ They pursue specific roles that they have seen 
and understand what is involved, that they know who is helped by 
that person or that role. In the cyber arena today, there is almost  
no visibility at this level.” 

Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator, Applied Visions, Inc., 
a division of Secure Decisions

“In 1971, there were 700 women and 78,000 men playing high 
school soccer. Today, 450,000 men and 390,000 women play at 
that level.  For cyber, we want to create a showcase that holds up 
these mental athletes in as much esteem as physical athletes are 
held up.  More jobs, careers and economic impact will come from 
this arena than from physical sports, and have(ing) competitive 
cyber leagues will bring that level of attention, excitement, 
support and awareness that the field deserves.”

Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair , California State 
Polytechnic University

Establishing leagues 
and divisions to 
support a 
competitive ladder 
for varying ages 
and skill levels

Developing 
Cyber as a Sport

“Cyber is more than IT. It is our behaviors, actions, and uses — most for 
good ends, but some for bad. Cyber games train us to know what we’re 
looking for, as well as how best to respond. They develop leadership, 
communication and teamwork skills in a group of people that typically 
are more introverted. By developing cyber teams that compete in games 
like sports teams do, we can establish a code of ethics and a non-military 
approach centered on collaboration and strategy that will create the 
workforce we need for the future.” 

Jessica Gulick, CEO, Katzcy Consulting 

Both a great need and a great opportunity exist for all stakeholders in the cyber 
competitions community to come together to better define the end-goal.  Whatever the 
differences of opinions and priorities, there are significant synergies across all participants; 
and these synergies can deliver accelerated results through collaboration, coordination and 
standardization, while acknowledging that creativity and agility must be given a wide berth.

29

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 1: 
Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders

In the course of over 25 interviews, interviewers described their involvement with and the 
operation of many competitions at the secondary school, collegiate and professional level.  
A comprehensive inventory of most competitions is included in a separate appendix; this 
appendix describes several of the competitions and competition platforms mentioned by 
the stakeholders.

CyberPatriot for middle school and high school students
CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Education Program.  There are three main 
programs within CyberPatriot: the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition, AFA 
CyberCamps and the Elementary School Cyber Education Initiative.  At the center of 
CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition. The competition puts teams 
of high school and middle school students in the position of newly hired IT professionals 
tasked with managing the network of a small company. In the rounds of competition, 
teams are given a set of virtual images that represent operating systems and are tasked 
with finding cybersecurity vulnerabilities within the images and hardening the system while 
maintaining critical services.  Teams compete for the top placement within their state and 
region, and the top teams in the nation earn all-expenses paid trips to Baltimore, MD for 
the National Finals Competition where they can earn national recognition and scholarship 
money.

National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) for college students
NCCDC’s ask competitions ask student teams to assume administrative and protective 
duties for an existing “commercial” network — typically a small company with 50+ users, 
7 to 10 servers, and common Internet services such as a web server, mail server, and 
e-commerce site.  Each team begins the competition with an identical set of hardware and 
software and is scored on their ability to detect and respond to outside threats, maintain 
availability of existing services such as mail servers and web servers, respond to business 
requests such as the addition or removal of additional services, and balance security needs 
against business needs.  Throughout the competition, an automated scoring engine is used 
to verify the functionality and availability of each team’s services on a periodic basis; and 
traffic generators continuously feed simulated user traffic into the competition network.  A 
volunteer red team provides the “external threat” all Internet-based services face and allows 
the teams to match their defensive skills against live opponents.

30

Day-Con X for professionals
Day-Con is an annual conference dedicated to security training, competitions and 
information exchange. Started in 2007, the group hosts an annual event in Dayton, Ohio 
and facilitates Packetwars™ battles, which are described as “Formula One Racing meets 
World Cup with a dash of Professional Wrestling thrown in for good measure.” Public and 
private battles provide combatants the opportunity to train and be assessed in a fast-paced 
and “safe” environment.

DEFCON for professionals
Started in 1993, DEFCON is one of the world’s largest annual hacker conventions held 
each year in Las Vegas, NV.  Attendees include computer security professionals, journalists, 
lawyers, federal government employees, security researchers, students and hackers 
with a general interest in software, computer architecture, phone phreaking, hardware 
modifications, and anything else that can be “hacked.”  The event includes speaker tracks 
as well as social war games and other contents.

Black Hat for professionals
Black Hat is the most technical and relevant global information security event series in 
the world. For more than 18 years, Black Hat has provided attendees with the very latest 
in information security research, development, and trends in a strictly vendor-neutral 
environment. These high-profile global events and Trainings are driven by the needs of 
the security community, striving to bring together the best minds in the industry. Black Hat 
inspires professionals at all career levels, encouraging growth and collaboration among 
academia, world-class researchers, and leaders in the public and private sectors.

From its inception in 1997, Black Hat has grown from a single annual conference in Las 
Vegas to the most respected information security event series internationally. Today, the 
Black Hat Briefings and Trainings are held annually in the United States, Europe and Asia, 
providing a premier venue for elite security researchers and trainers to find their audience.

CyberQuest an online competition qualifier for US Cyber Challenge
CyberQuests are a series of fun but challenging on-line competitions allowing participants 
to demonstrate their knowledge in a variety of information security realms. Each quest 
features an artifact for analysis, along with a series of quiz questions. Some quests focus 
on a potentially vulnerable web server as the artifact, challenging participants to identify 
its flaws using vulnerability analysis skills. Other quests are focused around forensic 
analysis, packet capture analysis, and more. The quests have varying levels of difficulty 
and complexity, with some quests geared toward beginners, while others include more 
intermediate and ultimately advanced material.

US Cyber Challenge for professionals
The mission of U.S. Cyber Challenge (USCC) is to significantly reduce the shortage in 
today’s cyber workforce by serving as the premier program to identify, attract, recruit and 
place the next generation of cybersecurity professionals. USCC’s goal is to find 10,000 of 
America’s best and brightest to fill the ranks of cybersecurity professionals where their skills 
can be of the greatest value to the nation.

31

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceNational Cyber League (NCL) for college students 
The NCL was founded in May 2011 to provide an ongoing virtual training ground for 
collegiate students to develop, practice, and validate their cybersecurity skills using next-
generation high-fidelity simulation environments. One of the distinguishing factors of 
the NCL is the integration of learning objectives in all its activities. One of the main ways 
this is accomplished is by aligning customized content available in NCL Gymnasiums 
with simulations and games. This allows players to use the Gym environment to develop 
knowledge and skills and then demonstrate these newly acquired skills in competitive 
individual and team play. It also allows the NCL to measure player’s game performance and 
produce individualized reports (NCL Scouting Report) on strengths and weakness among 
various learning objectives and industry-recognized competencies.

Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) for the military academies
The Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) is an annual competition designed to sharpen the skills 
of our nation’s next generation of cyber warriors. The prestigious event, held each spring, 
tests the ability of students representing U.S. and Canadian military service academies to 
build, secure, and defend networks from cyber attacks mounted by IA experts.

FireEye’s FLARE for students and professionals
Now in its third year, this online challenge has achieved international success.  This six-week 
challenge presents individual competitors with a series of reverse engineering challenges 
and puzzles targeting engineers, malware analysts and security professionals.  Prizes are 
awarded and online recognition is given.

Cyber 9/12 Challenge for high school students
Now entering its fourth year, the Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge is a one-of-a-kind 
competition designed to provide students across academic disciplines with a deeper 
understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis and conflict. Part 
interactive learning experience and part competitive scenario exercise, it challenges 
teams to respond to a realistic, evolving cyberattack and analyze the threat it poses to 
national, international, and private sector interests.  Students have a unique opportunity to 
interact with expert mentors and high-level cyber professionals while developing valuable 
skills in policy analysis and presentation. The competition has already engaged over 400 
hundred students from universities in the United States, United Kingdom, France, Poland, 
Switzerland, Hungary, Finland, and Estonia.

CSAW for college students
Cybersecurity Awareness Week (CSAW) is the largest student-run cybersecurity event in 
the nation, featuring six competitions, an industry conference, workshops and an industry 
fair. In 2003, it was a small, local competition. Today, CSAW is preparing the nation’s 
brightest students to shape the future of the industry.  Every year, it brings undergrad and 
graduate students together with academic and professional experts to discuss the tools and 
techniques used by attackers and defenders throughout the field, while students of every 
academic level (from high school to doctoral) compete in a range of challenges designed to 
motivate, educate and showcase industry talent.

32

SANS NetWars for professionals
SANS NetWars is a suite of hands-on, interactive learning scenarios that enable information 
security professionals to develop and master the real-world, in-depth skills they need to 
excel in their field. In SANS award-winning courses, attendees consistently rate our hands-
on exercises as the most valuable part of the course. With NetWars, we have really raised 
the ante, as participants learn in a cyber range while working through various challenge 
levels, all hands-on, with a focus on mastering the skills information security professionals 
can use in their jobs every day.

Secure Decision’s Comic-BEE for students
Comic-BEE (Comic-Based Education and Evaluation) is a cyber security education 
technology suitable for all ages and expertise levels, developed with funding from the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) S&T, Cyber Security Division.  A scoring capability 
is being added to enable use of branching, graphic stories as a competition platform, 
available early 2017.

GE’s GhostRed for students
GhostRed is a hands on technology platform for high school and college students to learn 
cybersecurity.  It contains many module and challenges that cover the breadth of topics 
required to understand the subject matter, from programming, digital forensics, networking 
many modules and system administration. 

Facebook’s CTF Open Source platform for students
Facebook began hosting college-level CTF competitions in 2013, and increasingly focused 
on helping younger kids discover computer science and security. Their CTF platform has 
been used at dozens of events with organizations all over the world, from the Girl Scouts of 
America to the University of Cambridge and high schools in Spain. Due to the high cost and 
technical requirements of building and running CTF environments, few publicly available 
resources exist for schools, students, and non-profit organizations to use. Additionally, 
finding any security education resources at the middle and high school level is still a 
challenge. As a result, Facebook built a free platform for everyone to use that takes care 
of the backend requirements of running a CTF, including the game map, team registration, 
and scoring.

33

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 2: 
Cyber Competitions List

16+
Middle School
High School
18+
Collegiate

Competition Name

Level

Location

URL

Cyber Security Challenge UK

16+

United Kingdom

https://cybersecuritychallenge.
org.uk/index.php

Cyber Security Awarenes Week (CSAW) 
Qualifications & Finals

High School and 
Collegiate

US

https://csaw.engineering.nyu.
edu

At Large Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CDC)

Collegiate Penetration Testing 
Competition

Collegiate

Alaska, Hawaii

http://www.virtualccdc.com/

Collegiate

US

http://cptc.csec.rit.edu

Digital Forensics Cyber Quest 

Collegiate

National

http://digitalforensics.
securitytreasurehunt.com/

Information Security Talent Search

Collegiate

United States

http://uscc.cyberquests.org/

Iowa State University Cyber Defense 
Competition (CDC)

Collegiate

Iowa

https://cdc.iseage.org

Mid-Atlantic Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CDC)

Collegiate

Midwest Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CDC)

Collegiate

Pennsylvania, 
New Jersey, 
West Virginia, 
Maryland, 
Delaware, Virginia

Iowa, Missouri, 
Ohio, Michigan, 
Indiana, 
Wisconsin, 
Minnesota, Illinois

http://maccdc.org

http://www.cssia.org/ccdc/

National Collegiate Cyber Defense 
Ccmpetition (NCCDC)

Collegiate

United States

http://www.nationalccdc.org

National Cyber League

Collegiate

United States

http://www.
nationalcyberleague.org/

34

Competition Name

Level

Location

URL

North Central Regional Collegiate 
Cyber Defense Competition

Collegiate

Northeast Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Montana, North 
Dakota, South 
Dakota, Wyoming

Maine, Vermont, 
New Hampshire, 
New York, 
Massachusetts, 
Rhode Island, 
Connecticut

http://dakotacon.org

http://dakotacon.org/#ccdc

http://neccdc.net/wordpress/

Pacific Rim Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Washington, 
Oregon, Idaho

https://www.prccdc.org

Packet Capture Analysis Cyber Quest 

Collegiate

National

http://uscc.cyberquests.org/

Panoply

Collegiate

Global

http://www.Cyberpanoply.com

Rocky Mountain Regional Collegiate 
Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Utah, Colorado, 
Nebraska, Kansas

http://academic.regis.edu/
cias/rmccdc/

Southeast Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Southwest Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Western Regional Collegiate Cyber 
Defense Competition (CCDC)

Collegiate

Alabama, 
Florida, Georgia, 
Kentucky, 
Mississippi, 
Tennessee, South 
Carolina, and 
North Carolina

Oklahoma, 
Arkansas, 
Louisiana, New 
Mexico, Texas

Arizona, 
California, 
Nevada

http://www.seccdc.org/

http://southwestccdc.org

http://www.wrccdc.org/

CyberPatriot

High School and  
Middle School

United States

http://www.uscyberpatriot.org

ASIS Capture the Flag 

Over 18

Global

https://asis-ctf.ir/home/

35

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCompetition Name

Level

Location

URL

Black T-Shirt Cyber Forensics 
Challenge

Over 18

National

BSides Colombia Capture the Flag

Over 18

Codegate

CyberLympics

Over 18

Over 18

DEFCON: Backdoor Hiding Contests

Over 18

DEFCON: Crack Me If You Can

DerbyCon Capture the Flag

Over 18

Over 18

Global

Korea

Global

Nevada

Nevada

Global

https://
cyberforensicschallenge.com

Not provided

http://www.codegate.org/

http://www.cyberlympics.org

http://www.defcon.org/

http://www.defcon.org/

https://www.derbycon.com

Digital Forensics Security Treasure 
Hunt

Over 18

Global

http://uscc.cyberquests.org/

Facebook Capture The Flag 2016

Over 18

Global

Ghost in the Shell Code

Over 18

Global

Maryland Cyber Challenge & 
Conference (MDC3)

Over 18

Maryland

http://gsec.hitb.org/sg2016/
facebook-capture-the-flag/

http://ghostintheshellcode.
com

http://www.fbcinc.com/e/
cybermdconference/default.
aspx

Over 18

United States and 
Canada

http://www.academynetriders.
com

http://www.sans.org/cyber-
ranges/netwars

http://packetwars.com/

http://www.shmoocon.org/
hack_fortress

http://smashthestack.org

http://ictf.cs.ucsb.edu/

Global

Global

Global

Global

NetRiders

NetWars

PacketWars

SchmooCon Hack Fortress

Over 18

Global

Over 18

Over 18

Smash the Stack Wargaming Network

Over 18

UCSB International Capture the Flag

Over 18

List of Cyber Competitions (Provided by Dan Manson)

36

Appendix 3: 
Contributors

The views expressed by these contributors do not necessarily reflect the views of their 
organizations.

Laurin Buchanan
CISSP, Principal Investigator
Applied Visions, Inc., a division of Secure Decisions 

A Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) with 
over 25 years’ experience in Information Technology, Ms. Buchanan 
has experience both as an information security practitioner and a 
cyber security researcher. She has a strong technical background in 
infrastructure, networks and systems, having managed corporate IT 
operations and security operations, as well as developing information 
security programs and awareness training at all levels. Ms. Buchanan 
currently is Principle Investigator for cybersecurity software R&D projects 
to develop novel techniques for cybersecurity education, cyber security 
visualizations, and to automatically model and map dependencies 
between missions, users, and the cyber assets they depend on.

Laurin cut her teeth defending a corporate network from international 
hacktivists in 2000, and brought inline Intrusion Prevention Systems onto 
that network a year later. 

She has a strong technical background in infrastructure, networks and 
systems, having performed and managed IT operations, as well as 
security operations and architecture. She has developed and delivered 
security awareness training at all levels. She has created and managed 
corporate information security programs from the ground up. Coming 
into IT from business, she understands business needs and compliance 
concerns and can communicate these to management. 

Laurin leads research efforts to develop ways to improve the 
performance of people who are defending our networks and 
information, through better education, more usable systems, and 
leveraging automation wherever possible. 

37

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceChris Camacho
Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer
Ninjajobs
 

Chris is responsible of the leadership and direction of NinjaJobs. He 
has over 15 years of technical leadership in cybersecurity and has led 
initiatives across multiple areas including Incident Response, Forensic 
Investigations, Security Operations Centers, and Operational Strategy, to 
ensure Global Financials cyber risk posture are aligned with the business. 
Chris is an active member of the FS-ISAC Threat Intelligence Committee 
and serves on multiple cybersecurity and innovation boards.

Mike Cameron
Director of Business Development
Leidos
 

Mike is the Director of Business Development for Leidos Cyber 
Operations/AIMO and leads the market strategy and business 
development for cyber solutions and services across Intelligence, 
Defense, Civil, and International markets. He is experienced in forming 
regional marketing and sales agreements with international partners. 
Mike currently serves as an industry advisor to a NATO working group 
on Cybersecurity and is a frequent public speaker on the subject of 
cyber workforce development.

38

Tony Cole
Vice President and Global Government CTO
FireEye, Inc.
 

Tony Cole, VP and Global Government CTO at FireEye, assists 
governments in understanding today’s advanced threats and their 
potential impact. He previously held senior roles at McAfee and 
Symantec and is retired from the U.S. Army. His last assignment was the 
Technical Operations Manager for Network Security at the Pentagon and 
he’s been featured in FCW, CNN, BBC, ABC, Washington Times, and 
many others. He’s served on the President’s NSTAC IoT subcommittee 
and was appointed to the FCC’s CSRIC-V Council. In 2014 he was 
awarded ‘Industry IT Executive of the Year’ by GCN, and in 2015 was 
inducted into the Wash 100 by Executive Mosaic as one of the most 
influential Industry Executives impacting Government. He has a BSc in 
Computer Networking, is the former President of ISSA-DC, and an ICIT 
Fellow.

Peter Clay
Principal 
Zeneth Tech Partners 

With over 20 years of experience in Cybersecurity, Peter Clay is a veteran 
CISO, a visionary practitioner and respected business leader skilled at 
building highly effective cybersecurity initiatives on a global scale.  With 
notable expertise in making complex security concepts accessible and 
actionable, Peter embraces innovation, encouraging his teams to think 
out of the box to achieve risk management objectives.  As a Principal at 
Zeneth Tech Partners, Peter is focused on scaling information security to 
meet the needs of the other 99% of organizations’ information security 
requirements.  Peter is a frequent keynote speaker at industry events 
and meetings of corporate executive boards and trade associations.  
He has authored several publications, and been cited as a source for 
many others.  Peter holds a certification in Information System Security 
(CISSP).  An Oxford University-educated historian, Peter brings a unique 
perspective to cybersecurity, with his passion for American and British 
history informing his studies of modern cyber warfare.

39

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceKaren Evans
Partner
KE&T Partners, LLC
CyberCompEx.org
 

Currently serving as an independent director and outside manager for 
publicly traded companies. Karen oversaw the development of over 
$70B spent by the federal government in Information Technology 
and associated services and advised the Director of the Office of 
Management and Budget on the performance of these investments and 
the federal enterprise architecture promoting inter and intra-agency 
cooperation for key Presidential initiatives and cross government 
solutions. Accomplishments included Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive 12 regarding authentication; IPv6, Information Sharing 
Initiatives, Cyber Security, privacy to address the interests of the citizens 
and government to improve government services through the use 
of technology and leveraging the federal government buying power 
and requirements with the establishment of the SmartBUY program. 
Transparency and accountability were demonstrated with the publication 
of the Management Watch List and High Risk List, the E-Gov Benefits 
Report to Congress, FISMA reporting and increased focus on cyber 
security with the creation of the Federal Desktop Core Configuration.

40

Bryan Fite
Global Account CISO
British Telecom
 

A committed security practitioner and entrepreneur, Bryan is currently 
a Global Account CISO with BT Security. He specializes in using 
Facilitated Innovation to solve “Wicked Business Problems”. Having 
spent over 25 years in mission-critical environments, Bryan is uniquely 
qualified to advise organizations on what works and what doesn’t. Bryan 
has worked with organizations in every major vertical throughout the 
world and has established himself as a trusted advisor. “The challenges 
facing organizations today require a business reasonable approach 
to managing risk, trust and limited resources, while protecting what 
matters.”

Professional Highlights:
• Host of Day-Con the annual “Non-Con” Dayton Security Summit
• Founded Meshco™ Producers of PacketWars™
• Introduced Forensix™ computer forensics collection, analysis and 

visualization suite 

• Released AFIRM: Active Forensic Intelligent Response Method to the 

general public

• Founded GETSecure™ a full service security practice; products, 

professional services, managed services and training.

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

41

Jessica Gulick 
CEO and Founder 
Katzcy Consulting
 

Jessica Gulick is founder and CEO of Katzcy Consulting, a woman-
owned growth strategy and marketing firm specializing in cybersecurity 
start-ups and SMBs.  A CISSP and PMP, Jessica is a 20-year veteran in 
the cybersecurity industry with proven experience in strategy, cyber 
policy, business metrics, global marketing and security program 
management.  She has successfully launched multiple award-winning 
global cyber marketing campaigns for services, products and cyber 
competitions.  Her portfolio of work also includes the authorship of 
NIST Special Publications, strategic cybersecurity plans for federal 
government agencies and white papers for private companies, 
cybersecurity consulting and engineering projects for national security 
and financial clients, and a public-private initiative launching the first 
Maryland Cyber Challenge and Conference. In addition to being a 
Mach37 mentor, she is president of the Virginia Tech MBA alumni board, 
vice president of the Society of Women Cyberjutsu national board, and 
co-chair of the NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup.

Katie Hanson
Director 
Sherman Consulting
   

Sherman Consulting was founded in 1997 when professionals from 
various industries of organizational development, PR, government and 
public affairs came together to create a synergy of talents to offer clients 
strategic and innovative solutions.

As a Director at Sherman Consulting, I offer an entrepreneurial spirit 
to Sherman Consulting’s environment offering innovative solutions for 
clients in the fields of communications, marketing, public relations, 
government relations and business strategy, where I oversee various 
aspects of both strategy and implementation processes.
Currently, my focus at Sherman resides in the cybersecurity industry as 
we facilitate the strategy and advancement of workforce development 
programs and information sharing that builds the cybersecurity 
community. We specifically work with organizations and programs 
including US Cyber Challenge, the Center for Internet Security, the 
Council on CyberSecurity and CyberCompEx.

42

Jenn Henley
Director of Security
Facebook
 

Jennifer (Jenn) Henley is a Director of Security at Facebook. In her role, 
Jenn is responsible for leadership and planning across the Security 
organization.  On a day to day basis she manages growth & strategic 
initiatives for the organization and also the team’s cross functional 
relationships with other departments and teams across Facebook. Prior 
to her employment at Facebook, Jenn was Chief of Staff for the CISO 
at PayPal. She has over 15 years industry experience, holds her PMP 
certification and is a graduate of St. Mary’s College of California where 
she received a B.A. in Communications.  She also holds an Honorary 
Doctorate of Humane Letters from Bay Path University.    

George Heron
Executive Vice President, Education and Mentorship
Lifejourney
 

George Heron is the executive vice president for Education and 
Mentorship at LifeJourney, an online learning platform that enables 
students to live a day in the life of America’s STEM and Cyber leaders. 
He has a passion for inspiring students to follow paths in STEM 
education and explore technology careers, and he is active in youth 
training events, cyber competitions and education-based technology 
initiatives across the country.

43

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceLisa Jiggetts
Founder & CEO
Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu
 

Lisa Foreman-Jiggetts is the founder and CEO of the Women’s Society 
of Cyberjutsu (WSC); one of the fastest growing nonprofits dedicated to 
women in cybersecurity. WSC provides women with the resources and 
support required to enter and advance as a cybersecurity professional. 
Her organization uses a holistic approach to develop programs that 
train women in both the hard technical skills and soft skills, leaving 
them feeling empowered to succeed. She is most proud to be known 
as a straight-up, but down-to-earth motivator with the women whom 
she mentors. A service-disabled veteran, she began her cyber career 
in the military where she excelled as an IT security specialist. Not just 
a full time geek with a passion for making a difference, she is also an 
accomplished artist.

44

Peder J. Jungck
Vice President, Chief Technology Officer
BAE Systems, Intelligence & Security
 

Peder is Vice President and Chief Technology Officer of BAE Systems 
Intelligence & Security (I&S) sector. BAE Systems Intelligence & Security 
enables the U.S. government to transform data into intelligence and 
provides engineering, integration and sustainment support for critical 
military platforms and systems. I&S provides services and products to 
the Department of Defense, the intelligence community, federal law 
enforcement officials troops deployed around the world.  

Peder joined BAE Systems in April 2013 after serving in several key 
technology leadership positions for Science Applications International 
Corporation (now Leidos), most recently as the Senior Vice President 
and Chief Technology Officer of the Cyber Security Group within the 
National Security Sector.  He was also named a Technical Fellow during 
his tenure.  He joined SAIC via the acquisition of the Silicon Valley based 
CloudShield Technologies, Inc. which he founded in 2000 delivering 
trusted platforms for cyber security to the defense, intelligence and 
commercial telecommunications provider communities.  Previous roles 
include leading large scale IT deployments in the retail sector while 
working for AT&T/NCR, as well as a breadth of IT and Software, CTO 
and CIO roles for private, public and venture backed corporations. 

He has earned 24 patents, published many peer-reviewed papers, a 
regular conference speaker and co‐author of the packetC language 
for cyber and software defined networking.  Among his board and 
advisory board seats, he serves on the board of IT-ISAC on behalf of 
BAE Systems as well as on the Dean’s Leadership Council for Clarkson 
University’s College of Engineering.  Peder attended Clarkson University 
for electrical and computer engineering and received a Bachelor of Arts 
degree from Beloit College in mathematics and computer science.

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

45

Joseph Krull
Security Principal Director
Accenture
‐  

Joe provides high-impact professional services to Fortune 500/Global 
1000 companies and emerging technology companies. He is an author 
and frequent public speaker on security and privacy subjects including 
application security, mobile device security, secure e-commerce, identity 
fraud prevention, wireless threats and the maturing science of Network 
Intrusion Prevention. He is a Certified Protection Professional (CPP), 
Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP), National 
Security Agency IAM Certified, Certified Information Systems Auditor 
(CISA), Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control (CRISC) and 
Certified Information Privacy Professional (CIPP).  Joe is an Advisory 
Board member of the  National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition 
(NCCDC) and a member of the Texas Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO) Council.

Marcelle Lee
Adjunct Professor
Anne Arundel Community College, 
University of Maryland
 

Marcelle Lee is a malware analyst, an adjunct professor at Anne Arundel 
Community College and University of Maryland, and co-founder of 
Fractal Security Group, LLC.  She is involved with several industry 
organizations, working groups, and boards, including the Women’s 
Society of Cyberjutsu and the ISSA Women in Security Special Interest 
Group.

Marcelle has earned the CSX-P, GCFA, GCIA, GCIH, GPEN, GISF, GCCC,  
C|EH, CCNA, Security+, Network+, and ACE industry certifications.  She 
holds several degrees and is currently pursuing a Master’s degree in 
cybersecurity at UMBC.  She is a cybersecurity competition enthusiast 
and an active volunteer in outreach to students and the community.

46

William Leigher
Government Cyber Solutions Director
Raytheon
 

Bill is a career U.S. Navy officer with thirty-three years’ experience in 
operations and staff experience in Signals Intelligence, Information 
Operations, Communications and Network Operations.   He has 
extensive and hands-on experience operating and securing enterprise 
networks on a worldwide scale. Developed and implemented 
methodologies for predictive analysis of network intrusion events. Bill is 
an effective communicator of strategic and technical concepts and plans.

Dr. Daniel Manson
Professor and Department Chair 
California State Polytechnic University
 

Dr. Dan Manson, CISSP, is a Professor and Department Chair in 
Computer Information Systems at California State Polytechnic 
University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona). Dr. Manson has taught 
Information Systems Auditing, Internet Security and Computer 
Forensics in the College of Business Administration Computer 
Information Systems undergraduate and Master of Science in 
Information Systems Auditing programs. From September 2003 to 
March 2004 and January to December 2006, Dr. Manson served as the 
campus Information Security Officer for Cal Poly Pomona.

Dr. Manson led the effort for Cal Poly Pomona to be designated a 
National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance 
Education in 2005 and again in 2008. Dr. Manson is in charge of the 
Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition and California 
Cyber Challenge as part of the United States Cyber Challenge.

Dan has been co-Principal Investigator on three National Science 
Foundation grants to support workforce, curriculum and professional 
development in cyber security, including the current CyberWatch West 
NSF ATE Regional Center grant. Dan serves on the Academic Relations 
Committee for the Los Angeles Chapter of the Information Systems 
Audit and Control Association and is a past president of the Southern 
California High Technology Crime Investigation Association.

47

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceJim Michaud
Director, CyberTalent Solutions
The SANS Institute
 

Jim Michaud is the Director of CyberTalent Solutions for the SANS 
Institute, which helps clients find, develop, and retain qualified 
cybersecurity professionals. SANS VetSuccess and Women’s Academy 
programs are bringing new and diverse talent to this critical field. He 
also teaches human resources at the highly regarded School of Human 
Resources and Labor Relations at Michigan State University. He is a 
frequent guest speaker on topics of high interest to the global HR 
community. Prior to SANS, Jim held senior executive positions in HR 
at Cliffs Natural Resources, Arcelor Mittal, and Alcoa. He is a Board 
member of the Detroit Manufacturing Renaissance Council, the Global 
Employment Institute, and the Michigan State University School of 
Human Resources Advisory Board.

48

Diane Miller
Director, InfoSec Operations and Cyber Initiatives
Northrop Grumman Corporation
 

Diane Miller is the director of InfoSec Operations and Identity 
Management for Northrop Grumman Corporation, and is Northrop 
Grumman director of Global Cyber Education and Workforce 
Development Programs. In her role as director, Infosec Operations 
and Identity Management, Ms. Miller ensures effective operational 
leadership of the Information Security function for Northrop Grumman’s 
Global Network and leads all aspects of both assured identity and 
identity provisioning for the company. In her role as director for Global 
Cyber Education and Workforce Development Programs, Ms. Miller 
is the focal point for the corporation’s global cybersecurity education, 
outreach and workforce development efforts, leading its commitment 
to cultivate a highly-trained, global cyber workforce of tomorrow.

Ms. Miller is a member of the Advisory Board for the IEEE Software 
Technology Conference, a member of the Association of Information 
Technology Professionals, and a founding member of the National 
Software Council. For 12 years, she served on the Editorial Board of the 
Northrop Grumman Corporation Technology Review Journal. She is a 
member of the President’s Strategy Development Council for California 
State Polytechnic University, Pomona, the National Visiting Committee 
for the National Science Foundation’s National CyberWatch Center 
and CyberWatch West, and a member of the Education and Workforce 
Development Working Group at Department of Homeland Security.

Ms. Miller graduated Magna Cum Laude with a bachelor of science 
degree in information systems from California State Polytechnic 
University, Pomona. She is a Certified Computing Professional 
(CCP), conferred by the Institute for the Certification of Computer 
Professionals, and is a Certified Six Sigma Green Belt.

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

49

William Newhouse
Deputy Director
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
 

Bill Newhouse is the Deputy Director of the National Initiative for 
Cybersecurity Education (NICE), and Senior Security Engineer at that 
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), Both NICE 
and the NCCoE are part of the Applied Cybersecuirty Division in the 
Information Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST).   

As the deputy director of NICE, he leads and promotes efforts within 
government and with those involved in cybersecurity competitions 
to foster, energize, and promote a robust network and an integrated 
ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce 
development that can more effectively secure cyberspace.  

At the NCCoE, he is leading the drafting of building blocks that 
address broad technology gaps in cybersecurity implementations that 
affect multiple sectors. These projects rely on insight and passion from 
members of various industries who share a common goal of meeting 
a particular cybersecurity need and will demonstrate commercially 
available technologies that provide cybersecurity improvements to the 
multiple sectors addressed. 

Additionally, Mr. Newhouse promotes cybersecurity R&D efforts as a 
co-chair of a Federal cybersecurity interagency working group and as 
a regular representative to other federal cybersecurity R&D working 
groups. 

Before coming to NIST in 2010, Bill spent five years in the Office of 
the Secretary of Defense where he worked initially with the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (ASD(R&E)) and 
then with the Office of the Chief Information Officer for Identity and 
Information Assurance focused on cybersecurity R&D and technology 
discovery. Bill utilized the Defense Venture Catalyst Initiative (DeVenCI) 
to focus on innovative companies working in areas that had the potential 
to improve cybersecurity. Bill started his Federal career at NSA evolving 
from telecommunications to information assurance to cybersecurity.

Mr. Newhouse is a graduate of both the Georgia Institute of Technology 
and George Washington University and has been with the federal 
government for over 29 years.

50

Rodney Petersen
Director
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
 

Rodney Petersen is the director of the National Initiative for 
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST). He previously served as the Managing Director 
of the EDUCAUSE Washington Office and a Senior Government 
Relations Officer. He founded and directed the EDUCAUSE 
Cybersecurity Initiative and was the lead staff liaison for the Higher 
Education Information Security Council. Prior to joining EDUCAUSE, 
he worked at two different times for the University of Maryland - first 
as Campus Compliance Officer in the Office of the President and 
later as the Director of IT Policy and Planning in the Office of the Vice 
President and Chief Information Officer. He also completed one year of 
federal service as an Instructor in the Academy for Community Service 
for AmeriCorps’ National Civilian Community Corps. He is the co-
editor of a book entitled “Computer and Network Security in Higher 
Education”. He received his law degree from Wake Forest University and 
bachelors degrees in political science and business administration from 
Alma College. He was awarded a certificate as an Advanced Graduate 
Specialist in Education Policy, Planning, and Administration from the 
University of Maryland.

51

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDavina Pruitt-Mentle
Academic Lead
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
 

Dr. Davina Pruitt-Mentle serves as Lead for Academic Engagement of 
the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Prior to joining NICE, she 
was a senior researcher and policy analyst for Educational Technology 
Policy, Research and Outreach (ETPRO) and served as the Co-PI for the 
National Science Foundation (NSF) supported National Cyberwatch 
Center (NCC). Previous to NCC leadership, she served as faculty within 
the College of Education at the University of Maryland, College Park, 
and served as Director of Educational Technology Outreach within the 
College of Education at UMCP from 2001-2008. She has spent the past 
20 years conducting research on student and educator cyberawareness, 
and developing programs to help increase the cybersecurity workforce 
pipeline. She received her Ph.D. in Educational Technology Policy from 
the University of Maryland, her M.Ed from Lynchburg College, and her 
B.S. from Virginia Tech.

52

Nasrin Rezai
Global Chief Information Security Officer 
GE Capital &
GE Digital Security Governance, Tech Risk and M&A
 

Nasrin Rezai is GE Capital’s Global Chief Information Security Officer 
and head of Corporate Governance, Technology Risk and M&A security, 
for the industrial GE businesses. In this role she is responsible for all 
aspects of cyber security management including incident response, 
threat intelligence, security management, operation, compliance. 

Prior to joining GE, Nasrin was SVP Chief Technology Risk Officer in the 
Enterprise Risk Management Organization at State Street. In this role, 
she oversaw the creation of a technology risk management function to 
ensure effective, independent technology risk management governance, 
improved risk-based management decision processes and framework 
and automated processes and reporting. 

Nasrin’s other senior roles also included chief Technology Officer of 
Security for Cisco Sales and architecture function. In that role, she 
promoted thought leadership in security architecture and technology 
for Cisco’s customers. She also led go to market strategies to embed 
security in cross architecture selling models. Other roles at Cisco also 
included responsibility for Cisco’s global security vision, strategy, and 
architecture to protect the company’s information and computing 
assets. In that capacity, she integrated leading-edge technologies and 
solutions  —  including borderless networking, “BYOD,” virtualization 
and cloud computing  —  into the company’s security architecture. With 
responsibility for the security architectures of Cisco’s diverse businesses 
such as WebEx, Nasrin oversaw the development and management 
of the company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) security model.  Prior 
to Cisco, Nasrin held a series of executive-level positions at Hewlett 
Packard Corporation. 

Throughout her career, Nasrin has promoted engineering, architecture 
in designing security solutions for large enterprises.  She is passionate 
about helping others develop their potential, and mentors many young 
men and women. She holds a master’s degree in business administration 
and a bachelor’s degree in information systems. She holds an Executive 
Certification from Harvard and Cambridge. 

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

53

Monica Ricci
Executive Producer, Content and Messaging
Katzcy Consulting, LLC 
 

Throughout her career, Monica’s method is to directly engage with 
customers and market experts to realize her mission: bringing insights 
and market awareness into an organization’s strategy, roadmap and 
execution.  She excels at bridging the expanse between technical teams 
and business leaders, positioning technology both to optimize business 
processes and to deliver intelligence, as well as translating business 
goals and objectives into technical requirements.  Monica worked for 
over twenty years in the telecommunications industry, as a cellular radio 
engineer, an operations business analyst, a product manager and a 
director of marketing strategy. She has a BS in Physics from Santa Clara 
University and an MBA from the University of Chicago Booth School of 
Business.

54

Bernie Skoch
CyberPatriot National Commissioner 
 

Brigadier General Bernie Skoch (USAF, Ret.) was named National 
Commissioner of CyberPatriot, the Air Force Association’s National 
Youth Cyber Education Program, in 2010. Skoch graduated from the 
University of Arkansas in 1974 with a bachelor’s degree in industrial 
engineering. Upon graduation he was commissioned as a second 
lieutenant in the Air Force. His 29-year Air Force career took him 
throughout the United States, Europe, Asia, the Pacific, and the Middle 
East on permanent and temporary duty until retiring at the rank of 
brigadier general. 

Skoch has more than 20 years of experience in leadership positions 
developing, managing and implementing communications and 
information systems for the United States Air Force as well as the 
Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA).  During his time at DISA 
he served as the Principal Director for Customer Advocacy and also 
as the Principal Director for Network Services.  Within the USAF he 
served as Director of Mission Systems, Director of Communications 
Operations, and Director of Chief Information Officer Support where 
he was responsible for aligning information technology systems with 
business process improvements.  He has developed policies for global 
telephone, video, radio, voice, data and satellite systems.  Before 
joining CyberPatriot, Skoch was a consultant in the cyber and IT industry. 

As Commissioner, Skoch oversees the planning and implementation 
of CyberPatriot and provides leadership and support for the program’s 
development.  In this role, Skoch is able to further student interest in 
science, technology, engineering and mathematics related studies, as 
well as increase their awareness of cybersecurity threats. 

Bernie is an Instrument-Rated Commercial Pilot, an amateur astronomer, 
a marathon runner and a ham radio operator. Bernie and Debbie, his 
wife of 44 years, have six children and eighteen grandchildren, all 
residing in Northwest Arkansas. 

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce

55

Bobbie Stempfley
Director Cyber Strategy Implementation
The MITRE Corporation
 

Roberta “Bobbie” Stempfley is currently director of cybersecurity 
implementation at The MITRE Corporation. She is responsible for 
advancing MITRE’s cyber strategy, shaping the company’s cyber 
work program, executing the cyber business strategy, and raising 
awareness across the customer base. Most recently, Ms. Stempfley 
served in key leadership roles in the Department of Homeland Security, 
including deputy assistant secretary and acting assistant secretary for 
cybersecurity and communications. Previously, Ms. Stempfley was 
the chief information officer at DISA. Ms. Stempfley holds a B.S. in 
engineering mathematics from the University of Arizona and an M.S. in 
computer science from James Madison University.

Dr. Adam Tagert
Technical Director 
NSA Science of Security Program
 

Adam Tagert is the Science of Security (SoS) Technical lead in National 
Security Agency Research Directorate. He works in all aspects of SoS 
particularly in the promotion of collaboration and use of foundational 
cybersecurity research. He promotes rigorous research methods by 
leading the Annual Best Scientific Cybersecurity Paper Competition 
and supports the SoS community as a frequent poster on the SoS 
Virtual Organization Site. Dr. Tagert received his Ph.D. from Carnegie 
Mellon University in Engineering and Public Policy where he researched 
national cybersecurity strategies of small developing nations, particularly 
Rwanda. He majored in Computer Science at Princeton University.

56

Greg Touhill
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity and Communications
DHS
 

Greg Touhill is one of the nation’s premier cybersecurity and information 
technology senior executives. He is a highly experienced leader 
of large, complex, diverse, and global operations, and a senior US 
federal government official leading national programs to protect the 
United States and its critical infrastructure. A decorated combat leader, 
American diplomat, and senior executive with documented high 
levels of success on the battlefield and in the boardroom, Greg is an 
accomplished author and highly sought public speaker.  In September 
2016, he was named as the first ever federal chief information security 
officer, reporting to Tony Scott (federal CIO) and responsible for 
bolstering the government’s digital defenses.

57

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDan Waddell
Regional Managing Director, North America Region
 (ISC)², Inc.
 

Dan Waddell is responsible for managing (ISC)² operations in the North 
America Region, which primarily focuses on supporting our U.S. and 
Canadian members, customers and strategic partners with over 20 years 
of experience in information technology, information assurance, and 
cybersecurity.  Dan has served in various management and leadership 
roles with (ISC)² for over 15 years.  He has been a featured guest speaker 
on cybersecurity issues on both TV and radio shows such as “NBC 
News4 Midday,” “Government Matters” and “Federal News Radio,” 
in addition to several cybersecurity conferences across the United 
States. He is currently a Fellow at the Institute of Critical Infrastructure 
Technology (ICIT), a non-partisan think-tank based in Washington, D.C. 
that acts as a conduit between the legislative community, technology 
providers and federal agencies. Mr. Waddell also chairs both the (ISC)² 
U.S Government Advisory Council and the U.S. Government Executive 
Writers Bureau, and received the (ISC)² President’s Award in 2013.

During his consulting career, Dan’s clients included the Department of 
Transportation, Department of Defense, Department of State, Internal 
Revenue Service, Social Security Administration, Department of Health 
and Human Services and the Department of Homeland Security. 
Services provided included CISO/CSO advisory services, information 
security program management, secure cloud computing, security 
authorization, privacy, data loss prevention, information assurance, 
regulatory compliance, threat and vulnerability assessments, incident 
response, disaster recovery/business continuity, risk management and 
security engineering.

58

Dr. Gregory White
Director, Center for Infrastructure Assurance and Security (CIAS)
UT San Antonio

Dr. Gregory White has been involved in computer and network security 
since 1986. He spent 30 years with the Air Force and Air Force Reserves. 
He obtained his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Texas A&M University 
in 1995 conducting research in the area of computer network intrusion 
detection and he continues to conduct research in this area today. He 
currently serves as the Director of the Center for Infrastructure Assurance 
and Security (CIAS) and is an Associate Professor of Computer Science 
at The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA).

Dr. White has been involved in security instruction for many years. 
He taught at the U.S. Air Force Academy for seven years where he 
developed and taught courses on Computer Security and Information 
Warfare. He helped build the nation’s first undergraduate information 
warfare laboratory while at the Academy and twice received the 
Academy’s Computer Science Research Excellence Award. At UTSA 
Dr. White continues to develop and teach courses on computer and 
network security. He has also been very active in the development and 
presentation of cyber security exercises for states and communities 
around the nation and with the development of training designed to 
help states and communities develop viable and sustainable cyber 
security programs. He very active in development of cyber security 
competitions and was instrumental in the development of NCCDC and 
CyberPatriot.

Dr. White has written numerous articles and conference papers on 
computer security. He is also the co-author for five textbooks on security 
and has written chapters for two others. His current research interests 
include an examination of organizational issues affecting computer 
security, high-speed intrusion detection, infrastructure protection, 
community cyber incident response, and the development of the 
Community Cyber Security Maturity Model (CCSMM).

59

Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce© Copyright 2016 Katzcy Consulting.

