For Release on Delivery 
Expected at 2:00 p.m. ET 
Tuesday, April 4, 2017 

 
United States Government Accountability Office 
 
Testimony  
 
 
 
Before the Subcommittee on Information 
 
 
Technology, Committee on Oversight 
 
 
and Government Reform, House of 
 
 
 
Representatives 
CYBERSECURITY 
Federal Efforts Are Under 
Way That May Address 
Workforce Challenges 

Statement of Nick Marinos, Director, Cybersecurity and 
Information Management Issues 

 
 
 

 

GAO-17-533T 

 

 April 4, 2017 
CYBERSECURITY 
Federal Efforts Are Under Way That May 
Address Workforce Challenges 

  

Highlights of GAO-17-533T, a testimony 
before the Subcommittee on Information 
Technology, Committee on Oversight and 
Government Reform, House of 
Representatives 

Why GAO Did This Study 
The federal government faces an ever-
evolving array of cyber-based threats 
to its systems and information. Further, 
federal systems and networks are 
inherently at risk because of their 
complexity, technological diversity, and 
geographic dispersion, among other 
reasons. GAO has designated the 
protection of federal information 
systems as a government-wide high-
risk area since 1997. In 2001, GAO 
introduced strategic government-wide 
human capital management as another 
area of high risk. A key component of 
the government’s ability to mitigate and 
respond to cyber threats is having a 
qualified, well-trained cybersecurity 
workforce. However, shortages in 
qualified cybersecurity professionals 
have been identified, which can hinder 
the government’s ability to ensure an 
effective workforce. 
This statement discusses challenges 
agencies face in ensuring an effective 
cybersecurity workforce, recent 
initiatives aimed at improving the 
federal cyber workforce, and ongoing 
activities that could assist in recruiting 
and retaining cybersecurity 
professionals. In preparing this 
statement, GAO relied on published 
work related to federal cybersecurity 
workforce efforts, and information 
reported by other federal and non-
federal entities focusing on 
cybersecurity workforce challenges. 
What GAO Recommends 
Over the past several years, GAO has 
made several recommendations to 
federal agencies to enhance their IT 
workforce efforts. Agencies are in 
various stages of implementing these 
recommendations. 
 
View GAO-17-533T. For more information, 
contact Nick Marinos at (202) 512-9342 or 
marinosn@gao.gov. 

 

What GAO Found 
GAO and others have identified a number of key challenges facing federal 
agencies in ensuring that they have an effective cybersecurity workforce: 
• 

Identifying skills gaps: As GAO reported in 2011, 2015, and 2016, federal 
agencies have faced challenges in effectively implementing workforce 
planning processes for information technology (IT) and defining cybersecurity 
staffing needs. GAO also reported that the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) could improve its efforts to close government-wide skills gaps. 

•  Recruiting and retaining qualified staff: Federal agencies continue to be 

challenged in recruiting and retaining qualified cybersecurity staff. For 
example, in August 2016, GAO reported that federal chief information 
security officers faced significant challenges in recruiting and retaining 
personnel with high-demand skills. 

•  Federal hiring activities: The federal hiring process may cause agencies to 

lose out on qualified candidates. In August 2016 GAO reported that OPM 
and agencies needed to assess available federal hiring authorities to more 
effectively meet their workforce needs.  

To address these and other challenges, several executive branch initiatives have 
been launched and federal laws enacted. For example, in July 2016, OPM and 
the Office of Management and Budget issued a strategy with goals, actions, and 
timelines for improving the cybersecurity workforce. In addition, laws such as the 
Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 require agencies to 
identify IT and cyber-related positions of greatest need. 
Further, other ongoing activities have the potential to assist agencies in 
developing, recruiting, and retaining an effective cybersecurity workforce. For 
example: 
•  Promoting cyber and science, technology, engineering and 

mathematics (STEM) education: A center funded by the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) developed a kindergarten to 12th grade-level 
cyber-based curriculum that provides opportunities for students to become 
aware of cyber issues, engage in cyber education, and enter cyber career 
fields.   

•  Cybersecurity scholarships: Programs such as Scholarship for Service 

provide tuition assistance to undergraduate and graduate students studying 
cybersecurity in exchange for a commitment to federal service. 

•  National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies: DHS, in 

partnership with several other agencies, launched the National Initiative for 
Cybersecurity Careers and Studies in 2013 as an online resource to connect 
government employees, students, educators, and industry with cybersecurity 
training providers across the nation.  

If effectively implemented, these initiatives, laws, and activities could further 
agencies’ efforts to establish the cybersecurity workforce needed to secure and 
protect federal IT systems. 
 

 

 United States Government Accountability Office 

Letter 
  

 
Letter 
 
 
 
 

Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and Members of the 
Subcommittee: 

Thank you for inviting me to participate in today’s hearing on the federal 
information technology (IT) and cybersecurity workforce. As recent 
cyberattacks have illustrated, the need for robust and effective 
cybersecurity has never been greater. Threats to federal IT infrastructure 
continue to grow in number and sophistication, posing a risk to the 
reliable functioning of our government. Compounding the risk, systems 
used by federal agencies often have security vulnerabilities. 

Accordingly, having cybersecurity professionals in the federal workforce 
to help to prevent or mitigate vulnerabilities in federal IT systems that can 
be exploited by the increasing number of threats from a variety of sources 
is essential. However, achieving a resilient, well-trained, and dedicated 
cybersecurity workforce to help protect our information and infrastructure 
has been a long-standing challenge for the federal government. Since 
1997 we have identified the protection of federal information systems as a 
government-wide high-risk area. In addition, in 2001, we introduced 
strategic government-wide human capital management as another area 
of high risk.1 

My statement today discusses a number of the key challenges federal 
agencies face in ensuring that they have an effective cybersecurity 
workforce with the right knowledge, skills, and abilities to secure federal 
systems and critical cyber infrastructure. I will also discuss executive 
branch initiatives and federal laws aimed at improving the federal 
cybersecurity workforce, as well as other ongoing activities that could 
assist agencies in recruiting and retaining cybersecurity professionals. 

In preparing this statement, we relied on our previously published work 
related to cybersecurity and government-wide workforce efforts and 
challenges faced by the federal government in establishing an effective 
cybersecurity workforce. Based on this work, we examined recently 
enacted legislation, executive branch initiatives, and other ongoing 
activities intended to address these challenges. Further, we reviewed 
information reported by other federal and non-federal entities focusing on 
cybersecurity workforce challenges. Our reports cited in this statement 

                                                                                                                       
1GAO, High-Risk Series: Progress on Many High-Risk Areas, While Substantial Efforts 
Needed on Others, GAO-17-317 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 15, 2017). 

Page 1 

GAO-17-533T   

Background 

 
 
 
 
 
 

include detailed discussions of the objectives, scope, and methodology 
for the work that we conducted. 

The work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance 
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate 
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained 
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on 
our audit objectives. 

 
Federal agencies and our nation’s critical infrastructures—such as 
energy, transportation systems, communications, and financial services— 
are dependent on computerized (cyber) information systems and 
electronic data to carry out operations and to process, maintain, and 
report essential information. The information systems and networks that 
support federal operations are highly complex and dynamic, 
technologically diverse, and often geographically dispersed. This 
complexity increases the difficulty in identifying, managing, and protecting 
the myriad of operating systems, applications, and devices comprising the 
systems and networks. 

The security of federal information systems and data is vital to public 
confidence and the nation’s safety, prosperity, and well-being. However, 
systems used by federal agencies are often riddled with security 
vulnerabilities—both known and unknown. For example, the national 
vulnerability database maintained by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) identified 82,384 publicly known cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and exposures as of February 9, 2017, with more being 
added each day. 

Federal systems and networks are also often interconnected with other 
internal and external systems and networks, including the Internet, 
thereby increasing the number of avenues of attack and expanding their 
attack surface. In addition, cyber threats to systems supporting the 
federal government and critical infrastructure are evolving and becoming 
more sophisticated. These threats come from a variety of sources and 
vary in terms of the types and capabilities of the actors, their willingness 
to act, and their motives. For example, foreign nations—where 
adversaries possess sophisticated levels of expertise and significant 
resources to pursue their objectives—pose increasing risks. 

Page 2 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

Cybersecurity professionals can help to prevent or mitigate the 
vulnerabilities that could allow malicious individuals and groups access to 
federal IT systems. The ability to secure federal systems depends on the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities of the federal and contractor workforce that 
uses, implements, secures, and maintains these systems. This includes 
federal and contractor employees who use the IT systems in the course 
of their work as well as the designers, developers, programmers, and 
administrators of the programs and systems. 

However, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has noted that 
the federal government and private industry face a persistent shortage of 
cybersecurity and IT talent to implement and oversee information security 
protections to combat cyber threats. In addition, the RAND Corporation2 
and the Partnership for Public Service3 have reported that there is a 
nationwide shortage of cybersecurity experts, in particular in the federal 
government. According to these reports, this shortage of cybersecurity 
professionals makes securing the nation’s networks more challenging and 
may leave federal IT systems vulnerable to malicious attacks. 

 
We and others have identified a number of key challenges federal 
agencies are facing to ensure that they have a sufficient cybersecurity 
workforce with the skills necessary to protect their information and 
networks from cyber threats. These challenges pertain to identifying and 
closing skill gaps as part of a comprehensive workforce planning process, 
recruiting and retaining qualified staff, and navigating the federal hiring 
process. 

 
A high-performance organization needs a workforce with talent, 
multidisciplinary knowledge, and up-to-date skills in order to achieve its 
mission. To ensure such a workforce for cybersecurity, we have identified 
key practices for strategic IT workforce planning that focus especially on 
the need for organizations to identify and address gaps in critical skills. 
These practices include (1) setting the strategic direction for IT workforce 
planning, (2) analyzing the workforce to identify skill gaps, (3) developing 
                                                                                                                       
2RAND Corporation. Hackers Wanted: An Examination of the Cybersecurity Labor Market 
(2014). 
3The Partnership for Public Service and Booz Allen Hamilton, Cyber-In-security: 
Strengthening the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce (July 2009) and Cyber In-Security II: 
Closing the Federal Talent Gap (April 2015). 

Page 3 

GAO-17-533T   

Agencies Face Key 
Challenges in 
Ensuring an Effective 
Cybersecurity 
Workforce 

Identifying and Closing 
Skill Gaps 

 
 
 
 
 
 

strategies and implementing activities to address these gaps, and (4) 
monitoring and reporting progress in addressing gaps.4 

However, over the last several years, we and others have reported on 
federal agencies’ challenges to define their cybersecurity workforces and 
address their IT skills gaps. For example: 

• 

• 

In November 2011, we reported that eight federal agencies had 
identified challenges in their workforce planning efforts.5 For example, 
they were not able to determine the size of their cybersecurity 
workforce because of variations in how the cyber-related work was 
defined and the lack of a cybersecurity specific occupational series. In 
addition, we noted that the eight agencies had taken varied steps to 
implement workforce planning practices for cybersecurity personnel. 
For example, five of the eight agencies had established cybersecurity 
workforce plans or other agency-wide activities addressing 
cybersecurity workforce planning. However, these plans did not 
always include strategies for addressing gaps in critical skills or 
competencies, among other things. To address these shortcomings, 
we made six recommendations to enhance individual agency 
workforce planning activities. Of the six agencies to which we made 
individual recommendations, five agreed and one neither agreed nor 
disagreed with our recommendations. Since our report was issued, 
the agencies have implemented most of these recommendations. 
In January 2015, we reported that the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) and a Chief Human Capital Officers Council 
working group had identified skills gaps in government-wide, mission-
critical occupations, including cybersecurity.6 We noted that, although 
these initial efforts had created an infrastructure for addressing skills 
gaps, overall progress was mixed. At times, goals had targets that 
were difficult to measure. Likewise, agency officials chose to track 
metrics that often did not allow for an accurate assessment of 
progress made toward these goals for closing skills gaps. In addition, 
OPM had not established time frames or a process for collecting 

                                                                                                                       
4See GAO, Cybersecurity Human Capital: Initiatives Need Better Planning and 
Coordination, GAO-12-8 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 29, 2011) and IT Workforce: Key 
Practices Help Ensure Strong Integrated Program Teams; Selected Departments Need to 
Assess Skill Gaps, GAO-17-8 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 30, 2016). 
5GAO-12-8. 
6GAO, Federal Workforce: OPM and Agencies Need to Strengthen Efforts to Identify and 
Close Mission-Critical Skills Gaps, GAO-15-223 (Washington, D.C.: Jan. 30, 2015). 

Page 4 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

• 

• 

 

government-wide staffing and competency data to help agencies 
determine the competencies that are critical to successfully achieving 
their mission. We pointed out that OPM and selected agencies could 
improve efforts to address skills gaps by strengthening their use of 
quarterly data-driven reviews (known as HRstats). Based on these 
findings, we recommended that OPM (1) strengthen its methodology 
for identifying and addressing skills gaps, (2) establish a schedule and 
process for collecting government-wide staffing and competency data, 
and (3) develop a set of metrics for agency HRstat reviews. OPM 
generally concurred with the first and third recommendations, but did 
not concur with the second recommendation, citing funding 
constraints. These recommendations have not yet been implemented. 
In an April 2015 report, the Partnership for Public Service noted a 
continuing need for the government to develop an understanding of 
the size and skills of the current cybersecurity workforce; project the 
government’s future cybersecurity human capital needs; assess 
qualitative and quantitative gaps between the current workforce and 
the workforce needed to address future challenges; and develop 
strategies, as well as program and policy goals, designed to close 
those gaps. The Partnership attributed these challenges to the lack of 
a government-wide master cybersecurity workforce strategy, leaving 
agencies to operate largely on their own under a haphazard system.7 
In November 2016, we reported that five selected agencies had made 
mixed progress in assessing their IT skill gaps.8 These agencies had 
started focusing on identifying cybersecurity staffing gaps, but more 
work remained in assessing competency gaps and in broadening the 
focus to include the entire IT community. For example, four of the five 
agencies had not demonstrated an established IT workforce planning 
process, which would assist them in identifying and addressing skill 
gaps. In several cases, these shortcomings were due to a lack of 
comprehensive policies and procedures for assessing workforce 
needs. We recommended that the agencies take steps to fully 
implement IT workforce planning practices. The agencies agreed or 
partially agreed with our recommendations; however, the 
recommendations have not yet been implemented. 

                                                                                                                       
7Partnership for Public Service, Cyber In-Security II. 
8GAO-17-8. 

Page 5 

GAO-17-533T   

Recruiting and Retaining 
Qualified Staff 

 
 
 
 
 
 

An effective hiring process meets the needs of agencies and managers 
by filling positions with quality employees through the use of a timely, 
efficient, and transparent process. To recruit and retain personnel with the 
critical skills needed to accomplish their missions, federal agencies can 
offer incentives, such as recruitment, relocation, and retention incentive 
payments; student loan repayments; annual leave enhancements; and 
scholarships. Agencies can also use training and development 
opportunities as an incentive to help recruit and retain employees. 

However, we and others have found that agencies have faced persistent 
challenges in recruiting and retaining well-qualified cybersecurity talent: 

• 

• 

In November 2011, we reported that the quality of cybersecurity 
training and development programs varied significantly across the 
eight agencies in our review. Additionally, most of the eight agencies 
in our review said they used some incentives to support their 
cybersecurity workforce; however, they either had not evaluated or 
had difficulty evaluating whether incentives effectively support hiring 
and retaining highly skilled personnel in hard-to-fill positions.9 We also 
found that, although OPM had planned to develop guidance and tools 
to assist agencies in the administration and oversight of their incentive 
programs, it had not yet done so. To address this shortcoming, we 
recommended that OPM finalize and issue guidance to agencies on 
how to track the use and effectiveness of incentives for hard-to-fill 
positions, including cybersecurity positions; OPM has since 
implemented this recommendation. 
In August 2016, we reported the results of our review of the current 
authorities of agency chief information security officers (CISO).10 
Among other things, CISOs identified key challenges they faced in 
fulfilling their responsibilities. Several of these challenges related to 
the cybersecurity workforce, such as not having enough personnel to 
oversee the implementation of the number and scope of security 
requirements. In addition, CISOs stated that they were not able to 
offer salaries that were competitive with the private sector for 
candidates with high-demand technical skills. Furthermore, CISOs 
said that some security personnel lacked security skills or were not 
sufficiently trained. 

                                                                                                                       
9GAO-12-8. 
10GAO, Federal Chief Information Security Officers: Opportunities Exist to Improve Roles 
and Address Challenges to Authority, GAO-16-686 (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 26, 2016). 

Page 6 

GAO-17-533T   

Navigating the Federal 
Hiring Process 

 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Others have also noted the challenge of hiring and retaining qualified 
cybersecurity professionals. For example, the April 2015 Partnership 
for Public Service report highlighted obstacles to federal recruitment 
of cybersecurity talent, including the inability of the government to 
offer salaries competitive with those in the private sector.11 In addition, 
according to a January 2017 report from the federal CIO Council, 
chief information officers (CIO) reported that it is difficult for agencies 
to offer well-qualified candidates a salary that is competitive with the 
private sector.12 This salary issue in turn can create problems in 
retaining talented government employees. OMB has also identified 
additional potential issues, such as job candidates’ concern that a 
private sector position may give them more autonomy and a more 
flexible work culture than a federal information security position. 

 
We have previously reported that the federal hiring process all too often 
does not meet the needs of (1) agencies in achieving their missions; (2) 
managers in filling positions with the right talent; and (3) applicants for a 
timely, efficient, transparent, and merit-based process. In short, we noted 
that the federal hiring process is often an impediment to the very 
customers it is designed to serve in that it makes it difficult for agencies 
and managers to obtain the right people with the right skills, and 
applicants can be dissuaded from public service because of the complex 
and lengthy procedures.13 

As we and others have reported, the federal hiring process can pose 
obstacles to the efficient and effective hiring of cybersecurity talent: 

•  The Partnership for Public Service reported in 2015 that the 

government loses top candidates to a slow and ineffective hiring 
process characterized by “self-inflicted” process delays and outdated 
assessment methods.14 The CIO Council also reported in January 
2017 that CIOs were often frustrated with the federal hiring process. 
Its report noted that the hiring process for federal agencies often takes 
significantly longer than in the private sector and that selection 

                                                                                                                       
11Partnership for Public Service, Cyber-Insecurity II. 
12CIO Council, State of Federal Information Technology (January 2017). 
13GAO, Human Capital: Transforming Federal Recruiting and Hiring Efforts, GAO-08-762T 
(Washington, D.C.: May 8, 2008). 
14Partnership for Public Service, Cyber In-Security II. 

Page 7 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

• 

officials with limited cybersecurity expertise may misevaluate 
candidates’ capabilities, leading to under-qualified candidates 
advancing ahead of well-qualified ones.15 
In August 2016, we issued a report on the extent to which federal 
hiring authorities were meeting agency needs.16 Although competitive 
hiring17 has been the traditional method of hiring, agencies can use 
additional hiring authorities to expedite the hiring process or achieve 
certain public policy goals. Among other things, we noted that 
agencies rely on a relatively small number of hiring authorities (as 
established by law, executive order, or regulation) to fill the vast 
majority of hires into the federal civil service. Further, while OPM 
collects a variety of data to assess the federal hiring process, neither 
it nor agencies used this information to assess the effectiveness of 
hiring authorities. Conducting such assessments would be a critical 
first step in making more strategic use of the available hiring 
authorities to more effectively meet their hiring needs. We 
recommended that OPM work with agencies to determine the extent 
to which hiring authorities were meeting agency needs and use this 
information to refine, eliminate, or expand authorities as needed. OPM 
generally concurred with these recommendations but has not yet 
implemented them. 

As noted previously, we have identified both information security and 
strategic human capital management as government-wide high-risk 
areas. To address these high-risk areas, agencies need to take focused, 
concerted action, including implementing our outstanding 
recommendations, which can help mitigate the challenges associated 
with developing an effective cybersecurity workforce. This will help ensure 
that the federal government has a capable cybersecurity workforce with 
the necessary knowledge, skills, and competencies for carrying out its 
mission. 

 
                                                                                                                       
15CIO Council, State of Federal Information Technology. 
16GAO, Federal Hiring: OPM Needs to Improve Management and Oversight of Hiring 
Authorities, GAO-16-521 (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 2, 2016). 
17Federal employees can be hired under several different hiring authorities, including 
competitive service (the standard hiring authority), excepted service, and direct hire 
authority. Each authority has different rules and regulations governing the selection of 
candidates, with the rules for excepted service and direct hire intended to make it easier 
or faster for agencies to hire personnel under certain circumstances. 

Page 8 

GAO-17-533T   

Recent Federal 
Initiatives, Legislation, 
and Ongoing 
Activities Are 
Intended to Improve 
the Federal 
Cybersecurity 
Workforce 
Multiple Executive Branch 
Initiatives Are Under Way 
to Address Workforce 
Challenges 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Based on a review of our previous work, we identified a number of 
ongoing efforts to improve the cybersecurity workforce. The executive 
branch, Congress, and federal agencies have recognized the need for, 
and taken actions aimed at achieving, an effective federal cybersecurity 
workforce. Specifically, executive branch organizations have initiatives 
under way to help government agencies address workforce-related 
challenges; Congress passed legislation intended to improve workforce 
planning and hiring; and federal agencies have instituted other ongoing 
activities that may assist the federal government in enhancing its 
cybersecurity workforce. 

 
 
A number of executive branch initiatives have been undertaken over the 
last several years intended to improve the federal cybersecurity 
workforce. They include the following, among others: 

•  The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE): This 

initiative, which began in March 2010, is a partnership between 
government, academia, and the private sector that is coordinated by 
NIST to help improve cybersecurity education, including efforts 
directed at training, public awareness, and the federal cybersecurity 
workforce. The mission of NICE is to energize and promote a robust 
network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and 
workforce development. NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with 
government, academic, and industry partners to build on existing 
successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and bring 
leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity 
professionals helping to keep our nation secure. 

•  National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework: In April 2013, NICE 

published a national cybersecurity workforce framework, which was 
intended to provide a consistent way to define and describe 
cybersecurity work at any public or private organization, including 
federal agencies. The framework defined 31 cybersecurity-related 
specialty areas that were organized into seven categories: (1) 
securely provision, (2) operate and maintain, (3) protect and defend, 
(4) investigate, (5) collect and operate, (6) analyze, and (7) oversight 
and development. 

Page 9 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

In November 2016, NIST issued a draft revision to the framework.18 
Among other things, the revised framework defines work roles19 within 
each specialty area and also describes cybersecurity tasks for each 
work role and the knowledge, skills, and abilities demonstrated by a 
person whose cybersecurity position includes each work role. The 
revised framework is intended to enable agencies to examine specific 
IT, cybersecurity, and cyber-related work roles, and identify personnel 
skills gaps, rather than merely examining the number of vacancies by 
job series. 

•  OMB Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan: In October 

2015, OMB issued its Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation 
Plan (CSIP) for the Federal Civilian Government to present the results 
of a comprehensive review of the federal government’s cybersecurity 
(known as the “Cybersecurity Sprint”).20 According to the CSIP, the 
Cybersecurity Sprint identified two key observations related to the 
federal cybersecurity workforce: (1) the vast majority of federal 
agencies cited a lack of cyber and IT talent as a major resource 
constraint that impacted their ability to protect information and assets; 
and (2) there were a number of existing federal initiatives to address 
this challenge, but implementation and awareness of these programs 
was inconsistent. To address these challenges, among other things, 
the CSIP tasked OPM to provide agencies with information on a 
number of hiring, pay, and leave flexibilities to help recruit and retain 
individuals in cybersecurity positions, and called for OMB and OPM to 
publish a cybersecurity human resources strategy and identify 
possible actions to help the federal government recruit, develop, and 
maintain a pipeline of cybersecurity talent. 

•  Cybersecurity National Action Plan: Announced by the White 

House in February 2016, the Cybersecurity National Action Plan was 
intended to build on the CSIP activities while calling for innovation and 
investments in cybersecurity education and training to strengthen the 
                                                                                                                       
18NIST, NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NCWF), National Initiative for 
Cybersecurity Education (NICE), Draft Special Publication 800-181 (Gaithersburg, Md.: 
November 2016). 
19According to NIST, work roles are the most detailed groupings of IT, cybersecurity, or 
cyber-related work, which include specific knowledge, skills, and abilities required to 
perform a set of tasks. Some examples or work roles could include an authorizing official, 
a software developer, or a system administrator. 
20OMB, Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP) for the Federal Civilian 
Government, M-16-04 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 30, 2015). 

Page 10 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

talent pipeline. As part of this plan, the fiscal year 2017 President’s 
Budget proposed investing $62 million to, among other things, expand 
the CyberCorps Scholarship for Service program to include a 
CyberCorps Reserve program offering scholarships for americans 
who wish to gain cybersecurity education and serve their country in 
the civilian federal government; develop a cybersecurity core 
curriculum for academic institutions; and strengthen the National 
Centers for Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity Program to 
increase the number of participating academic institutions and expand 
cybersecurity education across the nation. These initiatives were 
intended to help the federal government recruit and retain 
cybersecurity talent with the technical skills, policy expertise, and 
leadership abilities necessary to secure federal assets and networks 
well into the future. 

•  Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy: As called for by the 
CSIP, OMB and OPM issued the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce 
Strategy in July 2016, detailing government-wide actions to identify, 
expand, recruit, develop, retain, and sustain a capable and competent 
workforce in key functional areas to address complex and ever-
evolving cyber threats.21 The strategy identified a number of key 
actions within four broad goals to address cybersecurity workforce 
challenges. Table 1 describes the goals of the strategy and 
associated activities. 

Table 1: National Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy Goals, Activities, and Responsible Entities 

Goal 
1. Identify Cybersecurity 
Workforce Needs 

• 

Examples of required activities 
• 

educate federal human resources and chief information officer staff 
about the revised National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework 
expand cybersecurity position coding to capture work roles outlined 
in the framework, and align those roles with cybersecurity 
vacancies 
conduct strategic workforce planning 

• 
•  work with the private sector to explore trends and anticipate future 

2. Expand the 
Cybersecurity Workforce 
through Education and 
Training 

• 

• 

workforce needs 
collaborate with academic institutions to address skill gaps by 
identifying or promoting existing foundational curriculum that 
institutions can consult and adopt 
provide resources to academic institutions to accelerate and 
expand cybersecurity education across the nation 

Responsible entities 
Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), National Initiative for 
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) 
partner agencies, other federal 
agencies 

Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB), National Security 
Agency, Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), and 
NICE partner agencies 

                                                                                                                       
21OMB and OPM, Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, M-16-15 (Washington, D.C.: 
July 12, 2016). 

Page 11 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

Goal 
3. Recruit and Hire 
Highly-Skilled 
Cybersecurity Talent 

4. Retain and Develop 
Highly Skilled Talent 

Examples of required activities 
• 

• 

• 

• 

establish programs to assist federal agencies in their use of 
existing flexibilities for compensation and explore opportunities for 
new or revised pay programs for cybersecurity positions 
establish a cybersecurity HR Cadre (an expert group of HR 
professionals from across the government) to execute a model 
cybersecurity end-to-end hiring process at agencies that is tailored, 
timely, and a high-quality experience for both applicants and hiring 
managers 
develop a common training program for specific categories of 
cybersecurity professionals 
develop career paths that leverage existing programs and 
responsibilities to deliver on best practices of performance 
management, talent development, and compensation flexibility, 
among other things 

Responsible entities 
OPM, DHS 

OPM, DHS 

Source: OMB and OPM Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, M-16-15 (Washington, D.C.: July 12, 2016). | GAO-17-533T 
 

Recent Laws Address 
Cybersecurity Workforce 
Issues 

According to OMB’s 2016 report on agency implementation of the Federal 
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), agencies had 
made progress in implementing this strategy to address workforce 
shortages.22 Specifically, OMB reported that agencies hired over 7,500 
cybersecurity and IT employees in 2016; by comparison, federal agencies 
hired 5,100 cybersecurity and IT employees in 2015. 

These executive branch initiatives include many actions that could help 
address the challenges of identifying and closing skill gaps, recruiting and 
retaining staff, and navigating the federal hiring process. While 
responsible agencies have begun to take action on many of these items, 
it will be important to continue this momentum if these efforts are to be 
effectively implemented and foster a significant improvement in the 
federal cybersecurity workforce. 

 
In addition to the aforementioned executive-level initiatives, several 
recently enacted federal laws include provisions aimed at improving the 
federal cybersecurity workforce.23 For example: 

•  The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 includes provisions 

intended to address challenges related to recruiting and hiring. 

                                                                                                                       
22OMB, Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 Annual Report to 
Congress, Fiscal Year 2016 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 10, 2017). 
23We have not evaluated whether these actions have been implemented. 

Page 12 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

Specifically, the law requires the Department of Commerce, National 
Science Foundation (NSF), and DHS, in consultation with OPM, to 
support competitions and challenges to identify, develop, and recruit 
talented individuals to perform duties relating to the security of 
information technology in federal, state, local, and tribal government 
agencies, and the private sector.24 The law also calls for NSF, in 
coordination with OPM and DHS, to continue a federal cyber 
scholarship-for-service program to recruit and train the next 
generation of information technology professionals, industrial control 
system security professionals, and security managers to meet the 
needs of the cybersecurity mission for federal, state, local, and tribal 
governments. 

•  The Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014 includes 

provisions intended to improve recruiting and hiring of cybersecurity 
staff at DHS. Specifically, the law authorizes the Secretary of 
Homeland Security to establish, as positions in the excepted service, 
such positions in DHS as the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
carry out certain responsibilities relating to cybersecurity.25 

•  The Homeland Security Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment 

Act (2014) requires DHS to take certain actions related to 
cybersecurity workforce planning. Specifically, the Secretary of 
Homeland Security is to identify all positions in DHS that perform 
cybersecurity functions and identify cybersecurity work categories and 
specialty areas of critical need.26 

•  The Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 

assigns specific workforce planning-related actions to federal 
agencies.27 These actions include 

                                                                                                                       
24Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113-274 (Dec. 18, 2014).  
25DHS cybersecurity workforce recruitment and retention provisions were enacted as 
section 3 of the Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113-277 § 3,128 
Stat. 2995, 3005-3008 (Dec. 18, 2014), 6 U.S.C. § 147.  
26The Homeland Security Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act was enacted as part 
of the Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113-277 § 4,128 Stat. 
2995, 3008-3010 (Dec. 18, 2014), 6 U.S.C. § 146 note. The act also requires GAO to 
assess DHS’s efforts implementing the cybersecurity workforce initiative and to report on 
our assessment by December 18, 2017. 
27The Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 was enacted as a part of 
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016, Pub. L. No. 114-113, Div. N, Title III, 129 Stat. 
2242, 2975-77 (Dec. 18, 2015). 

Page 13 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

•  developing a coding structure to capture the work roles outlined in 
the revised National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (OPM, 
in coordination with NIST);28 

•  establishing procedures for implementing the coding structure to 
identify all civilian cybersecurity positions (OPM, in coordination 
with DHS, NIST, and the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence); 
identifying all IT or cyber positions at agencies, and assigning the 
appropriate codes to each (federal agencies); and 
identifying IT and cyber-related work roles of critical need, and 
report these needs to OPM (each federal agency, in consultation 
with OPM, NIST, and DHS).29 

• 

• 

The act also requires GAO to analyze and monitor the implementation 
of the act’s requirements and report on this assessment to 
Congress.30 We plan to report on the results of our review by no later 
than December 18, 2018. 

Similar to the executive branch initiatives discussed above, these laws 
call for actions that, if effectively implemented, can address challenges 
related to skill gaps and recruiting, hiring, and retaining skilled 
cybersecurity professionals. Further, these laws are an important 
mechanism to hold agencies accountable for taking action and 
demonstrating results in building an effective cybersecurity workforce. 

 

                                                                                                                       
28In October 2012, OPM, in coordination with NIST, published a coding structure for 
federal cybersecurity positions based on the National Cybersecurity Workforce 
Framework. The structure assigns unique numeric codes to each of the seven categories 
identified in the framework, as well as three new categories. The codes were intended to 
allow OPM and agencies to identify and categorize all federal cybersecurity positions, 
laying the groundwork for a consistent government-wide count of the federal cybersecurity 
workforce. The coding structure that was developed under the Federal Cybersecurity 
Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 was based on the November 2016 revision of the 
framework. 
29The act also includes various reporting and other requirements, including that OPM was 
to submit a progress report on the implementation of the law’s requirements related to the 
coding structure and applying the revised codes by June 2016. OPM submitted this report 
in July 2016. 
30Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-113, Div. N, 
Title III, § 305 (Dec. 18, 2015). 

Page 14 

GAO-17-533T   

Other Ongoing Activities 
Could Assist Agencies in 
Recruiting and Retaining 
Cybersecurity 
Professionals 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Beyond the government-wide initiatives and recently enacted legislation 
discussed previously, federal agencies have instituted other ongoing 
activities that may assist the federal government in enhancing its 
cybersecurity workforce. These include the following, among others: 

•  Promoting cyber and science, technology, engineering and 

mathematics (STEM) education: A recent presidential commission 
on cybersecurity highlighted the need for federal programs that 
support education at all levels to incorporate cybersecurity awareness 
for students as they are introduced to and provided with Internet-
based devices.31 As an example of such a program, the National 
Integrated Cyber Education Research Center (NICERC), an academic 
division of the Cyber Innovation Center funded by DHS, was created 
to design, develop, and advance both cyber and STEM academic 
outreach and workforce development programs across the nation. 
NICERC develops cyber-based curricula for use by K-12 teachers 
across the country. The curricula developed by NICERC is free to any 
K-12 educator within the United States and comprises a library of 
cyber-based curricula that provides opportunities for students to 
become aware of cyber issues, engage in cyber education, and enter 
cyber career fields. 

•  CyberCorps scholarship: According to the Partnership for Public 

Service, one way agencies can increase the supply of cyber talent is 
through the use of undergraduate and graduate scholarships to 
promising cybersecurity and STEM students. One such program—the 
Scholarship for Service program operated by DHS and NSF—
provides scholarships and stipends to undergraduate and graduate 
students who are pursuing information security-related degrees, in 
exchange for 2 years of federal service after graduation. According to 
a November 2015 memo from the federal Chief Human Capital Officer 
Council, since 2000 these scholarships have been awarded to more 
than 1,650 students. There are also nearly 400 graduating students in 
related academic programs to meet agencies’ cybersecurity needs 
each year. 

•  National Centers of Academic Excellence: Sponsored by DHS and 
the National Security Agency, this program designates specific 2- and 
4-year colleges and universities as “centers of academic excellence” 
(CAE) based on their robust degree programs and close alignment to 

                                                                                                                       
31Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity, Report on Securing and Growing the 
Digital Economy (Dec. 1, 2016). 

Page 15 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 
 

specific cybersecurity-related knowledge units, validated by subject 
matter experts. Currently, over 200 colleges and universities across 
44 states, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico are designated CAEs for cyber-related degree programs. This 
program is intended to help institutions of higher education produce 
skilled and capable cybersecurity professionals and equip students 
with the necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to protect 
and defend our nation’s infrastructures. 

•  National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies: DHS, in 

partnership with several other agencies, launched the National 
Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies (NICCS) in February 
2013 as an online resource to connect government employees, 
students, educators, and industry with cybersecurity training providers 
across the nation. NICCS provides a catalog of cybersecurity-focused 
training courses that are delivered by accredited universities, CAEs, 
federal agencies, and other training providers. Each course is mapped 
to the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework. 

In coordination with a strategic, government-wide approach to improving 
the workforce, these programs and activities are intended to provide 
valuable resources for agencies as they attempt to mitigate the shortage 
of cybersecurity professionals. 

 
In summary, recruiting, developing, and retaining a qualified and 
competent cybersecurity workforce remains a critical challenge for the 
federal government. This is highlighted by the ever-evolving nature of the 
cyber threat and the vulnerabilities that we have identified over the years 
in agencies’ information security programs. The federal government 
continues to be challenged in key areas—such as identifying skills gaps, 
recruiting and retaining qualified staff, and navigating the federal hiring 
process—that are essential to ensuring the adequacy of its cybersecurity 
workforce. To better equip agencies to adequately protect federal 
information and information systems from increasingly sophisticated and 
ever-changing cyber threats, it is critical that a number of our open 
recommendations be addressed. 

Recent federal initiatives and legislation are intended to address the 
challenges associated with the cybersecurity workforce, and agencies 
may also be able to draw on other ongoing activities to help assist in 
mitigating cybersecurity workforce gaps. 

Page 16 

GAO-17-533T   

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

If effectively implemented, these initiatives, laws, and activities could help 
establish the cybersecurity workforce needed to secure and protect 
federal IT systems. 

Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and Members of the 
Subcommittee, this concludes my statement. I would be pleased to 
address any questions that you have. 

 
If you have any questions about this statement, please contact Nick 
Marinos at (202) 512-9342 or marinosn@gao.gov. Other contributors to 
this statement include Tammi Kalugdan, assistant director; William Cook, 
analyst-in-charge; Chris Businsky; David Hong; Franklin Jackson; Lee 
McCracken; Luis Rodriguez; Adam Vodraska; Daniel Wexler; and Merry 
Woo. 

Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgments 

(101944) 

Page 17 

GAO-17-533T   

 
 
 
 
 

 

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 

 

GAO’s Mission 

Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 
Order by Phone 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the 
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public 
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, 
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed 
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government 
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

 

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through GAO’s website (http://www.gao.gov). Each weekday afternoon, GAO 
posts on its website newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. To 
have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, go to http://www.gao.gov 
and select “E-mail Updates.” 

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and 
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether 
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering 
information is posted on GAO’s website, http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.  
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or  
TDD (202) 512-2537. 
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, 
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information. 

Connect with GAO 

Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or E-mail Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at www.gao.gov and read The Watchblog. 

To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 
Congressional 
Relations 
Public Affairs 

Contact: 
Website: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470 

Katherine Siggerud, Managing Director, siggerudk@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, 
Washington, DC 20548 

Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, DC 20548 

Strategic Planning and 
External Liaison 

James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, 
Washington, DC 20548 

 

Please Print on Recycled Paper.

