Strategic Recruitment  

for Cybersecurity 

Data-driven. Collaborative. Strategic. 

Analyze 

Investigate 

Oversight and 
Development 

Collect and  
Operate 

Operate and 
Maintain 

Protect and 
Defend 

Securely 
Provision 

March 2017  

1 

Strategic Recruitment  

The Office of Management and Budget’s, Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy 
Memorandum M-16-15, issued on July 12, 2016 reads: 
•

Goal 3: Recruit and Hire Highly-Skilled Talent. Engaging in Government-wide and agency-
specific efforts to expand the cybersecurity workforce through recruitment of highly-
skilled talent, and streamlining the hiring and security clearance process while still meeting 
applicable law and standards. 

– Purpose:   Engage in Government-wide and agency-specific efforts to conduct 
outreach and recruitment for cybersecurity talent and improve and expand on 
existing hiring and retention efforts.  

 

– Outcome:  Increase the pipeline of cybersecurity talent entering the Federal 

workforce, including candidates who have not traditionally considered Federal 
employment, and provide reliable and effective human resources services that enable 
agencies to immediately fill vacancies.   
 
 

 

 

March 2017  

2 

Strategic Recruitment 

Consistent with the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, OPM is: 

1. Ensuring the Federal cybersecurity 

4. Providing applicant flow data to help 

workforce is diverse and highly-skilled by 
supporting agencies’ recruitment and 
outreach initiatives. 

agencies better target and measure the 
success of their recruitment efforts. 

5. Conducting outreach to stakeholders in 

2. Partnering with agencies and key 

cybersecurity leaders to continue to 
improve the way the Federal Government 
attracts and recruits new talent. 

3. Offering recruitment tools on USAJOBS 

such as resume mining, interactive maps, 
and job opportunity announcement 
analytics. 
 

 

March 2017  

the public, private, nonprofit, and 
academic sectors to help educate them 
and raise awareness of various career 
paths, scholarships, fellowships, and 
employment opportunities. 

6. Assisting agencies to strengthen their 

recruitment programs by providing 
training and tools such as the 
Recruitment Policy Studio on 
www.HRU.gov. 

 

3 

Components 

Agencies with a proactive recruitment model focused on building talent pipelines, cultivating 
and maintaining partnerships, monitoring recruitment activities and sharing accountability 
will be more successful in securing top cybersecurity talent.  

Resources  

Employer Branding  

– Staff 
– Budget 
– Technology 

Collaboration  

– Leadership 
– Hiring Managers 
– Human Resources 
– Recruiters 

Data-driven Approach 

– Workforce Planning 
– Labor Market 
– Recruitment Analytics 

– Job Postings 
– Recruitment Messaging 
– Communication with 

Candidates 

Integrated  Social Media 

– Branding and Messaging 
– Communication with 

Candidates 

Onboarding and Retention 

– Mentoring 
– Orientation 

 

March 2017  

Sourcing 

– Students, Recent 

Graduates and Alumni 

– Presidential 

Management Fellows 
– Transitioning Service 

Members 
– Veterans 
– Military Spouses 
– Federal Employees 
– Experienced 
Candidates 

– Senior Executives 

 

4 

Resources 

In order for a recruiting strategy to be successful agencies must determine what resource 
needs  will be required for implementation. Having the right staff and technology with the 
capabilities to implement the strategy is a critical step in the strategic process. 

Budget—The strategic recruitment plan will need to be examined against current and 
future budgeting requirements.  A proactive recruitment strategy will require more 
funding than a traditional passive recruitment strategy.  
 
Staff—The collaboration of HR and Hiring Managers can only accomplish a part of 
the strategic recruitment process due to the transactional nature of the relationship. 
Agencies may need to seek out qualified talent acquisition professionals (i.e., 
recruiters, sources, or vendors) to gain access to groups of qualified individuals. Staff 
capability to accomplish recruitment sourcing will need to be assessed. 
 
Technology—Access and the ability to utilize recruitment technology and tools will 
be critical in reaching qualified job seekers and maintaining agency competitiveness 
with the private sector. 

March 2017  

5 

Resources—Budget 

Recruiting Expenses 

Operations 

Technology 

Advertising 

Agency Misc. 

Candidate 

Misc. 

• Infrastructure 
• Staff expenses 
• Security  

• Website(s) 
• Social media 
• Databases 

• Print 
• Online 
• Third-party 

• Travel 
• Staff training 
• Memberships 

• Travel 
• Relocation 
• Assessments  

Alleviating Constraints 

• Advance headcount targets 
• Supportive staffing model  
• Zero-based budgeting   

March 2017  

6 

Resources—Budget 

Costs associated with the recruitment and sourcing of candidates are often carried by the 
agency, but the individual costs (e.g., candidate travel, relocation, background checks) may 
be borne by the office or component.  Some budgeting recommendations include: 
 

– Develop hiring goals (e.g., headcount targets) prior to developing a budget.  
– Obtain budget approval as far in advance of the recruitment cycle as possible for 

items such as Relocation, Recruitment, and Retention (3Rs), advertising, technology, 
travel, etc. 

– Consider a zero-based budgeting approach. 
– Create a long-term, scalable recruitment strategy to address budget uncertainty. 

 

 
 

How is the acquisition of 
mission critical talent 
prioritized in your budget? 

March 2017  

7 

Resources—Staff 

Successful recruitment requires experienced recruitment teams with expertise  in developing 
networks, identifying groups of qualified individuals, managing the recruitment lifecycle,  and 
building relationships with sources of talent. Your agency will need to define the following: 
 

Team Purpose 
– Aligned with Strategic Recruitment Plan 

 

Organizational Structure 
– Fit and Function within the Organization 

• Talent Pipeline 
• Requisition-Specific 
• Occupation-Specific 
• Volume 
Seasonal 
•

Team Role 
– Talent Capability  

• Messaging 
Sourcing 
•
• Outreach 
•
• Candidate Experience 

Full Lifecycle 

• Organizational Home 
• Working Relationships 
•

Integrated Processes 

– Governance and Compliance 
– Workflows (Effectiveness and Efficiency) 
– Service Level Agreements 

Sourcing Methodology  
– How Sourcing will be Done 

Sourcing (Finding Talent)  

• Research (Market Intelligence)  
•
• Messaging (Engaging Talent)  
• Conversion (Generating Qualified Applicants)  

March 2017  

8 

Resources—Technology 

Your agency will need the technical capability (e.g., equipment, infrastructure) to set-up and 
carry out recruitment activities through online resources (i.e., USAJOBS, job boards, sourcing 
tools, and social media). You will need to ensure staff have the capability and technological 
resources to conduct online recruiting as well as clear policy guidance on social media usage.  
 
Other technology considerations include:  

– Organizational coordination of online resources. 

• Social media account management. 

– Employment brand alignment with agency brand. 
– Brand messaging coordinated with agency communications and media 

relations office. 

– Focus on resolving business problems should lead system development. 

• How to manage the candidate lifecycle in real-time?  
• How to establish and manage a social media branding and recruitment strategy? 
• How to acquire the right technology and access to social media to accomplish the 

above?  
 

March 2017  

9 

Collaboration 

Hiring managers should be involved in the recruitment process to ensure quality of candidates.  
 
1. Work closely with human resources (HR) before the job opportunity announcement (JOA) is 

posted to: 

– Ensure the position description (PD) is accurate and up-to-date; 
– Complete a job analysis to identify the critical competencies needed in the job; 
– Participate in identifying/developing the assessment tool that will be used to evaluate 

candidates; 

– Develop a recruiting strategy; and 
– Ensure the JOA accurately describes the duties of the job and competencies and 

experience required in an easy-to-understand and appealing manner. After the applicants 
are assessed and the referral list is issued, the hiring manager should actively engage in 
interviewing top candidates and making the selection. 

“Quality is much better than quantity.  One home run is much better than two doubles." 

—Steve Jobs  

March 2017  

10 

Collaboration  

2. Hiring managers and HR Specialists should collaborate to recruit and hire a diverse, high- 

performing workforce that reflects the diversity of the American society. 

Hiring Managers 
–

Prepare for the conversation (i.e., be 
able to describe your team/office, have 
past PDs, provide historical feedback 
from interviewers and/or applicants on 
the process, etc.). 
Finalize recruitment plan. 
Participate in recruitment and outreach 
activities before JOAs are posted.  

–
–

Recruiters and HR  Specialists 
– Educate your managers on recruiting 

strategies, hiring authorities, and agency 
policies. 

– Use OPM resources and training to inform 

managers on the recruitment and hiring 
process. 

– Encourage hiring managers  to engage in 

outreach and recruitment activities.  

– Solicit hiring manager’s feedback on the 

ROI of recruiting events.    

– Collaborate with internal diversity councils 

to access diversity data and incorporate 
that data into  your planning. 

 

March 2017  

11 

Collaboration  

Hiring Managers 
–

–

–

–

–

Allocate sufficient time to devote to 
recruitment.  
Reach out to HR about data.  Internal 
agency policies determine who has access 
to data, but they also encourage the use 
of such data. 
Provide realistic job requirements so HR 
and recruiters can prepare a realistic job 
preview to attract quality applicants 
throughout the hiring process. 
Provide timely feedback to HR and help 
reduce or eliminate transactional barriers. 
Think long-term about hiring needs and 
resources to attract talent (e.g., 
recruitment and relocation incentives). 

Recruiters and HR  Specialists 
– Research the job series related to 

cybersecurity and similar internal or external 
job postings. 

– Review relevant hiring data and industry 

trends and share information with managers. 
– Provide the manager with an overview of the 

process and timeframes to manage 
expectations. 

– Set realistic expectations and help develop 

recruiting options. 

– Advise on assessment options. 
– Keep managers and applicants informed. 
 

March 2017  

12 

Data-Driven—Workforce Planning 

1. Review your organization’s workforce plan, 

especially for cybersecurity positions. 

– Define hiring projections:  number of 

cybersecurity vacancies. 

– Identify series, grade/band, skill levels, 

competencies and level of experience to 
target. 

– Identify and address workforce gaps. 

 
2. Ensure proper cybersecurity coding to 

capture work roles and align those roles with 
cybersecurity vacancies.   

– Refer to the NIST Guidance, Federal Cybersecurity Coding Structure issued 

 
November 15, 2016 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/05/15/opm_cyber
securitycodingstructure.pdf 
 

 

 

 
 

March 2017  

 

13 

Data-Driven  

3. Recruiters/HR Specialists must research workforce trends and talent needs and inform 

cybersecurity managers and HR specialists.   
– Labor trends, market shifts, economic factors, educational trends, workforce demographics. 
– Skill sets of talent pools. 
– Information on current recruitment trends will be available on HRU.gov (Recruitment Policy 

Studio).  

 

4. Review  your organization’s applicant flow data and workforce diversity to give you a clear 

guide on where  gaps exists. OPM reports include:  

– https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/reports/ 
– https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/federal-workforce-at-

a-glance/  

 

@ 

OPM Contact   

DiversityandInclusion@opm.gov 

 
 

March 2017  

14 

Data-Driven—Applicant Flow Data 

Applicant Flow Data is used to determine if applicant 
pools are reflective of the civilian labor force.  

USA Staffing built an Applicant Flow Data (AFD) 
reporting capability by combining demographic data 
collected by USAJOBS with data from the hiring process.   

Application 

Applicant Flow Data is available to agencies using USA 
Staffing through a secure FTP site and Cognos. Agencies  
using other Talent Acquisition Systems will need to 
contact their service provider for access to AFD. 

AFD allows agencies to identify barriers and best 
practices at each stage in the hiring process:  application, 
qualification, referral and selection. 

USA Staffing and OPM’s Office of Diversity and Inclusion 
host an interagency Applicant Flow Data Work Group to 
share information and best practices.   

•

•

•

•

•

March 2017  

 

Qualification 

Referral 

Selection 

AFD 

15 

Data-Driven—Applicant Flow Data 

USA Staffing began offering Summary AFD Reports in Cognos in 2016.  

To find out more about USA Staffing capabilities, 
please contact:  
Alesia Booth, USA Staffing Program Manager 
Alesia.Booth@opm.gov  
 

16 

March 
2017  

Data-Driven  

5. Collect and use data to track the success of the recruiting strategy.  Some metrics include: 

– Time-to-hire—How long it takes to hire. 
– Source-of-hire—Where you get quality hires. 
– Conversion Rates—For the Pathways and Scholarship for Service Programs. 
– Quality of Hire—New hire performance and productivity. 
– Cert-to-hire Ratio—The number of candidates referred divided by the number of hires. 
– Yield Ratios—Examine yields for key stages of the recruiting lifecycle. 
– Utilization Rates—For hiring flexibilities and special hiring authorities. 
– Satisfaction Surveys—Measure hiring manager, applicant, and new hire satisfaction. 
– Exit Surveys—Address recruitment and retention issues in real-time. 

6. Make adjustments to improve sourcing. 

– Conduct barrier analysis.                                                                                
– Use available hiring flexibilities  and hiring authorities to drive sourcing efforts, including 

those specific to attracting cybersecurity talent. 

– Effectively target diverse applicant pools. 
– Build relationships with viable sources of applicants. 
 

March 2017  

17 

Employer Branding 

The Employment Brand is critical in 
communicating core organizational and 
occupational attributes to cybersecurity talent.  
•

Employee Value Proposition (EVP) is built 
around attributes relevant to the talent pool 
and is critical to an effective brand.  
Your brand includes your EVP, the values 
exhibited by your leaders and employees, and 
reflects what others say about your agency. 
Social Media is an effective employment 
branding tool and least effective as a job 
board. 
Effective Employer Branding increases 
candidate quality. 
Your brand makes clear to job seekers what 
your agency’s competitive advantage is as 
compared to other employers. 

•

•

•

•

March 2017  

18 

Employer Branding 

1. Create or validate your Employee Value Proposition based on what is important to the 

cybersecurity talent that you seek. 

2. Develop an Employment Brand and branding strategies before considering use of social 

media. 
Integrate the Employment Brand into the entire recruitment lifecycle. 

3.
4. Provide enough information through branding so applicants can determine if the position is a 

good fit. 

5. Create clear and consistent recruiting messages in your career portal, website, and marketing 

materials. 

6. Write clear and understandable job postings that describe the duties of the job, competencies, 

and required experience in plain language and in an appealing manner.  

7. Communicate with your applicants when you recruit, when they apply, and when there are 

jobs that can be a good fit. 
 
 

Large agencies may find it difficult to create a consistent brand that applies across all 
components.  A  theme  that  best  describes  the  cybersecurity  mission  of  the  agency 
can  be  determined  by  examining  the  attributes  of  your  current  cybersecurity 
workforce.  

March 2017  

  
 

19 

Integrated Social Media 

Social media recruiting is integrated into the organizational social media strategy through cross-
functional collaboration. 
1.
Lead with a Strategy. 

– Engage executive leadership, communications and media offices, hiring managers, 

subject matter experts, and recruiters in creating the organizational social media 
recruiting strategy for cybersecurity positions. 

2. Use an event-based approach and limit the use of social media feeds as job boards. 

– Engage job seekers (e.g., post an article, video) 
– Provide an event in which job seekers can actively participate (e.g., Recruiter’s Resume 

Tips WebEx). 

3. Use Available Resources.  

– Leverage your careers website to engage potential applicants who are attracted to your 

agency's mission or careers.  

4. Share Meaningful Content.  

– Have your recruiters involved by posting cybersecurity news and other relevant 

information that may attract applicants to your job openings (e.g., hiring initiatives, 
Federal Viewpoint Survey scores). 

March 2017  

 

20 

Sourcing—Practices 

Active and targeted sourcing of talent is necessary to meet the high volume of cybersecurity 
hiring required to expand and maintain the Federal workforce. 
 
1. Partner with colleges and universities, including minority serving institutions, Centers of 

Academic Excellence in cybersecurity to increase recruiting efforts. 

– Raise awareness of career and scholarship opportunities.  
– Use Student Ambassadors from your agency  to talk to cybersecurity students about 

your agency and careers.  

– Have cybersecurity experts provide virtual or in-person information sessions to 

students. 

 

The 1st Merit System Principle is your mandate to source: 

“Recruitment should be from qualified individuals from appropriate sources 

in an endeavor to achieve a workforce from all segments of society,…” 

March 2017  

21 

Sourcing—Practices (Continued) 

2. Work with industry and professional organizations to learn effective strategies to attract  

qualified candidates. 
Increase outreach activities to include women and minorities in cybersecurity fields. 

3.
4. Have current employees, subject matter experts, managers, and supervisors participate in 

career fairs, virtual events, testimonial videos, etc. to provide a realistic job preview. 

5. Use your cybersecurity employees and new hires to refer applicants for hard-to-fill positions. 
6. Use online resources (e.g., social media, résumé databases, discussion forums) to identify 

qualified individuals and inform them about open positions. 
 

March 2017  

22 

Sourcing—Types of Talent 

Students and  

Recent Graduates 

• Use the Pathways Programs, and other internship 

programs to hire candidates who possess up-to-date 
knowledge in cybersecurity specialties. 

Veterans 

• Recruit veterans who possess valuable cybersecurity-
related knowledge and skills gained in service to the 
Nation. 

Federal Employees 

• Identify agency employees on cybersecurity career 

paths, rotational assignments, etc. or Federal 
employees who desire to enter cybersecurity fields. 

Passive Candidates 

• Source applicants who are at different stages of their 

careers in private industry, academia, and Government 
yet are not actively looking for jobs. 

Presidential 

Management Fellows     

• Access candidates with advanced degrees in all 
academic backgrounds, including cybersecurity. 

March 2017  

23 

Sourcing–Student and Recent Graduates  

1. Recruit candidates who are pursuing Bachelors, Masters, or Ph.D. degrees in Information 

Assurance and Cybersecurity- related degree programs.  To recruit CyberCorps® Scholarship 
for Service (SFS) participants, Hiring Managers and HR specialists can visit www.sfs.opm.gov 
and register as an agency official or contact the program office at sfs@opm.gov. You can 
receive information on CyberCorps® SFS participants available and their degree information 
so you can contact them directly, work directly with a participating institution, or work directly 
with OPM staff to determine other methods that may work better for you.  
 
Hiring Option:  Agencies may appoint CyberCorps® SFS participants into the excepted service 
and then once they complete their obligation they can be noncompetitively converted to 
career conditional status.  When making appointments (for both internships and post-
graduation employment), agencies will cite the statute as the legal authority, and use the 
general Nature of Action (NOA) code for excepted appointments based on a law (these are 
described in the Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA)). 
 

March 2017  

24 

Sourcing–Student and Recent Graduates 

(Continued)  

2. Recruit from a talented candidate pool from over 100 Centers for Academic Excellence colleges 

and universities that is available yearly for internship and permanent positions. 

– Identify Centers for Academic Excellence colleges and universities that have a diverse student 

population, including women and minorities. 

– Maintain a year-round presence on campus to keep your employer brand in the minds of 

potential applicants.  Share your organization mission and job openings. 

– Recruit students and recent graduates from qualifying educational programs outside of the 

traditional college or university programs (e.g., apprenticeships, certifications, junior colleges). 

 
Hiring Option:  Agencies may use the Pathways Programs Internship Program or the Recent 
Graduates Program  to hire students and recent graduates at all educational levels.  Once they 
complete their educational and program requirements, they can be noncompetitively converted to 
career conditional status.   Contact your agency Pathways Program Officer or OPM at 
pathways@opm.gov for additional information. 

 
 

March 2017  

25 

Sourcing–Student and Recent Graduates 

(Continued)  

3. Use the Workforce Recruitment Program (WRP) for College Students with Disabilities.  This 

recruitment and referral program connects agencies with college students and recent 
graduates with disabilities from over 300 colleges and universities across the country.  The 
WRP is managed by the Department of Labor.  Visit www.wrp.gov or contact wrp@dol.gov.  

 

Hiring Option:  Agencies may use the Schedule A for Individuals with Disabilities.   

 
4. Consider using third-party internship programs such as Hispanic Association of Colleges and 

Universities (HACU) to hire diverse talent.  Visit http://www.hacu.net/hacu/HNIP.asp.  

5. Sponsor or participate in cyber challenges and competitions to raise awareness to students 

early in their education.   

– Offer internships to students before they go to college, especially during summer break.  

 

 

Hiring Options:  Agencies may use the Pathways Internship Program, Student Volunteer 
Programs, or agency-specific hiring authority (if applicable) to hire students at all educational 
levels.   

March 2017  

26 

Sourcing–Veterans  

Many wounded warriors, transitioning service members, and veterans have the ideal background 
and training from the military to meet your cybersecurity workforce staffing needs.   Many 
veterans are pursuing training and/or education through various Department of Veterans Affairs 
programs, to include the GI Bill, that make veterans an exceptional applicant pool.  
 
1. Use the Feds Hire Vets platform and social media sites to recruit Veterans for your 

cybersecurity staffing needs.   

– Website www.fedshirevets.gov 
– Facebook http://www.facebook.com/pages/Feds-Hire-Vets/262183904582 
– Twitter http://twitter.com/#!/fedshirevets/ 

2. Post your positions and/or expedite hiring using special hiring authorities for veterans: 

Hiring options 

– Veterans’ Recruitment Appointment (VRA) 
– 30% or More Disabled Veterans 
– Schedule A 
– Veterans Employment Opportunity Act (VEOA) 

 
March 2017  

27 

Sourcing–Veterans (Continued)  

3. Contact the CHCO Agency Veteran Employment Program Office (VEPO) to:   

– Develop Vets to Feds (V2F) Career Development Program for critical occupations  

• Develop a program for cybersecurity occupations to target veteran candidates for 

training and development  

– Participate in the Department of Veterans Affairs Vocational Rehabilitation Program 

• Non-paid Work Experience 
• On-the-job Training Program 

– Partner with Veterans Service Organizations to create talent pipelines 

• Veterans of Modern Warfare, Student Veterans of America, American Legion, etc. 

– Participate in Department of Defense Programs 

• Hiring Heroes Program/Hiring Heroes Career Fairs/Pre-scheduled interviews 
• Operation Warfighter Intern Program  

– Find VEPO POCS at www.fedshirevets.gov/AgencyDirectory/index.aspx 

•

If you do not have a VEPO, contact OPM’s Veterans Services at: 
fedshirevets@opm.gov or (202) 606-3017 

 

March 2017  

28 

Sourcing–Federal Employees 

Identify potential cybersecurity professionals inside the Federal workforce. 

1.
2. Develop and promote cybersecurity career paths, rotational assignments, and mentoring 

and coaching programs to provide employees with opportunities to become subject 
matter experts in their field or move into entry- or higher-level cybersecurity positions. 
3. Encourage agency employees with requisite skill sets to gain training and/or experience 

in anticipation of applying and competing for entry-level cybersecurity positions. 

4. Keep internal and external Federal employees informed (through social media, website, 
or other forums) about cybersecurity initiatives and challenges to encourage individuals 
who may be interested to apply for cybersecurity positions. 
Leverage educational discount programs for Federal employees by encouraging 
continuing education in cybersecurity. 

5.

 

Hiring and Staffing Options:   
– Merit promotion 
– Details 
–
–
March 2017  

Agency career upward mobility programs 
Interagency rotations   

 

29 

Sourcing–Experienced Candidates  

1. Expand efforts to cybersecurity professional organizations and alumni organizations to 

identify highly-qualified candidates. 

2. Seek referrals from current cybersecurity employees and contractors to identify possible 

candidates with the skill sets needed for open positions. 

3. Use the Resume Mining tool on USAJOBS to search for cybersecurity talent and invite them 

to apply for specific job openings that are a possible match to their skill set.   

4. Use social networking such as LinkedIn to connect with potential candidates, especially at 

the mid-and senior-level. 

5. Where possible under existing law, provide opportunities for private sector employees to 

participate in rotational assignments at Federal agencies, enabling professionals to commit 
for short periods of time to share their skills with Federal employees while gaining Federal 
service experience. 
 
Hiring Options: 
–
–
–
 
March 2017  

R Authorities - 5 CFR 213.3102(r) 
Schedule A  
Agencies may have specific hiring authorities 

30 

Sourcing–PMF Program 

1. Recruit Presidential Management Fellows with advanced degrees in cybersecurity. 

– Utilize PMF program office to advertise open positions. 
– Participate in PMF job fairs. 
– Include information about the PMF program in outreach to students and recent 

graduates with advanced degrees. 

– Utilize current and former PMF participants as college ambassadors. 

 
Hiring Option:   
–

Pathways Programs – Presidential Management Fellows Program.  Visit www.pmf.gov/ 
or contact pmf@opm.gov.   

 

March 2017  

31 

Onboarding and Retention 

1. Develop a plan and strategies to implement onboarding in phases over an 18-month period 

starting before the employee comes on board to the end of the first year.  

2. Participate in the Government-wide cybersecurity orientation program for new 

cybersecurity professionals. 

3. Use higher-level and senior cybersecurity staff to mentor new employees and bring them               

up-to-speed on mission critical work, organizational culture, and new technologies. 

4. Establish career paths for cybersecurity employees and track the development of critical 

skills sets. 

5. Offer mentoring programs and networking opportunities within the cybersecurity 

community. 
 

Potential Onboarding Delivery Methods 

In-person 

Virtual 

Self-guided  Combination 

March 2017  

32 

Strategies–Checklist 

Talent Acquisition        

Strategy Status 

• Create consistent policies across the organization.  

Plans by Talent Type 

• Develop  sourcing  plans for each Mission Critical Occupation (MCO). 

Executive Engagement 

• Implement defined leadership roles and accountability. 

Planning Horizon 

• Conduct long-term planning for MCO sourcing and selection. 

Integration with Other 

Talent Processes 

Identification and      
Selection of Metrics 

• Ensure talent strategy is aligned with other talent processes. 

• Align metrics with sourcing and selection objectives. 

Implementation Approach 

• Align talent strategy with strategic human capital plan. 

Business Impact  

• Focus on results: Defined, tracked, and transparent.  

March 2017  

33 

Strategies–Talent Acquisition Strategy 

Development Map 

March 2017  

34 

Strategies–Social Media Strategy Map 

March 2017  

35 

OPM Resources 

•

Compensation: 
– Guide on compensation flexibilities for cybersecurity professionals: 

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/reference-
materials/handbooks/compensation-flexibilities-to-recruit-and-retain-cybersecurity-
professionals.pdf 

– Fact sheet on compensation for prospective employees:  

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/pay-administration/fact-
sheets/federal-employee- compensation-package/ 

 
Recruitment and Hiring: 

•

– Cybersecurity Hiring, Pay, and Leave Flexibilities 

https://www.chcoc.gov/content/cybersecurity-hiring-pay-and-leave-flexibilities  
CyberCareers.gov 
https://www.cybercareers.gov/ 

 

–

 

March 2017  

36 

OPM Resources 

https://hru.gov/  

https://hru.gov/Studio_Recruitment/Studio_Recruitment.aspx  

 

Recruiting Boot Camp:       

Professional Development Series  

outreach@opm.gov 

 

 

Pathways Programs      
Professional Development 

Series  

pathways@opm.gov 

 

March 2017  

37 

