WHITE PAPER

Credentialing
Cybersecurity 
Workforce

CompTIA INSIGHTS INTO  
THE CERTIFICATION PROCESS

Table of Contents

Foreword
The Cybersecurity Training Imperative
Industry-Driven, Vendor-Neutral Certifications:  
The CompTIA Story
IT Certification in the Cybersecurity Environment   
What is a Certification?
Producing Trusted Cybersecurity Certifications 
The Certification Development Process  
How is an IT Certification Made?
How is a Certification Delivered?

3 
4 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
 
 
9 
10  What to Measure in a Credential Examination:  
 
11 
 
 
13  CompTIA and the Cybersecurity Credentials  Industry
13  Glossary
17  Appendices

Knowledge, Performance or Both?
The CompTIA Public-Private-Academic Partnership:  
Optimum Responsiveness to Rapid Developments  
in the Cybersecurity Threat Environment

 

 

 

 
 

Industry Recognized Credentials

Foreword

CompTIA, the leading global provider of vendor-neutral IT certifications, develops security 
certifications that are foundational and promote the workforce skills needed to combat 
cyber threats and weaknesses. This white paper provides a transparent explanation of 
CompTIA’s expertise in developing, disseminating, and updating IT security certifications. 
Although other peer organizations may offer procedural variations, it is our hope that 
this description of the CompTIA methodology will provide a broader understanding of the 
importance and effectiveness of the private sector credentialing community. In this paper 
we set forth:

•  The importance of developing varied career paths to meet today’s workforce and  

cybersecurity challenges.

•  CompTIA’s network of learning and testing partners and the origin and importance  

of vendor-neutral certifications.

•  The meaning of a certification: A credential achieved through examination that validates 

the knowledge and skills of an individual or organization.

•  How effective certification is constructed and kept up to date by assembling subject 

matter experts to develop a Job Task Analysis (JTA), an examination blueprint, and 
extensive examination questions that map to the blueprint.

•  A discussion of our testing partners and the steps undertaken to ensure the integrity of 

examinations and their results.

•  The value of both knowledge- and performance-based testing.

•  The breadth of CompTIA relationships with government and academic communities, all 

of which enhance the effectiveness of the credential and the rapidity by which real-world 
developments can drive updates, improvements, and training.

•  A framework that demonstrates order and coherence to the cybersecurity credentialing 

ecosystem.

With a rapidly developing cybersecurity threat matrix, both government and private-sector 
professionals must be nimble and collaborative. We are all a part of the solution.

Todd Thibodeaux, President and CEO
CompTIA

03

CompTIA.org

The Cybersecurity Training Imperative

Technology innovation has given us an interconnected global 
marketplace. We now have hundreds of millions of online users 
with constantly evolving mobile computing platforms offering 
ubiquitous access to information, communication, and commerce 
wherever we live. We now have more raw computing power 
contained in smart phones than the cumulative mission-control IT 
capability that propelled mankind on the first lunar missions
in the 1970s. The correspondingly complex and mobile nature of 
digital threats to the world’s computer networks is growing at the 
same exponential pace.

Training the cybersecurity workforce for 
tomorrow’s threat environment requires 
forward-looking approaches; merely 
informing end users and IT security 
professionals about existing cyber threats 
is not enough. Those responsible for hiring 
the best human cybersecurity talent must 
have confidence—before a breach or 
breakdown occurs—that employees are 
trained and equipped in a manner that 
can be confidently identified, measured, 
and validated. The challenge we face is to 
produce the best-trained professionals
in the world, equipped with proper tools. 
Further, it is essential to develop and 
provide ongoing training so that the 
professional workforce is prepared to 
address new and emerging threats to our 
increasingly digital way of life.

Cybersecurity professionals rely on a 
variety of tools to prepare for defending 
against and responding to cyber threats. 
In most cases, training and corresponding 
credentials come through degree programs 
(from higher education or technical training 
institutions) and technical certifications (in 

either vendor-specific software or hardware
products). Other sources include vendor- 
neutral credentials that address a broader 
subject or practice area, on-the-job training 
programs, internships or other practical, 
experience-based programs.

In the cybersecurity world, career paths 
vary from technical information assurance 
and auditing to IT management—with levels 
within each scaling from apprentice to 
master. Each pathway serves a distinct and 
important role in addressing today’s cyber 
threats and requires unique training and 
skill sets.1  (See Appendix 1 for details.) 

CompTIA certifications also cover a wide 
array of IT fields including cloud, mobility, 
storage, healthcare, green IT, and more. 
However, the focus of this paper is the suite 
of IT certifications that are the basis for 
cybersecurity training and the specific role 
of certifications in addressing the
critical need to train, credential, and deploy 
thousands of professionals to protect our 
national IT infrastructure.

1. A useful resource for viewing the structure for how IT certifications advance along different 
career paths is the Department of Defense Directive 8570 (http://www.dtic.mil/whs/direc-
tives/corres/pdf/857001p.pdf). Civilian career paths can and do map to DOD equivalents. 
Another resource is the Essential Body of Knowledge matrix developed by the Department 
of Homeland Security (http://www.us-cert.gov/ITSecurityEBK/EBK%20Matrix-Sept08.pdf).

Industry Recognized Credentials

“No foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our 
networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American 
families, especially our kids. We are making sure our government 
integrates intelligence to combat cyber threats, just as we have done to 
combat terrorism. And tonight, I urge this Congress to finally pass the 
legislation we need to better meet the evolving threat of cyber-attacks, 
combat identity theft, and protect our children’s information. If we don’t 
act, we’ll leave our nation and our economy vulnerable. If we do, we 
can continue to protect the technologies that have unleashed untold 
opportunities for people around the globe.”

–  President Barack Obama, State of the Union Address, January 2015

Industry-Driven, Vendor-Neutral 
Certifications: The CompTIA Story

The success of the personal computer led 
the computer service and repair industries 
to commission CompTIA to create its globally 
recognized, vendor-neutral CompTIA A+ 
certification program in 1992, which has been 
continually updated in the over two decades 
since. The continuing success of CompTIA’s 
A+ certification demonstrates an ongoing 
need to provide a means of validating 
skills across a wide spectrum of computer 
hardware and software. Following on the 
success of the CompTIA A+ certification, 
CompTIA developed and introduced CompTIA 
Network+, and CompTIA Security+. Each 
CompTIA certification is industry- driven, 
validating technical skills for both individuals 
working in IT and for the people who hire and 
train them.

By securing and validating core skills and 
knowledge, both job-seekers and
established professionals can progress to 
more complex and specialized cybersecurity 

credentials, such as vendor-specific 
hardware and software training. As a  
career in cybersecurity matures, it may well 
necessitate higher-level, specialty training 
and skills in subjects such as security 
auditing, forensics, and cybersecurity 
management. Workers might also feel 
compelled to acquire additional credentials 
to validate those skills to current or 
prospective management. A diverse array of 
career paths needs to be available in order to 
maintain a skilled cybersecurity workforce.

Along with a global network of third-  
party academic and training providers, 
CompTIA plays an important role in the 
skills-development efforts for today’s 
cybersecurity workforce. As a result of our
focus on creating independent certification 
credentials developed in isolation from the 
training community, CompTIA is recognized 
worldwide as a trusted provider of vendor- 
neutral certification exams.

05

CompTIA.org

IT Certification In The Cybersecurity 
Environment  

In addition to validating core competencies, 
certifications can be developed and deployed 
quickly to address ever-evolving threats 
to our IT infrastructure. Certifications can 
demonstrate that a workforce remains 
current and informed on technology 
advancements that defend against ever-
present cyber threats.

CompTIA has put an increasing focus on 
cybersecurity, enabling professionals  
and solution providers with foundational 
principles for securing a network and 
managing risk. The responsiveness of 
CompTIA’s credentialed certifications in 
addressing technological advancements 
has led to private sector and government 
mandates for continuing education 
requirements for cybersecurity
professionals—a development that  
CompTIA fully supports.

WHAT IS A CERTIFICATION?
Determining what constitutes a certification 
as compared to a certificate, a credential, 
and accreditation can be challenging. 
Put simply, a certification is achieved 
through an examination that validates the 
knowledge and/or skills of an individual or 
an organization. A certification differs from 
a certificate program, which is usually an 
educational offering that confers a document 
at the program’s conclusion. The American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) provides 
a useful definition:

Certification and certificate are distinct 
terms, yet they are often used synonymously. 
Certification is more comprehensive and 
includes an assessment of an individual’s 
knowledge, skills, and abilities based on a 
body of knowledge pertaining to a profession 
or occupation.

 In comparison, certificate programs 
emphasize learning events and coursework 
completion. Certification is valid for a specific 
time period and involves recertification at 
the expiry of the stated period. Certificates 
are generally issued for life.2

Beyond this important distinction, the 
industry often refers to credentials and 
accreditations. Credentials attest to 
someone’s knowledge or authority such 
as a FBI agent badge, a Ph.D. in physics, or 
an IT security certification. Accreditation is 
granted when stated quality criteria are met. 
For example, by submitting to a voluntary, 
self-regulatory process through American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI), CompTIA 
has sought accreditation of foundational 
certifications CompTIA A+, Network+ and 
Security+, as well as the CompTIA Advanced 
Security Practitioner certification.

The wide variety of methods used to train 
and validate knowledge for cybersecurity 
professionals demonstrates there is no “one- 
size-fits-all” solution. While most academic 
and professional programs promote broad, 
introductory knowledge for cybersecurity 
professionals, the generalized scope of such 
programs is impractical for many full-time
IT professionals. Specialty certifications 
can be more effective in providing “just-
in- time” training and validation for a 
specific technology tool or skill. But in 
some situations, more in-depth training 
and certification,  which generally requires 
more experience in a profession and 
more core knowledge, is appropriate. 
Ideally, IT professionals, along with their 
career guidance personnel, can construct 
learning and career paths using a variety of 
credentialing options as tools to develop the 
skill sets required.

2. https://www.ansica.org/wwwversion2/outside/PERfaq.asp?menuID=2

Industry Recognized Credentials

Producing Trusted Cybersecurity 
Certifications

IT certification has evolved into a validation 
instrument that is a trusted resource in 
both the IT and the human resources (HR) 
communities. How is an internationally 
validated and trusted certification 
instrument  constructed?

THE CERTIFICATION DEVELOPMENT 
PROCESS

To be an effective and defensible IT 
certification, a credential must meet the 
following criteria:

•  Technical Precision and Accuracy with 

respect to the current and particular body 
of knowledge.

•  Comprehensive in Scope to validate the 

breadth of skills required by the IT and 
cybersecurity professional. 

•   Educationally Valid Verification to fairly 

and accurately gauge skills and knowledge. 

•   Integrity in the Exam Creation Process so 

students trust that an exam fairly validates 
the requisite skills for a particular job or 
skills area and is worth requisite study and 
experience; and that IT management and 
HR professionals trust both the credential 
and the holder as a person who possesses 
genuine and comprehensive knowledge.

•   Rigorous and Effective Security in Delivery 
to ensure that cheating does not take place. 

To meet these important benchmarks, 
CompTIA employs an exacting process to 
develop and disseminate credentials.

HOW IS AN IT CERTIFICATION MADE?

Development of an IT certification begins by 
identifying and bringing together Subject 
Matter Experts (SMEs) to draft a blueprint for 
the examination known as a Job Task Analysis 
(JTA). Using the JTA, SMEs proceed to draft a 
series of questions that form the basis of the 
certification exam. (See Appendix 2.)

Bringing Subject Matter Experts  
to the Table
To be accurate and to validate current 
knowledge, CompTIA first selects SMEs to 
construct a certification instrument. Each 
SME is required to sign a legally binding non- 
disclosure agreement3 precluding any profit 
motive in the credentials-training industry. 
This is done to address any potential 
conflicts of interest. To assure both a 
balanced and comprehensive product, 
SMEs are selected from a wide variety of 
disciplines and vertical markets — including 
government, private sector, and, where 
individuals are not in any way involved 
in course preparation or delivery for IT 
certifications, academic professions. Recent 
SMEs for CompTIA IT security certifications 
have included government professionals 
from the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Navy. 
Private-sector experts from companies 
including Booz Allen Hamilton and Lockheed 
Martin have also participated. CompTIA 
allows no more than two individuals 
from the same organization or agency to 
participate in the process, ensuring that the 
exam is not skewed or biased toward any 
one agency or vendor technology.

07

3. For details about the requirements SMEs must meet before participating in CompTIA’s certification 
development process, see http://certification.comptia.org/get-involved/examdevelopment.aspx 

CompTIA.org

After a group of qualified SMEs is selected,  
it is sequestered at CompTIA’s headquarters 
(much like a deliberating jury in a legal 
setting) with precautions taken against 
tampering or outside influences upon the 
group’s deliberations.

Creating a Job Task Analysis and 
Examination Blueprint
The foundation of a strong certification 
program is a JTA that defines the subject 
matter content that is valid for assessment. 
The JTA is then used to develop a blueprint 
to test against. The JTA, along with other 
test development procedures, helps ensure 
the defensibility of the resulting content. 
The collaborative nature of the process is 
underscored in the requirement that both 
the draft JTA and the draft examination 
blueprint cannot be received in final form 
until a significant volume of feedback 
is received from qualified professionals 
worldwide.4 The partnership between 
public, private, and academic sectors of 
the cybersecurity learning, research, and 
practice domains is clearly evident in the 
final product.

The Separation of Teaching and Learning 
Materials from Test Creation
Once the JTA and examination blueprint 
are published, a number of activities 
take place. Curriculum developers, book 
publishers, authors and designers, and other 
professionals begin developing teaching 
and learning materials for training and the 
eventual certification exam.

Certification candidates have access to 
resources like these as well as resources like 
CompTIA CertMaster. CompTIA CertMaster 
is an online study companion using four 
components to ensure professionals not 
only learn but retain  the information they 
are studying. These four components include 
brain science, adaptive learning, superlative 
study tools, and mobile learning.
 

When it comes to certification exam 
integrity, CompTIA has maintained a policy 
of precluding all instructors, professors, 
authors, training executives, and even 
unauthorized members from their own 
organization (e.g., marketing and sales 
personnel) from the vital activities required 
in the creation of an examination. While 
there may be other avenues to a similar 
outcome, this process protects against 
proprietary knowledge obtained  in the 
creation of a test from being used to “teach 
to the test.” CompTIA’s practice is to maintain 
a clear wall of separation to protect the 
integrity and validity of the examination 
process.

Writing the Questions
Once the JTA and examination blueprint 
are completed another group of SMEs is 
convened for the question writing phase of 
the process. This is a difficult and precise 
process, because hundreds of questions are 
needed for the initial drafts of the exam. 
Questions are accepted based on their 
relevance to the material and the clarity 
of the question, with care to omit any 
ambiguities in terminology or verbiage.

Once the required number of questions 
mapped to every area on the examination 
blueprint is created, the examination—still 
in beta format—is published. At authorized 
CompTIA testing centers, professionals are 
encouraged to take the beta examination 
and submit feedback. After the beta exam is 
completed, a standard-setting workshop is 
conducted to determine that valid inferences 
are made from the test. This is one of the 
most crucial steps in exam development. 
At the workshop, another group of SMEs 
estimates the number of minimally qualified 
candidates who would answer each question 
correctly. As such, the workshop determines 
the cut score, which is the demarcation 
between pass and fail.

4. CompTIA generally seeks approximately 200 responses within the target audience 
in order to validate a JTA blueprint.

Industry Recognized Credentials

“With this increased reliance on cyber-dependent systems, come  
increased threats and vulnerabilities. Protecting the cybersecurity of our 
critical infrastructure is a top priority for the nation, and in February 
2013 the President signed Executive Order (EO) 13636: Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity and released Presidential Policy Directive  
(PPD)-21: Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, which aims to 
increase the overall resilience of U.S. critical infrastructure.”

– About the Critical Infrastructure Cyber Community C³ Voluntary Program,  
Dept. of Homeland Security; 2013

Keeping the Credential Current,  
Valid, and Relevant
Given the type of threats and the 
corresponding levels of complexity of 
hardware and software to meet the 
exigencies of IT security, a valid certification 
examination must stay up to date.

CompTIA relies upon a Certification Advisory 
Committee, yet another group of impartial 
industry experts, academics, and analysts 
who review the certification blueprint. This 
group reports significant developments
in a subject area to CompTIA credential 
managers. If the committee recommends 
that additional technologies be addressed 
before a scheduled exam update, the 
development cycle is altered in order to cover 
all knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary 
to perform the job functions associated with 
cybersecurity—and yet another question- 
writing development cycle is added to the 
certification for that year.

As an example, since CompTIA Security+ was 
first published in 2002, CompTIA  has provided 
regular updates and major revisions to this 
ANSI/ISO 17024-accredited certification.5 
SMEs from the government, academic, and 
private sectors meet regularly to ensure 
that the content of the examination remains 
relevant and accurate. As the technology has 
evolved and the threats and exploits have 

grown, so too has the response in providing  
timely and accurate training materials  
and best practices.

HOW IS A CERTIFICATION 
DELIVERED?

In conjunction with its authorized 
examination centers worldwide, CompTIA 
takes several precautions to mitigate 
unauthorized exam activity. Individuals who 
break the rules risk losing their credential 
and being reported to authorities and 
governing professional bodies. They also face 
legal prosecution if they divulge answers 
or other prohibited intellectual property 
relating to an examination.6

To deter cheating, a variety of proprietary 
technologies are employed. These include 
delivery and transmission of exams in 
encrypted formats, random scrambling
of examination questions and answers, pools 
of thousands of potential questions to stem 
the brute-force memorization of answers, 
and digital forensics such as biometrics and 
time-per-question analysis. The objective 
is to ensure that a CompTIA security 
certification is ethically created and honestly 
earned. Further, CompTIA participates in 
forums with other credential providers to 
maintain the integrity and security of IT 
certification credentials.

09

5. Exams are updated with new questions every six to eight weeks. CompTIA has 
launched its third major revision of the exam.
6. Pearson VUE, Prometrics, and the Government Services Agency (GSA) through
TestSmart are leading CompTIA testing partners. Incidentally, they are also the 
preferred testing providers for the DOD 8570 information assurance program.

CompTIA.org

What to Measure in A Credential Examination: 
Knowledge, Performance or Both? 

There is an internal debate among 
cybersecurity practitioners as to what is 
more important to validate: 1) An individual’s 
conceptual knowledge, or 2) Performance 
associated with a particular job or 
responsibility. Advocates for each of these 
two aspects of validation may hold one of 
the approaches as superior over the other. 
However, CompTIA regards this growing rift 
as a false dilemma. Both domain knowledge 
expertise and practical skills are absolutely 
vital and should be a part of any serious 
competency training and validation process.

When a certification is developed or updated, 
CompTIA works closely with its learning 
partners to ensure training materials are 
available in the industry and are available
in multiple mediums. Both knowledge- and 
performance-based aspects are necessary 
for training, and nothing can substitute for 
hands-on learning. Moreover, a significant 
portion of testing for CompTIA certifications
includes scenario-based questioning that asks 
the test taker to react to real-life situations.

A meaningful benefit in certifications that 
are predominately knowledge-based is that 
they help establish criteria or measure an 
individual’s readiness and ability to move to 
higher-level and more complex certifications. 
This core base of knowledge provides 
confidence in situations not previously 
encountered and leads to the development of 
best practices, resulting from lessons learned 
in other settings. Psychometric validation 
that can accurately measure conceptual 
knowledge has existed for decades and is 
evident in the trustworthiness of high-stakes 
assessments such as the SAT, GRE, MDCAT, 
and LSAT.

We need to know how to drive the car, but 
we also need to know things about speed 
limits, right of way, and other conceptual 
knowledge before we can secure a driver’s 
license. It’s really not one or the other; it’s a 
matter of authentically integrating both the 
practical and the foundational knowledge 
and then making sure that testing processes 
validate both types of knowledge. To ensure 
this, CompTIA has added performance- based 
questions to many of its certification exams 
and will continue to include them on all new 
and updated products.

Innovations that allow for test simulations 
will increasingly promote performance- 
based testing as appropriate for specific 
career paths and levels of expertise. In 2011, 
CompTIA introduced its first mastery-level 
certification exam in the cybersecurity 
domain, the CompTIA Advanced Security 
Practitioner (CASP) certification exam.
This exam validates a higher level of skills 
required for both systems and network 
security. It is highly recommended that 
individuals taking this exam have a minimum 
of five years of technical security experience 
at the enterprise level. The CASP certification 
exam has a special software design that 
allows for simulation-based items. 

As cybersecurity specializations develop, 
expertise will lean toward performance- 
based criteria but will also continue to  
be supported by a foundation of core 
conceptual knowledge—much like a surgical 
internship practically validates a medical 
student who has already passed his or 
her graduation requirements. The key is 
to make sure that such a process does not 
unnecessarily bottleneck the cybersecurity 
education and training ecosystem. We need 
cybersecurity professionals who are trained 
and credentialed in a timely manner.

Industry Recognized Credentials

The CompTIA Public-Private-Academic 
Partnership: Optimum Responsiveness 
to Rapid Developments in the 
Cybersecurity Threat Environment

The cybersecurity challenges of today — 
and tomorrow — are being confronted by 
dedicated professionals in the government, 
the private sector and academia working in 
a collaborative setting and utilizing the best 
available technical tools.

CompTIA certifications are an indispensable 
piece of an ecosystem that stands at the ready 
to protect this vital digital infrastructure. As  
an association, we have been engaged with 
various government agencies, academic  
partners and initiatives to ensure that industry- 
recognized certifications are a prominent 
piece of the overall national cybersecurity 
posture.  Support for industry-recognized 
certifications is a fundamental tenant of  
the National Initiative for Cybersecurity  
Education (NICE).

As technology becomes more broadly used, 
cybersecurity awareness is important for the 
general workforce along with specialized se- 
curity professionals. CompTIA research found 
that human error accounted for 55 percent of 
security breaches in 2013, and that number is 
growing every year. The NICE campaign has 
four components and it seeks to improve the 
cyber-behavior, skills and knowledge of the 
population-at-large in order to create a safer 
cyberspace. The components are:

•  National Cybersecurity Awareness.

•  Formal Cybersecurity Education.

•  Cybersecurity Workforce.

•  Cybersecurity Workforce Training and 

Professional Development.

As an early contributor to the NICE initiative, 
particularly as it relates to the professional-
ization and training of the nation’s workforce,  
CompTIA provided input to NIST and the  
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to help 
articulate standards for how the association 
defines cybersecurity roles and responsibilities. 
The goal of this component of the NICE process 
is that it will result in a common lexicon in 
terms of how various cybersecurity roles  
are defined and what knowledge, skills and 
abilities (KSAs) align to those roles across 
 government. The resulting input from a 
broad cross-section of government, private 
sector and academic contributors (including 
CompTIA) was the establishment of 31 cyber-
security specialty areas that are now housed 
on a portal. The portal was designed to be 
an online resource for individuals looking to 
enter the cybersecurity workforce, advance 
their careers or simply want to be more 
cyber-savvy.7  

CompTIA also engaged in a detailed mapping 
process to align its certifications to many of 
the cybersecurity specialty areas and jobs 
identified by DHS. In an effort to ensure a 
clear connection between CompTIA certifica- 
tions and specialty areas, if the association’s 
certifications did not address 85 percent of 
the KSAs within a specialty area, the exam 
was not presented as a viable test to validate 
skills for that specialty. CompTIA has also  
encouraged peer-credentialing bodies 
through our role as a founding member of  
the Cybersecurity Credentials Collaborative8  
to do the same.

11

7. http://niccs.us-cert.gov/
8. http://www.cybersecuritycc.org/

CompTIA.org

This mapping exercise will no doubt have im-
portant implications for academic and private 
sector settings. Additionally, NICE is working 
with the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) to ensure that this work has relevance 
and application to the federal workforce 
across all the agencies. A baseline definition 
of cybersecurity jobs will finally allow OPM to 
properly benchmark and identify gaps in the 
federal workforce. The objective is to support 
government professionals already employed 
and recruit new professionals who have iden-
tifiable skill-sets to ensure a sufficient and 
capable workforce is in place to protect the 
government’s online environment.

Another piece to the puzzle is Executive Order 
13636, entitled the “Framework for Improving 
Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.” The 
Executive Order, which was issued in February 
2013, established “it is the Policy of the United 
States to enhance the security and resilience 
of the nation’s critical infrastructure and to 
maintain a cyber-environment that encour-
ages efficiency, innovation and economic 
prosperity while promoting safety, security, 
business confidentiality, privacy and civil 
liberties.”

The Executive Order charged NIST with 
developing a framework that is voluntary, 
risk-based and intended only for owners 
and operators of critical infrastructure. The 
framework is a set of industry standards and 
best practices designed to help organizations 
manage cyber risks. According to CompTIA 
research, only 41 percent of firms currently 
perform formal risk analysis as part of their 
security planning. For the purposes of the 

framework, critical infrastructure is defined 
as “systems and assets, whether physical or 
virtual, so vital to the United States that the 
incapacity or destruction of such systems and 
assets would have a debilitating impact on 
security, national economic security, national 
public health or safety, or any combination of 
those matters.”

NIST worked closely with industry and govern-
ment partners in the development of this 
framework organizing five workshops – three 
of which CompTIA participated in – and a 
call for public comment – to which CompTIA 
submitted recommendations.9

Through the Certified Academic Partnership 
Program (CAPP), CompTIA works with commu-
nity colleges and other academic institutions. 
Many of these institutions are academic 
centers of excellence and serve as gateways 
for government recruiting in cybersecurity.

The partnership between government, 
academia and industry is a robust and strong 
one. By working with government partners, 
CompTIA is able to share resources and tools 
that have been created by the private sector 
for the development of a strong federal and 
private cyber workforce. These alliances 
with government and academia go far in 
ensuring a seamless workforce – one that can 
easily move from the public to the private 
sector, effectively share new knowledge and 
approaches, and always ensure that there is 
an adequate skilled labor force to ward off 
cybersecurity attacks and advance critical 
infrastructure needs.

“For the last 10 years, what we’ve seen on our networks has been essentially 
exploitation, [such as] theft of intellectual property and crime. Over the last 
few weeks, we’ve seen distributed denial-of-service attacks, so we’re seeing 
the threat grow from exploitation to … disruption, and my concern is it’s 
going to go from exploitation and disruption to destruction.”

– Army Gen. Keith B. Alexander, Director of the National Security Agency  
   Oct. 2, 2012

9. Refer to the NISTFramework pdf 
(http://techvoice.org/Libraries/Documents/CompTIA_Comments_NISTFramework_12-13-13.sflb.ashx)

Industry Recognized Credentials

CompTIA and the Cybersecurity 
Credentials Industry

As domain areas in cybersecurity continue 
to evolve, there is a corresponding increase 
in credentials that validate new skill sets. 
While proliferation of credentials can lead 
to confusion, in most cases the distinctions 
among them can be understood when one 
considers the particular domain addressed, 
as well as the complexity of the skill and
any reference to vendor-specific or vendor- 
neutral expertise.

A simple but important way to distinguish 
valid credentials from “fly-by-night” entrants 
is to consult the ANSI.10 ANSI maintains 
a personnel certification accreditation 
program, and governmental agencies 
in key sectors such as national security, 
public safety, and healthcare rely on ANSI 
accreditation for third-party verification 
of the competence of certification bodies. 
ANSI is the only personnel certification 
accreditation body in the U.S. to fulfill the 
globally recognized requirements of ISO/IEC 
17011:2004, which represents the highest 
internationally accepted practices for 
accreditation bodies.

CompTIA also works closely and 
collaboratively through meetings and 
engagements with peer certification 
organizations and stakeholders in 
government, academia, and the private 
sector. The shared objective is to align 
credentials to identified career pathways, 
inform senior IT leadership and the 
educational community about the role
of cybersecurity credentials, and provide 
continuous improvement and management 
of the credentialing ecosystem. It is 
incumbent upon those in the IT security 

credentials world to align various
organizations and vendor companies to 
publicize more coherent and interrelated 
career paths—from entry-level to mastery 
levels of IT expertise. IT professionals will 
continue to inspire trust and support from IT 
and HR personnel in the cybersecurity world.

GLOSSARY

ANSI American National Standards Institute, 
a 501(c)(3) non-profit association and the 
voice of the U.S. standards and conformity 
assessment system. While helping to assure 
the safety and health of consumers and 
the protection of the environment, ANSI 
oversees the creation, promulgation, and 
use of thousands of norms and guidelines 
that directly impact businesses in nearly 
every sector—from acoustical devices to 
construction equipment, from dairy and 
livestock production to energy distribution, 
and many more. ANSI is also actively 
engaged  in accrediting programs that 
assess conformance to standards, including 
globally recognized cross-sector programs 
such as the ISO 9000 (quality) and ISO 14000 
(environmental) management systems.

Bloom’s Taxonomy A classification scheme 
of intellectual behavior developed by 
Benjamin Bloom who identified six levels of 
cognitive learning—from the simple recall 
of facts (Knowledge), as the lowest level, 
through the increasingly complex levels
of Understanding, Application, Analysis, 
Synthesis, and Evaluation.

CompTIA A+ Certification The CompTIA A+ 
certification is the industry standard for 

13

10. Refer to the ANSI Accreditation Directory (https://www.ansica.org/wwwversion2/outside/PERdirectory.asp?menuID=2)

CompTIA.org

computer support technicians. The
international, vendor-neutral certification
proves competence in areas such as 
installation, preventative maintenance, 
networking, security, and troubleshooting.
CompTIA A+ certified technicians also 
have excellent customer service and 
communication skills to work with clients.

CompTIA Advanced Security Practitioner 
(CASP)  CASP is CompTIA’s first mastery level 
certification exam and was voted on to
the DoD 8570 exam list in early 2013. CASP 
is approved for IAT Level III, IAM Level II, 
IASAE Level I, and IASAE Level II in U.S. DoD 
Information Assurance directive 8570.01-M. 
It is designed for information assurance 
professionals in technical leadership roles 
in an IT enterprise environment (especially 
military environments). CASP proves 
competence in enterprise security; 
risk management and incident response;
research and analysis; integration of 
computing; communications and business 
disciplines; and technical integration of 
enterprise components.

CompTIA Network+ Certification The 
CompTIA Network+ certification is the sign 
of a competent networking professional. It is 
an international, vendor-neutral certification 
that proves a technician’s competency in 
managing, maintaining, troubleshooting, 
installing and configuring basic network 
infrastructure. Since its introduction in 1999, 
more than 235,000 people have become 
CompTIA Network+ certified.

CompTIA Security+ Certification CompTIA 
Security+ is an international, vendor-neutral 
certification that proves competency in 
system security, network infrastructure, 
access control, and organizational security. 

Critical IT Infrastructure The backbone 
of our nation’s economy, security and 

health. We know it as the power we use 
in our homes, the water we drink, the 
transportation that moves us, and the 
communication systems we rely on to stay 
in touch with friends and family. Critical 
infrastructure are the assets, systems, 
and networks, whether physical or virtual, 
so vital to the United States that their 
incapacitation or destruction would have 
a debilitating effect on security, national 
economic security, national public health or 
safety, or any combination thereof. (http://
www.dhs.gov/what-critical-infrastructure)

Cyberspace Cyberspace is a global domain 
within the information environment 
consisting of the interdependent network 
of IT infrastructures, including the Internet, 
telecommunications networks, computer 
systems, and embedded processors and 
controllers. 

Cybersecurity A synonym of Information 
Security as cited in ISO 27001.

Examination Blueprint is a document 
related to a particular area of domain 
knowledge, composed of one or many 
learning objectives. A learning objective 
answers the question: What is it that an 
individual should be able to do or know? A 
learning objective makes clear the intended 
learning outcome rather than what form the 
instruction will take. Learning objectives 
focus on student performance. Action verbs 
that are specific, such as list, describe, report, 
compare, demonstrate, and analyze should 
state the behaviors students are expected 
to perform. Clearly defined objectives form 
the foundation for selecting appropriate 
content, learning activities, and assessment 
measures. (From Patricia Archer, 1979,  
Writing Higher-Level Learning Objectives:  
The Cognitive Domain, New York: Media 
Systems Corporation) 

Industry Recognized Credentials

Global Information Grid The globally 
interconnected, end-to-end set of 
information capabilities, associated 
processes, and personnel for collecting, 
processing, storing, disseminating, and 
managing information on demand to 
war fighters, policy makers, and support 
personnel. The global information grid 
includes owned and leased communications 
and computing systems and services, 
software (including applications), data, 
security services, other associated  
services, and national security systems.  
Also called GIG. 

Global Information Infrastructure 
The worldwide interconnection of 
communications networks, computers, 
databases, and consumer electronics 
that make information available to users. 
The global information infrastructure 
encompasses a wide range of equipment, 
including cameras, scanners, keyboards, 
facsimile machines, computers, switches,
compact disks, video and audio tape, cable, 
wire, satellites, fiber optic transmission 
lines, networks of all types, televisions, 
monitors, printers, and much more. The 
friendly and adversary personnel who make 
decisions and handle the transmitted
information constitute a critical component 
of the global information infrastructure. 
Also called GII.

Information Assurance Measures that 
protect and defend information and 
information systems by ensuring their 
availability,  integrity,  authentication, 
confidentiality, and  non-repudiation. 
This includes providing for restoration 
of information systems by incorporating 
protection, detection, and reaction 
capabilities. (DOD 8500.01E, October 24, 2002, 
recertified April 23, 2007)

Information Security is defined as the 
preservation of the confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of information. Additionally, 
other properties such as authenticity, 
accountability, non-repudiation, and 
reliability can also be involved (ISO/
IEC 17799:2005). Also see NIST 800-30,
“Information system security is a system 
characteristic and a set of mechanisms 
that span the system both logically and 
physically. The five security goals are 
integrity, availability, confidentiality, 
accountability, and assurance.”

ISO The Independent, non-governmental 
membership organization and the world’s 
largest developer of voluntary International 
Standards. (http://www.iso.org/iso/home/
about.htm)

Job Task Analysis (JTA) The formal process 
of defining the requirements of a position 
and identifying the knowledge, skills, and 
abilities necessary to effectively perform the 
duties of the position. (www.hss.energy. gov/
DepPersonnelSec/hrp/html/glossary.htm)

Malware Software such as viruses or “Trojan 
Horse” programs designed to cause damage or 
disruption to a computer system.

Psychometrics Psychometrics is the field 
of study concerned with the theory and 
technique of educational and psychological 
measurement, which includes the 
measurement of knowledge, abilities, 
attitudes, and personality traits. The field is 
primarily concerned with the construction 
and validation of measurement 
instruments, such as questionnaires, tests, 
and personality assessments. It involves 
two major research tasks, namely:
(i) the construction of instruments and 
procedures for measurement; and (ii) the 
development and refinement of theoretical 
approaches to measurement. Those who 

15

CompTIA.org

practice psychometrics are known as 
psychometricians and although they may 
also be clinical psychologists, they are
 not obliged to be so and could instead be, 
for example, human resources or learning 
and development professionals. Either 
way specific, separate qualifications in 
psychometrics are required. 

Subject Matter Expert (SME)  An SME or 
domain expert is a person who is an expert 
in a particular area or topic. When spoken, 
sometimes the acronym «SME» is spelled out 
(«S-M-E») and 

Industry Recognized Credentials

Appendix 1
CAREER ROADMAP

CompTIA Fundamental 
Knowledge: Preparing for 
Training and Certification

CompTIA Core
Certifications

Fundamental IT credential 
for multiple careers

Fundamental IT credential 
for multiple careers

CompTIA Certifications

Hardware and End User Support

Further Vendor 
Specific  
Certifications

Career paths:
   • A+ certification
   • General job prep

Average Salary: $54,620*
Possible job roles:
   • Help Desk or Field 
     Technician
   • IT Support Technician

A+ and twelve months 
networking experience

Average Salary: $62,950*
Possible job roles:
   • Network Administrator
   • Network Engineer

Two years network 
administration with 
security focus

Average Salary: $84,243*
Possible job roles:
   • Information Security  
     Specialist
   • Network Adminstrator

Network/Data Management

Business Process Management

17

* Source: Computerworld Salary Survey 2013 - U.S. salaries only

CompTIA.org

Appendix 2
CERTIFICATION EXAM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

Job Task Analysis & 
Blueprint Development

Preliminary JTA and 
Exam Objectives:  
Blueprint Validation

Preliminary Exam  
Development  
& Validation

• Need Arises for  

the Development  
of a Certification 
Examination
• Selection of  

Subject Matter  
Experts (SMEs)

• Job Task Analysis 
(JTA) Workshop, 
CompTIA HQ

• Output: Preliminary 
JTA and Preliminary 
Examination  
Objectives Blueprint 
(EOB)

• Statistical survey to 
validate Preliminary 
Blueprint (Statistically 
significant number of 
respondents needed;  
global feedback  
opportunity)

• Output: Working  

Examination  
Objectives Blueprint 
released globally  
(translated)

• Curriculum & training 

development 
initiated with  
3rd-party providers

• Exam Item-writing 

workshop (12-15 SME 
participants, CompTIA 
HQ

• Output: Beta  

Examination to be  
published globally  
by CompTIA test  
providers

• Beta Examination 

taken and validated by 
statistically significant 
beta test population & 
feedback

• Output: Final  

Certification Examination 

Exam Publication  
and Release

• Examination localization 

& translation(s)  
development

• Examination release 

(timed to coincide 
with availability of 
3rd-party curricular 
materials) 

• Annual updates to 

create additional items 
for the examination 
question pool

• Regular refresh of  

all content to assure  
accuracy and currency 
of domain knowledge 
validated

Appendix 3
CYBERSPACE INFRASTRUCTURE RELATIONSHIPS11

Critical Infrastructure/
Key Resources (CIKR)

Physical Infrastructure

Cyber Infrastructure

Emergency 

Services

Energy

Agriculture

& Food

Corporations/ 

Institutions

Farms/Food
Processing 

Plants

Delivery Sites

Information

Services

Software

Defense  

Industrial Base

Banking & 
Finance

Transportation

Dams/

Reservoirs  

Treatment Plants

Cable/Fiber

Railroad/Highway/ 

Bridges/

Piplines/Ports

Control
Systems

Internet

Government

Public Health

Public 
Facilities

Nuclear 

Power Plants

Energy

Hospitals

Hardware

Chemical

Water

Nuclear

11. Adapted from “Securing the Nation’s Critical Cyber Infrastructure,” US Department of Homeland Security

Industry Recognized Credentials

About CompTIA

CompTIA is the voice of the world’s information 
technology (IT) industry. Its members are the 
companies at the forefront of innovation and the 
professionals responsible for maximizing the  
benefits organizations receive from their investments 
in technology. CompTIA is dedicated to advancing 
industry growth through its educational programs, 
market research, networking events, professional 
certifications, and public policy advocacy. 

For more information, please visit CompTIA.org.

19

CompTIA.org

CompTIA Worldwide Headquarters
CompTIA Member Services, LLC
3500 Lacey Road, Suite 100
Downers Grove, Illinois 60515

630.678.8300

CompTIA.org

© 2015 CompTIA Properties, LLC, used under license by CompTIA Member Services, LLC. All rights reserved. All membership activities and 
offerings to members of CompTIA, Inc. are operated exclusively by CompTIA Member Services, LLC. CompTIA is a registered trademark 
of CompTIA Properties, LLC in the U.S. and internationally. Other brands and company names mentioned herein may be trademarks or 
service marks of CompTIA Properties, LLC or of their respective owners. Reproduction or dissemination prohibited without written consent of 
CompTIA Properties, LLC. Printed in the U.S. 00794-Jan2015

