 

Workshop Summary Report 
Cyber Threats and International Cooperation 
 
February 26, 2015 
Washington, DC 
 
Rapporteurs: Amelia M. Wolf, Research Associate, Center for Preventive Action (CPA); Aliza Litchman, 
Intern, CPA  
 
This  workshop  was  cosponsored  by  the  International  Institutions  and  Global  Governance  program  (IIGG)  and  the 
Digital  and  Cyberspace  Policy  program  at the  Council  on Foreign Relations  (CFR), and  was  made possible by  the 
generous support of the Robina Foundation.  
 
In the past year alone, the number of cyberattacks worldwide grew by 48 percent and the cost of each incident 
increased 92 percent. Hackers attacked Target in January 2014 and stole credit card information from more than 
forty million customers, which they sold on the black market for $53.7 million. An attack on JPMorgan Chase went 
unnoticed for two months—despite the company’s $250 million cybersecurity budget—affecting seventy-six 
million households and seven million businesses. And in fall 2014, both the White House and State Department 
announced breaches, likely carried out by Russian-backed hackers. The increase in the frequency, scale, and 
sophistication of cyberattacks has raised pressing questions about how the United States can deter adversarial state 
and nonstate actors; respond to cyberattacks of varying intent; cooperate internationally to establish norms for 
appropriate activity in cyberspace; and facilitate private-public partnerships to enhance deterrence, defense, and 
attribution capabilities. In light of current challenges, CFR’s International Institutions and Global Governance 
program and Digital and Cyberspace Policy program cosponsored the workshop “Cyber Threats and International 
Cooperation.” The meeting took place on February 26, 2015, at CFR’s office in Washington, DC, bringing 
together cybersecurity experts from the government, academic, nonprofit, and private sectors. The discussion was 
conducted on a not-for-attribution basis.  

SESSION ONE 

The State of Cyber Threats 

Cybercrime has changed the nature of conflict by blurring the line between state and nonstate actors. Conventional 
conflict is fought on land, in the air, or by sea and generally involves uniformed armies and physical weapons. But 

1 

 

the introduction of a new domain—cyberspace—has expanded the battlefield beyond geographical boundaries and 
significantly increased the number of players. Participants discussed the reasons for and implications of this shift.  

A low cost of entry has allowed nonstate actors—including terrorist and criminal organizations, intellectual 

property thieves, and even lone hackers—to conduct damaging cyberattacks that target technologically advanced 
countries. Though there are higher costs and greater capability requirements for large-scale attacks, such as with 
Stuxnet, any actor that wants to conduct a limited attack does not need to develop its own offensive cyber 
capability, but can simply buy malware on the black market. 

The difficulty in attributing attacks, given the use of proxies and multiple servers, and the lagging norms on what 

constitutes appropriate state behavior in cyberspace allow malicious activity to go relatively unpunished. For example, 
the U.S. government suspects China of launching cyberattacks to extract intellectual property from American 
businesses to weaken the U.S. economy, and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is suspected of having 
conducted a cyberattack on Sony to prevent the release of The Interview, a movie based on the fictional assassination of 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. In some cases, governments contract terrorists or criminals to target other states, 
making it even more difficult to determine the origin of the attack. Participants pointed out that correctly attributing 
an attack is not only time consuming but difficult. They noted the widespread concern that a wrongful attribution or 
disproportionate response risks escalation into a crisis, which is of particular concern for situations with already 
heightened tensions or bilateral relationships that lack the necessary methods of communication to clarify 
misunderstandings, such as bilateral crisis channels between corresponding national cyber agencies. For example, a 
cyberattack against Japan that has no known original but is wrongfully attributed to China could exacerbate existing 
tensions or result in an escalatory response. 

Identifying appropriate responses to cyberattacks is complicated by the prevalence of “short-of-war” attacks and 

the anonymity of actors in cyberspace. Low-level short-of-war attacks repeatedly target mid-level businesses or small 
sections of critical infrastructure. These attacks are not large enough to warrant a military response but have the 
potential to inflict enough damage that numerous attacks over a long period of time could harm an economy, 
complicating a policymaker’s calculus for determining an appropriate response. Participants agreed that this scenario 
is more likely to occur than a “cyber–Pearl Harbor,” which would come swiftly, without any warning, and inflict 
extensive damage.  

There is also a growing trend of malicious actors positioning malware on networks and software without a clear 

intent. These could be designed for espionage or to be activated for future attacks that would be particularly damaging 
to industrial control systems, which support critical infrastructure. Participants widely agreed that this complicates a 
response because the purpose and potential harm of an attack that uses such malware is unclear. Additionally, the 
longer that malware remains inactive, the more difficult it is to attribute an attack once it occurs. 

SESSION  TWO 

Gaps in U.S. Coordination and International Cooperation 

To date, the United States has made some strides in collaborating with states and international institutions to address 
the evolving threat of cyberattacks. The United States has developed plans for bilateral cybersecurity collaboration, 
most recently with Canada and the United Kingdom; hosted a White House Summit on Cybersecurity and Consumer 
Protection; and participated in numerous United Nations (UN) meetings. However, participants noted that these 
efforts have not kept pace with the growing and evolving threat of cyberattacks. They agreed that increased 
collaboration is needed to establish norms for appropriate activities in cyberspace, develop standards for state 

 

2 

responsibility for cyberattacks launched within a state’s territory, and identify best practices for deterring and 
defending against nonstate cyberattackers, as well as holding them accountable for their actions.  

One of the greatest challenges for the United States is identifying appropriate response options for cyberattacks 
below the act-of-war threshold, and determining what offensive operations are acceptable in cyberspace. In order to 
address these challenges, the United States is working to develop a normative framework for activity in cyberspace, 
which would also allow the United States and its allies to collectively act against attackers. To date, it has made 
substantial gains by defining its preferred norms in the 2011 International Strategy for Cyberspace and recognizing 
that international law applies to state action in cyberspace. Additionally, while participating in the UN Group of 
Governmental Experts, the United States has proposed three specific norms for how states should act in cyberspace 
during peacetime: 

 

  States should not conduct or knowingly support online activity that intentionally damages critical infrastructure. 
  States should not conduct or knowingly support activity intended to prevent national Computer Security Incident 

Response Services (CSIRTs) from responding to cyber incidents. 

  States should cooperate with requests for assistance from other states in investigating cyber crimes.  
 
However, the United States suffered significant setbacks with the 2013 Snowden disclosures. Moving forward, U.S. 
efforts should be enhanced by confidence-building measures, including routine cooperation to institute norms and 
meet cyber challenges, and enhanced transparency, which will be vital to reducing mistrust and tensions between 
rivals in cyberspace. Deterrence will be increasingly difficult the longer the United States delays efforts to establish 
concrete norms to guide activity in cyberspace. 

While norms are intrinsic to setting standards for state operations in cyberspace, their effectiveness is limited to 

large groups of like-minded individuals—primarily state actors that share the same values—given that nonstate actors 
do not operate according to the same rules. Although Russia and China may be potential adversaries, encouraging 
their participation in cybersecurity cooperative efforts can help shape their behavior. For nonstate actors not guided 
by norms, intent and capability determine their potential threat. A normative framework would, however, help the 
United States and its allies collectively act against nonstate enemies.  

SESSION  THREE 

Working Lunch 

Private-sector companies have expanded cyber intelligence—formerly a government-only domain—enhanced 
defensive technology, and opened a new avenue of information sharing. For many private-sector companies, 
cyberattacks are a facet of daily business. To better mitigate against and prevent attacks, companies will have to 
adapt to an environment of persistent cyber threats, remain vigilant, and strengthen defenses. Unfortunately, as 
participants pointed out, companies often opt out of cybersecurity because of the large accompanying expenses or 
lack of knowledge about the available options or about how to navigate the insurance marketplace. However, 
participants widely agreed that the risks of a destructive attack could far outweigh those costs. 

As the leading target of malicious cyberattacks, the private sector will play a vital role in setting normative 

standards of behavior in cyberspace and enhances U.S. defenses. For the U.S. government, collaboration is important 
not just because of the benefits that the private sector has to offer, but because potential adversary countries such as 
China often view U.S. corporations as an extension of the government based on how Chinese society functions. 

 

3 

Consequently, like offensive cyber actors, the line between state and nonstate defensive actors has been blurred and 
inherently demanded a collaborative approach by private and public sector actors.  

Participants discussed why private-sector companies are disincentivized from sharing information. First is the fear 

of a breach being publicized, which could harm the public perception of the company’s security. Second is a 
company’s obligation to clients that limits the disclosure of potentially sensitive information. Additionally, 
collaborating with competitors could reflect poorly on the company’s independent success. Third is simply mistrust 
among and between companies. However, in order to play a role in international dialogues intended to shape 
standards for operating in the cyber domain, which they desire to do, private-sector companies must share 
information and act collectively to present actionable ideas.  

Participants identified numerous steps that public and private actors could take to enhance collaboration, such as 

distinguishing cybersecurity needs based on company size rather than sector; undertaking drills to test responses 
during a cyberattack, identifying which public and private actors are responsible for what and how to facilitate a quick 
and collective response; and enhancing liability insurance for information sharing, building off of the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework. Additionally, as participants pointed out, 
cybersecurity is currently an opt-in market and needs to transform into an opt-out market to adequately strengthen 
defense. This would require congressional legislation to incentivize private-sector companies and hold them 
accountable for their inaction.  

Productive information sharing between the public and private sectors already occurs on an ad-hoc basis, primarily 

based on personal relationships. However, there is room for improvement. First, public-private information sharing 
usually focuses on responding to particular types of threats, actors, and malware, but should be reoriented to focus on 
tools, technologies, and vulnerabilities, which would enhance defenses. Second, actors from both sectors should 
collectively strengthen U.S. response plans for future crisis scenarios. This will entail clarifying responsibilities of the 
government and private sector, differentiating between policy and legal issues, and identifying which government 
agencies and public actors handle specific types of cyber threats. Third, the establishment of information-sharing 
analysis centers, which the financial sector has had for fifteen years, would help facilitate inter-sector partnerships.  

CONCLUSION 

Although the United States has taken steps to enhance international and public-private collaboration on 
cybersecurity, much work is left to be done to enhance deterrence, strengthen defense, set standards for operating 
in cyberspace, and develop appropriate response options for malicious activity. Cyberattacks, many of which target 
the U.S. government and private American companies, are increasing in frequency, scale, and sophistication. 
Further delay risks opening a space for state actors with conflicting perceptions of appropriate behavior in 
cyberspace to take the lead in or thwart international efforts to establish norms.  
 

 

4 

