Cybersecurity Public Private Partnerships: Challenges and Opportunities  

By Justin S. Daniels and Joe D. Whitley 

Originally published in Law Journal Newsletters' Cybersecurity Law & Strategy, February 2017 

The  allegations  that  Russia  hacked  the  Democratic  National  Committee  (DNC)  is  the  latest 
evidence  that  cybersecurity  has  and  will  continue  to  have  an  overarching  impact  on  our  daily 
lives.  Further  complicating the cyber threat is  that it is  evolving so quickly that  it outstrips the 
ability  of  our  private  or  government  sectors  to  adequately  address  the  threat  and  its 
consequences. The severity of the cyber threat has resulted in the private sector and the United 
States government partnering to identify and respond to threats that can impact entire industries, 
especially  financial  services  and the  electrical  grid,  two  essential  parts of  our  country’s  critical 
infrastructure. This article examines: 1) the challenges that inhibit partnering between the private 
and  public  sectors;  2)  how  such  partnership  is  addressed  in  the  Cybersecurity  Information 
Sharing Act (CISA) of 2015; and 3) what this all means going forward.  

Cybersecurity  impacts  individual  privacy,  commerce  among  businesses,  and  our  national 
security. Critical infrastructure such as  financial services are owned, operated and protected by 
the  private  sector,  which  is  mainly  concerned  with  competing  in  their  industry  and  making  a 
profit.  See,  Eric  A.  Kaijankoski,  Cybersecurity  Information  Sharing  Between  Public-Private 
Sector  Agencies,  Naval  Post  Graduate  School  Theses  and  Dissertation,  March,  2015,  page  35. 
Moreover,  the  financial  services  industry  facilitates  commerce  globally.  Meanwhile,  the 
government  is  concerned  that  a  hack  could  render  our  entire  financial  services  industry 
inoperable for just a few days and place our national security in extreme peril.  

The acceleration of global connectivity is unparalleled in human history. At the same time, it has 
created  unprecedented  benefits  and  multifaceted  opportunities  for  those  who  wish  to  do 
unimaginable  and  irreparable  harm.  Close  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sector  is 
crucial,  given  the  enormous  risks  associated  with  the  continued  acceleration  of  global 
connectedness. Upon closer inspection, however, significant cultural and legal barriers exist that 
can hinder further cooperation necessary to effectively combat the cyber threat.  

Cooperation Challenges  

In  today’s  world,  significant  cooperation  challenges  continue  to  exist  between  the  private  and 
public  sector.  The  biggest  challenge  that  undercuts  cooperation  is  a  lack  of  trust  between  the 
public  and  private  sector.  Can  business  leaders  trust  that  the  government  won’t  interfere  with 
operations?  Does  government  involvement  mean  providing  unfettered  access  to  systems  and 
ceding  control  of  such  systems  along  with  confidential  information  and  incident  response 
strategies?  See,  Judith  H.  Germano,  Cybersecurity  Partnerships:  A  New  Era  of  Public-Private 
Collaboration, The Center on Law and Security NYU School of Law, October 2014, page 3.  

The Snowden episode has made businesses wary of being seen in the marketplace as too closely 
cooperating with government. The private sector is also concerned that disclosing vulnerabilities 
or  threats  could  result  in  an  unwelcome  visit  from  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC), 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
or  other  industry  government  regulators  voicing  concerns  about  cyber  compliance.  A  company 

may  fear  that  such  collaboration  with  a  government  entity  might  intentionally  or  unwittingly 
result  in  a  release  of  proprietary  information  that  makes  industry  competitors  aware  of  a 
vulnerability that they might exploit for economic benefit.  

Additionally  the  unsettled,  conflicting  and  evolving  cybersecurity  U.S. regulatory  regime  gives 
the private sector pause when considering closer collaboration with the government. Liability for  

breaches  under  the  current  regulatory  framework  can  include  actions  by  diverse  governmental 
agencies  that  can  include  the  FTC,  SEC,  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ)  and  state  attorneys 
general.  In  addition  to  government  enforcement  actions,  data  breaches  may  also  result  in  class 
action  lawsuits.  All  these  challenges  occur  in  an  environment  where  there  is  no  federal  data 
breach  notification  law.  Therefore,  companies  are  left  to  navigate  the  conflicting  data  breach 
notification laws currently enacted by 47 states.  

Criminals  and  nation  states  who  conduct  cyberattacks  are  a  separate  category  of  challenges 
impacting  the  development  of  a  private  and  public  partnership.  According  to  Assistant  U.S. 
Attorney (AUSA) Steven D. Grimberg, Deputy Chief, Financial Fraud & Cyber Division of the 
U.S. Attorney’s Office, Northern District of Georgia: “It is difficult to overstate the importance 
of reporting breach activity to the government, especially if it’s coming from actors outside the 
United States. A Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) may think no information has been 
taken, but it does not address that the network that was breached might be used to gain access to 
another network, or used as a test run to see if a method of attack is successful.”  

In  response  to  CISO’s  who  believe  that  sharing  information  with  government  prosecutors  may 
trigger a visit from a regulator; AUSA Grimberg emphasized that: “Prosecutors are not generally 
in  the  business  of  sharing  information  with  regulators.  The  prosecutor’s  goal  is  to  find  the 
perpetrator or perpetrators who may be hurting multiple companies and possible national security 
implications.”  These  comments  underline  the  delicate  balance  between  a  company  concerned 
that sharing information may trigger a regulatory investigation with the prompt investigation of 
perpetrators  whose  attack  may  have  industry  wide  or  national  security  implications.  AUSA 
Grimberg’s  comments  also  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  government’s  role  in 
apprehending  cyber  criminals  and  regulating  the  private  sector.  From  a  private  sector 
perspective,  industry  is gratified  when  cyber criminals  are  brought  to  justice  while at  the  same 
time  chafing  over  the  cost  of  complying  with  what  the  company  or  private  sector  believes  are 
overly burdensome government regulations.  

Trust,  complicated  and  overlapping  Federal  and  state  cybersecurity  regulatory  regimes,  and 
balancing the prosecutor and regulator roles are a significant but not exhaustive list of challenges 
that face the growth of public private partnership. How are these challenges addressed by CISA? 

CISA 

CISA was signed into law on Dec. 18, 2015  and has two main components. First, it authorizes 
companies  to  monitor  and  implement  defensive  measures  on  their  own  information  systems  to 
counter  cyber  threats.  Second,  the  law  provides  certain  protections  to  encourage  companies  to 
voluntarily  share  information  —  specifically,  information  about  “cyber  threat  indicators”  and 
“defensive measures” — with the federal, state and local governments, and other companies and 

private entities. See, Brad S. Karp, Federal Guidance on the Cybersecurity Information Sharing 
Act  of  2015,  Harvard  Law  School  Forum  on  Corporate  Governance  and  Financial  Regulation, 
March 3, 2016, page 1. 

CISA  specifically  addresses  private  sector  concerns  about  legal  liability  by  shielding  private 
entities from any cause of action brought in a federal or state court for monitoring an information 
system and for sharing cyber threat indicators or defensive measures in accordance with CISA. 
Information shared under CISA will not be used for federal and state regulatory purposes. CISA 
also grants information shared with the government an exemption from Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) requests under federal or state law. CISA’s utility however, is weakened by the fact 
that it applies only if a company voluntarily shares information with the government and there is 
no statutory or regulatory requirement that a company share such information. A public company 
will  also  have  to  weigh  if  sharing  information  with  the  government  under  CISA  satisfies  a 
materiality threshold triggering disclosure in a public filing. Ibid, page 6. 

Moving Forward 

While CISA attempts to address barriers that inhibit closer public private partnership, it does not 
replace building the trust that is essential to closer collaboration. The financial services industry 
is  undertaking  efforts  that  are  worthy  of  emulation  by  other  industries.  The  Financial  Services 
Information  Sharing  Analysis  Center  (FS-ISAC)  is  one  of  several  sharing  centers  that  are 
conduits  for  information  sharing  among  the  public  and  private  sector.  See,  Kaijankoski,  supra, 
page 49. 

In  addition  to  information  sharing,  the  FS-ISAC  conducts  an  annual  Cyber  Attack  Against 
Payment  Processes  Simulation.  FS-ISAC  tests  the  nearly  1,000  and  growing  participating 
financial institutions that use payment services in responding to simulated cyber attacks. Ibid. 

The value of cyber attack simulations and evaluating the incident response to the attack cannot 
be overemphasized. When asked what the most important thing companies can do differently in 
dealing  with  a  cyber  threat,  AUSA  Grimberg  responded:  “Many  companies  that  have  a  cyber 
incident response plan fail to practice the plan and see how it works in a cyber attack simulation. 
Companies  should  have  a  tabletop  exercise  in  responding  to  a  hack  to  see  how  their  cyber 
incident  response  plan  works,  and  if  it  needs  to  be  refined  based  on  that  simulated  situation.” 
Cyber  threat  simulations  are  a  key  ingredient  in  a  21st  century  trust  recipe  that  is  necessary  to 
cultivate improved public private collaboration. 

The high stakes, sophistication and acceleration of technology vulnerable to cyber attacks means 
that  existing  collaboration  is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient,  in  responding  to  the  cyber  threat.  In 
the coming years, the private and public sector will need to find proactive, sensible and flexible 
ways  to  share  information.  The  recent  DNC  breach  represents  another  example  that  the 
consequences for continuing with the status quo presents more opportunities for those who hack 
for  profit,  or  commercial  or  geopolitical  gain.  The  economic  repercussions  from  the  next  hack 
could very well make the 2008 recession seem mild by comparison. 

***** 

Justin  S.  Daniels,  a  shareholder  in  Baker  Donelson’s  Atlanta  office,  serves  as  the  head  of  the 
Baker Donelson Cybersecurity Accelerator and Baker Donelson’s Atlanta Emerging Companies 
Group.  He  may  be  reached  at  jdaniels@bakerdonelson.com.  Joe  D.  Whitley,  a  shareholder  in 
Baker  Donelson’s  Atlanta  and  Washington,  DC,  offices,  chairs  the  firm’s  Government 
Enforcement  and  Investigations  Group  and  served  as  the  first  General  Counsel  of  the  United 
States Department of Homeland Security. He may be reached at jwhitley@bakerdonelson.com. 

 

