April 4, 2017 

Cybersecurity in the Health Care 
Sector: Strengthening Public-Private 
Partnerships 

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, United States House of Representatives, One Hundred 
Fifteenth Congress, First Session  

HEARING CONTENTS:

Member Statements 

Greg Walden 
Chairman, Committee on Energy and Commerce 
[View pdf] 

Tim Murphy 
Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 
[View pdf] 

Witnesses 

Denise Anderson 
President, National Health Information Sharing and Analysis Center 
[View pdf] 

Michael McNeil 
Global Product Security & Services Officer, Philips 
[View pdf] 

Terry Rice 
Vice President, IT Risk Management & Chief Information Security Officer 
Merck & Company, Inc. 
[View pdf] 

* Please Note: External links included in this compilation were functional at the time of its
creation but are not maintained thereafter. 

This hearing compilation was prepared by the Homeland Security Digital Library, 

Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security. 

Available Webcast(s)*: 

[View Webcast] 

Compiled From*: 

https://energycommerce.house.gov/hearings-and-votes/hearings/cybersecurity-
heath-care-sector-strengthening-public-private 

* Please Note: External links included in this compilation were functional at the time of its
creation but are not maintained thereafter. 

This hearing compilation was prepared by the Homeland Security Digital Library, 

Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security. 

Opening Statement of Chairman Greg Walden 
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations  

Hearing on “Cybersecurity in the Health Care Sector: Strengthening 

Public-Private Partnerships” 

April 4, 2017 

	  

(As prepared for delivery) 

	  

We are well aware of the threats posed by our increasingly connected 
society, but nowhere do these risks hit closer to home than on the very 
technology we rely on for our own health care. The threats range from 
ransomware, breaches of patient data at heath care organizations, to the 
vulnerabilities in pacemakers and other medical devices. Taken in 
isolation, these and other threats pose serious challenges to health care 
organizations. Collectively, they demonstrate the breadth, complexity, 
and unavoidable nature of cyber threats in modern society – both now 
and for the foreseeable future.   
 
As technology becomes increasingly integrated with all levels of our 
health care, cyber threats pose a challenge to the entire sector. Everyone 
- from the smallest rural hospitals, to large providers and device 
manufacturers - faces some level of exposure and risk.   
 
Breaches, exploits, and vulnerabilities are inevitable realities of modern 
society, even for the most well-resourced and sophisticated 
organizations. But this does not mean doom-and-gloom for everyone 
with an internet connection. It is simply reality and must serve as the 
baseline for any discussion about cybersecurity. We may not be able to 
stop every attack, but as the threats continue to escalate, we must do 
more to minimize the risk.   
 
Improving security is a collective responsibility. When we work together 
– government and private sector, large companies and small – we can do 
more to improve security than if we attempt to solve it on our own.  

 

 

An attack on one organization may be prevented elsewhere if we have 
the infrastructure and mechanisms necessary to communicate effectively 
with others across the sector. Further, if an event has widespread or 
national implications, we need to coordinate an effective and efficient 
response – with unity of effort, not confusion over roles and 
responsibilities.     
 
That is why, for almost two decades, the U.S. has worked to establish 
public-private partnerships to coordinate security planning and 
information sharing within and across our 16 critical infrastructure 
sectors, which includes health care.  
Effective collaboration between government and the private sector is 
vital to elevating our security posture,. These partnerships provide a vital 
link between those responsible for the safety and security of the nation 
with those who own and operate the infrastructure critical to those 
objectives.  
 
To date, these public private partnerships have experienced mixed 
results. Some sectors have been more successful than others in coming 
together – both with private sector and government partners. The health 
care sector, in particular, has struggled to coalesce around these public-
private partnerships for cybersecurity. It is this shared, goal that brings 
us together today. 
 
This hearing marks an important opportunity to hear from our 
distinguished panelists about what is necessary to bring the health care 
sector together and continue building momentum in the right direction. 
Simply put, the cost of inaction is too great. As the threats continue to 
escalate, so too do our cybersecurity challenges. We’ve seen the 
headlines – we know the attacks will continue. But today is about what 
improvements can be made so we can be prepared for the inevitable.  
 
	  

	  

Opening Statement of The Honorable Tim Murphy 

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 

Hearing on “Cybersecurity in the Health Care Sector: Strengthening 

Public-Private Partnerships” 

April 4, 2017 

We are here today to talk about cybersecurity in the health care sector.  

	  
Strong cybersecurity practices are essential in this industry.  This isn’t just about 
protecting patient data or information – this is about patient safety.  
  
For nearly two decades, a cornerstone of the nation’s efforts to combat cyber 
threats have been public-private partnerships designed to facilitate engagement and 
collaboration between the government and private sector.  Over time this model 
has evolved, but the objective remains the same – unity of effort between those 
responsible for protecting the nation and those who own and operate the 
infrastructure that is critical to that mission. 
 
The focal point of these efforts are 16 critical infrastructure sectors—one of 
which is the health care sector.  Each sector is organized around several key 
institutions – a Sector Specific Agency, Government Coordinating Council, Sector 
Coordinating Council and Information Sharing and Analysis Center.  Each of these 
institutions plays an important role in ensuring participation, collaboration, and 
unity of effort of the government and private sector participants within each sector.   
 
Despite a number of efforts to improve this model over the years, it has 
achieved mixed results across the various sectors.  Some sectors have succeeded in 
developing robust support and engagement with both government and industry 
participants.   
 
The gold standard, to date, has been the financial sector.  This sector enjoys 
a strong, collaborative relationship with their government partner – the Department 
of the Treasury – which is noteworthy because Treasury is also their regulator.  In 
addition, despite having a very diverse sector, they have succeeded in encouraging 
support and participation from a wide variety of institutions – from small 
community banks to large multi-national financial institutions.  This extensive 
membership has helped the sector to establish the nation’s most sophisticated and 
well-resourced ISAC, which improves its value to the entire sector.   
 

Another, more recent, success story has been the electricity sector.  This 

sector has improved collaboration and engagement – both with government 
partners at the Department of Energy and across private industry – through senior 
executive participation on the sector coordinating council.  In addition to elevating 
the priority for industry partners, it has improved coordination and unity of effort 
with the government.   
 
Despite the relative success of these and several others, every sector has 
unique characteristics and challenges that influence the pace of adoption and 
engagement in these institutions.  What works for one sector may not work for 
others.  As each sector figures out what works best for their participants, however, 
the lessons from others should not be overlooked or ignored – especially for those 
sectors that continue to evolve. 
 
Which brings us to the focus of today’s hearing – the health care sector.  
This sector has long struggled to coalesce around the public-private partnership 
model, especially with respect to cybersecurity.  This may be partially attributable 
to the fact that cybersecurity is a relatively new challenge for much of this sector. 
However, as health care becomes increasingly digitized, the need to improve 
cybersecurity must be a priority.   
 
obstacles will not be easy for this sector.  To start, health care is an incredibly 
diverse and complex sector, with a wide range of industries and institutions of 
varying sizes, technological sophistication, and resources.  It is also a sector where 
cybersecurity often becomes conflated with privacy or compliance, complicating 
the discussion.  This, in turn, is exacerbated by the fact that a successful public-
private partnership depends on collaboration and trust with HHS – an 
understandable challenge given the many participants in the sector who are 
regulated by various entities within the Department.   
 
small, rural health care institution – where cybersecurity falls to one employee who 
is also responsible for managing IT systems and fixing copiers, among other duties 
– what value do I get for the cost of joining the ISAC or listening to guidance from 
the sector coordinating council?  At present, it is hard to answer that question, 
especially for those institutions already operating on negative margins.   
 
patients, as well as health care institutions – is too great.  Cybersecurity incidents 

These challenges, however, must be overcome.  The cost of failure – for 

Gaining the acceptance and support necessary to overcome historical 

These and other challenges are understandable and daunting.  If I am a 

can result in life or death situations if a medical device is hacked, or an attack shuts 
down a hospital’s computer systems.  Cybersecurity is a collective responsibility 
and that is why it is imperative that this sector find a way to come together to find 
a sustainable path forward.   
 
this sector and what is needed to bring unity and commitment from all participants.  
These are the folks working in the trenches and while the sector has shown signs of 
progress, much work remains to be done.      

I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses about the challenges of 

 

 

 

 

Testimony of 

Denise Anderson 

On Behalf of the 

The National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center and the 

National Council of Information Sharing and Analysis Centers 

Before the 

United States House of Representatives 

Committee on Energy and Commerce 

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 

 

April 4, 2017 

 

 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
ISAC BACKGROUND 

 April 4, 2017 

Chairman Murphy and members of the Subcommittee, my name is Denise Anderson.  I am 

President of the National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center (NH-ISAC) and Chair 

of the National Council of ISACs (NCI).  I want to thank you for this opportunity to address the 

Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee about the industry perspective on cybersecurity and 

information sharing as well as the importance of collaboration and coordination between the 

public and private sectors.  

 

ISACs were formed in response to the 1998 Presidential Decision Directive 63 (PDD 63), which 

called for the public and private sectors to work together to address cyber threats to the nation’s 

critical infrastructures.  After 9/11, in response to Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 (its 

2013 successor, Presidential Policy Directive 21) and the Homeland Security Act, ISACs 

expanded their role to encompass physical threats to their respective sectors.  Many ISACs have 

been in existence over a decade and in some cases almost two decades. 

 

ISACs are primarily trusted communities that promote the sharing of timely, actionable and 

reliable information for their respective critical infrastructure sectors and provide forums for 

owner and operator sharing around threats, incidents, vulnerabilities, best practices and 

mitigation strategies. ISACs are operational in nature and have strong reach into their sectors in 

order to gather and disseminate information quickly and efficiently. ISACs have been thriving 

and growing in recent years as owners and operators have seen the benefit to participating in 

these trusted communities, which is a testament to the value ISACs deliver to their members. 

  

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 2 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
NCI BACKGROUND 

 April 4, 2017 

The NCI is a voluntary organization of ISACs formed in 2003 in recognition of the need for the 

ISACs to share information with each other about common threats and issues. The mission of the 

NCI is to advance the physical and cyber security of critical infrastructure in North America by 

establishing and maintaining a framework for valuable interaction among and between the 

ISACs and with government. There are currently 21 individual ISACs that represent their 

respective critical infrastructure sectors or sub-sectors and 3 like organizations who are members 

of the NCI. The NCI has made it a goal to be inclusive of each critical infrastructure sector and 

sub-sector’s operational arm. 

 

The ISACs collaborate with each other daily through the NCI daily operations centers cyber call, 

and the NCI listserver. The NCI also hosts a weekly operations centers physical call and meets 

monthly to discuss issues and threats. The organization is a true cross-sector partnership engaged 

in sharing cyber and physical threats, mitigation strategies and working together and with 

government partners during incidents requiring cross-sector response as well as addressing issues 

affecting industry. In addition, the NCI conducts and participates in cross-sector exercises, works 

with the National Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC) and the National Cybersecurity and 

Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) during steady-state and incidents, holds 

emergency calls as needed and develops joint white papers around threats. The ISACs have been 

instrumental in embracing, developing and advancing the automatic exchange of data within 

their memberships and across the ISACs, as well as with government as possible. 

 

 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 3 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
ISACs AND GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIPS  

 April 4, 2017 

ISACs, which are not-for-profit organizations, work closely with various government agencies 

including their respective Sector Specific Agencies (SSAs) where they exist, intelligence 

agencies, law enforcement and state and local governments. In partnership with the Department 

of Homeland Security (DHS), several ISACs participate in the National Cybersecurity and 

Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) watch floor.  ISAC representatives, cleared at the 

Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) level, attend the daily briefs and 

other NCCIC meetings to share information on threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, and potential or 

known impacts to the critical infrastructure sectors.  Having ISACs on the floor has allowed for 

effective collaboration on threats and incidents and there have been many examples of successful 

information sharing. The ISACs also serve as liaisons to the National Infrastructure Coordinating 

Center (NICC) and play a vital role in incident response and collaboration under the Critical 

Infrastructure Partner Annex to the Incident Management Plan. 

 

Finally, it should be noted that the ISACs collaborate with their sector coordinating councils as 

applicable and work with other critical infrastructure partners during steady state and incidents.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 4 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
NH-ISAC BACKGROUND 

 April 4, 2017 

The NH-ISAC, founded in 2010, is a 501(c)6 nonprofit organization and is funded primarily by 

its member firms through member dues. Since 2010 the membership has expanded to over 200 

organizations including healthcare delivery organizations (HDOs), pharmaceutical and medical 

device manufacturers, retail pharmacy, laboratory and radiological, electronic medical record 

providers and payers representing approximately one-third of the US Health and Public Health 

GDP*.  

 

The NH-ISAC is a global organization that has members in several different countries and 

membership is growing rapidly. 

 

Besides offering a trusted forum and community for sharing, the NH-ISAC offers a number of 

other services such as workshops, two annual summits, webinars, a daily report, monthly 

newsletter, white papers, special interest groups, a number of working groups and committees 

and various technical tools for member sharing. The ISAC provides alerts, has a representative 

on the NCCIC floor, and participates in exercises such as the national Cyberstorm series. The 

NH-ISAC was one of the first organizations to adopt STIX and TAXII, which are protocols for 

automated indicator and intelligence sharing and fosters a robust member machine to machine 

sharing environment. 

 

 

 

*Based on the annual revenue of all NH-ISAC member organizations. ($1.3 Trillion).  

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 5 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
 

 April 4, 2017 

The NH-ISAC is also engaged in two ground-breaking initiatives. The first is the CyberFit suite 

of services that allows members to leverage the NH-ISAC community to realize cost savings and 

efficiencies. 

 

Included in the initial suite of services is a third party risk assessment platform with over 80 

questions tailored for healthcare organizations that will then be stored in an accessible database 

for the benefit of participating members, a benchmarking offering, as well as a ‘shared security 

operations center (SOC)’ program that will offer affordable services for malware analysis, 

penetration testing, vulnerability scanning and incident response.  

 

The second is the Medical Device Security Information Sharing Council that is advancing efforts 

in the area of medical device security and safety. Under a Memorandum of Understanding 

between the NH-ISAC, the Medical Device Innovation, Safety and Security Consortium 

(MDISS), and the FDA; a number of national initiatives are underway to improve the security 

and safety of medical devices. These include: (1) MD-VIPER launched early this year to support 

the reporting of vulnerabilities and responsible medical device vulnerability disclosure per the 

FDA post market guidance (2) the National Cyber Safety Network for Health Technology, which 

leverages best public health practices to achieve national scale impact on patient safety and 

critical infrastructure and (3) the Medical Device Risk Assessment Platform, funded by DHS 

Cyber Security Division, a program for medical device assessments and threat intelligence with a 

database that HDOs use to understand and secure devices in their environment. Our programs 

include collaborations with DHS ICS-CERT, FDA, NIST National Cybersecurity Center of 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 6 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
Excellence, the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), manufacturers and 

 April 4, 2017 

national hospital networks as well as many other stakeholders. 

 

NH-ISAC and MDISS also offer a community forum for manufacturers and HDOs to interact 

and collaborate through listservers, meetings, tracks at NH-ISAC summits, and workshops, 

among other things. The group has already held two medical device security workshops this year 

with many more scheduled and in February 2017, NH-ISAC and MDISS held an all-day medical 

device cybersecurity symposium at HIMSS, an industry conference.  

 

The FDA has been very forward leaning in the medical device security collaboration space and 

the partnership with FDA, NH-ISAC and MDISS is a great example of how industry and 

government can come together to address cybersecurity issues. The partnership has been highly 

collaborative and is governed by a Memorandum of Understanding. Some examples of this 

public/private partnership include co-sponsoring of the FDA public workshop in January 2016, 

co-presenting at the FDA webinar on the post market guidance this past January 2017, presenting 

together at NH-ISAC Summits, and in particular, leveraging the NH-ISAC infrastructure for 

medical device vulnerability information sharing to meet the ‘ISAO functionality’ as described 

in FDA’s post market guidance, as a regulatory incentive. 

 

THE UNIQUE NATURE OF HEALTH AND CYBER 

Six years ago, ‘cyber’ and ‘healthcare’ were not even placed in the same sentence. Today 

because of the proliferation of advances in technology and the efficiencies of connecting devices 

and data via the internet, the cyber threat surface in healthcare has ballooned and the threat actors 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 7 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
have followed. Threat actors have many motivations to attack whether for financial reasons, 

 April 4, 2017 

disruption, intellectual property theft, revenge or to make a political statement. Unfortunately, 

the stakes are very high. The focus has traditionally been on data and privacy but if HDOs cannot 

deliver services, as was seen in several recent ransomware attacks, or data is manipulated or 

destroyed, patient lives can be at risk. 

 

Unlike in other sectors, healthcare data must be portable.  Sensitive patient information must 

move between various medical providers, pharmacies, diagnostic facilities and payers to 

facilitate proper patient care and history as well as payment for those services. Many healthcare 

facilities such as hospitals operate in environments that are accessible to the public. Hospitals 

employ tens of thousands of medical devices, many using outdated operating systems, and many 

of which are connected to a network. These devices are made by a variety of manufacturers with 

various levels of security and patching protocols built in. Coupled with a diverse base within the 

sector, complex siloed departments, a lack of skilled cyber staff, a lack of cyber security 

situational awareness, a lack of knowledge and training for the medical staff as well as the CEO 

and Board level, and lack of cyber security strategy including a risk management approach, the 

health and public health sector faces an enormous challenge. 

 

MEETING THE CHALLENGE 

There are a number of great initiatives and efforts underway within the sector but there is still a 

lot more that can be done. Congress can help meet this challenge by focusing on four key areas: 

 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 8 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
1-EDUCATION, RECOGNITION AND FACILITATION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF 

 April 4, 2017 

INFORMATION SHARING 

One of the greatest challenges for the NH-ISAC and all ISACs is the lack of awareness amongst 

the critical infrastructure owners and operators, particularly the smaller owners and operators, 

that the ISACs exist and are a valuable tool. Numerous incidents have shown that effective 

information sharing amongst robust trusted networks of members works in combatting cyber 

threats.  

 

Government, and specifically the Sector Specific Agencies (SSAs) should regularly and 

consistently encourage owner/operators and especially at the Board and CEO level to join their 

respective ISACs. This has been very effective in the financial sector where the United States 

Department of the Treasury, the regulators and state agencies have been strongly encouraging 

membership in the FS-ISAC as a best practice. Currently, not all SSAs support their sector 

designated ISACs in the same manner. 

 

The SSAs indeed have a policy reference for this kind of advisory to their sector representatives: 

the NIST Cybersecurity Framework.  This Framework, developed over the course of a year 

collaboratively by government and private sector stakeholders, lays out a cyber risk management 

framework linked to five core functions: identify, protect, detect, respond and recover.  Among 

the functional categories identified as part of a mature cyber risk management strategy is external 

communications and coordination around cyber security threats, response and best practices.  In 

other words, membership in an ISAC or ISAO is an essential element of a successful cyber risk 

management strategy.  Likewise, the most recent draft of the White House cybersecurity 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 9 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
executive order calls for an assessment of how government can support critical sectors’ cyber 

 April 4, 2017 

risk management programs.  Accordingly, one of our key recommendations in response to that 

review would be a policy statement that provides explicit guidance to SSA’s and their sectors to 

integrate into their cyber risk management and preparedness programs their participation in and 

collaboration with these information sharing and incident response organizations where 

applicable. 

 

Another way to facilitate sharing and build robust communities is by providing financial 

incentives through tax breaks or other means to critical infrastructure organizations that join their 

respective ISACs.  

 

2-PROTECT INFORMATION SHARING 

Recently, the Automotive ISAC was served a non-party deposition subpoena to furnish all 

documentation related to communications between the Auto ISAC and one of its members. The 

Auto ISAC with the help of other ISACs was able to quash the subpoena with Judge Wilkerson 

of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Illinois effectively ruling that the subpoena 

was nothing more than a fishing expedition.  

 

The concern with this subpoena however, is that if Courts were to allow broad sweeps for 

information and using ISACs as “one-stop-shops” to accomplish it, such actions would 

effectively kill information sharing and undermine Congress’ important information sharing 

goals set forth by the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA) and the government’s 

interest in promoting national security through the ISACs and public-private information sharing. 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 10 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
The confidential information shared amongst the members of an ISAC should be considered 

 April 4, 2017 

protected information and not subject to disclosure. 

 

3-ELIMINATE THE CONFUSION BETWEEN THE TERMS ISAC AND ISAO 

The Executive Order, Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing, signed 

February 15, 2015 by President Obama is commendable in its intent to foster information 

sharing. Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) were first defined in the 

Homeland Security Act of 2002. ISACs were created under Presidential Decision Directive 63 

(PDD-63). Effectively ISACs were the original ISAOs and are the subject matter experts in 

information sharing with a majority of ISACs having been in existence for over a decade.  

 

Indeed, there is a need for many groups that may not fall in with the critical infrastructure sectors 

such as legal and media and entertainment organizations, who are increasingly becoming targets 

for cyber incidents and attacks, to share information. The private sector is already organizing 

efforts in this area and as an example; the FS-ISAC, working with the legal industry, formed the 

Legal ISAO. 

 

However, ISACs are much more than ISAOs. ISACs offer several vehicles to share effective 

techniques and practices for preventing, detecting and managing cyber security risk that are often 

un-conventional controls (definition: controls that are designed and implemented independent of 

any risk framework, standard or regulatory guidance). ISAOs don’t offer vehicles for this type of 

sharing. 

  

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 11 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
For example: enterprises can choose to obtain an intelligence feed to identify newly registered 

 April 4, 2017 

domains and choose to drop all email originating from newly registered domains. This is an 

example of a technique shared at last year’s NH-ISAC Summit. This information is not shared in 

any other forum or event. Another example is the focus put on the adoption of the use of 

DMARC as a standard for improving trust in email and constraining the use of email for 

phishing attacks. This was initially shared at the FS-ISAC and today is offered through the    

NH-ISAC. These two examples have a material impact on improving industry resiliency and 

these techniques, like many others, are indicative of the unique services an ISAC offers to its 

members. 

 

ISACs also serve a special role in critical infrastructure protection and resilience and play a 

unique role in the sector partnership model. While the White House has noted that the EO seeks 

to “not limit effective existing relationships that exist between the government and the private 

sector” the EO and prominent coverage of ISAOs has led to much confusion within industry as 

to the impacts to ISACs. It is absolutely essential that the successful efforts ISACs have 

established over the years should not be disrupted. It is clear that ISACs by their success meet 

the distinct and unique needs of each of their sectors and the owner and operator members of 

those sectors. 

 

We have seen this clearly in the Health and Public Health Sector. When the FDA in its post 

market guidance for medical device security announced the need for manufacturers to participate 

in an ISAO, confusion ensued. The NH-ISAC is effectively serving as the ISAO and as 

mentioned is doing a large ground-breaking body of work in the medical device arena with the 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 12 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
FDA, but the guidance by using the term ISAO resulted in sector stakeholders immediately 

 April 4, 2017 

thinking some new organization needed to be created and has caused a lot of confusion that is 

still being sorted out. 

  

The solution to easing this confusion is very simple. The White House, SSAs and other relevant 

agencies need to call out, recognize and support the unique role ISACs play in critical 

infrastructure protection and resilience and not apply the term ISAO as a blanket term for all 

information sharing. For instance, ISACs have the responsibility to maintain sector wide threat 

awareness within their respective sectors. It is critical that our federal partners continue to 

respect and support that role to avoid undermining one of the main duties of ISACs to their 

members and sectors. It is vital that the process is not diluted and remains streamlined to 

facilitate effective situational awareness and response activities particularly when an incident 

occurs. 

 

4-ESTABLISH CYBER SECURITY PROFESSIONALS AS SSA LIAISONS 

Given that cyber security has only recently come to healthcare, it is understandable that there has 

not been a need previously for a cyber security professional to act as a strong, government 

liaison and advocate for the public private partnership when it comes to cyber matters. It has 

become increasingly apparent that industry needs a government representative who understands 

cyber security issues, threats, vulnerabilities and impacts as well as the blended threats between 

physical and cyber security. Having an established, clear government ‘go to’ lead in this area is 

imperative to strengthening the partnership and improving the overall cyber security posture of 

the health and public health sector. 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 13 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 
 

 April 4, 2017 

EFFECTIVE INFORMATION SHARING 

It is important to note that the goal of information sharing is not to share information in and of 

itself but to create situational awareness in order to inform risk based decisions as well as allow 

operational components within owner/operation organizations that have direct actionable control 

over the content they are sharing, to perform an action. The focus needs to be on enhancing the 

ability of operational groups to work closely with each other. 

 

The ISACs are successful organizations with almost two decades of proven case studies of 

information sharing and collaboration. They are the subject matter experts on information 

sharing. For information sharing to be effective it must be: 

  Voluntary – not mandated or regulated 

 

Industry Driven 

  Actionable, Timely and Relevant 

  Bi-directional and Collaborative 

 

Government can help this effort by: 

  Encouraging owners and operators of critical infrastructure to join their respective sector 

ISACs  

  Offering financial incentives such as tax breaks for owners and operators to join ISACs 

  Recognizing ISACs and the unique operational role that they play in critical 

infrastructure protection and resilience 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 14 

Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony 
 
 
 

 April 4, 2017 

  Protecting information sharing by ensuring confidential data shared amongst members is 

protected from disclosure 

  Place strong, defined and permanent cyber security liaisons and leadership within the 

SSAs to advocate the public private partnership when it comes to cyber matters. Cyber 

security liaisons and their leadership, should be experienced and certified cyber security 

professionals. 

 

This concludes my testimony.  Thank you again for the opportunity to present this testimony and 

I look forward to your questions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center 
 

Page 15 

 

 
 
 

 

Michael C. McNeil, Philips 

AdvaMed, the Advanced Medical Technology Association 

 Testimony 

 

Energy & Commerce Committee, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 

“Cybersecurity in the Heath Care Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships.” 

 

Tuesday, April 4, 2017 

 
Thank you Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and members of the Committee for 
the opportunity to testify today. My name is Michael C. McNeil, and I am testifying on behalf of 
Philips and our trade association, AdvaMed. As the Global Product Security and Services Officer 
at Philips, a leading healthcare technology company, my responsibility is to oversee efforts to 
ensure that consistent repeatable cybersecurity processes are deployed throughout the 
development and maintenance of products. Philips is driving the convergence between 
professional health systems and personal consumer technologies to seamlessly and securely 
connect devices, data, systems and people across the entire health continuum, from the hospital 
to the home. 
 
AdvaMed is the world’s largest trade association representing medical technology 
manufacturers.  AdvaMed member companies produce the medical devices, diagnostic products 
and health information systems that are transforming health care through earlier disease 
detection, less invasive procedures and more effective treatments. Collectively, we are 
committed to ensuring patient access to life-saving and life-enhancing devices and other 
advanced medical technologies.  
 
Let me first say a few words about Philips’ cybersecurity strategy.  Our strategy includes not just 
staying on top of emerging software-based vulnerabilities and potential external threats while 
anticipating how they might affect Philips products, it also includes collaborating with regulatory 
agencies, industry partners,  and health care providers to close security loopholes. This includes 
participating in the Health Care Industry Cyber Security Task Force, under the auspices of the 
Department of Health and Human Services.   
 
Working with these organizations, we can understand how other industries have addressed 
cybersecurity threats, identified challenges to health care environments, and provide health care 
industry stakeholders guidance on preparing for, and responding to, cybersecurity threats.    
Moreover, we can help develop effective and uniform application of practical, innovative 
security technologies and methodologies that enhance the country’s ability to address current and 
future computer and information security challenges. 
 
We also work with health system partners like Augusta University Health, as part of visionary 
public-private programs like the one created by Governor Nathan Deal in Georgia, to address the 
cyber security challenges facing the US healthcare system.  We also actively participate in 
industry groups like AdvaMed. 

 

 

 
 
Overview of Medical Technology Sector and Cybersecurity 
 
Let me now describe an overview of the medical technology sector and cybersecurity.  AdvaMed 
and its member companies, are committed to a robust cybersecurity framework as part of the 
development and postmarket management of medical technologies. Medical device 
manufacturers address cybersecurity throughout the product lifecycle, including during the 
design, development, production, distribution, deployment, maintenance and disposal of the 
device and associated data. Similarly, manufacturers implement proactive measures to manage 
medical device cybersecurity, including but not limited to routine device cyber maintenance, 
assessing postmarket information, employing risk-based approaches to characterizing 
vulnerabilities, and timely implementation of necessary actions.  
  
Principles for Robust Medical Technology Cybersecurity 
 
Working with my colleagues at AdvaMed, we have developed the following five foundational 
principles for the management of medical device cybersecurity:  
 

1.  Medical device development and security risk management 

 
First, an effective cybersecurity risk management program should incorporate both premarket 
and postmarket lifecycle phases and address cybersecurity from medical device conception to 
disposal.  In addition, medical device security risks should be addressed through a risk 
management process that is based on consensus-driven recognized standards and reference 
documents.  This risk management process should include a process to monitor the ongoing 
security of devices in use. 
 

2.  System-Level Security 

 
Second, medical technology cybersecurity is a shared responsibility among all stakeholders 
within the healthcare community.  Because systems are only as secure as their weakest point, all 
elements of the system must be appropriately managed and secured.  
 

3.  Coordinated Disclosure  

 
Third, medical device manufacturers should deploy a coordinated disclosure process that 
provides a pathway for researchers and others to submit information, including potential 
vulnerabilities, to the organization.  Coordinated disclosure processes should clearly define the 
responsibilities of both the manufacturer and researcher. It is important to emphasize that 
whenever potential vulnerabilities involving a medical device are discovered, these findings 
should first be brought to the attention of the manufacturer and / or FDA for review, analysis, 
and possible remediation. Any other approach potentially places patients’ lives at risk. 
  
 
 
 

 

4.  Information Sharing 

 

 

 
Fourth, to assist manufacturers in continuously managing their device’s cybersecurity throughout 
the product’s lifecycle, industry should judiciously share threat and vulnerability information.  
 

5.  Consensus Standards, Regulatory Requirements, and Education 

 
Finally, the development of cybersecurity-related consensus standards and regulations should be 
accomplished collaboratively among regulators, medical device manufacturers, independent 
security experts, academia, and health care delivery organizations.  We also believe the health 
care industry should leverage the experiences and expertise of other critical infrastructure sectors 
and government agencies, such as NIST.  
 
Engagement with FDA and Public-Private Partnerships 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to commend the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(“FDA” or “Agency”) for its proactive leadership role over medical device cybersecurity.  The 
FDA has worked closely with the medical technology industry and the broader healthcare 
ecosystem to ensure medical device cybersecurity is considered and addressed throughout all 
stages of product design and use.  For example, in 2013, FDA released final guidance concerning 
premarket cybersecurity-related issues device manufacturers must consider when designing a 
connected medical device.  And most recently, in December 2016, FDA released final guidance 
addressing the postmarket management of medical device cybersecurity.  Taken together, these 
documents represent significant – and welcomed – achievements by the Agency to inform 
manufacturers of their medical device cybersecurity obligations.   
 
Moreover, the FDA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with the National 
Health Information Sharing and Analysis Organization (“NH-ISAC”) and the Medical Device 
Innovation, Safety and Security Consortium (“MDISS”) to promote cybersecurity information 
sharing for medical devices.  These efforts have led to the creation of a medical device-specific 
information sharing and analysis organization, which has recently launched a program called the 
Medical Device Vulnerability Intelligence Program for Evaluation and Response, or MD-
VIPER.  MD-VIPER provides a streamlined mechanism for medical device manufacturers to 
submit and share information concerning cybersecurity-related issues, as well as other members 
of the broader healthcare ecosystem.   
 
In light of the FDA’s significant work and achievements to date, and the Agency’s staff ongoing 
engagement with industry, we believe that the FDA serves as an example to all regulatory bodies 
with respect to the type of interaction, collaboration, and guidance an agency should provide to 
its regulated industry. 
 
Conclusion 
 
I want to underscore how critical it is to our industry that medical devices are safe for patients 
and risks, including cybersecurity threats, are appropriately and safely managed. Healthcare 
technology companies, like Philips, take seriously the need to continuously assess the security of 

 

 

 
their devices in a world where the risks, no matter how remote, evolve. Manufacturers make 
every effort to address cybersecurity throughout the product lifecycle, including during the 
design, development, production, distribution, deployment, maintenance and disposal of the 
device and associated data. Similarly, manufacturers implement proactive measures to manage 
medical device cybersecurity, including but not limited to routine device cyber maintenance, 
assessing postmarket information, employing risk-based approaches to characterizing 
vulnerabilities, and timely implementation of necessary actions.  
 
We work very closely with the FDA and look forward to continuing to work with Congress and 
the Administration to ensure that the medical technology industry maintains a collaborative 
approach to cybersecurity and device safety.  
 

 

 

 

 

Written Testimony of 

Terence M. Rice 

On Behalf of  

Merck & Co., Inc. 

Before the 

United States House of Representatives 

Committee on Energy and Commerce 

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 

 

April 4, 2017 

 

 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and Members of the Oversight and 

Investigations Subcommittee, my name is Terry Rice.  I have been involved in healthcare 

cybersecurity for more than fifteen years in a wide variety of roles including my current 

assignment as the Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) at Merck & 

Co., Inc.  I also participate in a number of public-private partnerships that are working to 

improve cybersecurity across the healthcare sector.  These partnerships include the National 

Health-Information Sharing and Analysis Center (NH-ISAC), the Healthcare Sector 

Coordinating Council (SCC), the SAFE BioPharma Association, and the Healthcare Industry 

Cybsecurity Task Force, the latter of which was created by the Cybersecurity Information 

Sharing Act of 2015.  I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you on the topic of 

cybersecurity in the healthcare industry and to discuss how public-private partnerships have 

assisted and can do even more to address the complex challenges we are facing.  

THE STATE OF HEALTHCARE CYBERSECURITY 

Cybersecurity has rapidly become a top concern for governments and industries around 

the world. In just the last four years, cybersecurity has jumped from the fifteenth greatest risk 

facing companies to the third highest risk in the Allianz Annual Risk Barometer, a global survey 

that measures the sentiments of corporate risk professionals.i  Cybersecurity has also been listed 

as a top concern by many national governments and has been included as a top risk in the US 

Intelligence Community’s annual Worldwide Threat Assessment since at least 2013.ii  Nowhere 

is the situation more acute than in the healthcare industry.  In just the last few years we have seen 

over one hundred million health records exposed in a number of well-publicized security 

breaches, we have observed cybersecurity researchers demonstrate how software vulnerabilities 

 
 

Page 2 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
in insulin pumps and pacemakers could be exploited to cause a lethal attack, and we have 

witnessed entire hospitals in the United States and the United Kingdom shutting down for 

periods of time to combat a ransomware infection on critical systems.  It is because of these 

events and many others that IBM named the healthcare industry as the most attacked industry in 

its 2016 IBM Cyber Security Intelligence Index.iii  

Unfortunately, I believe the news stories and reports underrepresent the risk we are facing as 

an industry.  I make this statement based on five observations: 

1.  The total number of cybersecurity incidents is significantly underreported.  Today, 

organizations are only required to report cybersecurity incidents when a) personal health 

information is breached, b) the incident directly impacts patient safety, or c) the loss of 

information or disruption of service would be considered a financially material eventiv.  

Organizations are unlikely to report security incidents if not required to do so given the 

potential reputational harm that might occur.  The reports we read about are only a small 

fraction of the incidents that actually occur.  Furthermore, the incidents that do get 

reported (e.g. breaches of personal health information) also create a narrow focus on 

privacy protections for personal health information instead of considering the full 

spectrum of impacts caused by healthcare cyber incidents.  

2.  The healthcare industry consists of many small to mid-sized businesses that lack the 

capital and personnel to deal effectively with all but the most basic cybersecurity issues.  

According to one statistic, more than 90% of firms in the healthcare services subsector 

employ less than 100 people and about 70% of these firms employ less than 10 

employees.v  To complicate this, the healthcare services and hospital subsectors have 

some of the lowest profit margins across industry.vi  These two factors make it difficult 

 
 

Page 3 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

for these firms to acquire the advanced tools and services necessary to prevent, or at least 

detect, sophisticated attacks.  These small to mid-sized firms often face the difficult 

choice of investing in the latest cybersecurity tool or purchasing a crucial medical system.  

More often than not the latter will win.  Even if these entities are able to make the capital 

investments required, they are almost always unable to acquire the talent necessary to 

install, operate, and maintain these capabilities and develop a broader cybersecurity 

program.   

3.  The portability of healthcare information increases the risk.  Unlike other industries, the 

healthcare industry requires information to be shared among multiple companies to 

provide patient care.  Primary care physicians must share data with specialists, specialists 

must share data with labs, labs provide information to pharmacies and pharmaceutical 

benefits managers, and all of them share subsets of this data with insurance companies.  

To facilitate this information sharing, most of these entities interconnect their networks 

and systems.  Consequently, a failure anywhere in the ecosystem may lead to impacts 

across the sector.   

4.  Proliferation of software into the healthcare ecosystem increases the attack surface.  The 

healthcare industry was somewhat of a laggard in the adoption of software services and 

solutions.  The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health 

(HITECH) provisions of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided 

both incentives and penalties to increase the adoption of electronic health records.  This 

rapid adoption of electronic health record technology has spurred the development of new 

software solutions and services that can create, input, and analyze patient health 

information.  While these advances offer tremendous potential healthcare benefits and 

Page 4 

 
 
 

 
 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

may help to reduce cost across the industry, we are rapidly increasing the cyber attack 

surface in the healthcare sector.  The risk is exacerbated by the fact that software 

developers have not yet come up with a way to prevent errors and mistakes in the 

software they create.  In fact, computer programmers continue to make many of the same 

mistakes in their code that were made 15-20 years ago. Today we measure software 

errors in the number of defects per thousand lines of code; many of medical applications 

being developed contain millions if not tens of millions of lines of software code.  We 

will be dealing with these inadvertent flaws for a decade or more from now.  So we must 

account for this with additional preventative and detective controls.   

5.  Anecdotal electronic evidence also suggests there are a lot more security incidents than 

what is currently reported. As part of normal information security monitoring, it is quite 

common to find information about other companies that have been attacked or even 

compromised.  These indicators might be something as simple as malware traffic 

emanating from a partner’s network or the observation of another company’s name 

showing up in a data dump released by an attacker.  In fact, there are web services like 

Shodan that specialize in identifying and cataloging vulnerable systems and devices 

including many from the healthcare industry in an easily searchable web interface.  

When all of these observations are combined, it leads me, and many of my peers, to believe 

that the cybersecurity situation in the healthcare industry is far worse than what public reporting 

indicates.  Neither private industry nor the government can solve this problem alone; we must 

work collaboratively and transparently to reduce this risk.  

 

 

 
 

Page 5 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
THE VALUE OF PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN CYBERSECURITY 

The notion of public – private partnerships for cybersecurity first gained traction in 1997 

following the publication of recommendations from the President’s Commission on Critical 

Infrastructure Protection. These recommendations were codified in Presidential Decision 

Directive/NSC 63- Critical Infrastructure Protection which specified the industry segments that 

should be considered critical infrastructure, appointed a sector specific agency to coordinate the 

public-private partnership, and identified ten tasks that should be accomplished by each sector.  

A Government Coordinating Council and Sector Coordinating Council were created to represent 

the myriad of government departments/agencies and private sector participants respectively.  The 

tasks included an assessment of threats and vulnerabilities that might impact the sector, the 

development of a sector-wide remediation/protection plan, and the sharing of intelligence 

information between the government and private sector.  Although subsequent administrations 

have tweaked the industries and functions that make up the critical infrastructure and have made 

minor modifications to the tasks on which each sector should focus, by and large there has been 

support for the concept for two decades.  

The healthcare and public health sector has been designated a part of the critical 

infrastructure since PDD-63.  The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has been 

the sector specific agency since that time.  However, it is only in recent years that the topic of 

cybersecurity has become a prominent issue.  The Sector Coordinating Council now devotes a 

regular portion of its meetings and monthly teleconferences to discussing developments in the 

cybersecurity space and has established working groups to tackle items of common interest 

among the members.  The NH-ISAC, created in 2010, has grown from about a dozen original 

members to more than 200 participating companies and it continues to attract more and more of 

 
 

Page 6 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
the thousands of healthcare entities that exist in the United States.  More importantly the quantity 

and quality of actionable intelligence shared by members has increased substantially in the last 

12-18 months. The NH-ISAC has stood up working groups that work collaboratively to identify 

new sources of threat intelligence and ways to disseminate to all parties in the most effective 

manner, and to collaborate on ways to more effectively secure “big data” within the healthcare 

industry, but both organizations have the potential to do even more. 

At the same time, other public-private partnerships have grown out of a desire to reduce 

the cost and complexity of business.  The SAFE BioPharma Association was founded more than 

a decade ago out of a shared desire between the government and private industry to reduce the 

cost and complexity of submitting new drug applications to the Food and Drug Administration 

(FDA).  In order to move away from paper-based submissions, all parties needed to agree on a 

mechanism that would ensure data integrity, provide for non-repudiation, and ensure trust in the 

identity of the signer.  The members of SAFE BioPharma worked closely with the FDA, the 

National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST), the General Services Administration 

(GSA), and regulators in the European Union and Japan to create a digital identity and digital 

signature standard that today is accepted by all parties.  The standard creates an interoperable 

digital identity ecosystem in which all identities can be trusted at known risk-levels.  It allows 

government agencies and private sector healthcare providers to have standardized trust for 

authentication and signing.  Vendors have a tool for standardizing trust in their products and 

applications and the user can have a single identity for use across the ecosystem.  The standard 

has been certified to meet US government federal identity standardsvii and is used on electronic 

submissions, contracts, and other critical workflows that require integrity, identity trust, and non-

repudiation around the world.  More importantly, the industry has recently started adopting this 

 
 

Page 7 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
digital identity standard for authentication purposes, much in the manner the US Federal 

Government rapidly adopted the use of Personal Identity Verification (PIV) cards for strong 

authentication following the Office of Personal Management (OPM) breach.  According to 

Verizon’s 2016 Healthcare Data Breach Reportviii, two out of every three healthcare data 

breaches have been caused by hijacked user names and passwords.  SAFE BioPharma members 

hope to increase the use of standards-based authentication credentials across the healthcare 

industry.  Particular emphasis is being placed on multi-factor authentication capabilities across 

the healthcare industry using the SAFE BioPharma standard and other recognized standards that 

meet the same level of security – all based on NIST and GSA standards. 

As a participant and user of services provided by all three public-private partnerships, I 

feel each provides tremendous value and has become an essential part of my organization’s 

cybersecurity program.  We leverage the intelligence provided by the NH-ISAC to update our 

defenses on a continuous, 24x7 basis, we use the NH-ISAC’s benchmarking service to identify 

areas in where we may learn from our peers, we leverage SAFE BioPharma compliant digital 

identities in collaborating with peer organizations, and we actively participated in the recent 

DHS Cyberstorm table top exercise.   But there are many opportunities to further mature and 

develop these capabilities.   

OPPORTUNITIES FOR FURTHER PARTNERSHIP AND COLLABORATION 

1.  Appoint a Healthcare Sector Cybersecurity Liaison.  HHS should appoint a senior 

cybersecurity professional as a liaison to the private sector.  Today the Assistant Secretary 

for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) has the responsibility for ensuring the healthcare 

sector is prepared to respond to a critical health emergency such as a pandemic flu outbreak 

or the disruption of critical health infrastructure from a natural disaster as occurred in New 

 
 

Page 8 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

Orleans during Hurricane Katrina.  The Office of National Coordinator (ONC) has a Chief 

Privacy Officer who, along with the HHS Office of Civil Rights (OCR), works with the 

private sector on privacy policies and implements enforcement actions when necessary.  

HHS also has a Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) within the Office of the Chief 

Information Officer (CIO) who is primarily responsible for protection of HHS systems and 

services.  All four of these offices interact with the private sector but none of them have 

cybersecurity outreach as their primary mission.  A cybersecurity liaison would be the 

primary focal point for outreach to the private industry on topics of cybersecurity.  The role 

would not supplant current responsibilities, but instead focus on education and awareness of 

cybersecurity risks within the sector, advocacy for the use of cybersecurity tools and 

capabilities provided by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and collection of key 

issues from the sector.  The liaison would also chair a GCC working group on cybersecurity 

that would work closely with the Sector Coordinating Council equivalent.   

2.  Develop Cybersecurity Appendix to Healthcare & Public Sector Specific Plan.  While 

cybersecurity concerns were captured in the latest iteration of the Healthcare and Public 

Health Sector Specific Plan - May 2016ix, a more thorough and detailed appendix should be 

added to the existing plan to better assist public and private sector entities in developing their 

own cybersecurity incident response plans.  This appendix should include templates and 

guidelines to help smaller and less mature organizations create at least a rudimentary 

cybersecurity response plan.   

3.  Increase the Quality of Cybersecurity Intelligence and the Speed with Which It is 

Shared.  While there has been a significant increase in the quantity and timeliness of 

information shared by government agencies via DHS over the last 24 months, there is still 

 
 

Page 9 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

opportunity to improve both the quality of information and speed at which it is shared.  

Cybersecurity defenders need to respond to threats in minutes, if not seconds.  Waiting days 

or even weeks for information to be shared diminishes the value of the information.  For 

example, if an entity discovers a sophisticated phishing email that has been able to bypass an 

organization’s email filters, it is critical that information on the subject line, sender’s address, 

and other data about the message be sent out to others as quickly as possible so that the other 

security teams can search for and delete these messages before their users fall victim to an 

attack.  Today, members of the NH-ISAC are sharing this type of information in near real- 

time.  We still need to increase the percentage of members willing to share but we also need 

the government to share healthcare related cyber intelligence at similar speeds.  Ultimately, 

we need to automate the entire process to minimize any delays in responding to rapidly 

changing threats.   

4.  Facilitate Healthcare Cybersecurity Table Top Exercises and Simulations.  DHS 

conducts a nation-wide, cybersecurity exercise every two years. The latest exercise, Cyber 

Storm V, was conducted March 8-10, 2016.  It was the first year in which the healthcare 

sector had dedicated participation in the exercise.  The exercise included a number of 

healthcare specific scenarios that tested the readiness of the sector to respond to a 

cybersecurity emergency.  The lessons learned were invaluable .  As the SSA for the 

healthcare sector, HHS should consider conducting smaller and more frequent exercises with 

a broader array of healthcare firms and include scenarios that substantially test the resilience 

of the sector. 

5.  Collaborate on the Implementation of a Digital Healthcare Identity Based on Leading 

Government and Private Sector Standard That Are Mature and In Place.    Passwords 

 
 

Page 10 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

are still the most frequently used authentication mechanism to gain access to healthcare data 

and systems and should not be.  Passwords are one of the least effective mechanisms to 

protect sensitive data and applications.  Users tend to select easy to remember passwords that 

can be defeated with widely available password guessing tools.  If users employ complex 

passwords, they tend to reuse these on different systems.  Consequently, if one system gets 

breached the attacker can use the same password to access other systems and potentially 

escalate the breach/attack.  Most security professionals recommend utilizing multi-factor 

authentication solutions to protect critical systems.  This technique combines a token (e.g. 

smartcard, smartphone, or one-time password generating device) or a biometric method (e.g. 

fingerprint reader) plus a password to reduce the likelihood of a breach.  The problem with 

this approach is that without standards that allow a digital identity to be reused, users will 

quickly be encumbered with a wide array of smartcards, devices, and biometric readers to 

gain access to the many systems they need.  This would be costly and extremely complex to 

manage and would create significant confusion for the user.  The government and industry 

The government and industry have standards and solutions today that will work for patients 

and healthcare.  

In some respects, the government and private sector are de facto administrators of a 

public-private partnership for the healthcare sector.  Government agencies are responsible for 

public health, for regulation of therapies, medicines, and healthcare providers, and for 

insurance coverage of a significant portion of the US population.  The private sector provides 

the services, products, medicines and delivery system.   Government agencies and larger 

healthcare firms should build out the healthcare identity ecosystem by implementing existing 

Healthcare Digital Identity standards.   Such an ecosystem would not only significantly 

Page 11 

 
 
 

 
 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

improve cybersecurity, but also streamline business processes and rationalize the current 

fragmented, redundant identity trust issue in healthcare.  Further, government agencies and 

private sector entities should facilitate the adoption of strong authentication by their small 

firm partners. 

6.  Develop Healthcare Sector Implementation Guide to Complement the NIST 

Cybersecurity Framework (CSF).  Under Executive 13636 – Improving Critical 

Infrastructure Cybersecurity, the White House tasked NIST to develop a cybersecurity 

framework that “shall include a set of standards, methodologies, procedures, and processes 

that align policy, business, and technological approaches to address cyber risks.”  NIST 

published the first version of the Cybersecurity Framework in February 2014.  The 

Framework has been quickly adopted by many industry sectors as the baseline against which 

the members measure the maturity of their cybersecurity programs.  A recent study by 

HIMSSx found that 61% of healthcare companies have already adopted the standard to some 

degree.  However, there is a growing demand within the sector for implementation guidelines 

that specify how to align with the NIST controls given the unique nature of industry.  NIST 

has already developed a draft implementation guideline for the critical manufacturing 

industry.  HHS should consider working with NIST and the private sector to produce a set of 

specific guidelines for the implementation of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework within 

healthcare entities. 

7.  Collaborate with Global Agencies and Institutions.  Although healthcare delivery and 

healthcare insurance are conducted by and large nationally based companies, 

pharmaceuticals, medical device companies, research facilities, and some public health 

entities operate at an international scale.  It is critical that HHS and the private sector work 

 
 

Page 12 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

together with peers in other countries to ensure the adoption of common cybersecurity 

standards and identify ways in which threat intelligence may be shared more broadly across 

borders.   

8.  Collaborate on Ways to Address the Small Business Challenge.  One of the growing 

challenges we face in sharing threat intelligence throughout the sector is that smaller, less 

mature entities without cybersecurity teams have a significant challenge consuming the 

information that is shared among NH-ISAC members.  This is particularly true for the rapid 

dissemination of indicators of compromise that are in a machine-readable format. This 

information facilitates the rapid response necessary to deal with quickly evolving threats, but 

it hinders the ability of less mature entities to consume the information.  As larger 

organizations move to automated sharing and response, this is likely to increase the gap 

between them and the small entities.  HHS should work with the private sector to identify 

ways in which smaller entities can stay aligned with the quickly changing methods of 

automated sharing.   

9.  Recruit Departing Service Members to Help Offset the Shortage of Cybersecurity 

Personnel in the Critical Infrastructure Segments 

One of the greatest challenges we face in the healthcare sector and many other critical 

infrastructure segments is the shortage of adequately trained personnel to address the rapidly 

changing cybersecurity threat.  Some studies have indicated that there as many as 200,000 

open cybersecurity roles in the United States alone and that number is sure to rise as new 

software and devices work their way into every aspect of our livesxi.  HHS, DHS, and other 

Sector Specific Agencies should work with private industry to identify critical cybersecurity 

roles within the private sector for departing military personnel.  The departing military 

 
 

Page 13 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 

personnel would be required to take a basic cybersecurity curriculum at Cyber Command 

before leaving active duty.  In return for this valuable training, the service member would be 

required to serve an additional period of time in the National Guard or Reserves during 

which time the service member would be subject to recall in a national or state-level cyber 

emergency within any critical infrastructure segment.  The private sector would assist the 

service member in the completion of any degree required for the private sector role.  This 

would provide an immediate pipeline of cybersecurity talent to the private sector.  It would 

also provide states and the federal government with a cadre of trained cyber professionals 

upon which they could draw.  Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it would create 

opportunities for departing service members to enter a lucrative and growing field.   

I believe that if these recommendations were implemented, we would significantly improve 

the state of cybersecurity in the healthcare industry.  We would be able to respond to emerging 

threats in a more rapid and effective manner while we made it harder for those threat actors to 

gain a foothold in any healthcare entity.  More importantly, these recommendations would help 

create a greater level of trust among public and private members of the sector which would 

ensure better collaboration in a time of crisis.    

I will conclude my testimony on one final note.  If we are unsuccessful in these endeavors 

and we are unable to significantly reduce the cybersecurity risk that we face, we may delay or 

even lose the opportunity to utilize promising new health information technology that has the 

potential to save and improve lives around the world.  We may also hinder the ability to take cost 

out of the healthcare system through more aggressive automation.  We cannot let that happen.  

Thank you again for the opportunity to present and I look forward to your questions. 

 

 
 

Page 14 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
i http://www.agcs.allianz.com/insights/white-papers-and-case-studies/allianz-risk-barometer-
2017/ 
 
ii https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/SASC_Unclassified_2016_ATA_SFR_FINAL.pdf 

 
 

Page 15 

Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships 

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
iii http://www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?htmlfid=SEJ03320USEN 
 
iv The reporting of material events is only required at publicly traded companies.  Many, if not 
most, of the healthcare delivery entities are privately-held or operate as non-profit associations 
and this requirement would not apply. 
 
v https://www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/-american-health-economy-
illustrated_145021349951.pdf  
 
vi http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/margin.html 
 
vii The SAFE BioPharma standard meets both the US Federal Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
and Federal Identity, Credential, & Access Management (FICAM) standards.  The SAFE 
BioPharma PKI Certificate Authority is cross-certified with the US Federal PKI Bridge.   
 
viii http://www.verizonenterprise.com/verizon-insights-lab/dbir/2016/ 
 
ix https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/nipp-ssp-healthcare-public-health-2015-
508.pdf 
 
x The second annual HIMSS Analytics HIT Security and Risk Management Study 
 
xi http://peninsulapress.com/2015/03/31/cybersecurity-jobs-growth/ 
 

 
 

Page 16 

