Public–private partnerships in 

national cyber-security strategies

MADELINE CARR

Cyber security is emerging as one of the most challenging aspects of the infor-
mation  age  for  policy-makers  and  scholars  of  International  Relations  (IR).  It 
has implications for national security, the economy, human rights, civil liberties 
and international legal frameworks. Although politicians have been aware of the 
threats of cyber insecurity since the early years of internet technology,1 anxiety 
about  the  difficulties  in  resolving  or  addressing  them  has  increased  rather  than 
abated.2 In response, governments have begun to develop national cyber-security 
strategies to outline the ways in which they intend to address cyber insecurity. In 
many states where critical infrastructural systems in areas such as utilities, finance 
and  transport  have  been  privatized,  these  policy  documents  are  heavily  reliant 
upon what is referred to as the ‘public–private partnership’ as a key mechanism 
through which to mitigate the threat. In the United States and United Kingdom, 
the public–private partnership has repeatedly been referred to as the ‘cornerstone’ 
or ‘hub’ of cyber-security strategy.3

While  public–private  partnerships  have  often  been  developed  as  an  appro-
priate means to address both non-traditional and traditional security threats,4 in 
the context of national cyber security this arrangement is uniquely problematic. 
There has been a persistent ambiguity with regard to the parameters for such a 
partnership. The reluctance of politicians to claim authority for the state to intro-
duce tougher cyber-security measures by law, coupled with the private sector’s 
aversion  to  accepting  responsibility  or  liability  for  national  security,  leaves  the 
‘partnership’ without clear lines of responsibility or accountability. Questions are 
now being raised (by, among others, President Obama) about the efficacy of a 
market-driven approach to cyber security, though in liberal democratic states at 

1  William J. Clinton, A National Security Strategy for a new century (Washington DC: The White House, Oct. 

2  Barack Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’ (Washington DC: 

1998), p. 17.

The White House, 29 May 2009).

3  William J. Clinton, National Plan for Information Systems Protection Version 1.0: an invitation to a dialogue (Wash-
ington DC: The White House, 2000); George W. Bush, The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (Washington 
DC: The White House, 2003); Francis Maude, The UK Cyber Security Strategy: protecting and promoting the UK 
in a digital world (London: Cabinet Office, 2011).

4  Max  G.  Manwaring,  ‘The  new  global  security  landscape:  the  road  ahead’,  Low  Intensity  Conflict  and  Law 
Enforcement 11: 2–3, Winter 2002, pp. 190–209; Barack Obama, US National Security Strategy (Washington DC: 
The White House, 2012).

International Affairs 92: 1 (2016) 43–62
© 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. Published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford ox4 2dq, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

least, any alternative has yet to emerge.5 Crucially for IR scholars, questions arise 
here  about  the  extent  to  which  the  state  can  be  seen  to  be  abdicating  not  just 
authority but responsibility for national security. As Dunn Cavelty and Suter point 
out in their article on this topic, ‘generating security for citizens is a core task 
of the state; therefore it is an extremely delicate matter for the government to 
pass on its responsibility in this area to the private sector’.6 Essentially, this raises 
questions  about  how  well  the  state  is  equipped  to  provide  national  security  in 
this context and about how existing policies and practices of national security are 
being challenged by this new threat conception.

This article develops a comprehensive understanding of how policy-makers 
and the private sector are conceptualizing their respective roles in national cyber 
security, where there may be disparity in these conceptions and what implica-
tions this may have for national and international cyber security. To this end, 
it begins with some necessary background to the establishment of the public–
private  partnership  in  national  cyber-security  strategies.  It  then  analyses  the 
conceptions of security that are evident in these policy documents. Unpacking 
the assumptions about security that drive these policies is essential to developing 
an understanding of the goals, objectives and embedded interests that shape the 
partnership.  The  article  then  moves  on  to  analyse  the  public–private  partner-
ship from the perspectives of both partners. It finds that there is a fundamental 
disjuncture  between  the  expectations  of  the  two  ‘partners’  in  terms  of  roles, 
responsibility  and  authority.  Disjuncture  in  such  relationships  is  certainly  not 
unique to this context, but the particular significance here arises from the fact 
that what is at stake is not (for example) a civil engineering project but a national 
security concern. The conclusion is not that no kind of public–private partnership 
can be central to national security in the US and UK, but rather that the partner-
ship  referred  to  in  the  policy  documents  is  deeply  flawed  and  that,  unless  the 
problems identified here are acknowledged and addressed, it is unlikely that this 
arrangement will prove a durable or effective means of promoting national cyber 
security.

Methodology
Many states have recently produced national cyber-security strategies that place 
an emphasis on some kind of public–private partnership. Those examined in the 
course of the research underlying this article include Austria, Australia, Canada, 
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary, India, Japan, Lithuania, 
the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, the United 
Kingdom and the United States. The analysis in the article itself focuses exclu-
sively on the UK and the US. The US is an essential case because it is here that 
cyber-security strategies based on the public–private partnership were developed 

5  Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’.
6  Myriam  Dunn  Cavelty  and  Manuel  Suter,  ‘Public–private  partnerships  are  no  silver  bullet:  an  expanded 
governance model for critical infrastructure protection’, International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 
2: 4, 2009, p. 181.

44

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. in 2000 under President Clinton. Over the ensuing 15 years, the public–private 
partnership has been described by successive US presidents as the ‘cornerstone’ 
of national cyber security, though none has yet explicitly defined the parame-
ters,  extent  or  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  parties.  The  UK,  for  its 
part, provides a correlate case-study. Cyber-security policy in the UK has been 
modelled on and influenced by US policy though it is, of course, distinct. The 
purpose of looking closely at two states with similar approaches, similar security 
cultures and close ties between their intelligence communities, commercial sectors 
and  defence  relations  is  to  look  for  subtle  differences.  An  examination  of  two 
more  radically  different  states,  such  as  the  United  States  and  China,  would  be 
expected to show significant differences; but in such a comparison there are so 
many factors that could play a part that a close analysis could be difficult to pursue 
in a focused way. It is anticipated that this research may provide a foundation for 
further work in this area (a point to which I return below).

It should be noted also that the public–private partnership in national cyber 
security is multifaceted. Governments have diverse relations with internet service 
providers (ISPs), multinational information corporations (Google, Facebook, etc.), 
private cyber-security firms, promoters of human and civil rights, law enforcement 
agencies and civil society. However, both within the relevant policy documents 
and  within  the  cyber-security  discourse  generally,  the  public–private  partner-
ship is often referred to as a single entity, ignoring this complexity. Unpacking 
the term is therefore one of the contributions this article seeks to make. In the 
course of doing so, it becomes clear that despite this complexity and diversity, the 
core focus in the strategies (and consequently in this article) is on the relationship 
between the government and the owners/operators of critical infrastructure—the 
rationale being that, while the many other aspects of cyber security are regarded 
as linked to the national interest, critical infrastructure protection is unequivocally 
and intrinsically linked to national security.

A  number  of  informal  interviews  were  conducted  for  this  research  over  an 
18-month period. Representatives from the British and American public sector 
entities responsible for national cyber security were asked to comment on how 
effective they felt the public–private partnership was in terms of critical infrastruc-
ture protection, what problems they had observed with it and how they thought 
it  might  be  improved.  Interviews  were  also  conducted  with  representatives  of 
the  private  sector  in  the  UK  and  US,  with  a  particular  concentration  on  two 
specific sectors: those working for critical infrastructure owners and operators, 
and  those  working  for  private  cyber-security  firms.  Relationships  between  the 
public and private sectors in this area are sensitive, particularly from the private-
sector perspective. Although the comments made by private-sector participants 
were often mutually corroborated, being made in several interviews (as well as in 
those with representatives of the public sector), private-sector participants were 
reluctant  to  be  identified  and  the  interviews  have  therefore  been  anonymized. 
Consequently,  they  serve  here  to  enhance  the  research  findings  rather  than  to 
drive them in a more substantive way.

45

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.The  reluctance  of  key  actors  to  speak  openly  about  the  problems  with  this 
particular public–private partnership is one of the constraints on researching these 
issues. A second constraint is that it is difficult to look in the same detail at states 
that are less open about their policies and practices—as is, of course, often the case 
with defence or intelligence research. In order to develop our understanding of 
the implications for International Relations of the public–private partnership in 
cyber security, it would be illuminating to extend this research project to look at 
a very different case-study. China is a major power in global cyber security, and 
differs markedly from the US and UK in both the relationship between its public 
and  private  sectors  and  its  ownership  of  critical  infrastructure.  Having  looked 
closely at these two similar states to discern the distinctive nuances in their respec-
tive approaches, it would be useful to conduct the same study in China in order to 
extend the analysis of potential implications for global security in the twenty-first 
century.

Background to the public–private partnership in national cyber-security 
strategy
Dunn Cavelty and Brunner have observed that one of the dominant arguments in 
the literature on the implications of the information age for international politics 
is that ‘technological development enhances two trends that diminish the impor-
tance of the state, both of which have implications for security: increasing interna-
tionalisation and increasing privatisation’.7 These two trends unite in the approach 
of the US and UK to national cyber security, and become manifest in the form 
of the public–private partnership. Understanding the history and background to 
this approach is important in providing context for the tensions now evident in 
this partnership, because these tensions embody a whole set of beliefs about the 
respective roles of the state and of the private sector, and about the interrelation-
ship between economic promotion and national security.

An  important  catalyst  for  this  trajectory  can  be  traced  back  to  the  end  of 
the  Cold  War,  which  ‘decreased  the  demand  for  defense  research  and  made 
national  security  a  less  compelling  reason  to  support  [technology  research  and 
development]’.8 President Clinton’s foreign policy and economic policy were to 
form a close and symbiotic (although not always comfortable) relationship as his 
ideas about democratic enlargement through trade, the promotion of human rights, 
and globalizing and liberating markets combined to form a kind of ideological/
economic grand strategy.9 Clinton was in favour of spending the ‘peace dividend’, 

7  Myriam Dunn Cavelty and Elgin M. Brunner, ‘Introduction: information, power, and security—an outline 
of debates and implications’, in Myriam Dunn Cavelty, Victor Mauer and Sai Felicia Krishna-Hensel, eds, 
Power and security in the information age: investigating the role of the state in cyberspace (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007), pp. 
8–9.

8  Joseph E. Stiglitz and Scott J. Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships: promises and pitfalls’, Ameri-

can Behavioral Scientist 43: 35, Sept. 1999, p. 57.

9  In  September  1993,  President  Clinton  gave  a  speech  to  the  UN  General  Assembly  outlining  this  strategic 
framework, which was reiterated in several subsequent speeches by senior officials including the Secretary 
of State and the National Security Advisor: William J. Clinton, ‘Remarks to the 48th Session of the United 

46

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. and  by  1992  he  was  explicit  about  how  it  should  be  applied:  ‘Every  dollar  we 
take out of military R&D [research and development] in the post-Cold War era 
should go to R&D for commercial technologies, until civilian R&D can match 
and eventually surpass our Cold War military R&D commitment.’10 Stiglitz and 
Wallsten write that these conditions ‘led to a new push for public–private partner-
ships intended to support commercial [technology research and development]’.11 
Much  of  the  groundwork  for  these  partnerships  was  laid  in  the  1980s,  but  the 
Clinton administration made them ‘the centrepiece of its technology program’.12 
It was in this climate that the Clinton–Gore administration invested so heavily 
in internet technology. Though they were clear from the beginning about their 
intention that the private sector should play a primary role, they also acknowl-
edged  the  value  of  government  input.  The  new  administration  believed  that 
‘only the private sector has the skills and abilities to manage the complex process 
of  developing  new  technologies  and  bringing  them  to  market,  while  ...  [the] 
government  plays  a  vital  role  in  enabling  the  private  sector’s  efforts’.13  By  the 
mid-1980s,  the  internet  infrastructure  was  fiscally  supported  and  administered 
by  the  federal  government  through  the  National  Science  Foundation  (NSF), 
though this was regarded by the government as an interim measure on the way 
to  full  private  ownership  and  management.14  The  National  High-Performance 
Computing Act of 1990 specified that the NSF was to support the establishment of 
a high-speed national network ‘in a manner which fosters and maintains competi-
tion and private sector investment in high speed data networking’,15 and that the 
involvement of the NSF ‘be phased out when commercial networks can meet the 
networking needs of American researchers’.16

A  number  of  policy  initiatives  focused  on  stimulating  private-sector  invest-
ment as well as the development of network management capability. One of these 
initiatives was the enforcement of the ‘Acceptable Use Policy’ (AUP) drawn up by 
the NSF. This policy dictated that network traffic should be restricted to ‘open 
research  and  education’,  specifically  prohibiting  commercial  activity  until  such 
time as the infrastructure was privatized.17 Through this ‘carrot and stick’ policy 
Nations General Assembly’, New York, 27 Sept. 1993; Anthony Lake, ‘From containment to enlargement’, 
speech to the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, Washington DC, 21 Sept. 
1993; Warren Christopher, ‘Building peace in the Middle East’, speech at Columbia University, 20 Sept. 1993.
10  William J. Clinton, remarks at Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 16 

April 1992, http://www.ibiblio.org/nii/econ-posit.html, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.

11  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
12  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
13  Technology  in  the  National  Interest  (Washington  DC:  NSTC  Committee  on  Civilian  Industrial  Technology, 

1996), p. 42, cited in Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 63.

14  For an account of how the funding was organized in 1990, see Brian Kahin, ‘RFC1192—commercialization of 
the internet, summary report’, issued as a ‘request for comments’ by the Network Working Group, Harvard 
University, Nov. 1990, http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1192.html, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.

15  S.1067, National High-Performance Computing Act of 1990, 101st Congress, 2nd Session, as marked up 3 
April 1990. The Federal Research Internet Coordinating Committee, established to coordinate networking 
research activities, issued a report in 1989 stating that the network would ‘be implemented and operated so 
that [it] can become commercialized’: Federal Research Internet Coordinating Committee, Program plan for 
the National Research and Education Network (Washington DC, 23 May 1989), pp. 4–5.

16  S.2918, National High-Performance Computing Act of 1988, 100th Congress, 2nd Session, 19 Oct. 1988.
17  For background on this, see the NSF website, ‘The internet: changing the way we communicate’, http://

www.nsf.gov/about/history/nsf0050/internet/internet.htm, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.

47

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.approach,  the  government  sought  to  stimulate  necessary  private-sector  invest-
ment—and indeed, this policy did have the intended effect.18

The public–private partnership is not, of course, unique to cyber security. It 
has been employed widely by states including the US and UK as a mechanism to 
deal with a range of other issues, including security-related ones. The practice 
intensified from the 1990s, when the privatization of critical infrastructure was 
regarded as economically beneficial to the state, freeing up capital and drawing 
more heavily on the efficiencies and business practices of the private sector. In the 
wake of this shift, an extensive body of literature developed that examines the 
public–private partnership in all kinds of contexts. It deals with the background 
of these partnerships,19 the range of different approaches,20 how to measure success 
and failure,21 and how responsibility and authority are delegated.22 There has also 
been some examination of the public–private partnership in cyber security, most 
notably by Dunn Cavelty and Suter, but this focuses on ways to improve it rather 
than  critically  analysing  its  political  implications.23  Combined,  this  literature 
provides a solid foundation for the present research project, proving particularly 
useful in highlighting the ways in which this partnership is distinct but also in 
outlining common assumptions and expectations that run through public–private 
partnerships more generally.

In addition to the political history outlined above, it should be noted that for 
many public policy scholars, the history of public–private partnerships is in large 
part one of discourse. Although they are often portrayed as a ‘new’ management 
approach designed to blend the best of both sectors, examples of public–private 
partnerships have been traced back to biblical times.24 Without going back quite 
so far, Wettenhall uses the example of Drake’s fleet which defeated the Spanish 
Armada in the sixteenth century, highlighting the fact that most of the ships were 
privately owned and operated though they were serving under contract to the 

18  See  NSF  website,  http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/nsf50/nsfoutreach/htm/n50_z2/pages_z3/28_pg.htm;  also 
Barry M. Leiner, Vinton G. Cerf, David D. Clark, Robert E. Kahn, Leonard Kleinrock, Daniel C. Lynch, 
Jon Postel, Larry G. Roberts and Stephen Wolff, ‘A brief history of the internet, part 1’, On the Internet (The 
Internet Society), May–June 1997, http://www.isoc.org/oti/articles/0597/leiner.html (both accessed 4 Nov. 
2015).

19  Stephen H. Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership: a grammar of multiple mean-
ings’, American Behavioral Scientist 43: 1, Sept. 1999, pp. 35–51; Roger Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of 
public–private partnerships’, Public Organization Review: A Global Journal 3: 1, 2003, pp. 77–107.

20  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, pp. 52–73; James A. Dunn, ‘Transportation: 
policy-level partnerships and project-based partnerships’, American Behavioural Scientist 43: 1, Sept. 1999, pp. 
92–106; Philip E. Auerswald, Lewis M. Branscomb, Todd M. LaPorte and Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan, Seeds of 
disaster, roots of response: how private action can reduce public vulnerability (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2007).

21  Graeme A. Hodge and Carsten Greve, ‘Public–private partnerships: an international performance review’, 
Public Administration Review 67: 3, May–June 2007, pp. 545–58; Michael J. Garvin and Doran Bosso, ‘Assessing 
the effectiveness of infrastructure public–private partnership programs and projects’, Public Works Management 
and Policy 13: 2, Oct. 2008, pp. 162–78.

22  Nutavoot Pongsiri, ‘Regulation and public–private partnerships’, International Journal of Public Sector Manage-
ment 15: 6, 2002, pp. 487–95; Marco Schaferhoff, Sabine Campe and Christopher Kaan, ‘Transnational public–
private partnerships in International Relations: making sense of concepts, research frameworks, and results’, 
International Studies Review 11: 3, Sept. 2009, pp. 451–74.

23  Dunn Cavelty and Suter, ‘Public–private partnerships are no silver bullet’.
24  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’.
48

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. Admiralty,  to  demonstrate  that  the  practice  of  governments  cooperating  with 
private actors has a long historical pedigree.25 What appears to be ‘new’ is the 
discourse around it, which Reijniers argues has reflected trends in management 
reform from the early 1990s that saw a turn away from ‘leadership and behavioural 
principles and toward more structural emphases on flexibility and innovation—
reinforcing  partnership  ideals’.26 Linder  sees  the  growing  discourse  on  partner-
ships as a retreat from the ‘hard-line advocacy of privatization’ of the Reagan and 
Thatcher years.27 From this perspective, he argues, they are accommodationist; 
‘they hold back the spectre of wholesale divestiture and, in exchange, promise 
lucrative collaboration with the state’.28 Wettenhall also points out that the term 
has  a  positive  relationship  with  the  discourse  on  ‘third  way’  economics  and  is 
associated with expectations of ‘mutual obligation and trust’.29

All of this suggests a discursive and practical breaking down of boundaries or 
borders at a domestic level which, of course, is very much in keeping with the 
broader discourse around the internet. The observation by Hess and Adams that 
public–private partnerships emerge from ‘loss of faith in both state and market’ 
can go some way to explaining this discursive and policy shift.30 Despite the fact 
that internet technology was heavily supported and promoted by the US govern-
ment (and indeed, the private sector had to be pressured to some extent to take it 
over), there quickly developed a kind of expectation that governments had only a 
limited role to play in further development of the technology. However, Wetten-
hall argues that there is a persistent lack of precision in how the term ‘partnership’ 
is employed, and ‘belief that what it refers to is “a good” thing seems much more 
a matter of faith than of science’.31

What is meant by ‘cyber security’? 
Just as in the 19th century we had to secure the seas for our national safety and prosperity, 
and in the 20th century we had to secure the air, in the 21st century we also have to secure 
our position in cyber space.32
‘Cyber  security’  is  almost  as  broad  and  indistinct  a  term  as  ‘security’  itself; 
and  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  this.  First,  the  implications  of  internet 
technology are highly diverse because they penetrate many critical systems and 
practices on multiple levels. Cyber security is used to refer to the integrity of our 
personal privacy online, to the security of our critical infrastructure, to electronic 

25  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 92.
26  J.  J.  A.  M.  Reijniers,  ‘Organization  of  public–private  partnership  projects’,  International  Journal  of  Project 
Management 12: 3, 1994, pp. 137–42, cited in Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, 
p. 39.

27  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 41.
28  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 41.
29  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 78.
30  Michael Hess and David Adams, ‘Community in public policy: fad or foundation?’, Australian Journal of Public 

Administration 60: 2, 2001, p. 13.

31  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 80.
32  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom: safety, security and resilience in cyber space (London: Cabinet Office, 

June 2009), p. 5.

49

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.commerce, to military threats and to the protection of intellectual property. These 
areas range extremely widely, and are united only by the technology with which 
they engage. This of course, is also a problem with ‘security’ that has been recog-
nized by scholars in IR for many years.33 In order to arrive at some clarity about 
what cyber security means in the context of national cyber-security strategies, it 
is useful to turn to the three fundamental questions that guide those working in 
many areas of security studies: for whom? from what? and by what means? When 
these national cyber-security strategy documents refer to ‘cyber security’, whose 
security are they referring to? Exactly what threats are they responding to? And 
by what means do the strategies propose to mediate those threats?

Cyber security for whom?
The  referent  object  in  these  strategy  documents  is  typically  ‘the  state’,  which 
in turn is conceived of as comprising three main component parts: individuals, 
businesses and the internet itself. The way in which the individual (or citizen) is 
treated in these national cyber-security strategies is quite enlightening and demon-
strates the value of asking these three foundational questions. The interests of the 
individual are generally conflated with those of the state—a common approach 
to security in international relations that is being challenged now by concepts of 
‘human security’—according to which what is ‘best’ for the state is, by definition, 
best for individual citizens. The state exists to pursue security and, by doing so, 
ensures that it can provide for and protect individuals. There are some references 
in the strategy documents that acknowledge that state security interests do not 
always align with individual security interests. These take the form of norma-
tive statements or principles about simultaneously pursuing greater cyber security 
and also upholding values of privacy and civil liberties (a tension that has been 
of particular pertinence since the Edward Snowden case of 2013). The 2003 US 
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace states that cyber security and personal 
privacy need not be opposing goals and that the federal government should ‘lead 
by example in implementing strong privacy policies and practices’.34 The 2009 UK 
strategy is somewhat more forthright about the intention to exploit opportunities 
for data gathering35 in balance with civil liberties and privacy, upon which ‘our 
freedoms depend ... and which form the basis of our society’.36 The individual’s 
cyber security, then, is important at a profound societal level—but may have to 
be subsumed into broader collective state concerns.

The importance of the internet to national economies makes the business sector 
a  key  focus  in  these  strategies.  In  any  analysis  of  how  politicians  regard  cyber 
security  as  a  problem  for  US  power,  economic  factors  feature  significantly.37 
33  Peter Burgess, ed., The Routledge handbook of new security studies (London and New York: Routledge, 2010).
34  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, pp. 14–15.
35  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, pp. 4, 15.
36  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 10.
37  Senator Daniel Akaka referred to the internet as the ‘backbone of the US economy’ in a statement at ‘Securing 
cyberspace: efforts to protect national information infrastructures continue to face challenges’, hearing before 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the Subcommittee on Federal Finan-

50

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. Indeed,  in  a  2009  speech  entitled  ‘Securing  our  nation’s  cyber  infrastructure’, 
President Obama stated definitively that ‘America’s economic prosperity in the 
21st century will depend on cybersecurity’.38 In the ‘landscape review’ of the UK 
cyber-security strategy, Amyas Morse makes the point that if the internet were 
a national economy, it would be the fifth largest in the world.39 In addition, he 
writes, the UK has one of the world’s largest online economies, with 8 per cent 
of GDP generated online—a higher proportion than for any other G20 country.40 
To this end, the UK national Cyber Security Strategy specifically addresses the 
financial cost to businesses of security breaches.41 Intellectual property is also a 
key concern for the business sector; the US Cyberspace Policy Review quotes a 
2008 estimate that set the value of losses due to data theft as high as $1 trillion.42
Protecting the state also means ensuring the integrity and smooth functioning 
of  the  internet  itself  because  so  many  other  systems  rely  upon  it.  The  Obama 
administration’s first National Security Strategy in 2010 elevated the internet to 
the position of ‘strategic national asset’ and declared that protecting it was now a 
‘national security priority’.43 The UK Cyber Security Strategy states that it is the 
‘effective functioning of cyber space’ that is of vital importance.44 This introduces 
some  conflation  of  ideas  about  cyber  security,  because  in  addition  to  being  an 
object to be protected, the internet is also, of course, the source of threats (from 
what?) and the mechanism through which those threats can be addressed (by what 
means?). However, it is clear in these strategies that the network itself is a primary 
referent object for conceptions of security. It is the security of the technology itself, 
as well as the security of those who use the technology, that concerns the US 
and UK governments here; and the two forms of security are linked. ‘Citizens, 
business and government can enjoy the full benefits of a safe, secure and resilient 
cyber space.’45 The technology becomes an artefact to be protected, an asset essen-
tial to broader state security. 

There exists, then, a level of conceptual confusion within this question. Who 
is to be protected in these cyber-security strategies? Is it individuals—and, if so, 
what happens when the state itself is perceived as the threat to security, as it was 
for some in the context of the Prism/Tempora programme?46 If businesses are to 

cial Management, Government Information, and International Security, US Senate, 19 July 2005, p. 5. In a 
similar context, Representative Tom Davis called the internet the ‘central backbone of our global economy’ 
in his statement at ‘Computer security: cyber attacks: war without borders’, hearing before the Committee 
on Government Reform, US House of Representatives, 26 July 2000, p. 6.

38  Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’.
39  David Dean, Sebastian Digrande, Dominic Field, Andreas Lundmark, James O’Day, John Pineda and Paul 
Zwillenberg, The Internet economy in the G-20: the $4.2 trillion growth opportunity (Boston Consulting Group, 
March 2012), available online at http://www.bcg.com/documents/file100409.pdf , cited in Amyas Morse, The 
UK Cyber Security Strategy: landscape review (London: House of Commons, 11 Feb. 2013), p. 5.

40  Morse, The UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 5.
41  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 12.
42  Melissa Hathaway, Cyberspace policy review: assuring a trusted and resilient information and communications infrastruc-

ture (Washington DC: The White House, May 2009), p. 2.

43  Barack Obama, United States National Security Strategy (Washington DC: The White House, 2010), p. 27.
44  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 3.
45  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 3.
46  The  Prism  programme  refers  to  the  US  National  Security  Agency’s  practice  of  collecting  personal  data 
through a range of online services like social media and search engines. It was revealed by NSA contractor 
51

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.be protected, we might expect a greater contribution from that sector to finance 
national cyber security. Or is national cyber security to be regarded as a business 
subsidy? And finally, if the protection of the network is also the object of the 
strategies,  it  becomes  clear  that  conflicts  and  tensions  between  these  goals  are 
likely to become manifest in any arrangements to achieve them.

Cyber security from what?
National cyber-security strategies tend to explicitly identify the actors from whom 
threats  are  expected  to  emerge:  criminals,  terrorists  and  hostile  states.47  This 
triumvirate of malicious actors is conceived as existing in a framework of offline 
aggression and belligerence where it is possible to identify a perpetrator and, there-
fore, their motivation. Online, where it can be possible to conceal the origin of 
attacks, these distinctions have less meaning; but they are so firmly entrenched in 
our political and legal systems that it has proved difficult to conceptualize threats 
in cyberspace beyond these terms.

Beyond articulating some conception of the actors that pose a threat in cyber-
space, there are two main areas of concern that dominate the US and UK national 
cyber-security  strategies.  One  is  the  economy,  which  was  briefly  dealt  with  in 
the previous section. The second is critical infrastructure protection; and this is 
also the primary focus of the public–private partnership. Critical infrastructure is 
defined in the US as ‘systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to 
the nation that their incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on 
national security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or 
any combination of those matters’.48 The protection of critical infrastructure has 
been linked to cyber security for the past 25 years, during which many advanced 
industrialized states have privatized critical infrastructure systems such as water 
and sewerage, electricity, finance, communications and transport.49 By the time 
the new millennium arrived, some 85 per cent of US critical infrastructure was 
in private hands.50 With privatization came an increased discretion on the part 
of those managing the infrastructure in the choice of systems and technology to 
control these utilities and industries, and many of them moved from proprietary 

Edward Snowden in June 2013. He also revealed details about the UK Government Communications Head-
quarters (GCHQ) Tempora program which gathered data through intercepts placed on fibre-optic cables: 
Luke Harding, The Snowden files: the inside story of the world’s most wanted man (London: Guardian Faber, 2014).

47  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, pp. 12–14; Hathaway, Cyberspace policy review, p. 1.
48  Gregory C. Wilshusen, ‘Cyber security: continued attention needed to protect our nation’s critical infra-
structure and federal information systems’, testimony before the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastruc-
ture Protection, and Security Technologies, Committee on Homeland Security, House of Representatives 
(Washington DC: US Government Accountability Office, 16 March 2011), p. 2. A similar definition is used in 
the UK: ‘Those infrastructure assets ... that are vital to the continued delivery and integrity of the essential 
services upon which the UK relies, the loss or compromise of which would lead to severe economic or social 
consequences or to loss of life’. See Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure, ‘About CPNI: the 
national infrastructure’, http://www.cpni.gov.uk/about/cni/, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.

49  Information Sharing Environment, ‘ISE’s participation in the Open Government initiative’, http://www.ise.

gov/open, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.

50  ‘Agency  response  to  cyberspace  policy  review’,  presented  to  the  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology, 
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation and Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, US 
House of Representatives, 16 June 2009, p. 3.

52

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. systems to more generic computer programs known as ‘supervisory control and 
data acquisition systems’ (SCADA systems). While SCADA systems boosted the 
productivity and efficiency of many industries and services by allowing critical 
infrastructure to be controlled centrally and remotely, the combination of private 
ownership  and  the  vulnerabilities  of  SCADA  systems  led  to  a  range  of  cyber-
security  concerns  around  critical  infrastructure  protection  when  these  systems 
began to be connected to the internet.

An  attack  on  critical  infrastructure  remains  one  of  the  dominant  themes  of 
debates about cyber insecurity in the US. In a congressional hearing on SCADA 
vulnerabilities, Representative Bill Pascrell stated: ‘We know that vulnerabilities 
within these systems are abundant, and we know that the threat of a terrorist attack 
against these systems is real.’51 Over the course of the past decade, this type of 
attack has emerged not only as a terrorist threat but also in the context of state-to-
state conflict, as was demonstrated in Estonia in 2007 and Georgia in 2008 and, of 
course, in the Stuxnet episode of 2010. Critical infrastructure is typically discussed 
in terms of ‘sectors’, and these come under the purview of government agencies 
or departments.52 For the most part, the trend has been towards industry self-
regulation, best practices and some coordination in terms of information-sharing 
with the government. This is central to the public–private partnership, which is 
in large part ‘the means’.

Cyber security by what means?
It is not necessary in this article to describe in detail every policy proposal and 
recommendation  in  the  strategy  documents.  What  is  of  interest  to  the  core 
research objectives here is that two dominant lines of practice emerge in response 
to the question: ‘By what means?’ First, as discussed briefly above, there is a persis-
tent emphasis on remaining anchored in core values and norms that are believed to 
underpin the national identity and power more broadly—what Hans Morgenthau 
referred to as the ‘national character’.53 In the 2010 US National Security Strategy, 
President Obama argued that: ‘Fidelity to our values is the reason why the United 
States of America grew from a small string of colonies under the writ of an empire 

51  Representative Bill Pascrell, prepared statement at ‘SCADA systems and the terrorist threat: protecting the 
nation’s critical control systems’, joint hearing before the Subcommittee on Economic Security, Infrastructure 
Protection, and Cybersecurity with the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Science, and Technology 
of the Committee of Homeland Security on 18 Oct. 2005, p. 3.

52  In the UK, there are nine national infrastructure sectors: energy, food, water, transport, communications, 
government, emergency services, health and finance. These are further refined into ‘critical’ national infra-
structure, defined ‘according to its value or “criticality” and the impact of its loss’. See the Centre for the 
Protection  of  National  Infrastructure  website,  http://www.cpni.gov.uk/about/cni/.  In  the  US,  there  are 
16 critical infrastructure sectors, set out in Presidential Policy Directive 21 (PPD-21). They are: chemical, 
commercial  facilities,  communications,  critical  manufacturing,  dams,  defense  industrial  base,  emergency 
services, energy, financial services, food and agriculture, government facilities, healthcare and public health, 
information technology, nuclear reactors materials and waste, transportation systems, and water and waste-
water systems. See Department of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/critical-infrastructure-sectors 
(both accessed 4 Nov. 2015).

53  Hans Morgenthau, Politics among nations: the struggle for power and peace, 5th rev. edn (New York: Knopf, 1978), 

pp. 138–40.

53

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.to the strongest nation in the world.’54 And in the UK: ‘Our approach seeks to 
preserve and protect the rights to which we are accustomed (including privacy and 
civil liberties) because it is on these rights that our freedoms depend.’55

The second dominant line of practice articulated in these strategies that is of 
consequence for the public–private partnership is information sharing. Informa-
tion sharing is fundamental to conceptions of this ‘partnership’ and needs to be 
discussed at length in that context. The expectations of both partners, the challenges 
each faces and the impediments to greater clarity about lines of responsibility and 
authority are key to understanding the role of the public–private partnership in 
these cyber-security strategies. The next part of this article provides some context 
for these arrangements and also some analysis of how this particular partnership 
can be understood within the broader literature on public–private partnerships.

Analysis of the public–private partnership in cyber security
There are several reasons why cyber security, particularly in the context of critical 
infrastructure  protection,  has  been  conceived  of  as  some  kind  of  collaborative 
project for the public and private sectors. The state is understood to be respon-
sible for the provision of security, especially national security. Protecting critical 
infrastructure—those assets and systems necessary for the preservation of national 
security (broadly defined)—is perceived as an integral part of providing security 
to the state. The potential implications of a large-scale cyber attack on critical 
infrastructure are so extensive that it follows naturally that the government would 
recognize some authority and responsibility here. However, because most of the 
critical  infrastructure  in  the  US  and  UK  is  privately  owned  and  operated,  by 
definition there has to be some kind of relationship between the public and private 
sectors in terms of the provision of security in this context. 

What is this public–private partnership?
Having  established  the  background  to  public–private  partnerships,  in  terms  of 
both discourse and practice, it is necessary now to be clear about what exactly is 
meant by the term in this particular context. Perhaps not unexpectedly, there is a 
huge range of diverse arrangements that are referred to as public–private partner-
ships,  from  the  joint  provision  of  services  with  some  government  regulatory 
oversight (health sector), to closely contracted outsourcing of large infrastructure 
projects (building bridges, hosting the Olympic Games, etc.). Much of the litera-
ture  on  public–private  partnerships  revolves  around  identifying  and  classifying 
partnership arrangements. This identification and classification often takes place 
within a framework of authority and responsibility—key concepts for this study. 
In examining these relationships, Wettenhall identifies two broad categories: (a) 
horizontal, non-hierarchical arrangements characterized by consensual decision-

54  Obama, United States National Security Strategy, 2010, p. 35.
55  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 10.
54

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. making; and (b) hierarchically organized relationships with one party in a control-
ling role. The implication is, he argues, that true ‘partnerships’ are of type (a) and 
not type (b).56

This distinction has implications for the public–private partnership in cyber 
security. National cyber-security strategies avoid suggestions of hierarchy when 
they refer to the public–private partnership. The language is deliberately coopera-
tive and implies a shared purpose and shared interests. The UK Cyber Security 
Strategy states that achieving the goal of a safe, secure internet will ‘require every-
body, the private sector, individuals and government to work together. Just as 
we all benefit from the use of cyberspace, so we all have a responsibility to help 
protect it.’57 With specific reference to the role of the private sector, it states that 
there is an expectation that private-sector entities will ‘work in partnerships with 
each other, Government and law enforcement agencies, sharing information and 
resources, to transform the response to a common challenge, and actively deter 
the threats we face in cyberspace’.58 This non-hierarchical language belies the poor 
alignment of perceptions about the ‘common challenge’ and the ‘threats we face 
in cyberspace’. It implies that the challenge and the threats are the same for the 
public and the private sector, when in fact they are not. The private sector regards 
cyber-security challenges as financial and reputational—not as a common public 
good, which is how governments regard national cyber security.

On a more granular level, Stephen Linder identifies six distinctive uses of the 
term ‘public–private partnership’ and links them to neo-liberal or neo-conservative 
ideological perspectives. In doing so, he draws out questions about their intended 
purpose and significance as well as ‘what the relevant problems are to be solved and 
how best to solve them’.59 Two of these ‘types’ can shed light on what is meant by 
the public–private partnership in cyber security: partnership as management reform 
and partnership as power sharing.

Linder argues that partnership as management reform refers to the expectation that 
government managers will learn ‘by emulating their partners’ and shift their focus 
from  administrative  processes  to  deal-making  and  attracting  capital  in  a  more 
entrepreneurial and flexible approach.60 Significantly, this is regarded as one of 
the objectives of the partnership, because of the belief that the market is inher-
ently superior and ‘its competitive character stimulates innovation and creative 
problem solving’—a view embedded in neo-liberalism.61

Perhaps  not  surprisingly,  although  this  is  reflected  in  the  strategies  of  both 
states,  it  is  much  more  pronounced  in  the  US  documents.  The  Bush  adminis-
tration’s  National  Strategy  to  Secure  Cyberspace  argued  that  in  the  US  ‘tradi-
tions of federalism and limited government require that organizations outside the 
federal government take the lead’ in cyber security.62 This interpretation of the 
56  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 90.
57  UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 22.
58  UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 23.
59  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 42.
60  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 43.
61  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 43.
62  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. xiii.

55

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.government’s limited authority is combined here with an assumption of its limited 
capability. ‘The federal government could not—and, indeed, should not—secure 
the computer networks of privately owned banks, energy companies, transpor-
tation firms, and other parts of the private sector.’63 This assertion is based on 
the belief that ‘in general, the private sector is best equipped and structured to 
respond to an evolving cyber threat’,64 and reflected in the statement by Attorney 
General  Eric  Holder  that  decision-makers  in  the  US  ‘believe  strongly  that  the 
private sector should take the lead in protecting private computer networks’.65 In 
testimony before a hearing on internet security, the FBI’s Michael Vatis argued 
that cyber security is ‘clearly the role of the private sector. The Government has 
neither the responsibility nor the expertise to act as the private sector’s system 
administration.’66

There  is  a  rejection  here  of  government  liability  for  private  networks  that 
is  framed  in  the  belief  that  the  government  has  neither  the  authority  nor  the 
capability to deal with cyber security. It is an approach in keeping with the partner-
ship  as  management  reform  type  identified  by  Linder—though  the  government 
rejects  the  objective  of  change  inherent  within  that  type.  Rather,  it  promotes 
two ‘truths’ about the private sector. First, it must accept responsibility and liability 
for its own network security; and second, its superior capacity for flexibility and 
innovation means that it is best placed to take the lead on this particular security 
problem. The problem, of course, is that some of these networks—particularly 
with regard to critical infrastructure—are central to national security; and therein 
lies the problem from the perspective of the private sector.

The private sector develops a cyber-security strategy within a very different 
framework  from  the  government’s  ‘public  good’  conception.  For  the  private 
operators of critical infrastructure, decisions are made within a business model 
that responds to profit margins and shareholder interests. This is largely incom-
patible with the promotion of a ‘public good’. The private sector raises two main 
objections to the role that the government perceives for it in cyber-security strat-
egies.  First,  it  argues  that  the  expense  of  ensuring  cyber  security  to  a  national 
security  level  would  be  significant;  second,  it  argues  that  the  litigious  nature 
of (especially American) society means that industry would be very resistant to 
accepting liability for the security of its products or systems.67

Stiglitz and Wallsten make some important observations about this dichoto-
mized  approach  to  public–private  partnerships  in  the  context  of  technology 
innovation. ‘Theory predicts,’ they argue, ‘and many empirical studies confirm, 
that  profit-maximizing  firms  invest  less  than  the  socially  optimal  level  of 

63  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. 11.
64  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. 11.
65  Eric Holder Jr, Deputy Attorney General, US Department of Justice, prepared statement for ‘Internet Secu-

rity’, hearing on 8 March 2000, p. 12.

66  Michael A. Vatis, Deputy Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, National Infrastructure Protec-

tion Programs, prepared statement for ‘Internet security’, hearing on 8 March 2000, p. 26.

67  Alan Paller of the SANS Institute, testimony before ‘SCADA systems and the terrorist threat’, p. 62. See also 
Richard A. Clarke and Robert K. Knake, Cyber war: the next threat to national security and what to do about it (New 
York: Ecco, 2010).

56

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. [technology research and development].’68 What is in society’s best interest with 
regard to cyber security is not always in the best interests of the private sector. 
This  is  because,  they  argue,  social  benefits  do  not  translate  in  terms  of  private 
profitability—no matter how desirable the outcome.69

Private-sector  owners  of  critical  infrastructure  accept  responsibility  for 
securing their systems—to the point that it is profitable; that is, as far as the cost 
of dealing with an outage promises to cost more than preventing it. However, 
they tend to make a distinction between protecting against low-level threats such 
as ‘background noise, individual hackers, and possibly hacktivists’ and protecting 
against an attack on the state (national security).70 In testimony at a US hearing 
on privately owned critical infrastructure cyber security, one witness explained 
that ‘it is industry’s contention that government should protect against the larger 
threats—organized  crime,  terrorists,  and  nation-state  threats—either  through 
law-enforcement or national defense’.71 We saw this distinction play out in the 
2014 attack on Sony Pictures, where the focus on the likely source shifted from an 
‘insider threat’ attack (which the security community regarded as most likely72) 
to a North Korean initiative in response to the release of a film about the fictional 
assassination of Kim Jong Un.73

This disjuncture in perceptions is arguably at the heart of the tension in this 
‘partnership’. Typically, the rationale articulated in the literature for partnering 
is that neither partner on its own can achieve its desired objectives. Either each 
must need the other to achieve its own goals or there must be a financial arrange-
ment that makes the partnership attractive to both parties. It is difficult to ascribe 
either of these rationales comprehensively in the single most emphasized practice 
in  this  partnership—information  sharing.  Although  there  may  be  a  financial 
component to information sharing (paying for intelligence on vulnerabilities and 
attack vectors) and although there may also be some shared incentives, neither of 
these adequately encompasses the dynamics of the public–private partnership in 
this context. Perhaps information sharing can best be understood in the second 
of Stephen Linder’s ‘types’ of public–private partnerships—partnerships as power 
sharing.

Linder writes that partnerships as power sharing are based on an ethos of cooperation 
where ‘trust replaces the adversarial relations endemic to command-and-control 
regulation’ and where there is some mutually beneficial sharing of responsibility, 

68  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 53.
69  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 53.
70  Sam Varnado, written response to questions from Representative Bennie G. Thompson at ‘SCADA systems 

and the terrorist threat’, p. 95.

71  Varnado, written response, ‘SCADA systems and the terrorist threat’, p. 95.
72  Kim Zetter, ‘The evidence that North Korea hacked Sony is flimsy’, Wired Magazine, 17 Dec. 2014, http://www.
wired.com/2014/12/evidence-of-north-korea-hack-is-thin/; Marc Rogers, ‘Why I still don’t think it’s likely 
that North Korea hacked Sony’, Marc’s Security Ramblings, 21 Dec. 2014, http://marcrogers.org/2014/12/21/
why-i-still-dont-think-its-likely-that-north-korea-hacked-sony/; Bruce Schneier, ‘More data on attributing 
the Sony attack’, Schneier on Security, 31 Dec. 2014, https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2014/12/more_
data_on_at.html (all accessed 4 Nov. 2015). 

73  Barack Obama, ‘Executive Order—imposing additional sanctions with respect to North Korea’ (Washington 

DC: The White House, 2 Jan. 2015).

57

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.knowledge or risk. In most instances, he writes, ‘each party brings something of 
value to the others to be invested or exchanged’. Finally, ‘there is an expectation 
of give-and-take between the partners, negotiating differences that were other-
wise litigated’.74 The text above has explained how this partnership is character-
ized not by shared responsibility but by disputed responsibility. Sharing knowledge, 
however, is certainly regarded by both partners as integral to this relationship, and 
building trust and collaboration is a dominant theme running through not only 
the strategy documents but also the responses from the private sector.

The practice of information sharing as a partnership
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  main  expectation  of  cooperation  within  the 
public–private partnership is found in the emphasis on information sharing.75 In 
July 2010, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) published a report 
entitled Critical infrastructure protection, with the subtitle: Key private and public cyber 
expectations need to be consistently addressed.76 The purpose of the study was to clarify 
the  partnership  expectations  of  both  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  and  to 
determine  the  extent  to  which  those  expectations  were  being  met.  This  study 
was limited to five key critical infrastructure sectors deemed to be most reliant on 
cyber security.77

The  provision  of  timely  and  actionable  cyber-threat  and  alert  information 
emerges  as  a  key  expectation  of  the  partnership  from  both  the  public  and  the 
private sector, but there are a number of obstacles to sharing information from 
both perspectives.78 The private sector reports that it is not always easy to immedi-
ately distinguish between some kind of technical problem, a low-level attack and 
a large-scale sustainable attack.79 In addition, it sometimes runs counter to their 
commercial interests to report vulnerabilities, particularly if understanding and 
rectifying a problem before competitors become aware of it could offer a market 
edge.80  Finally,  if  a  private  security  firm  shares  information  with  the  govern-
ment about an attack, that information may be shared with its competitors.81 For 
private-sector security firms, their business model is reliant on obtaining, holding 
and selling information, not sharing it.82

The public sector also encounters limitations to sharing information. Classi-
fied contextual information cannot be shared with individuals who do not have 
adequate security clearance. Even those working in the private sector who do have 
security clearance can often do nothing with classified information because to take 

74  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 47.
75  Dunn Cavelty and Suter, ‘Public–private partnerships are no silver bullet, p. 181.
76  David  A.  Powner,  Critical  infrastructure  protection:  key  private  and  public  cyber  expectations  need  to  be  consistently 

addressed (Washington DC: Government Accountability Office, July 2010).

77  Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, p. 27.
78  Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, p. 23.
79  Author’s interview with UK-based private cyber-security firm, 2014.
80  Author’s interview with UK-based private cyber-security firm, 2014.
81  Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, p. 22.
82  Author’s interview with US-based private cyber-security firm, 2014.
58

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. action on it would be to expose it.83 In addition, there is a high expectation that 
threat information shared from the public to the private sector will be accurate, 
and this leads to extensive and stringent review and revision processes that delay 
the release of time-critical information.84 This problem of sharing information 
has  persistently  been  regarded  as  a  key  impediment  to  cyber  security,  and  was 
highlighted  by  a  senior  official  in  testimony  before  a  congressional  hearing  on 
cyber security in 2011 as one of two main areas that needed improvement.85

Significantly,  private-sector  interviews  consistently  revealed  that  personal 
relationships were central to effective information sharing.86 That is, people were 
much more inclined to share information with colleagues with whom they had 
a strong personal and/or professional bond. This human factor is important and 
should be further investigated in order to identify ways to establish and strengthen 
these relationships in sectors of network security and the public service, which are 
characterized by a relatively high turnover of staff.

Key objectives and markers of success
By the late 1990s, the critical literature looking more broadly at public–private 
partnerships  was  maturing  and  there  was  a  realization  that  evaluation  of  these 
arrangements  was  complex  and  under-researched.  Essentially,  there  was  little 
evidence to suggest what the success or failure rate of these arrangements was. 
In fact, there was not really even a conceptual framework for doing so. In 1999, 
American Behavioral Scientist published a special issue dedicated to these questions. 
In  the  introduction,  Pauline  Vaillancourt  Rosenau  summarized  many  of  the 
arguments set out in the contributions to the journal issue in writing that:
in general, partnering success is more likely if (a) key decisions are made at the very begin-
ning of a project and set out in a concrete plan, (b) clear lines of responsibility are indicated, 
(c) achievable goals are set down, (d) incentives for partners are established, and (e) progress 
is monitored.
She also identified a set of criteria for the measurement of success—some of which 
are useful in relation to the case considered here, particularly accountability and 
possible conflicts of interest.87

In  terms  of  conflict  of  interest,  Vaillancourt  Rosenau  makes  the  case  that 
partnerships do not (as many assume) necessarily reduce regulation. If the inter-
ests of the private sector are misaligned with normative goals such as care for the 
vulnerable (for example, in respect of homes for the elderly), then the govern-
ment must monitor and regulate to ensure the profit motive does not supersede 

83  Author’s interview with UK-based private cyber-security firm, 2015.
84  Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, p. 17.
85  Wilshusen, ‘Cyber security’, p. 8.
86  Author’s interviews with UK and US private-sector representatives from critical infrastructure owners/opera-

tors, 2014–15.

87  Pauline Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, American 

Behavioral Scientist 43: 1, Sept. 1999, pp. 11–12.

59

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.the intended delivery of service.88 Here we see the profile of one of the central 
problems  of  this  public–private  partnership:  the  expectation  that  the  private 
sector will invest in cyber security beyond its cost/benefit analysis to fully accom-
modate the public interest—in other words, to ensure national security. Because 
market incentives are not adequate to promote this level of security, oversight 
and some level of regulation are necessary. A 2013 GAO report found that many 
of the experts consulted argued that the private sector had not done enough to 
protect critical infrastructure against cyber threats.89 The private sector explana-
tion for not fully engaging in the government’s cyber-security strategy was that 
the  government  had  failed  to  make  a  convincing  business  case  that  mitigating 
threats warranted substantial new investment.90

Dunn Cavelty and Suter argue that while public–private cooperation is neces-
sary,  the  way  it  is  organized  and  conceptualized  needs  to  be  rethought.  They 
propose  to  do  so  through  governance  theory  and  they  find  that  critical  infra-
structure protection policy ‘should be based as far as possible on self-regulating 
and self-organising networks’.91 By this, they mean that ‘the government’s role no 
longer consists of close supervision and immediate control, but of coordinating 
networks and selecting instruments that can be used to motivate these networks 
for CIP tasks’.92 This may provide some forward momentum, though Vaillancourt 
Rosenau makes the point that a public–private partnership cannot be regarded as 
a success if it ‘results in lower quality of public policy services, the need for more 
government oversight, and the need for expensive monitoring, even if it appears 
to reduce costs’.93 Perhaps more problematic for Dunn Cavelty and Suter’s recom-
mendation is the question of accountability.

On  accountability,  Vaillancourt  Rosenau  writes  that  because  these  partner-
ships often see policy decisions and practices that are normally reserved for elected 
officials delegated to the private sector, accountability is essential to maintaining a 
healthy democratic order. If responsibility and accountability can be devolved to 
private actors, the central principle that political leaders and governments are held 
to account is undermined.94 For many scholars, to ensure effective accountability 
in  a  public–private  partnership,  the  specifics  of  roles  and  responsibilities  must 
be made clear at the outset and goals must be clearly articulated.95 Stiglitz and 
Wallsten observe that in the process of doing this, it becomes clear when additional 
incentives and resources are necessary to achieve agreed goals, and these must be 
provided if accountability is to be sustained.96 In cases such as cyber security, in 
which the end goal for government is the public good, accountability—like the 

88  Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, pp. 18–19.
89  Gregory C. Wilshusen and Nabajyoti Barkakati, Cybersecurity: national strategy, roles, and responsibilities need to be 

better defined and more effectively implemented (Washington DC: GAO, Feb. 2013), p. 49.

90  Wilshusen and Barkakati, Cybersecurity, p. 49.
91  Dunn Cavelty and Suter, ‘Public–private partnerships are no silver bullet’, p. 180.
92  Dunn Cavelty and Suter, ‘Public–private partnerships are no silver bullet’, p. 180.
93  Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, p. 18.
94  Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, p. 19.
95  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
96  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
60

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. alignment of interests discussed above—does not appear to emerge from market 
forces  alone.97  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  public–private  partnerships  cannot 
be successful when interests and objectives diverge; but, in the view of Stiglitz 
and Wallsten, in these cases ‘more attention needs to be placed on the incentive-
accountability structure’.98

The GAO report referred to above is also useful in analysing the key objec-
tives  of  this  partnership  and  in  measuring  its  success.99 The  report  found  that 
in  addition  to  information  sharing,  there  were  two  main  expectations  that  the 
government holds of the private sector in this partnership. First, it is expected that 
private-sector partners will commit to executing plans and recommendations such 
as best practices.100 This is important, because it is an example of the government 
shifting responsibility to the private sector in the understanding that if the private 
sector responds adequately, then regulation can be avoided. The study reported 
that four of the five sectors examined were meeting government expectations to 
a ‘great/moderate’ degree. The exception was the IT sector, which was reported 
as demonstrating ‘little/no’ commitment to execute plans and recommendations 
such as best practice.101 In fact, the IT sector meets government expectations to a 
‘great/moderate’ degree on only one out of ten criteria—technical expertise. On 
all other criteria, this sector is ranked as meeting expectations to ‘some’ or ‘little/
no’ degree. Given the reliance of the other sectors on the IT sector, this deficit 
is  particularly  worrying  and  must  undermine  the  others’  compliance  to  some 
extent. It also highlights the fact that the private sector is not accountable to the 
same degree that the public sector would be if it were offering the same services.102

Conclusion
Somewhat surprisingly, given its centrality in successive cyber-security policies 
produced by the UK and the US, exactly what the public–private ‘partnership’ 
entails has always been unclear. In the face of the continuing challenge of concep-
tualizing  cyber  security  within  a  national  security  framework,  this  article  has 
argued  that  a  sensible  starting-point  would  be  to  speak  with  clarity  about  the 
tensions and competing agendas that characterize the public–private partnership 
(particularly  in  the  context  of  critical  infrastructure  protection)  rather  than  to 
shroud them in normative ‘new management’ language. 

Although politicians often appear to subscribe to the notion that there exists 
(or should exist) a deeply entrenched norm of cooperation between the govern-
ment  and  private  sector,  this  is  clearly  not  the  case.  Rather,  the  private  sector 

97  H. M. Levin, ‘The public–private nexus in education’, American Behavioral Scientist 43: 1, 1999, pp. 124–37; M. 
S. Sparer, ‘Myths and misunderstandings: health policy, the devolution revolution, and the push for privatiza-
tion’, American Behavioral Scientist 43: 1, 1999, pp. 138–54, both cited in Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths 
and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, p. 21.

98  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
99  Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, pp. 22–3.
100 Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, pp. 22–3.
101 Powner, Critical infrastructure protection, p. 22.
102 Author’s interview with UK cyber-crime law enforcement representative, 2014.

61

Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategiesInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.has consistently (and perhaps understandably) expressed an aversion to accepting 
responsibility or liability for national security and regards cyber security within 
a  cost/benefit  framework  rather  than  a  ‘public  good’  framework.  The  public–
private partnership is consistently referred to in strategy documents using norma-
tive, value-based language rather than clear statements outlining legal authority, 
responsibility and rights across the diverse set of relationships that these govern-
ments  maintain  with  the  private  sector.  While  this  article  does  not  argue  that 
this latter type of regulation is necessarily the answer, it does point out why the 
partnership arrangement cannot work effectively in its current form. Successful 
public–private partnerships are either characterized by shared interests or, if the 
interests of the partners are not well aligned, governed by rules. This arrangement 
has neither shared interests nor rules in sufficient quantity.

In  essence,  while  states  like  the  UK  and  the  US  are  relying  on  the  private 
sector for a key element of national security, in the context of critical infrastruc-
ture protection (a persistent and key concern for national cyber-security policy-
makers)  this  entails  reliance  on  a  dysfunctional  partnership.  Several  possible 
conclusions arise from this analysis. First—the core contribution of this article—
the weaknesses in the partnership must be openly acknowledged so that we may 
begin to develop mechanisms to address them. Second, it could be more useful to 
cease to use the term ‘partnership’ and talk instead of a ‘relationship’. Third, we 
might begin to think more laterally about how cyber security fits within a national 
security framework. It might be more appropriate to develop a national cyber-
resilience  strategy  instead  of  a  national  cyber-security  strategy.  Finally,  it  would 
be useful to look more closely at how states that have retained public ownership 
of critical infrastructure deal with cyber security in this context and how states 
with more control over their private sector are addressing similar national cyber-
security concerns. 

Although it may not be entirely surprising that there are significant problems 
with this public–private partnership, it is important to remember that this is the 
‘cornerstone’ of UK and US national cyber-security strategies. In both the UK 
and the US, we are witnessing a unique approach to ‘outsourcing’ national cyber 
security, and this raises questions about how well the state is equipped to provide 
this security and about how existing policies and practices of national security 
are being challenged by this partnership for the provision of national security. 
States with greater government control over critical infrastructure and also over 
their information infrastructure potentially have a significant advantage in that 
they are able to control and shape their response to cyber insecurity with greater 
autonomy.  It  is  possible  that  a  market-led  approach  to  national  cyber  security 
will prove to be less effective than a state-led approach. It is also possible that we 
need to rethink the breadth and depth of security that we can usefully attach to 
expectations of national cyber security. Acknowledging these uncomfortable facts 
is essential to developing a more robust approach to state security in the informa-
tion age.

62

Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. 