Security Certiﬁcations 

•  General Security: Basic | Intermediate | Advanced  
•  Forensics/Anti-Hacking: Basic | Intermediate | Advanced  

GENERAL SECURITY - Basic 

 

•  BISA – Brainbench Information Security Administrator 

This  Brainbench  certiﬁcation  tests  knowledge  of  networking  and  Internet  security, 
including authorization, authentication, ﬁrewalls, encryption, disaster recovery and more. 
Source: Brainbench  

•  BITSF – Brainbench Information Technology Security Fundamentals 

This  Brainbench  certiﬁcation  tests  basic  knowledge  of  information  security  concepts, 
skills and best practices. Topics covered include: 

This entry- to mid-level security certiﬁcation focuses on two primary topics: ﬁrewalls and 
intrusion detection. Related curriculum and exams cover network security fundamentals, 

Page 1 of 13 

o  Attack recognition, prevention and response  
o  Content security  
o  Database infrastructure protection  
o  General concepts  
o  Network infrastructure protection  
o  Perimeter and Internet security  
o  Security management systems and security technologies  

Source: Brainbench  

•  GIAC – Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation Program 

This program seeks to identify individuals who can demonstrate knowledge of and the 
ability to manage and protect important information systems and networks. The SANS 
organization is well known for its timely, focused, and useful security information and 
certiﬁcation  program.  A  shining  star  on  this  landscape,  the  GIAC  program  aims  at 
serious,  full-time  security  professionals  responsible  for  designing,  implementing  and 
maintaining a state-of-the-art security infrastructure that may include incident handling 
and emergency response team management. Available entry-level certiﬁcations include 
the following: 

o  GIAC Information Security Fundamentals (GISF)  
o  GIAC Security Essentials Certiﬁcation (GSEC)  

Source: Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation  
•  SCNP – Security Certiﬁed Network Professional 

•  Security+ 

and network defense and countermeasures. Individuals who attain this certiﬁcation will 
be able to work as full-time IT security professionals with an operations focus.  
Source: Security Certiﬁed Program  

This security certiﬁcation focuses on important security fundamentals related to security 
concepts and theory, as well as best operational practices. In addition to functioning as a 
standalone exam for CompTIA, Microsoft accepts the Security+ as an alternative to one 
of  the  specialization  exams  for  the  MCSA  and  MCSE  Messaging  and  Security 
specializations.  
Source: CompTIA Security+ Certiﬁcation Overview  

•  SSCP – Systems Security Certiﬁed Practitioner 

The  entry-level  precursor  to  ISC2’s  CISSP,  the  SSCP  exam  covers  seven  of  the  10 
domains  in  the  CISSP  Common  Body  of  Knowledge.  The  exam  focuses  more  on 
operational  and  administrative  issues  relevant  to  information  security  and  less  on 
information policy design, risk assessment details and other business analysis skills that 
more germane to a senior IT security professional (and less so to a day-to-day security 
administrator, which is where the SSCP is really focused).  
Source: (ISC)2  

•  TICSA – TruSecure ICSA Certiﬁed Security Associate 

TICSA demonstrates basic familiarity with vendor-neutral system- and network-security 
principles,  practices  and  technologies.  It  is  an  entry-level  security  certiﬁcation  for 
network or system administrations and for those interested in climbing the ﬁrst rung in a 
security certiﬁcation ladder suitable for full-time IT security work.  
Source: TruSecure ICSA Practitioner Certiﬁcation  

 

GENERAL SECURITY - Intermediate 

•  BIS – Brainbench Internet Security Certiﬁcation 

The BIS seeks to identify individuals with a good working knowledge of Internet security 
practices,  principles  and  technologies.  It  is  aimed  at  full-time  network  or  system 
administrators who must manage systems with Internet connections or access.  
Source: Brainbench  

•  BNS – Brainbench Network Security Certiﬁcation 

The  BNS  seeks  to  identify  individuals  with  a  good  working  knowledge  of  network 
security practices, principles and technologies. This cert is aimed at full-time network 
administrators who must deal with external threats through boundary devices like routers, 
ﬁrewalls or intrusion-detection systems, as well as more typical internal threats.  
Source: Brainbench  

Page 2 of 13 

•  CIW Security Analyst 

Individuals who take and pass the CIW-Security Professional (CIW-SP) exam, and hold 
one of the following certiﬁcations qualify as a CIW Security Analyst (CIW-SA):  

o  Microsoft Certiﬁed Systems Administrator (MCSA)  
o  Microsoft Certiﬁed Systems Engineer (MCSE) 4  
o  Microsoft Certiﬁed Systems Engineer (MCSE) 2000  
o  Certiﬁed Novell Engineer (CNE) 4  
o  Certiﬁed Novell Engineer (CNE) 5  
o  Cisco Certiﬁed Network Associate (CCNA)  
o  Cisco Certiﬁed Network Professional (CCNP)  
o  Cisco Certiﬁed Internetwork Expert (CCIE)  
o  Linux Professional Institute (LPI) Level 2  

Individuals who hold this credential can carry out security policy, identify and handle 
security  threats,  and  apply  countermeasures  using  ﬁrewalls,  intrusion  detection  and 
related systems. The program’s Web focus also includes coverage of online payments, 
transaction processing and related security matters.  
Source: ProsoftTraining Inc.  

•  CIW-SP – Certiﬁed Internet Webmaster-Security Professional 

The  CIW-SP  demonstrates  knowledge  of  Web-  and  e-commerce-related  security 
principles  and  practices.  It  is  of  primary  interest  to  Web  administrators  who  must 
implement and manage a secure and working Web presence that may also include e-
commerce capabilities.  
Source: ProsoftTraining Inc.  

•  CWSP – Certiﬁed Wireless Security Professional  

This certiﬁcation recognizes individuals who can design, implement and manage wireless 
LAN security. To obtain this credential, candidates must ﬁrst acquire CWNA certiﬁcation 
and  pass  one  exam.  Planet3  Wireless  recommends  that  candidates  obtain  a  Security 
Certiﬁed  Program  certiﬁcation  or  the  Security+  certiﬁcation  before  taking  the  CWSP 
course.  
Source: Planet3 Wireless  

•  EWSCP – Enterprise and Web Security Certiﬁed Professional  

This certiﬁcation recognizes systems administrators, managers and IT support personnel, 
among others, who are responsible for the security of enterprise-wide networks, VPNs 
and Web communications. To obtain this cert, candidates must attend three core courses 
and one elective course, and pass all associated exams.  
Source: Learning Tree International  

Page 3 of 13 

•  GIAC – Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation Program 

This cert program seeks to identify individuals who can demonstrate knowledge of and 
the  ability  to  manage  and  protect  important  information  systems  and  networks.  The 
SANS organization is well known for its timely, focused, and useful security information 
and certiﬁcation program. A shining star on this landscape, the GIAC program aims at 
serious,  full-time  security  professionals  responsible  for  designing,  implementing  and 
maintaining a state-of-the-art security infrastructure that may include incident handling 
and emergency response team management. Available intermediate certiﬁcations include 
the following: 

o  GIAC Auditing Wireless Networking (GAWN)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed Firewall Analyst (GCFW)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed Intrusion Analyst (GCIA)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed ISO-17799 Specialist (G7799)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed Incident Handler (GCIH)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed Windows Security Administrator (GCWN)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed UNIX Security Administrator (GCUX)  
o  GIAC Security Leadership (GSLC)  
o  GIAC IT Security Audit Essentials (GSAE)  
o  GIAC Systems and Network Auditor (GSNA)  
o  GIAC Certiﬁed Security Consultant (GCSC)  
Source: Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation  
•  NSCP – Network Security Certiﬁed Professional 

The  NSCP  demonstrates  the  ability  to  design  and  implement  organizational  security 
strategies,  and  secure  the  network  perimeter  and  component  systems.  It  is  an 
intermediate-level IT security certiﬁcation aimed at network or systems administrators 
with heavy security responsibilities or those who work full-time on IT security matters.  
Source: Learning Tree International  

•  SCNA – Security Certiﬁed Network Architect 

This is a mid- to senior-level security certiﬁcation that focuses on concepts, planning and 
implementation  of  Private  Key  Infrastructure  and  biometric  authentication  and 
identiﬁcation systems. Individuals who attain this certiﬁcation will be able to implement 
either  or  both  of  these  technologies  within  organizations  or  as  consultants  to  such 
organizations.  
Source: Security Certiﬁed Program  

Page 4 of 13 

GENERAL SECURITY - Advanced 

 

•  AIS – Advanced Information Security Certiﬁcation 

Security  University’s  AIS  program  combines  coverage  of  key  information  security 
topics, tools and technologies with a hands-on, lab-oriented learning and testing program. 
To obtain AIS certiﬁcation, security professionals must complete eight courses, including 
six tools-oriented classes on topics such as: 

o  Network penetration testing  
o  Firewalls and VPNs  
o  Virus analysis, patch management and incident response  
o  PKI  
o 
o  Anti-hacking  

Intrusion detection and computer forensics  

Two management classes on network security policy and architecture security are also 
required. Students must take and pass a demanding exam.  
Source: Security University  

•  CCISM – Certiﬁed Counterespionage and Information Security Manager 

The  purpose  of  CCISM  is  to  prepare  individuals  to  study  potential  sources  of  threat, 
defeat attacks and manage information security at an organizational level. CCISM is a 
management-level certiﬁcation, where CCISMs generally manage, work with or consult 
IT organizations, technical specialists and other IT security professionals.  
Source: Espionage Research Institute  

•  CERI-ACSS – Advanced Computer System Security 

The  CERI-ACSS  seeks  to  identify  law  enforcement  ofﬁcials  with  advanced  computer 
crime investigation experience and training. Requirements include two years of computer 
investigation/debugging,  three  years  of  Microsoft  platform  analysis,  one  year  of  non-
Microsoft platform analysis, 40 hours of approved training, a written exam and successful 
completion of hands-on exercises. 
Source: Cyber Enforcement Resources Inc.  

•  CISM – Certiﬁed Information Security Manager 

The  CISM  demonstrates  knowledge  of  information  security  for  IT  professionals 
responsible for handling security matters, issues and technologies. This cert is of primary 
interest  to  IT  professionals  responsible  for  managing  IT  systems,  networks,  policies, 
practices and procedures to make sure organizational security policies meet governmental 
and regulatory requirements, conform to best security practices and principles, and meet 
or exceed requirements stated in an organization’s security policy.  

Page 5 of 13 

Source: Information Systems Audit and Control Association  

•  CISSP – Certiﬁed Information Systems Security Professional 

The  CISSP  demonstrates  knowledge  of  network  and  system  security  principles, 
safeguards and practices. It is of primary interest to full-time IT security professionals 
who  work  in  internal  security  positions  or  who  consult  with  third  parties  on  security 
matters.  CISSPs  are  capable  of  analyzing  security  requirements,  auditing  security 
practices and procedures, designing and implementing security policies, and managing 
and maintaining an ongoing and effective security infrastructure. CISSP candidates must 
have four years of experience (or a college degree plus three years of experience). 
Source: (ISC)2  

•  CPTS – Certiﬁed Penetration Testing Specialist 

An offering from Iowa-based training company, Mile 2, this credential stresses currency 
on the latest exploits, vulnerabilities, and system penetration techniques. It also focuses 
on  business  skills,  identiﬁcation  of  protection  opportunities,  testing  justiﬁcations,  and 
optimization of security controls to meet business needs and control risks and exposures. 
The  credential  is  structured  around  a  ﬁve-day,  $2,600  course  that’s  backed  up  by  a 
Prometric exam.  
Source: Mile2  

•  CPP – Certiﬁed Protection Professional 

The  CPP  demonstrates  a  thorough  understanding  of  physical,  human  and  information 
security principles and practices. The most senior and prestigious IT security professional 
certiﬁcation  covered  in  this  article,  the  CPP  requires  extensive  on-the-job  experience 
(nine years or seven years with a college degree), as well as a profound knowledge of 
technical and procedural security topics and technologies. Only those who have worked 
with and around security for some time are able to qualify for this credential.  
Source: American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS)  

•  CWPSS – Certiﬁed Web Professional Security Specialist 

Obtaining  this  credential  requires  passing  the  CIW  Security  Professional  exam  and 
meeting additional work experience requirements. Please see the CIW-SP listing for more 
information.  
Source: International Webmasters’ Association (IWA)  

•  GIAC – Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation Program 

This cert program seeks to identify individuals who can demonstrate knowledge of and 
the  ability  to  manage  and  protect  important  information  systems  and  networks.  The 
SANS organization is well known for its timely, focused, and useful security information 
and certiﬁcation program. A shining star on this landscape, the GIAC program aims at 
serious,  full-time  security  professionals  responsible  for  designing,  implementing  and 
maintaining a state-of-the-art security infrastructure that may include incident handling 
and emergency response team management. The GIAC Security Engineer (GSE) track is 

Page 6 of 13 

the senior-level certiﬁcation. All mid-level specializations, as well as additional exams 
and work, are required.  
Source: Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation  
ISSAP – Information Systems Security Architecture Professional 
The ISSAP permits CISSPs to concentrate further in information security architecture 
and stresses the following elements of the CBK: 

o  Access control systems and methodologies  
o  Telecommunications and network security  
o  Cryptography  
o  Requirements analysis and security standards, guidelines and criteria  
o  Technology-related business continuity and disaster recovery planning (BCP and 

DRP)  
Source: (ISC)2  
ISSEP – Information Systems Security Engineering Professional 
The ISSEP permits CISSPs who work in areas related to national security to concentrate 
further  in  security  engineering,  in  cooperation  with  the  NSA.  The  ISSEP  stresses  the 
following elements of the CBK: 

o  Systems security engineering  
o  Certiﬁcation and accreditation  
o  Technical management  

• 

• 

• 

Plus, it adds profound coverage of U.S. Government information assurance regulations.  
Source: (ISC)2  
ISSMP – Information Systems Security Management Professional 
The  ISSMP  permits  CISSPs  to  concentrate  further  in  security  management  areas  and 
stresses the following elements of the CBK: 

o  Enterprise security management practices  
o  Enterprise-wide system development security  
o  Overseeing compliance of operations security  
o  Understanding BCP, DRP and continuity of operations planning (COOP)  
o  Law, investigations, forensics and ethics  

Source: (ISC)2  

•  PSP – Physical Security Professional 

Another  high-level  security  certiﬁcation  from  ASIS,  this  program  focuses  on  matters 
relevant to maintaining security and integrity of the premises, and access controls over 
the devices and components of an IT infrastructure. Key topics covered include physical 

Page 7 of 13 

security assessment, and selection and implementation of appropriate integrated physical 
security measures. Requirements include ﬁve years of experience in physical security, a 
high school diploma (or GED) and a clean criminal record.  
Source: ASIS International: Physical Security Professional  

 

FORENSIC/ANTI-HACKING - Basic 

•  CCCI – Certiﬁed Computer Crime Investigator (Basic)  

The CCCI is one of two computer forensic certiﬁcations aimed at law enforcement and 
private IT professionals seeking to specialize in the investigative side of the ﬁeld. Basic 
requirements  include  two  years  of  experience  (or  a  college  degree,  plus  one  year  of 
experience), 18 months of investigative experience, 40 hours of computer crimes training 
and documented experience from at least 10 investigated cases. Advanced requirements 
bump experience to three years (or a college degree, plus two years of experience), four 
years of investigations, 80 hours of training and involvement as a lead investigator in 20 
cases, with involvement in over 60 cases overall.  
Source: High Tech Crime Network certiﬁcations  

•  CCFT – Certiﬁed Computer Forensic Technician (Basic)  

The CCFT is one of two computer forensic certiﬁcations aimed at law enforcement and 
private IT professionals seeking to specialize in the investigative side of the ﬁeld. Basic 
requirements  include  three  years  of  experience  (or  a  college  degree,  plus  one  year  of 
experience), 18 months of forensics experience, 40 hours of computer forensics training 
and documented experience from at least 10 investigated cases. Advanced requirements 
include three years of experience (or a college degree, plus two years of experience), four 
years of investigations, 80 hours of training and involvement as a lead investigator in 20 
cases with involvement in over 60 cases overall.  
Source: High Tech Crime Network certiﬁcations  

•  CEECS – Certiﬁed Electronic Evidence Collection Specialist Certiﬁcation 

The  CEECS  identiﬁes  individuals  who  successfully  complete  the  CEECS  certiﬁcation 
course. No prerequisites are required to attend the course, which covers the basics of 
evidence collection in addition to highly technical terminology, theories and techniques. 
Source: International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists  

•  CERI-CFE – Computer Forensic Examination 

The CERI-CFE seeks to identify law enforcement ofﬁcials with basic computer crime 
investigation  experience  and  training.  Requirements  include  two  years  of  computer 
investigation/debugging,  one  year  of  Microsoft  platform  analysis,  six  months  of  non-
Microsoft platform analysis, 40 hours of approved training, a written exam and successful 
completion of hands-on exercises.  
Source: Cyber Enforcement Resources Inc.  

Page 8 of 13 

 

FORENSIC/ANTI-HACKING - Intermediate 
•  CCE – Certiﬁed Computer Examiner 

The CCE, offered by the Southeast Cybercrime Institute at Kennesaw State University in 
partnership with Key Computer Service, seeks to identify individuals with no criminal 
record  who  have  appropriate  computer  forensics  training  or  experience,  including 
evidence  gathering,  handling  and  storage.  In  addition,  candidates  must  pass  an  online 
examination and successfully perform a hands-on examination on three test media.  
Source: Key Computer Service  

•  CEH – Certiﬁed Ethical Hacker 

The CEH identiﬁes security professionals capable of ﬁnding and detecting weaknesses 
and  vulnerabilities  in  computer  systems  and  networks  by  using  the  same  tools  and 
applying the same knowledge as a malicious hacker. Candidates must pass a single exam 
and prove knowledge of tools used both by hackers and security professionals.  
Source: EC-Council  

•  CFCE – Computer Forensic Computer Examiner 

The International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (IACIS) offers this 
credential to law enforcement and private industry personnel alike. Candidates must have 
broad  knowledge,  training  or  experience  in  computer  forensics,  including  forensic 
procedures  and  standards,  as  well  as  ethical,  legal  and  privacy  issues.  Certiﬁcation 
includes both hands-on performance-based testing as well as a written exam.  
Source: International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists  

•  CHFI – Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator 

The CHFI is geared toward personnel in law enforcement, defense, military, information 
technology, law, banking and insurance, among others. To obtain CHFI certiﬁcation, a 
candidate needs to successfully complete one exam.  
Source: EC-Council  

•  CIFI – Certiﬁed Information Forensics Investigator 

Obtaining  the  credential  of  Certiﬁed  Information  Forensics  Investigator  requires 
adherence to a code of ethics, successful completion of a rigorous exam and fulﬁllment of 
speciﬁc  experience  requirements.  Aimed  at  full-time  professional  practitioners,  this 
certiﬁcation is vendor-neutral and devoid of sponsored training requirements or the use or 
purchase of speciﬁc products.  
Source: International Information Systems Forensics Association  

•  CPTP – Certiﬁed Penetration Testing Professional 

An offering from Iowa-based training company, Mile2, this credential seeks to identify 
individuals  who’ve  developed  the  skills  necessary  to  conduct  thorough,  painstaking 

Page 9 of 13 

penetration tests for their employers, or for customers who hire them to conduct such 
testing independently. The credential is structured around a ﬁve-day, $2,600 course, and 
followed up with a Prometric exam.  
Source: Mile2  

•  CSFA – CyberSecurity Forensic Analyst 

The  CSFA  aims  to  identify  individuals  who  are  interested  in  information  technology 
security  issues,  especially  at  the  hardware  level.  Prerequisites  include  at  least  one 
certiﬁcation  in  computer  and  software  support,  networking  or  security  (such  as 
CompTIA’s A+, Microsoft’s MCSA or MCSE, or Cisco’s CCNA), successful completion 
of  an  introductory  and  an  advanced  computer  forensics  course  offered  through  the 
CyberSecurity Institute and no criminal record.  
Source: CyberSecurity Institute  

•  FCSS – Field Certiﬁed Security Specialist 

This  certiﬁcation  permits  individuals  to  specialize  in  Cisco,  Check  Point  or  cross-
platform topics (which is why we list it in both the vendor-speciﬁc – although the parent 
organization points out that these certs are "vendor-independent" – and vendor-neutral 
surveys).  Candidates  must  pass  a  hands-on,  performance-based  test  to  obtain  FCSS 
certiﬁcation.  
Source: Field Certiﬁed Professional Association  

•  GIAC – Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation Program 

This cert program seeks to identify individuals who can demonstrate knowledge of and 
the  ability  to  manage  and  protect  important  information  systems  and  networks.  The 
SANS organization is well known for its timely, focused, and useful security information 
and certiﬁcation program. A shining star on this landscape, the GIAC program aims at 
serious,  full-time  security  professionals  responsible  for  designing,  implementing  and 
maintaining a state-of-the-art security infrastructure that may include incident handling 
and  emergency  response  team  management.  The  program  includes  one  mid-level 
forensics certiﬁcation – GIAC Certiﬁed Forensic Analyst (GCFA).  
Source: Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation  

•  C3C – Certiﬁed Cyber-Crime Expert 

The C3C identiﬁes computer forensics investigators, information technology and security 
personnel, law enforcement ofﬁcials, lawyers and others, who must have the knowledge 
and tools to effectively collect, handle, process and preserve computer forensic evidence. 
The  certiﬁcation  requires  successful  completion  of  the  Computer  Forensic  and  Cyber 
Investigation course, and a practical and written exam.  
Source: E-business Process Solutions  

•  CCCI – Certiﬁed Computer Crime Investigator (Advanced)  

The CCCI is one of two computer forensic certiﬁcations aimed at law enforcement and 
private IT professionals seeking to specialize in the investigative side of the ﬁeld. Basic 
requirements  include  two  years  of  experience  (or  a  college  degree,  plus  one  year  of 

Page 10 of 13 

experience), 18 months of investigative experience, 40 hours of computer crimes training 
and documented experience from at least 10 investigated cases. Advanced requirements 
bump experience to three years (or a college degree, plus two years of experience), four 
years of investigations, 80 hours of training and involvement as a lead investigator in 20 
cases, with involvement in over 60 cases overall.  
Source: High Tech Crime Network certiﬁcations  

•  CCFT – Certiﬁed Computer Forensic Technician (Advanced)  

The CCFT is one of two computer forensic certiﬁcations aimed at law enforcement and 
private IT professionals seeking to specialize in the investigative side of the ﬁeld. Basic 
requirements  include  three  years  of  experience  (or  a  college  degree,  plus  one  year  of 
experience), 18 months of forensics experience, 40 hours of computer forensics training 
and documented experience from at least 10 investigated cases. Advanced requirements 
include three years of experience (or a college degree, plus two years of experience), four 
years of investigations, 80 hours of training and involvement as a lead investigator in 20 
cases with involvement in over 60 cases overall.  
Source: High Tech Crime Network certiﬁcations  

•  CERI-ACFE – Advanced Computer Forensic Examination 

The  CERI-ACFE  seeks  to  identify  law  enforcement  ofﬁcials  with  advanced  computer 
crime investigation experience and training. Requirements include two years of computer 
investigation/debugging,  four  years  of  Microsoft  platform  analysis,  two  years  of  non-
Microsoft platform analysis, 80 hours of approved training, a written exam and successful 
completion of hands-on exercises.  
Source: Cyber Enforcement Resources Inc.  

•  CERI-ACSS – Advanced Computer System Security 

The  CERI-ACSS  seeks  to  identify  law  enforcement  ofﬁcials  with  advanced  computer 
crime investigation experience and training. Requirements include two years of computer 
investigation/debugging,  three  years  of  Microsoft  platform  analysis,  one  year  of  non-
Microsoft platform analysis, 40 hours of approved training, a written exam and successful 
completion of hands-on exercises.  
Source: Cyber Enforcement Resources Inc.  

•  CPTS – Certiﬁed Penetration Testing Specialist 

An offering from Iowa-based training company, Mile 2, this credential stresses currency 
on the latest exploits, vulnerabilities, and system penetration techniques. It also focuses 
on  business  skills,  identiﬁcation  of  protection  opportunities,  testing  justiﬁcations,  and 
optimization of security controls to meet business needs and control risks and exposures. 
The  credential  is  structured  around  a  ﬁve-day,  $2,600  course  that’s  backed  up  by  a 
Prometric exam.  
Source: Mile2  

Page 11 of 13 

•  PCI – Professional Certiﬁed Investigator 

This is a high-level certiﬁcation from the American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS 
is also home to the CPP and PSP certiﬁcations) for those who specialize in investigating 
potential cybercrimes. Thus, in addition to technical skills, this certiﬁcation concentrates 
on testing individuals’ knowledge of legal and evidentiary matters required to present 
investigations in a court of law, including case management, evidence collection and case 
presentation. This cert requires ﬁve years of investigation experience, with at least two 
years in case management (a bachelor’s degree or higher counts for up to two years of 
such experience) and a clean legal record for candidates.  
Source: ASIS International  

 

FORENSIC/ANTI-HACKING - Advanced 

•  Brainbench HIPAA (Security)  

The Brainbench HIPAA (Security) cert deals with topics and requirements that drive the 
Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act  (HIPAA)  of  1996,  to  help  IT 
professionals  understand  and  implement  related  information  handling  and  processing 
requirements.  
Source: Brainbench  

•  CCSA – Certiﬁcation in Control Self-Assessment 

The  CCSA  demonstrates  knowledge  of  internal  control  self-assessment  procedures, 
primarily aimed at ﬁnancial and records controls. This cert is of primary interest to those 
professionals  who  must  evaluate  IT  infrastructures  for  possible  threats  to  ﬁnancial 
integrity, legal requirements for conﬁdentiality and regulatory requirements for privacy.  
Source: Institute of Internal Auditors  

•  CFE – Certiﬁed Fraud Examiner 

The CFE demonstrates ability to detect ﬁnancial fraud and other white-collar crimes. This 
cert is of primary interest to full-time security professionals in law, law enforcement or 
those who work in organization with legal mandates to audit for possible fraudulent or 
illegal  transactions  and  activities  (such  as  banking,  securities  trading  or  classiﬁed 
operations).  
Source: Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners  

•  CIA – Certiﬁed Internal Auditor 

The CIA cert demonstrates knowledge of professional ﬁnancial auditing practices. The 
cert is of primary interest to ﬁnancial professionals responsible for auditing IT practices 
and procedures, as well as standard accounting practices and procedures to insure the 
integrity and correctness of ﬁnancial records, transaction logs and other records relevant 
to commercial activities.  
Source: Institute of Internal Auditors  

Page 12 of 13 

•  CISA – Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditor 

The CISA demonstrates knowledge of IS auditing for control and security purposes. This 
cert is of primary interest to IT security professionals responsible for auditing IT systems, 
practices and procedures to make sure organizational security policies meet governmental 
and regulatory requirements, conform to best security practices and principles, and meet 
or exceed requirements stated in an organization’s security policy.  
Source: Information Systems Audit and Control Association  

•  GIAC – Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation Program 

This cert program seeks to identify individuals who can demonstrate knowledge of and 
the  ability  to  manage  and  protect  important  information  systems  and  networks.  The 
SANS organization is well known for its timely, focused, and useful security information 
and certiﬁcation program. A shining star on this landscape, the GIAC program aims at 
serious,  full-time  security  professionals  responsible  for  designing,  implementing  and 
maintaining a state-of-the-art security infrastructure that may include incident handling 
and  emergency  response  team  management.  Available  certiﬁcates,  which  indicate 
successful  completion  of  a  relatively  short  but  highly  focused  course,  include  the 
following: 

o  GIAC HIPAA Security Certiﬁcate (GHSC)  
o  GIAC Solaris Gold Standard Certiﬁcate (GGSC-0200)  
o  GIAC E-Warefare Certiﬁcate (GEWF)  
o  GIAC Ethics in IT (GEIT)  
o  GIAC Cutting Edge Hacking Techniques Certiﬁcate (GHTQ)  
o  GIAC Reverse Engineering Malware (GREM)  
o  GIAC Security Awareness (GSAW)  
o  GIAC Cyber Warrior Certiﬁcate (GCWY)  
o  GIAC Business Law and Computer Security (GBLC)  
o  GIAC Legal Issues in Information Technologies (GLIT)  
o  GIAC Contracting for Data Security (GCDS)  
o  GIAC Law of Fraud (GLFR)  
o  GIAC Windows 2000 Gold Standard Certiﬁcate (GGSC-0100)  
o  GIAC Auditing Cisco Routers Gold Standard Certiﬁcate (GGCS-0400)  

Source: Global Information Assurance Certiﬁcation  

 

Page 13 of 13 

