INSIGHTS AND RESOURCES FOR THE  
CYBERSECURITY  
PROFESSIONAL

BY

2

In enterprise IT, there is a single  
point where everything that matters in 
information, technology and business 
converges: Cybersecurity Nexus (CSX), 
a new security knowledge platform and  
professional program from ISACA.

PROTECT AND DEFEND YOUR ORGANIZATION.

When it comes to security breaches and cyber-attacks, it is often 
not a matter of if an organization will experience an attack, but 
when it will happen. Yet, an overwhelming number of organizations 
still feel ill-equipped to handle an attack and the need for skilled 
cybersecurity professionals continues to grow exponentially.

To help address the global cybersecurity skills crisis head on, 
ISACA has created Cybersecurity Nexus™ (CSX). CSX is helping 
shape the future of cybersecurity through cutting-edge thought 
leadership, as well as training and certification programs for the 
professionals who are leading it there. Building on the strength 
of ISACA’s globally-recognized expertise, it gives cybersecurity 
professionals a smarter way to keep organizations and their 
information more secure.

With CSX, business leaders and cyber professionals can obtain the 
knowledge, tools, guidance and connections to be at the forefront 
of a vital and rapidly changing industry. Because Cybersecurity 
Nexus is at the center of everything that’s coming next.

“It is often not until 
[businesses] have 
been hit that they 
realize there is an 
issue and a need  
to be proactive and  
to put resources  
into this area”

Jo Stewart-Rattray, CISA, CISM, CGEIT,  
CRISC, FACS CP, director of information  
security and IT assurance, BRM Holdich

Introducing CSX Skills-Based  
Cybersecurity Training And  
Performance-Based Certifications  
More and more cybersecurity professionals are turning to 
ISACA’s Cybersecurity Nexus™ (CSX) for the knowledge, tools 
and guidance they need to gain the skills and expertise to be 
successful in their jobs. And, when it comes to cybersecurity, 
it’s not enough anymore to just show you have the knowledge, 
it’s about proving you have the technical skills and ability to 
do the job from day one. Our new skills-based training and 
performance-based certifications are designed to help you build, 
test and showcase your skills in critical areas of cybersecurity.

CSX certifications are game-changers — the first vendor-neutral 
cybersecurity certifications based on the testing and validation 
of actual technical skill, ability and performance.  Whereas other 
certifications available today test for knowledge in a question 
and answer format, CSX training and exams are conducted in a 
live, virtual “cyber lab” environment and test on whether or not 
an individual has the skills and technical savvy to do the job. 
Driven by PerformanScore™, a learning and development tool 
that captures live feedback as the user performs specific tasks 
in response to real-world scenarios, CSX certifications measure 
skills and abilities against job role competencies.  

CSX Certification Path
CSX certifications and training are designed to help you through 
every step of your career, no matter what your level of experience.  
With self-assessment tools and guidance on career management, 
we’ll help you understand where you are now in your skills, where 
you want to take your career, and what you need to do to get there. 

Our holistic program starts with the knowledge-based 
Cybersecurity Fundamentals Certificate for those who are new to 
the profession or looking to change careers, and centers on our 
performance-based certifications at the Practitioner, Specialist and 
Expert levels. These performance-based programs train, test and 
validate technical skill and ability and ensure you have the skills 
necessary to be successful in your role.

3

CSX certifications align to existing global cybersecurity frameworks 
and test the candidate’s ability to perform tasks within the following 
cybersecurity areas in varying degrees of complexity:

>  Identify: Identification of threats and vulnerabilities
>  Protect: Protection of systems from outside threats
>  Detect: Detection of threats and system vulnerabilities
>  Respond: Response to, and mitigation of, cyber incidents 
>  Recover: Recovery from incidents and disasters

Each level of certification is differentiated by competency, and 
the levels are progressive in nature — with scenarios increasing 
in complexity and sophistication the higher the level.  All levels 
assume an understanding of knowledge and concepts covered in 
Cybersecurity Fundamentals.

Certified  

Information  

Security  
Manager®

CSX Expert

CSX Practitioner

Cybersecurity Fundamentals Certificate

CSX Specialist IdentifyCSX Specialist DetectCSX Specialist ProtectCSX Specialist RespondCSX Specialist Recover4

CSX CERTIFICATIONS  

CSX | Practitioner
A CSX Practitioner certification demonstrates your ability to serve 
as a first responder, following established procedures, defined 
processes and working mostly with known problems on a single 
system. You’ll show you have firewall, patching and anti-virus 
experience and can implement common security controls, 
perform vulnerability scans and some analysis.  

EXAM PREREQUISITES:
>  Related courses are not required to take the exam,  

but are recommended

RELATED COURSES:
Three hands-on training courses are offered to teach the skills 
needed at the CSX Practitioner level. Each course is 5 days and 
combines lecture with at least 50% hands-on lab exercise in 
a virtual cyber lab environment. Courses are available through 
leading global training partners.

CSX | Practitioner Level 1: Identification and Protection 
The first course in the series focuses on key cybersecurity skills 
and includes foundational, real-world instruction in the Identify 
and Protect domains. Topics range from preliminary network 
scanning to security control implementation. Through the 
completion of multiple lab-reinforced modules, you’ll learn how 
to apply industry-developed, experience-based methods to the 
identification of key networks and learn to develop appropriate 
protection mechanisms utilizing the basic concepts, methods and 
tools associated with cybersecurity controls.   

CSX | Practitioner Level 2: Detection  
The second course in the series goes deeper into skills focused in 
the Detect domain. You’ll learn the basic concepts, methods and 
tools used to leverage cybersecurity controls in order to identify 
system events and non-event level incidents. By completing 
multiple lab-reinforced modules, you’ll gain the skills necessary to 
detect potential network events and incidents. Topics range from 
incident packet analysis to IR report drafting and generation.     

CSX | Practitioner Level 3: Respond and Recover
The final course in the Practitioner series provides hands-on 
instruction in the Respond and Recover domains.  With course 
lecture backed up by lab sequences, you’ll learn how to apply 
professional methodology to respond and recover from network 
incidents or disasters. You’ll learn how to contain an event 
and protect assets and infrastructure and you’ll discover the 
components and procedures required for a comprehensive 
incident response plan.   

CSX | Specialist
The CSX Specialist series offers you the opportunity to pursue 
a certification in a specialty area — allowing you to demonstrate 
deep knowledge and ability in that domain. Choose from five 
independent certifications: Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond  
or Recover. These certifications build on the skills developed  
in CSX Practitioner and test advanced concepts in each of  
the domains.

EXAM PREREQUISITES:
>  CSX Practitioner certification
>  Related courses are not required to take the exam,  

but are recommended

RELATED COURSES:
Each certification in the Specialist series is paired with one 5-day 
training course, designed to teach the skills needed to practice 
at a CSX Specialist level in that particular area. Each course 
combines lecture with at least 50% hands-on lab exercise in 
a virtual cyber lab environment. Courses are available through 
leading global training partners. 

CSX | Specialist: Identify
This week-long course will help you gain an intermediate-level 
understanding of the concepts, skills and tools required to 
perform network asset and vulnerability identification. You’ll 
learn how to analyze and assess cyber threats against multiple 
levels of infrastructure from host to system-level using industry-
accepted methods and tools, as governed by the NIST and ISO 
publication guidelines.

CSX | Specialist: Protect
The CSX Specialist: Protect course offers practical instruction 
in the unique technical capabilities and governing policies that 
all members of a Computer Security Information Response 
Team (CSIRT) should maintain when protecting a network and 
its various components. The course covers areas such as: 
cybersecurity controls, control testing, vulnerability management, 
and plan maintenance. 

CSX | Specialist: Detect
You’ll learn how to distinguish network and system incidents and 
events with the CSX Specialist: Detect course. This course focuses 
on five key areas: intrusion identification, anomalous and malicious 
activity, attack analysis and reporting, system change remediation 
and defense mechanism enrichment. Upon completion, you’ll know 
how to identify compromise indicators, assess potential damage, 
and provide appropriate data to first response teams.

5

CSX | Specialist: Respond
The CSX Specialist: Respond course offers practical instruction 
on: incident response, scope determination, response plan 
implementation, digital forensics and incident documentation.  
Upon completion of the course, you’ll be able to participate in 
attack analysis, determine and communicate the scope and 
severity of the event, execute and coordinate response plans, 
follow appropriate forensic processes and document information 
related to incident response.  

CSX | Specialist: Recover
You’ll gain a deep understanding of the concepts, skills and 
tools required to fulfill tasks identified in organizational Business 
Continuity Plans (BCP) and Disaster Recovery Plans (DRP). 
This course offers hands-on instruction in service restoration 
and associated support tasks, as well as on proper post-IR 
documentation methodologies, to ensure that appropriate  
changes are adapted to system-wide control documentation  
and organizational policy.  

CSX | Expert
A CSX Expert certification establishes your standing as a  
master-level security professional capable of identifying, 
analyzing, responding to and mitigating the most complex 
cybersecurity incidents — usually in intricate enterprise 
environments that pose significant exposure to attacks. CSX 
Experts are the authoritative source for all cybersecurity matters 
within an organization and approve cybersecurity controls.  
These individuals are ultimately responsible for root cause 
analysis and correlation for evaluating business impact. They  
work with senior management to maximize organizational 
cybersecurity successes and communicate business impacts 
related to cyber issues, and serve as team leaders for incident 
response and disaster recovery.

EXAM PREREQUISITES:
>  Related courses are not required to take the exam,  

but are recommended

RELATED COURSE:
CSX | Expert
With this week-long course, you’ll gain the master-level technical 
capabilities to execute activities ranging from identification and 
analysis of new emerging threats, to vulnerability assessment, 
threat intelligence, metrics and incident detection or response 
— all the way up to performing detailed attack analysis and 
documentation of attack vectors/targets/scope of attack,  
response plans and post-incident monitoring of implemented 
cybersecurity controls.   

Get Certified and Set Yourself Apart
CSX certifications are testaments to real-life skills and excellence 
and show employers that you have not just the knowledge, but 
the ability to walk into an organization and actually do the job 
from day one.  

Globally accepted and recognized, CSX certifications:  

>  Validate skills critical to real-life cybersecurity scenarios
>  Signify higher levels of credibility to employers and 

organizations

>  Increase professional recognition by peers and colleagues
>  Provide credibility needed for career mobility

In addition, independent studies consistently rate ISACA’s 
designations among the highest paying and highly regarded IT 
certifications, and CSX certifications are designed to carry on  
that tradition.  

For more information on CSX skills-based training  
and performance-based certifications, please visit  
www.isaca.org/csx-certifications.

DID YOU KNOW

82% 

of organizations 
predict that a  

cyberattack is likely  

in 2015 

77% 

saw an increase  
in cyberattacks in  
2014 over 2013

Nearly

8 10out 

of

boards of directors are  
concerned with security

56% 

of enterprises  
spending more  
on cybersecurity  
in 2015 

SOURCE: State of Cybersecurity: Implications for 2015, an ISACA and RSA Conference Survey  |  www.isaca.org/state-of-cybersecurity-2015

6

Cybersecurity Fundamentals Certificate

The entry point into our cybersecurity program, our Cybersecurity 
Fundamentals offers a certificate in the introductory concepts that 
frame and define the standards, guidelines and practices of the 
industry. The certificate and related training are ideal for college/
university students and recent graduates, those new to the field, as 
well as those looking to change careers.  

The Cybersecurity Fundamentals exam tests for foundational 
knowledge across five key areas:

>  Cybersecurity concepts
>  Cybersecurity architecture principles
>  Cybersecurity of networks, systems, applications and data
>  The security implications of the adoption of emerging 

technologies

>  Incident response
The Certificate is aligned with the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) National Initiative for Cybersecurity 
Education (NICE), which is compatible with global cybersecurity 
issues, activities and job roles. The Certificate is also aligned with 
the Skills Framework for the Information Age (SFIA).

The exam is available online, and may be taken from the privacy 
of your home or office at your convenience. Simply schedule  
the date and time that works for you, and your exam will be 
remotely proctored. 

EDUCATION & TRAINING

No one said becoming the best would be easy. Cybersecurity 
Nexus will help you achieve your career goals with rigorous, 
cutting-edge training and educational opportunities. From online 
training and virtual events, to in-depth courses and workshops 
and on-site training, you’ll find what you need to build, grow and 
elevate your career, no matter what your level of experience  
may be. 

In addition to the skills-based training courses offered with CSX 
certifications, we offer the following programs:

Onsite Training
Cybersecurity Fundamentals Online Course 
Prepare to start or advance your role in cybersecurity with our 
new Cybersecurity Fundamentals Online Course — designed to 
help you grasp the principles that frame and define cybersecurity 
and understand the integral role of cybersecurity professionals in 
protecting enterprise data and infrastructure. 

You’ll enjoy the convenience of online learning through eight hours 
of instruction that covers the key areas of cybersecurity:

>  Cybersecurity objectives and roles and the difference between 

cybersecurity and information security

>  The Principles of Cybersecurity
>  Information Security within Lifecycle Management
>  Risks & Vulnerabilities
>  Incident Response

Ideal for those preparing for a career or new to the field, or as a 
cybersecurity refresher course, this online learning can also help 
you showcase your new knowledge and skills by preparing you to 
obtain the Cybersecurity Fundamentals Certificate. The Course 
offers 8 hours of Continuing Professional Education.

CSX Webinar Series
CSX offers a free, 60-minute webinar each month. Sessions 
are presented live by renowned subject matter experts who 
provide cutting-edge thought leadership, research, and advice 
on current and emerging cybersecurity threats, and discuss the 
tools necessary for succeeding in the ever-changing world of 
cybersecurity. 

Virtual Conferences
Enjoy the conference experience online with virtual exhibit halls, 
conference sessions, networking lounges and resource centers.  
It’s a great and easy way to expand your knowledge, and it fits 
conveniently into busy schedules without travel time or expenses.  
In addition, ISACA members can earn up to five Continuing 
Professional Education credits.

Cybersecurity Fundamentals  Study GuideAn excellent stand-alone publication for individual study of the core concepts and terms that frame and define the fast-changing and increasingly important field of cybersecurity, the guide was compiled and written by cybersecurity experts. The guide explores in detail the four key areas covered in the exam and Includes self-assessment questions and explanations of the answers.For more information, or to register for the exam, go to  www.isaca.org/cybersecuritycertificate.7

ON-SITE WORKPLACE TRAINING

Our on-site training programs bring expert cybersecurity 
instructors into the workplace to teach real-world courses, 
customized specifically for your employees. Onsite training 
offers you the opportunity to train your entire team in one or 
more sessions at one fixed price, with minimal downtime and 
without travel.  In addition to enhancing workforce skills, on-site 
training enables attendees to earn valuable CPE hours towards 
maintaining certifications.

AVAILABLE PROGRAMS:
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
The Cybersecurity Fundamentals onsite training course offers 
expert instruction on foundational areas of cybersecurity, 
stressing the importance of cybersecurity and the integral role of 
cybersecurity professionals. This two- or four-day course will help 
you: understand basic cybersecurity concepts and definitions; 
apply cybersecurity architecture principles; identify components 
of a cybersecurity architecture; understand malware analysis 
concepts and methodology; and recognize the methodologies 
and techniques for detecting host and network-based intrusions 
via intrusion detection technologies.

Implementing NIST Cybersecurity Framework  
Using COBIT 5
This course is focused on the Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) — 
its goals, the implementation steps, and the ability to practically 
apply this information in your organization. Developed for individuals 
who have a basic understanding of both COBIT 5 and security 
concepts, and who are involved in improving the cybersecurity 
program for their enterprises.

COBIT 5 Assessor for Security
The COBIT 5 Assessor for Security course is modeled on our 
popular COBIT 5 Assessor Course, with a specific focus on 
cybersecurity. The course provides a basis for assessing an 
enterprise’s process capabilities against the COBIT 5 Process 
Reference Model (PRM). Evidence-based to enable a reliable, 
consistent and repeatable way to assess IT process capabilities, 
this model helps IT leaders gain C-level and board member buy-in 
for change and improvement initiatives.

Workshops
From fundamentals to advanced topics, CSX workshops can 
enhance your knowledge base and propel you toward your next 
CSX certification or career goal.   Offered concurrently either before 
or after ISACA conferences and events, CSX workshops place 
special emphasis on key cybersecurity topics and offer more in-
depth and hands-on experience than the standard session.  

Cybersecurity Fundamentals Workshop:
The Cybersecurity Fundamentals Workshop offers expert 
instruction on foundational areas of cybersecurity, shows you 
how to: understand basic cybersecurity concepts and definitions; 
apply cybersecurity architecture principles; identify components 
of a cybersecurity architecture; understand malware analysis 
concepts and methodology; and recognize the methodologies and 
techniques for detecting host and network-based intrusions via 
intrusion detection technologies.  This workshop is also a great way 
to prepare for the Cybersecurity Fundamentals Certificate exam.

For more information on all of our training and educational 
opportunities, please visit www.isaca.org/education.

EDUCATION/CONFERENCES

Enhance your cybersecurity knowledge and skills at our global conferences, workshops and training events.

CSX 2015 North America Conference 
19-21 OCTOBER 2015 / WASHINGTON D.C. 

Join the leading cybersecurity experts from around the world at the inaugural CSX 2015 North America conference on 19-21 
October in Washington D.C.  The conference will offer over 70 highly-insightful sessions, led by the top names in the industry 
and covering the most current knowledge, skills and tools available. You’ll leave with insights and takeaways for every level of 
expertise and experience, and enjoy outstanding networking and social events while you’re there.  
For more information and to register to attend, please visit www.isaca.org/cyber-conference.

RESEARCH & PUBLICATIONS

Find the latest research and expert thinking on standards, best practices, emerging trends and beyond.

>  Advanced Persistent 

Threats: How To  
Manage the Risk To  
Your Business

>  Transforming  
Cyber security

>  Responding to  

Targeted Cyberattacks

>  Cybercrime Audit/ 
Assurance Program

>  Implementing the NIST 

Cybersecurity Framework

>  Security Mobile Devices

>  Advanced Persistent 

>  Overview of Digital 

Threat Awareness 
Study Results

Forensics

>  Cybersecurity: What 

the Board of Directors 
Needs to Ask

>  State of Cybersecurity: 

Implications for 2015

The Nexus 
Stay ahead of the ever-changing cyber landscape with our new  
CSX newsletter, The Nexus.  
Sign up to receive the newsletter free at www.isaca.org/cyber.

3701 Algonquin Road, Suite 1010
Rolling Meadows, IL 60008 USA
Phone:  +1.847.253.1545
Fax:  +1.847.253.1443
Email:  info@isaca.org
www.isaca.org

To learn more visit us at www.isaca.org/cyber

© 2015 ISACA. All Rights Reserved. 

Provide feedback:  
http://www.isaca.org/ISACA-insights

Participate in the ISACA Knowledge Center:
www.isaca.org/knowledge-center

Follow ISACA on Twitter: 
https://twitter.com/ISACANews

Join ISACA on LinkedIn:
http://linkd.in/ISACAOfficial

Like ISACA on Facebook:  
www.facebook.com/ISACAHQ

