Cyber Security Education, Qualifications and Training 
 

Prof. Keith M. Martin Information Security Group, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, Surrey 
TW20 0EX, UK 

 

This paper is a postprint of a paper submitted to and accepted for publication in the IET 
Engineering & Technology Reference and is subject to Institution of Engineering and 
Technology Copyright. The copy of record is available at IET Digital Library 

Official version, 1st published in June 2015, doi: 10.1049/etr.2014.0029, ISSN 2056-4007, 
www.ietdl.org 

 

Abstract 
 
The rise in significance of cyber security has led to an increase in the range of interesting career 
paths that can be followed in this area. Inevitably there has also been an explosion in the 
diversity of available cyber security education, qualifications and training, most of which is 
targeted at those seeking to engage with this promising job market. In this article, some 
guidelines are provided on how to select appropriate education, qualifications and training in 
cyber security, alongside a review of some of the many current offerings and how to differentiate 
between them. While the focus is on the UK cyber security sector, many of the observations 
have wider relevance. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The cyber security profession is growing and there are an increasing number of fascinating ways 
of making a career in cyber security. As organisations have embraced the many benefits of 
moving their infrastructures and businesses online, there has been growing awareness of the 
need to manage the cyber security risks that arise. Recent years have seen both an increase in 
the need for general organisations employ their own cyber security specialists, as well as an 
expansion of the cyber security service provision sector [1]. 
 
A 2014 UK Government report [2] presented the findings of an exercise to determine the needs 
of business with respect to cyber security skills. It highlighted ‘a demand amongst businesses for 
more professionals with a range of technical skills, but also a demand for new entrants with 
stronger business skills and greater work experience’. It also identified ‘the importance of 
increasing cyber skills among those who create, purchase and use technology to reduce 
business vulnerability to cyber attack, and among company decision makers who are responsible 
for managing business risks’. 
 
Although it has been possible to follow a career in cyber security outside of government for 
several decades, the current rapid expansion of the industry has taken place ahead of any 
mature notion of professionalization in the industry. The ‘UK Cyber Security Strategy’ [3] has 
helped to consolidate and galvanise attempts to develop a stronger notion of what it means to be 
a cyber-security professional and to identify different cyber security roles. 
 
A career in cyber security naturally requires relevant skills and competence. In the absence of a 
fully mature framework for identifying these, an abundance of different education and training 
(generically referred to here as ‘upskilling’) offerings are available, some of which lead to formal 

qualifications. One of the challenges for anyone seeking to prepare themselves for entering, or 
developing, a cyber-security career is which of those to pursue. 
 
Note that throughout this article no attempt is made to distinguish between the terms ‘cyber 
security’ (a relatively recent nomenclature) and the more established terms ‘information security’ 
and ‘information assurance’. While arguments can be made about subtle differences between 
these, for the purposes of this article they are regarded as the same. 
 
After a short discussion on identifying needs, this article will, in turn, examine cyber security 
education, qualifications and training from academia, professional bodies and the commercial 
sector. 
 
Identifying Needs 
 
The first step towards identifying how to upskill in cyber security is to identify needs. In terms of 
cybersecurity careers, here are some issues worth considering in advance of researching 
education or training in this area: 
 
  Type of qualification. A fundamental decision to make is whether a formal qualification is 

sought. Upskilling programmes offer a range of qualifications, including academic degrees 
and professional certifications. On the other hand, it may be that knowledge acquisition 
suffices. 

 
  Resource commitment. It is worth identifying the resources required to complete an upskilling 
programme. The financial cost is of course one resource, but perhaps more significant is the 
time. 

 
  Delivery mode. The mode of delivery is likely to be an important factor. Some programmes 

require a block of time away from work, others require a longer commitment of less time (day 
release), while others can be conducted remotely (distance or online learning). 

 
  Prerequisite knowledge. A good upskilling programme should make it clear what prerequisite 

knowledge is required. Some programmes assume some existing cyber security expertise, 
while others may be entry level. 

 
  Breadth of knowledge sought. There are relatively few upskilling programmes that provide an 

overall foundation. Most provide a level of specialisation or have a particular focus. It is 
important to identify what is required and how closely an offering matches this. 

 
  Role-based or subject-based. It is worth considering whether a particular cyber security 

career role is being sought, such as Chief Information Security Officer, or whether focused 
subject expertise is wanted, such as for penetration testing. Many upskilling programmes are 
targeted at specific roles and/or subjects. 

 
  Knowing or doing. It may be important to identify the extent to which upskilling needs relate 

to acquiring the ‘knowledge of how to do something’, as opposed to acquiring an ability to 
‘demonstrate that a particular skill has been applied in practice to a certain competency 
level’. Many upskilling programmes offer a combination of both, but some focus on ‘knowing’ 
while others focus on ‘doing’ (it is quite possible and acceptable to provide one of these 
during upskilling and not the other). 

 
  Government or private sector. There are some differences between the requirements for 

certain government and private sector career options. It is worth considering whether either 
of these employment sectors is being explicitly considered. 

 
  Technology specificity. Some upskilling programmes relate directly to specific technologies or 

are at least biased towards them. 

 

Incident Management, 

Information Systems Research. 

Information security management, 
Information risk management, 
Implementing secure systems, 
Information Assurance Methodologies and Testing, 

 
Institute of Information Security Professionals (IISP) Skills Framework 
 
Although it was noted that there was no mature framework for identifying relevant skills for a 
career in cyber security, in 2010 the IISP [4] established the IISP Information Security Skills 
Framework [5]. This identifies ‘a range of competencies expected of 
Information Security and Information Assurance Professionals in the effective performance of 
their roles’ and was developed through collaboration between established professionals in the 
public and private sectors, as well as academia. In many senses this is the best cyber security 
benchmarking framework that exists (certainly in the UK). 
 
The IISP Skills Framework is based around the following competency areas, noting that not all 
roles require expertise in all categories: 
 
 
 
 
 
  Operational Security Management, 
 
  Audit, Assurance and Review, 
  Business Continuity Management, 
 
 
The IISP Skills Framework has proved influential, particularly in areas of government. The UK 
has a ‘National Cyber Security Programme’, which is intended to implement the UK Cyber 
Security Strategy. This includes a mission to develop knowledge, capability and skills in cyber 
security, much of which is developed through CESG, the UK National Technical Authority for 
cyber security and the more public-facing part of GCHQ. As part of this initiative the ‘CESG 
Certified Training (CCT) Scheme’ [6] is attempting to assure high quality cyber security upskilling 
programmes by certifying specific programmes against the IISP Skills Framework. Likewise, a 
variation of the IISP Skills Framework is being used to benchmark ‘GCHQ Certified Master’s 
degree programmes in cyber security’ [7]. 
 
Education against Training 
 
Much has been written about the general differences between ‘education’ and ‘training’ and most 
remarks about this apply as well to cyber security as to other disciplines (e.g. see [8]). 
 
Crudely speaking, education is more focused on the acquisition of knowledge and 
understanding, through which skills are developed. On the other hand, training tends to be 
targeted at the acquisition of skills to a demonstrable level of competence. There is a strong case 
for engaging in both education and training as part of career development in cyber security. 
Perhaps this is best illustrated by example. Consider the case of someone tasked with taking on 
a new role overseeing the management of cryptographic keys for an organisation. 
 
A decent education programme in the area of key management should equip the employee with 
a sound understanding of the principles behind cryptography, its functionality and limitations, the 
significance of key management, an understanding of key lifecycles, an overview of hardware 
security modules (HSMs) and so on. This education should give the employee a very clear 
understanding of the role that key management plays within the wider cyber security strategy of 
any organisation. What an education programme is unlikely to provide is hands-on experience of, 
for example, managing keys using the specific HSM technology deployed by the organisation. 
Indeed, it is probably unlikely to have given the employee hand-on experience of using any HSM 
technology. 

 
This is the gap often filled with training programmes. These are more likely to offer hands-on 
experience and, in many cases, deal with very specific technologies. On a suitable training 
programme, the employee will hopefully learn how to operate and command a specific type of 
HSM. They might also learn how to develop policies and procedures for governing keys 
within the organisation and so on. 
 
It should be clear that, depending on existing knowledge, both education and training are 
relevant. A new employee might require both. A new graduate with an education in cryptography 
might require training. An experienced key manager from another organisation might require 
training on the specific systems in use. And an existing employee with some 
hand-on experience might well require education in order to better understand the role and 
prepare to take on more responsibilities.  
 
Crucially, a significant role of education, through delivery of the fundamentals, is to prepare 
someone for the future. Once you understand the fundamentals of key management you are well 
equipped to tackle future. developments. Training is much more about the here and now. In 
cyber security, as in other fields, education and training complement one another very 
comfortably. Progression in the cyber security profession can be aided by prudent engagement 
in both activities. 
 
 
Academic Qualifications 
 
A large number of upskilling programmes in cyber security are provided by academic institutions. 
This has particularly been so since the establishment of the UK National Cyber Security 
Programme, which has incentivised academic institutions to engage in cyber security activities. 
 
Why study an academic cyber security programme? 
 
There are probably three main reasons for considering an academic upskilling programme: 
 
1.  Qualifications. Academic institutions provide recognised qualifications. The quality of that 

qualification depends on the reputation of the specific programme and the institution behind 
it. 

2.  Educational focus. Academic institutions have a central mission to provide education and 

tend to be experienced as equipping people with fundamental skills uncluttered by the details 
of a particular organisational setting. 

 
3.  Neutrality. Academic institutions are often regarded as providing a neutral perspective free 

from commercial vested interests. 

 
Certification of Institutions and Programmes 
 
Owing to the relative explosion in the number of cyber security degree programmes, the UK 
Government is currently engaging in a set of certification activities designed to identify academic 
institutions and programmes that meet a number of quality benchmarks. 
These are: 
 
  Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research [9]. This status has been 

awarded to institutions which are engaged in world class research in cyber security. 
Acquisition of Academic Centre of Excellence in Cyber Security Research (ACE-CSR) status 
requires not just quality in research, but also established pedigree over a span of time and 
critical mass of research activity. Maintenance of this status is subject to periodic review. As 
of 2015 there are 13 ACE-CSR institutions, with further assessments anticipated in the 
future. 

 

 
  Certified Master’s degrees in Cyber Security [7]. This status is awarded to Master’s degree 
programmes that meet quality thresholds in terms of coverage and teaching. The first set of 
certified Master’s degrees was for programmes that provide a general education in cyber 
security. There are currently only four programmes that have full certified status and two 
withprovisional certified status. There are plans to certify more focused Master’s 
programmes, with the first such initiative being for programmes specialising in the area of 
digital forensics. 

 
  Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Education. An invitation to academic 
institutions to apply for this status is anticipated in 2015, with the holding of at least one 
Certified Master’s degreeexpected to be a prerequisite. 

 

 

 
Choosing an academic programme 
 
There are many different academic cyber security upskilling programmes on the market. The 
following criteria may be worth considering when assessing suitability of a specific offering. For 
another perspective on selecting academic programmes in cyber security see [10]. 
 
Type of programme. Fundamentally, the type of programme sought needs to be determined. The 
main classes of the degree programme are discussed shortly. 
 
  Cyber security focus. It is worth carefully checking the syllabus of degree programmes with 

‘security’ in their titles, since many academic institutions offer flavours 
of more general degrees that may qualify for a ‘security’ label with only a small security 
component. 

 
  Reputation of the programme. Probably the most important criteria are the reputation of the 
programme. Certification (if applicable) is certainly an indicator of this reputation, but is also 
worth determining by conducting some basic research. What have past graduates said about 
it in public fora? Are employers familiar with it? How many graduates does it have? What are 
they doing now? 

 
  Capability of the teaching team. The quality of teaching is an important factor and care 

should be taken to establish the capability of the team that will deliver the programme. A 
healthy diversity of teaching staff with cyber security interests is a good measure of this. 

 
  External connections. The depth and breadth of external (industrial, government and other) 

connections are a good measure of programme reputational quality. Cyber security is a 
practical discipline and a good programme should be embedded in the wider cyber security 
community. 

 
  Research activity. Engagement in quality cyber security research suggests a strong 

environment within which to receive cyber security upskilling. Evidence of quality publications 
and projects is the best indicator of this, with institutional ACE-CSR certification providing an 
indication of critical mass. 

 
  Delivery mode. All academic programmes require substantial time commitments and many 

require fulltime study. Some, however, are ‘friendlier’ towards student’s already in 
employment and may offer a range of part-time delivery options, such as block teaching and 
distance learning. 

 
 

 

 

Research degrees 
 
Research degrees require the most specialised ability and greatest time commitment. They have 
high entry requirements and are targeted at anyone considering a career where research skills 
are required. The standard research degree is the 3-year PhD programme. All ACE-CSR 
institutions are required to have an established and active PhD programme in place. The UK 
National Cyber Security Programme has funded two Centres for Doctoral Training (CDTs) in 
Cyber Security (at University of Oxford [11] and Royal Holloway, University of London [12]). 
These CDTs provide an additional first year of cohort-based structured taught cyber security 
training in advance of the 3-year research component. 
 
Master’s degrees 
 
By far the most popular type of dedicated degree programme in cyber security is a Master’s, 
which is typically 1-year fulltime or 2-year part-time. Many of these programmes are well-
established and have a strong track record of preparing students for cyber security careers [13]. 
 
Relatively few Master’s degree programmes provide a general balanced coverage of cyber 
security backed up by a strong delivery environment. The Certified Master’s degree in Cyber 
Security initiative [7] has thus far identified just four fully-certified programmes (at Edinburgh 
Napier University, Lancaster University, University of Oxford, and Royal Holloway, University 
of London). 
 
A number of Master’s programmes focus on specialised aspects of cyber security. These may be 
appropriate for a student with a clear specialisation in mind, however, no certification process 
has yet been completed for any of these types of programme. Examples of specialist 
programmes include Digital Forensics (Cranfield University), Cybercrime (University of Derby) 
and Security Management (City University), but there are many more. 
 
It is worth noting that a small number of Master’s programmes can be conducted by distance 
learning and hence fitted around work commitments. Examples include Edinburgh Napier and 
Royal Holloway, University of London. 
 
Undergraduate degrees 
 
There are a number of 3-year undergraduate degree programmes in topics relating to cyber 
security. It is at least contestable whether degrees at this level dedicated to cyber security make 
complete sense, since cyber security is perhaps best understood within a wider context. Perhaps 
the most critical features of such programmes to consider are whether they offer balanced 
coverage of cyber security and whether they provide the broad range of transferable skills 
expected from a more traditional undergraduate degree programme. An example of a 
programme that appears to offer these strengths is the BSc Computer and Information Security 
at Plymouth University. 
 
Perhaps undergraduate programmes are more prevalent in more traditional disciplines that offer 
a component of cyber security specialisation. While all modern programmes in areas such as 
computer science should include coverage of some cyber security, some programmes offer more 
substantive coverage. In the absence of any formal certification of such programmes, broader 
institutional activity in cyber security is a useful indicator of quality of cyber security coverage. 
 
Diplomas and certificates 
 
Some academic institutions offer certificates or diplomas in cyber security related topics. These 
are seen as a much lighter qualifications than degree programmes. These qualifications are also 
much more ambiguous in terms of what they represent (these terms are sometimes used for exit 
qualifications for partially completed higher degrees), as well as being easily confused with non-
academic programmes. 

 
Open online courses 
 
A number of platforms offer free university courses in cyber security. These are typically short 
taster courses that can be studied free over the Internet. In some cases a certificate of 
completion can be obtained. Examples include: 
 
  Coursera [14]. This is arguably the leading open learning platform and offers a small range of 

free cyber security courses from partner institutions around the world, including Stanford, 
University of Maryland University of London. 

 
  FutureLearn [15]. This platform is owned by the Open University and offers programmes from 

a large range of academic institutions in the UK. In particular, it hosts an ‘Introduction to 
Cyber Security’, which was developed by the Open University as part of the UK national 
Cyber Security Programme. This course is CCT certified. 

 
 

iTunes U. A range of educational audio and video podcasts on cyber security topics, 
including lectures and interviews, are available from institutional sites hosted by iTunes U. 

 
 
Professional Qualifications 
 
Another major source of cyber security upskilling programmes relate to qualifications provided by 
professional bodies. Professional qualifications tend to assess both the knowledge and the ability 
to put knowledge into practice, with many qualifications targeted at very specific professional 
roles. There are fewer of these qualifications than academic programmes, so choosing between 
them is more straightforward. Since these are in many ways complementary to, academic 
programmes it is common for cyber security professionals to hold several professional 
qualifications as well as an academic degree. Some of the main professional bodies issuing 
qualifications in cyber security are as follows. 
 
BCS 
 
The ‘BCS’ [16] has been in existence for over 50 years and is the chartered institute for IT. There 
are a number of Special Interest Groups for aspiring cyber security professionals. The BCS 
provides development opportunities at a broad range of career levels through events and 
qualifications. Full membership confers professional status and can be reinforced through the 
Chartered IT Professional status. The BCS offers a small number of certifications at both 
foundation and practitioner levels. The BCS is also one of the three certification bodies for the 
CESG Certified Professional (CCP) scheme. 
 
CESG 
 
The CCP scheme [17] is the UK Government’s approved standard for assessing cyber security 
professionals. The CCP scheme covers seven formally defined roles in cyber security and 
assesses them to four different skill levels. These roles are security and information risk advisor, 
information assurance architect, accreditor, information assurance auditor, IT security officer, 
communications and security officer, and penetration tester. Applicants for CCP certification can 
be independently assessed by one of three separate approved certification bodies (APM Group, 
BCS and IISP/CREST/Royal Holloway).  
 
CESG also operates the ‘CESG Listed Advisor’ scheme [18] which identifies and support 
consultants who provide information security advice to central government. Membership is highly 
regarded in the government sector. 
 
 
 

CREST 
 
‘CREST’ [19] is an example of a professional body focused around one type of career within 
cyber security, namely ethical hacking and allied capabilities in the commercial sector. CREST 
offers a full suite of very specific qualifications that assess competency in specific roles, such as 
‘CREST Registered Penetration Tester’, ‘CREST Certified Web Application Tester’ and ‘CREST 
Registered Intrusion Analyst’. 
 
IISP 
 
The IISP [4] was established in 2006 to provide a professional body focused on supporting cyber 
security professionals. While it does not itself directly provide qualifications, it is highly influential 
in the cyber security upskilling space as it established the IISP Skills Framework [3] and supports 
CCP certification. The IISP provides a variety of membership levels, which are awarded on the 
basis of knowledge, experience and competence. 
 
ISACA 
 
‘ISACA’ [20] is a US-based international membership and certification organisation which has 
been in operation for over 40 years. It is globally successful with over 200 chapters throughout 
the world. The focus of ISACA is audit and control of Information Systems. ISACA provides a 
range of services to aspiring professionals, including several relevant certification programmes in 
the area of cyber security: 
 
  Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA). The CISA certification is globally recognised 

and is probably the most important benchmarking certificate for cyber security professionals 
involved in auditing and monitoring information systems. 

 
  Certified Information Security Manager (CISM). The CISM certification is focused on security 

management and widely recognised as a respected assessment of capability to oversee an 
enterprise’s information security. 

 
  Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control (CRISC). The CRISC certification 

assesses capability in risk management, including risk assessment, response and 
monitoring. 

 
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC2) 
 
The ISC2 [21] is a US-based international certification body which has been operating for over 20 
years. Membership is related to certification.  
 
By far the most influential of the ISC2 certifications is the ‘Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional’ (CISSP). Indeed CISSP has become something of a global benchmark qualification 
in cyber security. CISSP certification requires passing an examination across ten domains of 
knowledge. It also requires evidence of at least 5 years of relevant work experience, although 1 
year of credit is given for possessing certain academic qualifications (including a Master’s degree 
in Information Security). Evidence of continued professional development is required to remain 
‘in good standing’, otherwise the examination must be retaken every 3 years. CISSP holders can 
achieve further specialised certification in security architecture, security engineering and security 
management. (ISC)2 also issues several other less prominent certifications in more specialist 
areas: 
 
  Certified Secure Software Lifecycle Professional. 
  Certified Authorization Professional. 
  Systems Security Certified Practitioner. 
  Certified Cyber Forensics Professional. 
  HealthCare Information Security and Privacy Practitioner. 

 
Commercial Qualifications 
 
 
A third source of cyber security upskilling programmes is the private sector. There are far too 
many private providers for a comprehensive overview to be provided here. Common sense 
should be applied when considering commercial providers and care should be taken to research 
the reputation and quality before signing up to private offerings. There are many good suppliers, 
and some less good. 
 
 
The SANS Institute 
 
The ‘SANS Institute’ [22] merits special mention as it is one of the most significant suppliers of 
commercial training in cyber security. The SANS Institute is a private US company founded in 
1989 and has gained an impressive reputation for the range and 
scale of its training activities in cyber security. Many SANS courses are focused on specific 
security operations activities. There are more generic or foundation courses along with courses 
which highlight security aspects of other disciplines such as programming/ developing systems. 
SANS runs both long courses (focused on a specific role) and short courses (focused on specific 
skills within a role). SANS courses are available in a number of different delivery modes, 
including distance learning. 
 
SANS has sufficient traction in this area that its activities stray into both the professional body 
and academic space: 
 
  SANS runs the ‘Global Information Assurance Certification’ scheme which certifies 

information security professionals in both technical and practical aspects of cyber security. 

 
  SANS operates the ‘SANS Technology Institute’, which is a private institution issuing 

Master’s degrees (in information security management and information security engineering) 
and certificate programmes. 

 

 
Vendor courses 
 
Upskilling courses, such as those run by SANS are intended to be vendor-neutral. However, 
cyber security technologies are often complex and it is entirely appropriate that a number of 
vendors offer cyber security upskilling programmes based on their specific technologies. Several 
of these vendors are so ubiquitous in the marketplace that their technology-specific certifications 
can be very useful to obtain. 
 
One well-known example of a vendor providing its own security certifications is Cisco. Security-
related certification provided by Cisco [23] include (among others): 
 
  Cisco Certified Network Associate Security, which validates the ability to set up a basic 

security network infrastructure, including core security technologies and monitoring. 

 
  Cisco Certified Network Professional Security, which validates the skills to be a network 

security engineer, including maintenance and deployment of appropriate tools for routing, 
switching and security defence. 

 

 
 
 

 
CESG Certified Training 
 
As previously mentioned, one of the initiatives that forms part of the UK National Cyber Security 
Programme is the development of the CCT scheme [6]. The CCT scheme is intended to identify 
high standard cyber security training amidst the plethora of offerings on the market. An upskilling 
programme needs to have been rigorously assessed in terms of its content, trainers and ability to 
manage training events in order to qualify for CCT status. The CCT scheme is based on the IISP 
Skills Framework and over a dozen programmes are now CCT certified, with this number 
expected to grow. 
 
 
Other Professional Development Activities 
 
There are many other initiatives in the areas of cyber security training that do not fall neatly into 
the previous categories. A few of these are worth mentioning in order to give a flavour of the 
types of activity available. 
 
The ‘Cyber Security Apprenticeship scheme’ is being run by the Tech Partnership [24] and 
provides on-the job training as well as some classroom-based training. This scheme is intended 
to accelerate new entrants into the cyber security profession by giving them real experience of 
working in the cyber security sector. The Tech Partnership is also supporting the development of 
‘Cyber Academy Learning Pathways’, which are intended to align with the IISP Skills Framework 
and provide assistance for individuals planning career progression in cyber security. 
 
The ‘Cyber Security Challenge’ [25] is an innovative series of national competitions designed to 
inspire people to enter the cyber security profession. While not directly a training activity, the 
Cyber Security Challenge does identify and inspire individuals to progress their cyber security 
skills, both as participants and as challenge setters. The Challenge also supports a cyber-
security mentoring scheme.  
 
There are a number of initiatives designed to support cyber security in specific sectors or 
targeting particular audiences. One example of the latter is ‘Responsible for Information’ [26], 
which is a free online course that has been developed by the UK Government for small and 
medium-sized enterprises to provide basic information security training. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
There probably has never been a more interesting time to consider a career in cyber security. 
However, cyber security is both multi-faceted and constantly evolving, making it challenging to 
acquire and maintain the skills necessary to act as a responsible cyber security professional. 
Anyone aspiring to enter the cyber security profession would be wise to engage in some level of 
education and training, and perhaps seek to acquire suitable qualifications. Indeed, most people 
already employed as cyber security professionals regularly require upskilling. This article has 
reviewed a range of available options for cyber security education, qualifications and training.  
The main differences between available programmes have been identified and some guidelines 
on how to match personal needs to upskilling options have been discussed. It is hoped that these 
observations are of some assistance in charting a successful and rewarding career in the cyber 
security profession. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
Thanks are due to Paul Dorey, Ian McKinnon and Fred Piper for useful conversations in 
preparation of this article. 
 
 

REFERENCES 
 
[1] ‘Competitive analysis of the UK cyber security sector: A study by Pierre Audoin Consultants for the Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills’, Version 1, 29 July 2013, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/259500/bis-13-1231-competitiveanalysis- 
of-the-uk-cyber-security-sector.pdf, accessed March 2015 
 
[2] ‘Cyber Security Skills: Business Perspectives and Government’s Next Steps, HM Government’, March 2014, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/289806/bis-14-647-cyber-securityskills- 
business-perspectives-and-governments-next-steps.pdf, accessed March 2015 
 
[3] ‘The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world’, HM Government, November 
2011, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cybersecurity-strategy, accessed March 2015 
 
[4] ‘The Institute of Information Security Professionals’, https://www.iisp.org 
 
[5] ‘IISP Information Security Skills Framework Version 6.1’, IISP (2010), 
https://www.iisp.org/imis15/iisp/Accreditation/Our_Skills_Framework/iispv2/Accreditation/ 
Our_Skills_Framework.aspx?hkey=e77a6f03-9498-423eaa7b-585381290ec4, accessed March 2015 
 
[6] ‘CESG Certified Training’, http://www.cesg.gov.uk/awarenesstraining/certified-training/, accessed March 2015 
 
[7] ‘GCHQ Certification of Master’s degrees in Cyber Security’ 
http://www.cesg.gov.uk/awarenesstraining/academia/Pages/Masters-Degrees.aspx, accessed March 2015 
 
[8] Masadeh, M.: ‘Training, education, development and learning:what is the difference?’, Eur. Sci. J., 2012, 8, (10), 
pp. 62–68 
 
[9] ‘Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research’, 
http://www.cesg.gov.uk/awarenesstraining/academia/Pages/Academic-Centres.aspx, accessed March 2015 
 
[10] Furnell, S.: ‘Securing a Good Degree?’. IISP Pulse, Spring 2011, pp. 6–8 
 
[11] ‘Oxford Centre for Doctoral Training in Cyber Security’, https://www.cybersecurity.ox.ac.uk/education/cdt 
 
[12] ‘Royal Holloway Centre for Doctoral Training in Cyber Security’, https://www.cybersecurity.ox.ac.uk/education/cdt 
 
[13] ‘Why cyber security is a safe choice for a postgrad degree’, The Guardian, 24 June 2014, 
http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/24/secure-a-cyber-career, accessed March 2015 
 
[14] ‘Cousera’, https://www.coursera.org/ 
 
[15] ‘Future Learn’, https://www.futurelearn.com/ 
 
[16] ‘BCS: The Chartered Institute for IT’, http://www.bcs.org/ 
 
[17] ‘Certified Professionals’, http://www.cesg.gov.uk/awarenesstraining/certified-professionals/Pages/index.aspx, 
accessed March 2015 
 
[18] ‘CESG Listed Advisor Scheme’, http://www.cesg.gov.uk/servicecatalogue/CLAS/, accessed March 2015 
 
[19] ‘CREST: Assurance in Information Security’, http://www.crest-approved.org/ 
 
[20] ‘ISACA: Trust in, and value from, information systems’, https://www.isaca.org/ 
 
[21] ‘(ISC)2: Inspiring a Safe and Secure Cyber World’, https://www.isc2.org/ 
 
[22] ‘SANS’, http://www.sans.org/ 
 
[23] ‘CISCO Training & Certifications’, http://www.cisco.com/web/learning/certifications/, accessed March 2015 
 
[24] ‘Tech Partnership: Skills for the digital economy’, http://www.thetechpartnership.com 
 
[25] ‘Cyber Security Challenge UK’, http://cybersecuritychallenge.org.uk/ 
 
[26] ‘Responsible for Information for SMEs’, http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/sme/, accessed March 2015 
 

