Maintaining a Cybersecurity Curriculum:  

Professional Certifications as Valuable Guidance 

Department of Information & Technology Management 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Kenneth J. Knapp 

Sykes College of Business 

University of Tampa 

Tampa, FL 33606, USA 

kknapp@ut.edu 

Christopher Maurer 

McIntire School of Commerce 

University of Virginia 

Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA 

Miloslava Plachkinova 

Sykes College of Business 

University of Tampa 

Tampa, FL 33606, USA 

ABSTRACT 

Department of Information & Technology Management 

Much  has  been  published  about  developing  a  cybersecurity  curriculum  for  institutes  of  higher  learning  (IHL).  Now  that  a 
growing number of IHLs globally offer such programs, a need exists on how to guide, maintain, and improve the relevancy of 
existing  curricula.  Just  as  cybersecurity  professionals  must  hone their  skills  continually  to  keep  up  with  a  constantly  shifting 
threat  landscape,  cybersecurity  programs  need  to  evolve  to  ensure  they  continue  to produce  knowledgeable  graduates.  In this 
regard, professional certifications in the cybersecurity industry offer an opportunity for IHLs to maintain a current curriculum. 
Governing  bodies  that  manage  professional  certifications  are  highly  motivated  to  ensure  their  certifications  maintain  their 
currency in the competitive marketplace. Moreover, employers who hire security professionals look for certifications in assessing 
a  candidate’s  overall  credentials.  This  paper  attempts  to  fill  a  void  in  the  literature  by  exploring  the  use  of  professional 
certifications as helpful input to shaping and maintaining a cybersecurity curriculum. To this end, we offer a literature analysis 
that  shows  how  changes  made  to  professional  certifications  are  applicable  and  relevant  to  maintaining  a  cybersecurity 
curriculum.  We  then  provide  a  case  study  involving  an  undergraduate  cybersecurity  program  in a  mid-sized  university  in  the 
United  States.  Before  concluding,  we  discuss  topics  such  as  experiential  learning,  cybersecurity  capstone  courses,  and  the 
limitations to our approach.   
 
Keywords: Cybersecurity, Curriculum design & development, Security, Certifications 
 
 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

a 

cybersecurity  or 

Several  scholarly  articles  have  been  published  concerning 
developing 
security 
curriculum1 for colleges and universities (Belle, Imboden, and 
Martin,  2013;  Bogolea  and  Wijekumar,  2004;  Endicott-
Popovsky  and  Popovsky,  2014;  Hentea,  Dhillon,  and 
Manpreet, 2006; Whitman and Mattord, 2004). Furthermore, a 
multitude  of 
for 

learning  objectives 

frameworks  and 

information 

in 

the  broader 

cybersecurity  are  found 
literature  (e.g. 
NSA/DHS Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense 
(and  Operations)  (CAE-CD,  CAE-CO),  NICE  Cybersecurity 
Workforce  Framework  (NCWF),  ACM  Joint  Task  Force  on 
Cybersecurity Education). Yet, a research gap exists regarding 
how  to  maintain  and  update  cybersecurity  curricula  at  a 
practical  level.  A  large  and  growing  number  of  institutes  of 
higher learning (IHL) offer such programs, and a need exists 
on how to best guide and improve upon established curricula.  

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017101While  many  disciplines  evolve  over  time,  cybersecurity 
faces a constantly shifting landscape of threats, vulnerabilities, 
and  countermeasures  that  can  impact  curricula.  Just  as 
cybersecurity  professionals  must  engage 
in  continuous 
education  to  ensure  they  remain  current  in  their  skill  sets, 
IHLs  with  cybersecurity  programs  must  also  be  prepared  to 
continuously  evaluate  their  curriculum  to  provide  students 
with  the  most  current  and  relevant  knowledge  to  succeed  in 
this field.   

required 

that  are 

There  is  certainly  no  shortage  of  new  and  emerging 
sources  for  faculty  members  to  reference  when  organizing 
their curricula. Designations like the NSA/DHS CAE-CD/CO, 
provide a thorough set of “knowledge units” that students are 
expected  to  acquire  throughout  their  studies  (NSA,  2016).  
Frameworks  such  as  NCWF  provide  a  detailed  listing  of 
knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities 
to 
successfully  perform  various  work  tasks  in  a  cybersecurity 
career  (NIST,  2016).  These  sources  of  material  have  much 
validity and are increasingly being recognized in the field for 
their  rigor.    However,  simply  incorporating  the  minimum 
baseline requirements or objectives from such frameworks can 
limit  an  IHL’s  ability  to  fully  differentiate  itself  from  other 
IHLs  offering  similar  cybersecurity  degrees.    Cybersecurity 
programs can therefore plan their curriculum initially around 
such  well-accepted 
the  ongoing 
maintenance and improvement of a program can be bolstered 
by considering professional certifications in the cybersecurity 
field.  

frameworks;  however, 

Any successful cybersecurity program should consider the 
needs  of  the  workforce  in  designing  and  maintaining  its 
curriculum.  A  common  job  title  for  recent  graduates  with  a 
cybersecurity degree is the Information Security Analyst.  The 
Department  of  Labor  describes  an  Information  Security 
Analyst as a person that may 

 
plan, 
implement,  upgrade,  or  monitor  security 
measures for the protection of computer networks and 
information;  ensure  appropriate  security  controls  are 
in  place  that  will  safeguard  digital  files  and  vital 
electronic infrastructure; respond to computer security 
breaches  and  viruses  (Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics, 
2010). 

the 

 
Information  Security  Analyst  jobs  are  expected  to  grow  by 
18%, and many organizations prefer candidates to have some 
sort of cybersecurity certification (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
2015a,  2015b).  As  such,  there  are  over  140  professional 
certifications from 30 certifying organizations that are relevant 
to 
job  description 
(Department of Labor, 2016).   

Information  Security  Analyst 

Considering  the  preference  given  to  job  candidates  with 
certifications and the number of certifications available, many 
argue  that  it  is  in  the  students’  best  interest  to  pursue 
professional  certification  (McGill  and  Dixon,  2005;  Rob, 
2014;  Wireschen  and  Zhang,  2010).  Wright 
states, 
“Academics should encourage students to pursue certification. 
There are hundreds of cybersecurity-related certifications, and 
navigating  through  the  confusing  array  can  be  a  daunting 
challenge.”    Moreover,  earning a  professional  certification is 
highly  useful  for  promotion  in  the  cybersecurity  career  field 
(Wright,  2015).    If  certifications  are  so  valuable  in  the 

incorporating 

technology  (IT) 

for  certification  exams  by 

workforce,  then  it  would  be  prudent  for  IHLs  to  prepare 
students 
the 
objectives of those exams into the overall program curriculum.   
In 2016, there were  more than 200,000 cybersecurity job 
postings, and some  forecast this number to grow to over 1.5 
million  globally  by  2019  (Tittel,  2016).  Cybersecurity 
positions  are  more  likely  to  require  certifications  than  other 
information 
jobs.  One-third  (35%)  of 
cybersecurity jobs call for an industry certification, compared 
to  23%  of  IT  jobs  overall  (Burning  Glass,  2015).  A  survey 
conducted  by  the  authors  in  2014  of  18  local  IT  business 
executives shows how they view certifications. The following 
question was given: “How important are industry certifications 
to your firm’s hiring process?” They responded with a 3.9/5.0 
average (1 = not important; 5 = very important) with 12 of the 
18 (67%) stating it was either important (4) or very important 
(5). One respondent commented, 

 
For an IT security position, we look for certifications 
because there is a minimum level of knowledge we are 
looking 
is  nothing  wrong  with 
certifications  –  they  can  only  help.    However,  just 
because  you  have  a  certification  does  not  mean  you 
will do a great job.   
 

for… 

there 

Organizations  employing  information  security  professionals 
generally  base  their  assessment  of  an  individual’s  skill  level 
on three main assessment criteria. These include 1) academic 
qualifications leading to a diploma or a degree, 2) professional 
and vendor-specific certifications, and 3) job experience, such 
as  internships  or  full  employment  (Hentea,  Dhillon,  and 
Manpreet,  2006).  Hentea,  Dhillon,  and  Manpreet  (2006) 
stated, 
 

Professional  and  vendor  certifications  in  information 
security validate competencies and skills, but they are 
not  replacing  experience  or  education.  While 
academic qualifications support broad knowledge and 
skills  in  general,  professional  certifications  may  be 
effective  in  a  limited  area  of  operations.  Academic 
programs exposing the students to theoretical concepts 
and  problem  solving  experience  are  critical  for 
preparing  graduates  for  jobs  in  the  information 
security (emphasis added). 

 
This same sentiment was conveyed by the respondent from the 
authors’  informal  survey  noted  above.  The  synergy  between 
content  knowledge,  critical  thinking,  and  problem  solving 
skills should not be underestimated. Cybersecurity issues are 
complex,  and  there  is  no  standard  recipe  for  protecting 
informational  assets  within  organizations.  Therefore,  a  solid 
base  of  content  knowledge  and  technical  skill  will  only  take 
one  so 
in  an  engaging 
environment, challenging them to think about problems from 
multiple  angles,  and  providing  a  broad  cybersecurity 
education, IHLs are well-positioned to develop individuals to 
succeed in the marketplace. 

immersing  students 

far.  By 

Students  pursuing  a  course  of  study  centered  on 
the 
professional  certifications  may  gain  an  edge 
marketplace, but should not necessarily do so at the price of 
finding an internship. Upon graduation, students will be well-

in 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017102for 

longer 

prepared  for  full-time  employment  if  they’ve  experienced  an 
internship  and  are  equipped  to  take  and  pass  certification 
exams.  Further,  students  must  demonstrate  more  than  an 
ability  to  memorize  facts  and  definitions,  often  required  to 
pass  certification  exams  –  they  need  to  learn  how  to  reason 
through  complex  problems  and  think  critically  about  issues 
presented  to  them.  Both  students  and  academics  need  to 
maintain  a  balanced  outlook  of  the  three  assessment  criteria 
discussed by Hentea, Dhillon, and Manpreet (2006). 

In  sum,  we  propose  an  approach  that  complements  other 
cybersecurity  curriculum 
frameworks.  Certifications  are 
commonly  referenced  as  a  requirement  in  job  postings  and 
have  existed 
than  some  newly  developed 
curriculum  frameworks.  Furthermore,  the  fact  that  so  many 
highly  specialized  cybersecurity  certifications  exist  allows 
IHLs to develop customized or specialized courses. This can 
provide  an  IHL  with  a  competitive  advantage  in  attracting 
high-caliber  students,  especially  in  situations  where  local 
organizations are looking for specialized cybersecurity talent. 
Specialized courses may sit alongside the standard knowledge 
courses  specified  in  many  educational  frameworks  of  this 
field.  The  certification  marketplace  is  competitive,  and 
governing  bodies  will  ensure  their  certifications  maintain 
industry  relevancy  or  else  they  will  lose  value.  Monitoring 
updates 
to  certification  content  areas  and  adjusting  a 
curriculum accordingly can therefore help IHLs with existing 
programs and ensure graduates remain in high demand. 

the  merits  of  professional  certifications 

In  the  following  section,  we  offer  a  literature  review 
exploring 
for 
curriculum  maintenance  and  introduce  a  framework  of  the 
considerations certification bodies ought to understand to keep 
their certifications relevant. Next, we demonstrate with a case 
study  how  one  IHL  is  using  this  approach  to  maintain  a 
current cybersecurity undergraduate program. Then, we offer a 
discussion  as  well  as  contributions  and  limitations  before 
concluding the paper. 

 

 

2. LITERATURE ANALYSIS: FACTORS IMPACTING 

CERTIFICATION RELEVANCY 

to  assess 

influencing 

the  factors  or  forces 

To maintain the relevancy of their exams, certification bodies 
need 
the 
cybersecurity  field  and  then  update  their  exam  content 
accordingly. These factors may emanate from external forces 
outside  the  boundaries  of  the  cybersecurity  field  or  internal 
forces from within the field. In this section, we briefly discuss 
five factors that certifying bodies consider when updating their 
exam coverage, as illustrated in Figure 1. These are important 
to IHLs because, fortunately, they are the same general factors 
that impact the content of a cybersecurity curriculum. 

To  analyze 

the  significant  factors 

that  professional 
certifying  bodies  consider  most  important,  we  reviewed  the 
available  literature  to  answer  the  question:  what  forces  do 
certification  bodies  consider  when  updating  their  exam 
content?  While  the  authors  evaluated  several  certifying 
bodies, we  focused on the International Information Systems 
Security  Certification  Consortium  [(ISC)²]  considerations  for 
maintaining  their  existing  certifications  and  introducing  new 
ones.  This  organization  is  a  logical  choice  because  of  the 
prominence  of  the  Certified  Information  System  Security 
Professional  (CISSP)  credential. Moreover,  (ISC)²  states  that 

the  CISSP  was  the  first  certification  in  the  information 
security  field  to  meet  the  requirements  of  ISO/IEC  Standard 
17024,  which  requires  certifying  bodies  to  maintain  a 
certification scheme for persons that includes the confirmation 
and relevancy of exam content areas (ISO/IEC, 2012).2 

their  exam  content: 

Based on our literature analysis, we categorized five major 
factors  that  cybersecurity  certifying  bodies  consider  in  the 
maintenance  of 
landscape, 
technology changes, industry standards, workforce needs, and 
government and regulation. This list is neither exhaustive nor 
does it completely represent the actions of every certification 
body. There may be other factors taken into consideration, and 
some  certifying  bodies  may  not  incorporate  all  five  of  the 
forces.  We  feel,  however, 
justifies  why 
certification curricula provide relevant and timely information 
that should be incorporated into higher learning curricula. 

threat 

that 

this 

list 

  

refer 

the  rapidly  changing 

2.1 Threat Landscape   
A  threat  is  an  indication  of  an  impending  undesirable  event 
that  may  inflict  injury  or  damage  to  a  company’s  resources 
(Parker,  1981).  This  external  force  is  at  the  top  of  the  list 
(Shearer, 2015) and understandably so. The EC-Council with 
its  Certified  Ethical  Hacker  (CEH)  exam  regularly  updates 
exam  material  on  the  threat  landscape  to  include  the  latest 
attack vectors, tools, and techniques that malicious hackers are 
using  in  their  environment  (EC-Council,  2016).  (ISC)2  also 
updated its CISSP and System Security Certified Professional 
(SSCP)  domains  of  knowledge  in  2015  in  response  to 
“changes  in  technology  and  the  evolving  threat  landscape 
occurring  in  the  information  security  field”  ((ISC)²,  2015a).  
These  updates  included  a  deeper  focus  on  asset  security  and 
security  assessment  given 
threat 
landscape pertaining to these areas. 
 
2.2 Technology Changes 
Just  as  changes  to  the  threat  landscape  present  critical 
challenges  to  the  field,  so  do  changes  and  evolutions  in  the 
technology  itself  (Shearer,  2015).  Technology  advances, 
which 
toward 
technological  progression,  never  stop.  For  example,  the 
Internet of Things and cloud computing are two relatively new 
technology  paradigms  that  are  having  major  impacts  on  the 
cybersecurity field. Such changes have ushered in updates to 
many  current  certifications  but  also  the  introduction  of  new 
ones,  such  as  the  Certified  Cloud  Security  Professional 
(CCSP) credential in 2015 ((ISC)², 2015b). Demonstrating this 
influence,  this  certification  was  developed  in  recognition  of 
the  market  need  for  cloud  security  experts  in  response  to 
changes  in  technology.  Another  such  example  is  the  Global 
Information  Assurance  Certification  (GIAC)  offering  a 
certification for Python coders. This niche credential responds 
to the need for penetration testers to rapidly develop their own 
tools  rather  than  wait  for  someone  else  to  develop  it.  The 
Python programming language is a technology well suited for 
this task (GIAC, 2016b). 
 
2.3 Industry Standards   
Certifying organizations also respond to industry  forces such 
as  standards  and  best  practices.  Over  the  past  decade, 
numerous  industry  standards  and  guidelines  have  emerged 
worldwide, such as ISO standards, NIST security frameworks, 

inexhaustible  drive 

society’s 

to 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017103to 

remain 

the 

authoritative 

(CBK).  Similarly, 

regularly  conducts  assessments  of 

and the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI-
DSS).  The  ISO  27000-series  is  a  prominent  international 
standard  providing  both 
statements  on 
information security management as well as procedures to be 
adopted  by  organizations  to  ensure  information  security 
(Backhouse,  Hsu,  and  Silva,  2006).  Numerous  NIST 
standards,  such  as  publication  800-53,  were  originally 
intended to serve U.S. Federal Government agencies but have 
been  adopted  or  used  as  a  benchmark  for  designing  security 
programs in private industry as well. PCI-DSS was developed 
by  the  major  credit  card  issuers  to  help  merchants  securely 
process  card  payments  and  store  card-related  data.  Such 
standards  are  updated 
relevant.  As  such, 
cybersecurity certifying bodies do not ignore their content and 
include them in exams such as the CISSP (Stewart, Chapple, 
and Gibson, 2015).   
 
2.4 Workforce Needs 
(ISC)2  gauges  global  workforce  needs  via  regular  surveys  to 
understand the trends and changes impacting the constituents 
in the profession ((ISC)², 2015d). This is valuable information 
used  in  their  certification  maintenance  process.  For  instance, 
70%  of  survey  respondents  stated  they  thought  a  cloud 
security certification is either very or somewhat relevant. This 
feedback  helped  to  justify  the  CCSP  as  well  as  introduce 
additional  cloud  security  material  into  the  CISSP  Common 
ISACA 
Body  of  Knowledge 
organization 
tasks 
performed  by  currently  certified  individuals.  The  Certified 
Information System Auditor (CISA) content was restructured 
to  reflect  the  latest  responsibilities  of  IS  audit  professionals 
(ISACA,  2015).  ISACA  has  also  polled  cybersecurity 
professionals  to  identify  key  skills  that  are  lacking  in  the 
available  workforce.  Findings  have  suggested  that  a  lack  of 
business  understanding  is  more  prominent  than  a  lack  of 
technical  skills  in  the  field  (ISACA,  2016).  Additionally, 
CompTIA  updates  its  Security+  exam  using  input  from 
subject-matter experts and industry-wide surveys to ensure its 
exam  verifies  what an information security professional with 
two years in the workforce must know (CompTIA, 2013). 
 
2.5 Government and Regulation   
Laws,  regulations,  and  governments  can  significantly  impact 
the  cybersecurity  field  of  a  nation.  In  the  United  States, 
organizations  like  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security 
(DHS) and the National Security Agency (NSA) significantly 
influence  the  field;  their  impact  on  cybersecurity  education 
will be discussed later in this paper. Laws such as the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the 
Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  (SOX)  have  also  had  major  impacts  on 
the  field.  Certification  bodies  often  respond 
these 
governmental  pressures  by  introducing  new  certifications  or 
adding content to existing ones. For example, (ISC)² tailored a 
credential  to  suit  government  needs  in  Japan  ((ISC)²,  2009), 
and 
Information  Security  &  Privacy 
Practitioner  (HCISPP)  credential  was  introduced  to  help 
specialists  navigate 
regulatory 
environment.   
 
 
 

the  growing  healthcare 

the  Healthcare 

to 

2.6 The Model 
Based  on  our  literature  review,  the  framework  in  Figure  1 
illustrates  five  key  factors  that  certifying  bodies  consider  as 
they maintain the relevance of their certifications. The output 
of these factors can help colleges and universities maintain a 
relevant cybersecurity curriculum.   

 
Factors 

Threat 
Landscape

Changing
Technology

Workforce 

Needs

Industry
Standards

Government 
& Regulation

Industry 

Certifying Bodies

Colleges & Universities

Professional 
Certifications

Cybersecurity
Curriculum 
Maintenance

 

Figure 1.  Factors Impacting the Maintenance of 

Cybersecurity Certifications 

looking 

to  better 

curricula.  By 

into  certification  design 

While overlap naturally exists, these factors represent the 
significant inputs requiring consideration by a certifying body 
in  maintaining  their  certifications.  This  level  of  research  is 
difficult for academics in IHLs to conduct on their own so it 
makes  sense  to  leverage  the  extensive  knowledge  gathering 
that  goes 
improve 
cybersecurity 
to  professional 
certifications through organizations like (ISC)², academics can 
tap  into  additional  sources  of  feedback  to  better  ensure  the 
relevance and currency of their own cybersecurity curriculum. 
To  illustrate  the  notion  that  IHLs  can  use  professional 
certifications as a guide for keeping cybersecurity curriculum 
current, consider the topic of mobile device security. In 2013, 
Patten and Harris (2013) proposed that future IT professionals 
should be  aware  of  and  learn  how  to  secure  mobile  devices.  
They  suggested  the  topic  be  integrated  into  an  IT  model 
curriculum.  However,  for  certifying  bodies,  this  topic  was 
already addressed. As it pertains to the CEH, the EC-Council 
was  covering  topics  relating  to  mobile  devices,  and  this 
material was already published in third-party exam preparation 
texts (Oriyano, 2014). Mobile security was then upgraded into 
a  larger  topic  for  the  CEHv9  exam.  Official  preparation 
material  from  the  EC-Council  contained  147  pages  of  slides 
covering the topic of Hacking Mobile Platforms (EC Council, 
2015).  In  this  case,  we  can  see  that  the  EC-Council  was 
making changes to its exams to adapt to technological changes 
as  IHLs  began  modernizing 
their  curricula.  Generally 
speaking,  certification  bodies  keep  up  with  technology  and 
industry  changes  and  can  therefore  be  good  sources  of 
forward-looking guidance.   

 
 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 20171043. CASE STUDY 

 
To  understand 
the  development  and  maintenance  of 
cybersecurity  curriculum,  we  utilized  qualitative  methods. 
Following  best  practices  on  qualitative  research  (Bryman, 
2012)  and  case  study  applications  in  education  (Merriam, 
1998),  we  examined  a  case  study  involving  a  medium-sized 
private university in the eastern United States. At this school, 
the  Cybersecurity  program  is  part  of  the  Information  & 
Technology  Management  department  within  the  College  of 
Business, which is accredited by the Association to Advance 
Collegiate  Schools  of  Business  (AACSB).  The  department 
also  supports  a  Management  Information  Systems  (MIS) 
major,  which  is  accredited  by  the  Accreditation  Board  for 
Engineering  and  Technology  (ABET).  The  Cybersecurity 
program officially began in August 2015, while the planning 
began  eighteen  months  prior.  Five  new  courses  were 
proposed,  and  four  existing  courses  were  integrated  into  the 
curriculum  with  minimal  adaptation.  The  entire  curriculum 
was designed to ensure comprehensive coverage of the CISSP 
CBK. After courses were designed but before the new courses 
were  first  offered  to  students,  (ISC)2  updated  the  CBK  by 
emphasizing  certain 
security  and 
assessment/testing)  and  re-aligning  other  topics  under  a 
different  domain  structure.    The  changes  were  studied  and 
used as an opportunity to analyze how certification evolution 
can  seamlessly  be  integrated  into  curricula.  This  particular 
change to the CBK did not impose the need for any significant 
modifications to the program, but it highlighted an opportunity 
to  review  the  knowledge  domains  for  other  prominent 
certifications to further improve the relevancy of the proposed 
curriculum.   

(like  asset 

topics 

Extending  beyond  the  CISSP,  content  areas  for  the 
Certified  Information  Security  Auditor  (CISA),  Certified 
Information  Security  Manager  (CISM),  and  CEH  credentials 
were  compared  to  the  existing  curriculum.  This  set  of 
certifications was chosen for several reasons. First, it helps to 
incorporate  environmental  sensing  capabilities  from  three 
different  certifying  bodies:  (ISC)2,  ISACA,  and  the  EC-
Council  (Table  1).  Second,  these  four  certifications  were 
chosen  because  they  are  all  listed  on  the  ANSI/ISO  17024 
certification  list  and  generally  cover  a  broad  range  of  topics 
related  to  cybersecurity.  Finally,  multiple  industry  surveys 
indicate  that  these  four  certifications  are  highly  requested  in 
job postings. One survey had the CISSP, CISA, and CISM as 
the top three certifications appearing in job postings within the 
field (Burning Glass, 2015). Another survey placed the CISSP, 
CISM,  and  CEH  in  the  top  four  of  information  security 
certifications  across  four  major  job  boards  (Tittel,  2016). 
These  results  demonstrate  the  value  of  these  certifications  in 
the  job  market.  The  reader  is  encouraged  to  visit  job  board 
sites such as Indeed, LinkedIn Jobs, SimplyHired, and others 
to  explore  the  value  employers  place  on  these  and  other 
certifications. 

To complete this review, faculty members (who passed the 
particular certification exam) compared the learning objectives 
and  topics  covered  in  each  course  to  the  certification  exam 
objectives.  The  percentage  of  a  course  dedicated  to  material 
from  each  certification  exam  was  identified  through  this 
exercise and the results are presented in Table 1. To conduct 

such  a  review,  faculty  members  should  have  earned  the 
certification or be a subject matter expert in the topic. 

Certification3 

(ISC)² 

ISACA 

CISSP  CISM 

CISA 

EC-

Council 
CEH 

Undergraduate 
Course 
Management 
Information 
Systems 
Application 
Development 
Information 
Security 
Principles 
Network & 
Cloud 
Infrastructure 
Info Security 
Standards, Risk 
Mgmt, & 
Compliance 
Network 
Security 
Ethical Hacking 
Physical and 
Operational 
Security 
Cybersecurity 
Capstone 
Total Coverage 
of Exam 
Objectives 

5% 

5% 

20% 

5% 

5% 

5% 

5% 

100% 

70% 

50% 

5% 

50% 

90% 

10% 

50% 

65% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

15% 

100% 

35% 
75% 
 

15% 

10% 
10% 

40% 

20% 
60% 

65% 

100% 
30% 

100% 

40% 

60% 

30% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

Table 1.  Generic Certification-to-Course Coverage Matrix 

Sample 

 

To 

illustrate, 

the  Ethical  Hacking  course 

is  100% 
dedicated  to  covering  CEH  objectives,  whereas  only  10%  of 
the course covers CISM objectives in our case study. Note that 
this does not imply that all CEH exam material is covered in 
the Ethical Hacking academic course. To arrive at the “Total 
Coverage of Exam Objectives” row at the bottom of Table 1, 
faculty members performed the mapping process in reverse by 
examining all content areas of each exam and evaluating the 
extent to which they are covered in each of the nine courses in 
the  curriculum.  Appendix  A  provides  an  example  of  this 
mapping  of  course  material  to  the  CISSP  CBK  domains.  
Appendix B provides an example of a more granular mapping 
using major course topics to one example CBK domain. 

The  two-way  mapping  approach  was  very  insightful  and 
allowed faculty members to identify key areas of opportunity. 
For  example,  in  reviewing  CEH  content  areas,  it  was 
determined  that  feasible  changes  could  be  made  to  the 
curriculum to achieve two primary outcomes. First, one course 
title  could  easily  be  rebranded  as  “Ethical  Hacking”  (it  was 
previously  named  “Advanced  Network  Security”)  and  could 
focus  on  covering  CEH  certification  material.  Second,  and 
more 
incorporate  additional 
experiential  education  opportunities  to  provide  students  with 
hands-on  activities  meant  to  develop  problem  solving  and 
adversarial thinking skills. Given the frequent use of examples 

importantly,  courses  could 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017105documented  in  various  CEH  exam  prep  books,  it  was 
straightforward to identify lab activities that could be used to 
illustrate the certification exam content areas in action.  

While  Table  1  and  Appendices  A  and  B reflect  our  case 
study, any cybersecurity program can replicate this table and 
adjust  it  to  fit  their  program.  Depending  on  the  focus  of  a 
particular  school’s  curriculum,  the  table  can  be  modified  to 
add  or  remove  certifications  as  well  as  updated  to  reflect 
changes in individual courses or certification exam objectives 
over 
review  available  professional 
certifications on an annual basis and evaluate whether changes 
to their curriculum should be incorporated. Further, the release 
of a new exam version or a change to certification objectives 
by  a  certification  body  should  trigger  a  corresponding 
curriculum review at the IHL. 

IHLs  can 

time. 

 

4. DISCUSSION 

for 

of  Using  Certifications 

 
4.1  Appropriateness 
Curriculum Shaping 
Using  professional  certifications  as  a  guide  for  course 
development  is  not  new  and  has  been  done  in  the  area  of 
accounting systems and control (Walters, 2007). As previously 
mentioned,  35%  of  cybersecurity  job  postings  requested  a 
professional certification. While no single certification should 
be  recommended,  certifications  are  currently  an  important 
measure  that  the  industry  has  for  regulating  professional 
competency, thus academic programs should work to integrate 
certifications  into  their  curriculum  (Fulton,  Lawrence,  and 
Clouse, 2014).    

Some  academic  viewpoints  hold 

that  emphasizing 
professional  certifications  focuses  too  much  on  yesterday’s 
technology  and  thus  IHLs  should  focus  on  training  a  new 
workforce  rather  than  building  one  based  on  certifications 
(Locasto  et  al.,  2011).  This  suggestion  is  valid  –  any 
cybersecurity  program  should  not  focus 
too  much  on 
professional  certifications  at  the  expense  of  introducing 
students to emerging developments in the field. Indeed, there 
is no reason why faculty should focus on certifications without 
also covering the latest changes that may not have made their 
way  into  certification  content  yet.  By  taking  a  strategic 
approach to selecting a few key certifications to integrate into 
a  curriculum,  there  should  be  plenty  of  room  left  to 
incorporate  new  technologies.  At  the  university  described  in 
the  case  above,  the  faculty  deemed  it  important  to  expose 
students  to  emerging  issues  related  to  critical  infrastructure, 
cyber-physical  systems,  and  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT).  
Without  losing  any  coverage  of  certification  exam  material, 
these topics were integrated into existing courses. 

Further, certification bodies are attempting to combat this 
challenge by updating their examination criteria and material 
on  a  more  frequent  basis.  For  example,  (ISC)2  has  refreshed 
the  CISSP  exam  material  approximately  every  three  years 
since  2009.  Therefore,  we  recommend  faculty  should  find 
ways to cover material that includes emerging technology and 
tools  while  also  promoting  certifications  so  students  can 
develop  a  rounded  and  relevant  education  as  they  enter  the 
workforce  (Kaspersky  and  Furnell,  2014).  Considering  input 
from multiple certifications also helps address this problem as 
certification  exams  undergo  revisions  to  their  objectives  at 

different  times,  meaning  that  each  year  brings  updates  to 
different certifications on an ongoing basis. 

focus  on 

4.2 Experiential Learning 
Different certifications will have different foci. For example, 
many certification exams stress broad knowledge and concepts 
such  as  the  CISSP.  Other  certifications  focus  on  specific 
technologies  or  infrastructure  (e.g.,  Certified  Cloud  Security 
Professional).  Some  certifications 
tools  and 
techniques, like the Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH) credential.  
The  Global  Information  Assurance  Certification  (GIAC) 
offers dozens of specialized certifications aimed to ensure an 
individual  has  the  skills  necessary  as  a  practitioner  (GIAC, 
2016a). Advanced certifications like the Licensed Penetration 
Tester  (LPT)  and  Offensive  Security  Certified  Professional 
(OSCP) require a hands-on penetration test demonstration in a 
cyber-range. While only a select few certifications require the 
demonstration of skills, nearly all discuss the use of tools and 
techniques  within  the  field  of  cybersecurity.  Schools  should 
implement  experiential  or  hands-on  material  wherever 
possible. This is advisable as Manson and Pike (2014) argue 
that  changes  in  technology  and  security  threats  require 
aspiring  cybersecurity  professionals  to  set  a  goal  of  10,000 
hours  of  relevant,  hands-on  skill  development  over  a  long-
term career. Providing hands-on experience, even if only in a 
simulated  lab  environment,  instills  in  students  not  only  the 
ability to understand what must be done to secure systems, but 
also  how  to  go  about  doing  it.  This  helps  to  address  the 
concerns  from  employers  that  certifications  alone  do  not 
guarantee competence; experience in applying the topics and 
techniques is a must. 

Thus,  in  addition  to  certification,  cybersecurity  programs 
should  promote  hands-on  experiential  learning.  Building  and 
configuring an infrastructure to provide such experience may 
be challenging for IHLs, but many certification bodies provide 
environments to teach hands-on skills, such as iLabs from the 
EC-Council. In addition to cyber competitions and games like 
capture the flag, hands-on focused certifications can be used to 
advance the notion that cybersecurity students need such skills 
development. 

 

 

4.3 Capstone Courses in Cybersecurity 
Capstones  courses  present  opportunities  to  prepare  students 
for  entry-level  professional  certifications.  Capstones  are 
typically  taken  by  seniors  who  are  nearing  graduation.  As 
cybersecurity majors, they will have taken the full curriculum 
allowing a capstone class to be taught at a high-level and serve 
as a certification exam prep course. Further, students are still 
in  “study  mode”  while  in  school  which  presents  timely 
opportunities to take these exams. Once they graduate and are 
working 40-60 hour weeks, it becomes increasingly difficult to 
set aside time to study. To overcome time constraints and the 
lack of motivation to study, many working professionals spend 
money on exam “boot camps” or other preparation materials. 
Rather than subjecting recent graduates to additional expenses 
associated  with  these  materials,  it’s  beneficial  to  provide 
current  students  with  the  necessary  tools  to  take  and  pass 
certification  exams  before  they  graduate.  While  capstone 
classes  traditionally  involve  “real-world”  projects,  they  may 
be used as intensive “boot camps” to prepare students to pass 
certification  exams.  This  approach  is  helpful  considering  the 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017106competitive  edge  certifications  can  give  a  job  candidate.  For 
faculty  considering  this  approach,  we  recommend  using  a 
quality  study  guide  as  a  course  textbook,  such  as  an  official 
CISSP study guide (Stewart, Chapple, and Gibson, 2015). 

While  some  cybersecurity  certifications  do  not  require 
(e.g.,  Security+  and  GIAC  Security 
work  experience 
Essentials),  other  certifications  require  a  minimum  length  of 
professional experience in the field. In some cases, completing 
a  university  degree  program  reduces  the  amount  of  work 
experience  required  (e.g.,  CISA,  CISM,  and  CISSP).  Work 
experience  requirements  should  not,  however,  discourage 
IHLs from modeling capstones after certification materials nor 
should it discourage current students from taking certification 
exams. Many certifying bodies allow an individual’s passing 
score to be valid for several years, allowing them time to gain 
the  experience  required  to  become  fully  certified.  Further, 
some  certifications  offer  alternate  designations  to  those  who 
have passed the exam but are still working toward fulfillment 
of  the  experience  requirement.  (ISC)2  awards  “associate” 
status  to  such  individuals,  and,  while  they  are  not  officially 
certified,  this  status differentiates  graduates  from  others  who 
have not even prepared for, and passed, a certification exam. 
Moreover,  many  certifications  have  significant  overlap  in 
coverage, so if a capstone concentrates on one certification, it 
will  also  cover  in  large  measure  other  major  certifications. 
Finally, 
focusing  on 
certifications  should  assess  how  well  students  and  graduates 
perform  in  passing  certification  exams.  Doing  so  will  help 
assess 
this  capstone  approach.  In 
summary,  undergraduate  capstones  offer  timely  windows  of 
opportunity where students can be primed to take entry-level 
certifications. Thus, consideration should be given to adding a 
capstone course to a program. 

the  effectiveness  of 

teach  a  capstone 

faculty  who 

5. CONTRIBUTION 

the 

to 

in 

 
Applying  our  approach  should  reduce  the  amount  of  time 
spent  determining  curricula  maintenance  in  an  ongoing 
manner.  While  we  should  not  limit  curricula  updates  to 
certification  material,  staying  in  tune  with  certifications  can 
reduce 
the 
cybersecurity  field.  In  essence,  we  are  proposing  a  way  to 
spend less time on figuring out “what” to teach, which allows 
for more time spent figuring out “how” to teach it.  

research  changes 

time  needed 

Many  cybersecurity  programs  in  the  United  States  seek 
designations by the Department of Homeland Security and the 
National  Security  Agency  (DHS/NSA).  These  U.S.  federal 
government  organizations  have  been  leaders  in  helping  to 
shape cybersecurity and information assurance curriculum for 
years  and  have  made  significant  positive  contributions  to 
cybersecurity  education.  The  approach  advocated  in  this 
paper,  however,  can  be  used 
to  maintain  any  IHL’s 
cybersecurity curriculum whether designated by DHS/NSA or 
not. This is important because our approach can be applied by 
any  IHL  globally  since  most  certifications,  such  as  from 
(ISC)2, are international in scope whereas DHS/NSA are U.S.-
centric. 

Finally,  based  on  our  extant  review  of  the  scholarly 
literature, a gap exists in the literature regarding maintaining 
cybersecurity programs. Developing course objectives that are 
relevant and applicable is of key significance to such a rapidly 

  

 

developing  field  like  cybersecurity.  Even  highly  successful 
programs can quickly fall behind the curve if their curricula is 
not  adequately  modernized  to  reflect  the  current  state  of  the 
field. While the current paper strives to provide guidelines to 
academicians who wish to update and maintain their existing 
programs, the same approach can also provide value to those 
looking to create a brand new program.   

6. RECOMMENDATIONS 

 
Faculty  managing  undergraduate  cybersecurity  curriculum 
should 
include  an  annual  review  of  key  professional 
certifications  and  monitor  them  for  updates  and  changes.  A 
great  way  to  stay  abreast  of  changes  to  these  professional 
certifications  is  for  faculty  to  become  certified  themselves. 
Most certification bodies require annual continuing education 
credits  to  ensure  that  certified  individuals  remain  current  on 
evolving threats and trends in the cybersecurity field. Having 
access to such training materials provides an effective way for 
academics to identify potential improvements to their existing 
curricula.  In  the  case  study,  the  CISSP,  CISA,  CISM,  and 
CEH  served  as  program  benchmarks.  The  cybersecurity 
faculty  either  obtained  these  certifications  or  are  active 
members  in  the  societies  supporting  them.  Any  changes  to 
these certifications are readily identifiable and can be used to 
update security courses.   
 

7. LIMITATIONS 

 
Besides certification, other inputs are important to maintaining 
curriculum  and  are  not  covered  in  this  paper.  These  include 
seeking  inputs  from  stakeholders,  employers,  graduates,  and 
faculty. Guidance can also come from academic accreditation 
bodies, such as the developing Cyber Science standards from 
ABET  (Gibson  et  al.,  2015).  In  keeping  curriculum  current, 
faculty can also solicit the help of graduates and local industry 
leaders to be members of an advisory board. These boards can 
meet annually to help ensure the relevancy of a program.   

international  standards,  particularly 

Other well-known or possible resources that may be used 
to  guide  the  maintenance  of  cybersecurity  programs  include 
using 
the  growing 
ISO/IEC  27000  series  of  information  security  publications. 
Academics  could look to these industry standards as a guide 
for  certain  course  coverage,  such  as  using  ISO  27000 
standards  in  covering  Governance,  Risk,  and  Compliance 
(GRC) topics. IHLs particularly based in the U.S. can look to 
the  US.  Government’s  National  Initiative  for  Cybersecurity 
Education (NICE). NICE promotes standards of cybersecurity 
education,  training,  and  workforce  development  throughout 
the  U.S.  This  effort  publishes  the  National  Cybersecurity 
Workforce Framework that gives a blueprint to organize and 
describe  cybersecurity  work  into  knowledge,  skills,  and 
abilities (KSAs). This comprehensive framework can be used 
to maintain and update cybersecurity curricula as it is used to 
help define professional requirements in cybersecurity (DHS, 
2016).  As  of  this  writing,  the  framework  is  being  developed 
into a U.S. standard (NIST, 2016).   

information  security 

like 
mathematics  where  the  materials  relied  upon  today  will  be 
timely in five years or even next semester, the faculty must be 
motivated  to  update  existing  materials,  assignments,  and 

is  not  a  subject 

Since 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017107 

course  requirements  that  reflect  events  of  the  changing  field 
(Belle,  Imboden,  and  Martin,  2013).  While  in  this  paper  we 
argue for the value of using professional certifications as input 
for curriculum review, other inputs obviously exist and must 
be considered as well. 

Lastly,  the  current  paper  is  limited  in  scope  and  is  not 
intended  to  explain  how  to  use certification  content  to  make 
changes  to  individual  course  curricula  and  course  syllabi. 
Instead,  we  merely  suggest  that  IHLs  should  look  to 
professional  certifications  for  valuable  guidance  in  their 
curriculum maintenance process. 

8. CONCLUSION 

in  a 

to  changes 
broad 

in  adapting 
the 

 
The  complexity  of  the  cybersecurity  landscape  provides  a 
number  of  opportunities  and  challenges.  While  industry  has 
been  making  progress  to  address  the  latest  developments  in 
cybersecurity, higher education is always in danger of lagging 
timely  manner. 
behind 
Understanding 
of 
professional 
certifications is helpful in order to better incorporate changes 
to cybersecurity curricula and prepare students for the highly 
competitive  field.  The  current  paper  offers  a  review  of 
literature on cybersecurity certifications and provides practical 
recommendations 
their 
cybersecurity  programs.  The  presented  case  study  showcases 
how  a  variety  of  certificates  can  be  integrated  in  the 
curriculum and demonstrates the benefits of such an approach. 
 

in  updating 

interested 

to  IHLs 

spectrum 

9. ENDNOTES 

 

1  Although  definitions  differ  between  cybersecurity  and 
information  security,  for  this  paper,  we  use  the  terms 
interchangeably. For a related discussion, see von Solms and 
van Niekerk (2013). 
2   Since  then,  ISACA,  GIAC,  EC-Council,  CompTIA,  and 
others have earned this designation for various certifications.  
For an expanded list, visit www.ansi.org (ANSI, 2017). 
3   (ISC)²,  CISSP,  SSCP,  and  CBK  are  registered  trademarks 
owned  by  (ISC)²,  Inc.  (visit  www.isc2.org).  ISACA,  CISM, 
and  CISA  are  registered  trademarks  owned  by  ISACA  (visit 
registered 
www.isaca.org).  EC-Council  and  CEH  are 
trademarks 
(visit 
www.eccouncil.org).  All  other  trademarks  mentioned  in  this 
article are the property of their respective owners. 
 

EC-Council 

owned 

the 

by 

10. REFERENCES 

(ISC)².  (2009).  (ISC)²  Launches  First  Country-Specific 
Credential 
to  Meet  Growing  Demand  for  Qualified 
Information  Security  Professionals.  Retrieved  June  25, 
2016, 
from 
http://www.isc2.org/pressreleasedetails.aspx?id=5206. 

(ISC)².  (2015a).  (ISC)²  CISSP  and  SSCP  Domain  Refresh 
from 

FAQ. 
https://www.isc2.org/cissp-sscp-domains-faq/default.aspx. 

Retrieved 

(ISC)². (2015b). Certified Cloud Security Professional (CCSP) 
from 

FAQs. 
https://www.isc2.org/ccsp-faqs/default.aspx. 

Retrieved 

(ISC)². (2015c). CISSP Exam Outline Candidate Information 

2016, 

2016, 

June 

July 

25, 

5, 

Bulletin (CIB). Clearwater, FL: (ISC)². 

(ISC)². (2015d). The 2015 (ISC)2 Global Information Security 
Workforce  Study.  Retrieved  June  25,  2016, 
from 
https://www.isc2cares.org/uploadedFiles/wwwisc2caresorg/
Content/GISWS/FrostSullivan-(ISC)%C2%B2-Global-
Information-Security-Workforce-Study-2015.pdf. 

(ISC)². (2017). (ISC)² International Academic Program (IAP). 
from 

Retrieved 
https://www.isc2.org/international-academic-program. 

AWS.  (2016).  Amazon  Web  Services  Overview  of  Security 

2017, 

June 

5, 

Processes. Amazon Web Services, Inc. 

3, 

2017, 

ANSI.  (2017).  ANSI/ISO/IEC  17024 (Accredited).  Retrieved 
June 
from 
https://www.ansi.org/accreditation/credentialing/personnel-
certification/Directory. 

Backhouse,  J.,  Hsu,  C.  W.,  &  Silva,  L.  (2006).  Circuits  of 
Power 
jure  Standards:  Shaping  an 
International  Information  Systems  Security  Standard.  MIS 
Quarterly, 30(Special Issue), 413-438. 

in  Creating  de 

Belle,  W.,  Imboden,  T.,  &  Martin,  N.  L.  (2013).  An 
Undergraduate Information Security Program: More than a 
Curriculum.  Journal  of  Information  Systems  Education, 
24(1), 63-70. 

Bogolea,  B.  &  Wijekumar,  K.  (2004).  Information  Security 
Curriculum Creation: A Case Study. 1st Annual Conference 
on Information Security Curriculum Development. (pp. 59-
65). Kennesaw, Georgia: ACM. 

Bryman,  A.  (2012).  Social  Research  Methods.  (4th,  Ed.) 

Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  (2010).  15-1122  Information 
from 

Security  Analysts.  Retrieved  June  21,  2016, 
http://www.bls.gov/soc/2010/soc151122.htm. 

Bureau 

of  Labor  Statistics. 

(2015a).  Occupational 
Employment  Statistics  Query  System.  Retrieved  June  23, 
2016, from https://data.bls.gov/oes/#/home. 

Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  (2015b).  Occupational  Outlook 
Handbook,  2016-2017  Edition.  Retrieved  June  25,  2016, 
from  https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-
technology/information-security-analysts.htm#tab-1. 

Burning Glass. (2015). Job Market Intelligence: Cybersecurity 

Jobs, 2015. Boston, MA: Burning Glass Technologies. 

12, 

2016, 

CompTIA.  (2013).  Security+  Certification  Exam  Objectives: 
from 

SY0-401. 
https://www.comptia.jp/pdf/comptia-security-sy0-401.pdf. 

Retrieved  August 

Department  of  Labor.  (2016).  Certification  Finder,  Search 
from 

Keyword  15-1122.  Retrieved  June  21,  2016, 
http://www.careeronestop.org/toolkit/training/find-
certifications.aspx?keyword=15-1122. 

DHS.  (2016).  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS). 
https://niccs.us-

2016, 

from 

Retrieved 
cert.gov/training/tc/framework. 

June 

EC-Council. (2015). Hacking Mobile Platforms - Module 15. 

21, 

In Certified Ethical Hacker - Exam 312-50. EC Council. 

28, 

June 

EC-Council.  (2016).  What  is  New  in  the  CEH  Version  9 
from 

Course? 
https://www.eccouncil.org/Certification/certified-ethical-
hacker. 

Retrieved 

Endicott-Popovsky,  B.  E.  &  Popovsky,  V.  M.  (2014). 
Application  of  Pedagogical  Fundamentals  for  the  Holistic 
Development of Cybersecurity Professionals. ACM Inroads, 
5(1), pp. 57-68. 

2016, 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017108Parker, D. B. (1981). Computer Security Management. Reston, 

Virginia: Reston Publishing Company. 

Patten,  K.  P.  &  Harris,  M.  A.  (2013).  The  Need  to  Address 
Mobile  Device  Security  in  the  Higher  Education  IT 
Curriculum.  Journal  of  Information  Systems  Education, 
24(1), 41-52. 

Rob, M. A. (2014). IT Certification: Demand, Characteristics 
into  Traditional  University  MIS 

and 
Curriculum. Communications of the IIMA, 14(1), 20-44. 

Integration 

Shearer,  D.  (2015).  Maintaining  the  Relevancy  of  (ISC)² 
Certifications: CISSP and SSCP Credential Enhancements. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://blog.isc2.org/isc2_blog/2015/01/maintaining-the-
relevancy-of-isc%C2%B2-certifications-cissp-and-sscp-
credential-enhancements.html. 

Stallings, W. (2016). Network Security Essentials, 6e. Essex, 

2016, 

June 

21, 

England: Pearson Education Limited. 

17, 

2016, 

Stewart,  J.,  Chapple,  M.,  &  Gibson,  D.  (2015).  Certified 
Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) Official 
Study Guide (7th ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Sybex. 

Tittel, E. (2016). Best Information Security Certifications for 
from 

2017. 
http://www.tomsitpro.com/articles/information-security-
certifications,2-205.html. 

Retrieved  December 

von  Solms,  R.  &  van  Niekerk,  J.  (2013).  From  Information 
Security to Cyber Security. Computers & Security, 38, 97-
102. 

Walters,  L.  M.  (2007).  A  Draft  of  an  Information  Systems 
Security  and  Control  Course.  Journal  of  Information 
Systems, 21(1), 123-148. 

Whitman,  M.  E.  &  Mattord,  H.  J.  (2004).  Designing  and 
Teaching  Information  Security  Curriculum.  1st  Annual 
Conference 
Security  Curriculum 
Development (pp. 1-7). ACM. 

Information 

Wireschen,  D.  &  Zhang,  G.  (2010).  Information Technology 
Certification  Value:  An  Initial  Response  from  Employers. 
Journal  of  International  Technology  and  Information 
Management, 19(4), 89-109. 

Wright,  M.  A.  (2015).  Improving  Cybersecurity  Workforce 

on 

Capacity and Capability. ISSA Journal, 14-20. 

 
 

 

17, 

July 

2016, 

Fulton,  E.,  Lawrence,  C.,  &  Clouse,  S.  (2014).  White  Hats 
Chasing Black Hats: Careers in IT and the Skills Required 
to  Get  There.  Journal  of  Information  Systems  Education, 
24(1), 75-80. 

GIAC.  (2016a).  GIAC  -  Information  Security  -  Program 
from 

Overview. 
http://www.giac.org/about/program-overview. 

Retrieved 

July  17,  2016, 

GIAC. (2016b). GIAC Launches New Certification for Python 
from 

Coders,  GPYC.  Retrieved 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/giac-launches-
new-certification-for-python-coders-gpyc-300265014.html. 
Gibson,  D.,  Hawthorne,  B.,  Buck,  S.,  Fitzgerald,  S.,  & 
Lingafelt,  S.  (2015).  Toward  Curricular  Guidance  in  the 
"Cyber Sciences." The Colloquium for Information Security 
Education  (CISSE).  Las  Vegas,  NV.  Retrieved  June  25, 
2016, from www.cybereducationproject.org. 

Hentea, M., Dhillon, H. S., & Manpreet, D. (2006). Towards 
Changes  in  Information  Security  Education.  International 
Journal of IT Education, 5, 221-233. 

ISACA.  (2015).  ISACA  to  Update  CISA  Exam  in  2016  to 
Reflect  Changes  in  Job  Requirements  -  Press  Release. 
Retrieved  from  http://www.isaca.org/About-ISACA/Press-
room/News-Releases/2015/Pages/isaca-to-update-cisa-
exam-in-2016-to-reflect-changes-in-job-requirements.aspx. 
ISACA. (2016). State of Cybersecurity: Implications for 2016. 
from 

Retrieved 
2016, 
http://www.isaca.org/cyber/Documents/state-of-
cybersecurity_res_eng_0316.pdf. 

ISO/IEC. (2012). ISO/IEC 17024 - General Requirements for 
Bodies  Operating  Certification  of  Persons.  Geneva, 
Switzerland: ISO/IEC. 

Kaspersky,  E.  &  Furnell,  S.  (2014).  A  Security  Education 
Q&A.  Information  Management  &  Computer  Security, 
22(2), 130-133. 

Locasto,  M.  E.,  Ghosh,  A.  K.,  Jajodia,  S.,  &  Stavrou,  A. 
(2011). The Ephemeral Legion: Producing an Expert Cyber-
Security Work Force from Thin Air. Communications of the 
ACM, 54(1), 129-131. 

Manson,  D.  &  Pike,  R.  (2014).  The  Case  for  Depth  in 

July 

7, 

Cybersecurity Education. ACM Inroads, 5(1), 47-52. 

Marsh, N. (2015). Nmap 6 Cookbook: The Fat Free Guide to 

Network Scanning. Fat Free Publishing. 

McGill,  T.  &  Dixon,  M.  (2005).  Information  Technology 
Information 
Certification:  A  Student  Perspective. 
International  Journal  of  Information  and  Communication 
Technology Education, 1(1), 19-30. 

Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative Research and Case Study 
Applications  in  Education.  Revised  and  Expanded  from 
Case Study Research in Education. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass Publishers. 

NIST.  (2016).  NICE  Cybersecurity  Workforce  Framework 
(NCWF),  NIST  Special  Publication  800-181  (draft).  (B. 
Newhouse,  Ed.)  Retrieved  December  17,  2016,  from 
http://csrc.nist.gov/nice/. 

NSA. (2016). Information Assurance Directorate at the NSA. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.iad.gov/NIETP/documents/Requirements/CAE
-CD_Knowledge_Units.pdf. 

Oriyano,  S.  P.  (2014).  Certified  Ethical  Hacker  (CEH) 

2016, 

June 

25, 

Version 8 Study Guide. Indianapolis, IN: Sybex. 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017109AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 

 

Journal 

  He 

Kenneth  J.  Knapp  is  an  Associate  Professor  at  The 
University  of  Tampa.    He  is  a  twenty-
year veteran of the U.S. Air Force and 
received his PhD at Auburn University.  
Dr.  Knapp  has  published  in  journals 
such 
as  Computers  &  Security, 
Communications of the Association for 
Information  Systems, 
of 
Organizational & End User Computing, 
International  Journal  of  Information 
Security  &  Privacy  and  Government 
Information  Quarterly. 
is  a 
Certified  Information  Systems  Security  Professional  (CISSP) 
and Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH). 
 
Christopher Maurer is an Assistant Professor in the McIntire 
School of Commerce at the University 
of Virginia.  He received his PhD from 
the  University  of  Georgia  and  was 
previously  an  Assistant  Professor  at 
the University of Tampa.  His research 
interests 
cybersecurity 
controls,  the  impact  of  cybersecurity 
breaches,  enterprise  systems,  and  IT-
business  alignment. 
  His  previous 
research  has  appeared  in  journals  and 
conference  proceedings  including  MIS  Quarterly  Executive, 
the  International  Conference  on  Information  Systems  (ICIS), 
the American Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), 
and the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS).   
 
Miloslava  Plachkinova 

is  an  Assistant  Professor  of 
Cybersecurity  in  the  Sykes  College 
of  Business  at  the  University  of 
Tampa,  FL.  She  holds  a  PhD  in 
Information 
and 
Technology 
Claremont 
Graduate  University,  CA.  She  is  a 
Certified 
Security 
Manager  (CISM)  and  a  Project 
Management  Professional 
(PMP). 
Dr.  Plachkinova’s  research  focuses 
and 
on 
healthcare. She investigates how human behavior leads to data 
breaches  and  her  work  in  the  healthcare  field  investigates 
security  and  privacy  issues  in  mobile  health  (mHealth)  and 
electronic health records (EHR) on the cloud. Dr. Plachkinova 
also  has  extensive  industry  experience  working  for  both  the 
private and the public sectors. 
 
 
 
 

Information 

information 

security 

Systems 

from 

include 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017110APPENDIX  A.  Matrix  of  CISSP  Common  Body  of  Knowledge  to  Undergraduate  Cybersecurity  Curriculum.  From  our  case 
study  example,  the  following  matrix  shows  the  results  of  an  analysis  of  the  CISSP  CBK  compared  with  a  university’s 
Cybersecurity undergraduate program. The percentage in each cell shows how much of each course is included in the CISSP 
CBK  per domain.  In  total,  the  entire  CISSP  CBK  is  covered  in this undergraduate  program.  The  assessment  used  the  CISSP 
Candidate  Information  Bulletin  (CIB)  of  April  2015.  The  CIB  lists  the  key  areas  of  knowledge  for  all  eight  CBK  domains. 
Course descriptions and syllabi were used for assessing the courses. The percentages were established by the faculty member 
teaching the actual course.  

Course 

CBK 
Domain 
Security 
& Risk 
Mgt 
Asset 
Mgt 

Security 
Engi-
neering 
Comm. 
& 
Network 
Security 
Identity 
& 
Access 
Mgt 
Security 
Assess-
ment & 
Testing 
Security 
Ops 

Soft-
ware 
Dev. 
Security 

 
 
 

Mgt 
Info 

Systems  

Network 
& Cloud 
Infrastr.  

Appl. 
Develop 

Info Sec 
Principl
es   

Network 
Security  

Risk 
Mgt  

Physical 
& Ops. 
Security   

Ethical 
Hacking  

Cyber 
Cap-
stone.   

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

40% 

<5% 

80% 

<5% 

<5% 

40% 

TOTAL 
Coverage 
of CISSP 
CBK per 
domain 
100% 

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

25% 

10% 

20% 

40% 

<5% 

50% 

100% 

<5% 

20% 

<5% 

15% 

20% 

<5% 

25% 

<5% 

40% 

100% 

<5% 

70% 

<5% 

20% 

80% 
(see 
Apdx B) 

<5% 

15% 

20% 

20% 

100% 

<5% 

15% 

<5% 

20% 

<5% 

<5% 

20% 

<5% 

50% 

100% 

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

15% 

20% 

30% 

60% 

100% 

<5% 

<5% 

<5% 

10% 

15% 

20% 

30% 

20% 

60% 

100% 

<5% 

<5% 

15% 

20% 

<5% 

<5% 

40% 

<5% 

60% 

100% 

 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017111APPENDIX  B.  Example  Matrix  of  Communication  and  Network  Security  Domain  to  the  Undergraduate  Network  Security 
Course. From our case study, the following matrix is an example of the type of analysis that can attain the percentages found in 
Appendix A. Ultimately, this analysis should be used as a guide for the faculty member to ensure that certification knowledge 
requirements are covered. The left column lists the Key Areas of Knowledge found in the CISSP CIB ((ISC)², 2015c, pp. 16-17). 
The title row across the top indicates major lesson topics covered in the Network Security course syllabus. These topics were 
derived from three substantial texts used in the course: 1) Network Security Essentials, 6th edition (Stallings, 2016), 2) Nmap 6 
Cookbook (Marsh, 2015), and 3) Amazon Web Services Overview of Security Processes (AWS, 2016). A check box indicates 
that the knowledge area received full (100%) coverage in the course textbook material and/or in a course assignment. Partial 
coverage is identified where the topic is only briefly covered. It is also possible to use course objectives instead of lesson topics, 
depending  on  the  level  of  granularity  of  the  course  objectives.  The  final  row  provides  the  approximate  coverage  of  the 
Communications & Network Security CISSP Domain in the Network Security course; as this is a guide, exact precision of the 
percentage is not necessary here. 

Network 
Security 

Course Major 

Topics 

Network 
Security Key 
Knowledge 
on CISSP 
Network 
Archit. (A) 
OSI & 
TCP/IP 
models (A.1) 
IP 
networking 
(A.2) 
Multi-layer 
protocols 
(A.3) 
Converged 
protocols 
(e.g. MPLS) 
(A.4) 
Software-
defined 
networks 
(A.5) 
Wireless 
networks 
(A.6) 
Cryptography 
(A.7) 
Secure 
Network 
Components 
(B) 
Hardware 
Operations 
(e.g. routers, 
WAPs) (B.1) 
Transmission 
media (B.2) 

Network 
access 
control (e.g. 
firewalls) 
(B.3) 
Endpoint 
security (B.4) 

R
e
v
i
e
w

 

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
&

 

 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k

 

 

u
s
i
n
g
N
m
a
p

 

 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
S
c
a
n
n
i
n
g

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

√ 

Partial 

Partial 

Partial 

Partial 

Partial 

 

 

√ 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

C
r
y
p
t
o
g
r
a
p
h
y

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

D
i
s
t
r
i
b
u
t
i
o
n

 

U
s
e
r
 

A
u
t
h

.
 

 

&
K
e
y

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

C
o
n
t
r
o
l
 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
A
c
c
e
s
s
 

 

A
W
S

 

 

C
l
o
u
d
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
&

 

 

S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y

 

T
r
a
n
s
p
o
r
t
 

L
a
y
e
r
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

√ 

 

W

i
r
e
l
e
s
s
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y

 

M

a
l
w
a
r
e
 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

F

i
r
e
w
a
l
l
s
 

I

D
S

,
 
I
P
S
&

 

 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
A
r
c
h

 

 

D
e
s
i
g
n
S
e
c
u
r
e
 

.
 

C
I
S
S
P

 

K
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e
 
o
n

 

C
o
v
e
r
a
g
e
 

o
f
 

K
e
y

 

100% 

100% 

25% 

25% 

 

 

 

 

Partial 

25% 

 

 

√ 

√ 

 

√ 

100% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

√ 

√ 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017112Network 
Security 

Course Major 

Topics 

Network 
Security Key 
Knowledge 
on CISSP 
Content-
distribution 
networks 
(B.5) 
Physical 
devices (B.6) 

Secure 
Comm. 
channels (C) 
Voice (C.1) 
Multimedia 
collaboration 
(C.2) 
Remote 
access (e.g. 
VPN) (C.3) 
Data 
communicati
on (e.g. 
VLANS) 
(C.4) 
Virtualized 
networks 
(C.5) 
Prevent or 
mitigate 
network 
attacks (D) 

R
e
v
i
e
w

 

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
&

 

 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k

 

 

u
s
i
n
g
N
m
a
p

 

 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
S
c
a
n
n
i
n
g

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

C
r
y
p
t
o
g
r
a
p
h
y

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

D
i
s
t
r
i
b
u
t
i
o
n

 

U
s
e
r
 

A
u
t
h

.
 

 

&
K
e
y

C
o
n
t
r
o
l
 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
A
c
c
e
s
s
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

A
W
S

 

 

C
l
o
u
d
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
&

 

 

S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y

 

T
r
a
n
s
p
o
r
t
 

L
a
y
e
r
 

W

i
r
e
l
e
s
s
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y

 

M

a
l
w
a
r
e
 

F

i
r
e
w
a
l
l
s
 

I

D
S

,
 
I
P
S
&

 

 

 

√ 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

√ 

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
A
r
c
h

 

 

D
e
s
i
g
n
S
e
c
u
r
e
 

.
 

C
I
S
S
P

 

K
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e
 
o
n

 

C
o
v
e
r
a
g
e
 

o
f
 

K
e
y

 

100% 

100% 

100% 

0% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

100% 

√ 

 

√ 

 

√ 

√ 

√ 

√ 

Approximate Coverage of Communications & Network Security CISSP Domain in Network Security Course  

80% 

 

 

 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017113 

Journal of Information Systems Education, Vol. 28(2) December 2017114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

Information Systems & Computing 

Academic Professionals 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

STATEMENT OF PEER REVIEW INTEGRITY 

All papers published in the Journal of Information Systems Education have undergone rigorous peer review. This includes an 

initial editor screening and double-blind refereeing by three or more expert referees. 

Copyright ©2017 by the Information Systems & Computing Academic Professionals, Inc. (ISCAP). Permission to make digital 
or hard copies of all or part of this journal for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made 
or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  use.  All  copies  must  bear  this  notice  and  full  citation.  Permission  from  the  Editor  is 
required to post to servers, redistribute to lists, or utilize in a for-profit or commercial use. Permission requests should be sent to 
the Editor-in-Chief, Journal of Information Systems Education, editor@jise.org. 
 
ISSN 2574-3872 

