 

VETERANS CYBERSECURITY  
TRAINING AND EDUCATION 
GUIDE 
Your guide to becoming a Cybersecurity Professional 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

INTRODUCTION  

As a veteran transitioning out of military service, you might be thinking about what your next 
career move could be. The Veterans Cybersecurity Training and Education Guide is tailored 
to veterans looking to gain the necessary skills to transition into a cybersecurity career. The 
demand  for  cybersecurity  professionals  is  growing  at  12  times  the  overall  job  market, 
making cybersecurity one of the most highly sought-after careers in the country.1 This Guide 
will help you decide if a cybersecurity profession is right for you and, if it is, provide you with 
the right tools and resources to help you transition to your cybersecurity career.  

Cybersecurity professionals report an average salary of $116,000—that’s nearly three times 
the  national  average.2  In  addition,  this  career  offers  you  the  opportunity  to  continue  to 
support  a  mission  that  protects  citizens,  critical  information,  and  even  national  security. 
Many jobs in cybersecurity offer rewards that are similar to your military experience, such as 
the  ability  to  thwart  adversaries,  make  quick  decisions  in  dynamic  situations,  and  help 
defend your country.  

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is committed to helping ensure our nation 
has a dependable pipeline of skilled cybersecurity professionals. To support this goal, DHS 

is offering training and education resources to U.S. veterans.  

 

WHAT’S INSIDE 

Inside you will find a number of tools to help you begin your journey to becoming a 
cybersecurity professional.  

ASSESS 

PREPARE 

 
    
Assess Your Readiness for a Cybersecurity Career  
Take a brief self-assessment to determine if a career in cybersecurity is right for you.  
 
 
 
Plan Your Cybersecurity Career 
Find tips on what you need to start your cybersecurity career such as educational 
requirements, certification and training.  
 
 
 
Launch Your Cybersecurity Career 
Arm yourself with the knowledge and training you need to pursue your cybersecurity 
career.  

ENGAGE 

                                                 
1 Burning Glass Technologies, 2014. 
2 Burning Glass Technologies, 2015. 

 

1 

FROM DEFENSE TO CYBER DEFENSE 

 
Transitioning from a military career to civilian life can be challenging and take some 
planning. Your military skills and experience can be applied to a variety of jobs, but one 
sector stands out as the fastest growing need across the nation—cybersecurity. It’s a field 
that allows veterans to transfer a passion for defending our country to a new battlefield – 
one that has an ever-changing landscape and many adversaries.  
  
As a veteran, you are likely ahead of your civilian counterparts when it comes to preparing 
for a career in cybersecurity. For example, you’ve likely been exposed to security 
procedures and can tackle challenges in a timely and systematic fashion. You may also 
have already acquired a security clearance during your service which can help you compete 
for a federal position. Having a clearance may help speed up the on-boarding process for 
you, placing you at an advantage over many civilians. 
  
The cybersecurity field is full of open positions for people with or without degrees. There 
are opportunities to get started right away, as well as ample room for professional growth. 
Cybersecurity professionals report an average salary of $116,0003 per year, and yet many 
cybersecurity jobs go unfilled. In fact, in January 2016, Forbes reported that over 209,000 
cybersecurity jobs were still open.4 
  
There is no better fit for a trained, experienced veteran than a needed, growing, and 
lucrative field protecting the nation that they love. Consider cybersecurity- a great field, 
protecting a grateful nation. 
 

                                                 
3 Burning Glass Technologies, 2015. 
4 http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevemorgan/2016/01/02/one-million-cybersecurity-job-openings-in-
2016/#4653c03e7d27  

2 

 

A 
S 
S 
E 
S 
S  
 

ASSESS YOUR READINESS FOR A 
CYBERSECURITY CAREER 

What is Cybersecurity?

Cybersecurity focuses on protecting 
computers, networks, and information 
from unauthorized access or attack. 

Essentially, if a device is connected to the Internet, it is vulnerable to attack and needs 
to be protected.  
 
See what you have in common with cybersecurity professionals. Find 
out how you match up! 

Is this a good 
career for me?

 
You’re probably wondering if you’d be any good at 
cybersecurity. You might have more things in 
common with cybersecurity professionals than you 
think! The table below features various traits of top 
cybersecurity professionals. Do your skillsets and 
interests align?  

 
In addition to your personal interests, your military experience may also help pave the 
way to a cybersecurity career. Many companies prefer to hire veterans for cybersecurity 
positions because of the training these candidates received in the military. Additionally, 
some work may require navigating systems and tracking down persistent threats: skills 
you may have gained through your service. 
 
Just as your personality and training made you successful in the military, those same 
traits and skills could make you successful on various cybersecurity teams. You will 
encounter a variety of working environments in a cybersecurity career that will require 
agility, critical thinking, and curiosity.  
 
Your military service likely equipped you with the ability to quickly process information 
for security decisions, maintain situational awareness, learn on your feet, and respond 
in challenging situations: all these abilities may help you be successful in a 
cybersecurity career as well. 
 

 

3 

P 
R 
E 
P 
A 
R 
E 

PLAN YOUR CYBERSECURITY CAREER 

 
The cybersecurity field offers many different jobs in many different environments. You 
might defend a network, create organizational strategies, or even try to breach systems 
to test vulnerabilities.  Understanding some of the requirements you may need for the 
job that looks most interesting to you is the first step in planning your new career. 

How can I prepare?

You have a number of available options to achieve 
your career goals in cybersecurity. In many cases, 
obtaining certain certifications is all you need to get 
a cybersecurity job, while other employers may require a related degree and/or training 
for cybersecurity jobs. As a veteran, you can take advantage of free training and degree 
scholarship opportunities to enter the cybersecurity field. Each of these paths will be 
addressed in this guide.  

Some of the specific certifications, technical training, and/or cyber-related degrees that 
employers require can be completed in a relatively short period of time with little or no 
cost, while others will require a longer and possibly more costly investment in your time 
and money. You’ll find different timelines and funding ideas in the PREPARE and 
ENGAGE sections below.  

Remember - using the Post-9/11 GI Bill, you can get up to 36 months of financial 
support for education and training for graduate and undergraduate degrees, 
vocational/technical training, correspondence training, licensing and national testing 
programs, and tutorial assistance to prepare you for a career in cybersecurity.  

Let’s talk about what you need to do to get started. We’ll break these actions into short- 
and long-term commitments.  

Short-Term Plan

The very nature of cybersecurity reacts to the fast-paced 
changing threats and vulnerabilities to our nation’s 
information systems. Being able to show that you are 

familiar with many of these threats in a job interview will set you apart. That’s why 
cybersecurity training and certifications are important. There are hundreds of training 
courses ranging from general security awareness and online user safety, to highly 
technical advanced certifications.  

Certifications are industry-recognized 
validations of having a specific skill, or 
experience in a particular subject area. 
Employers often use certifications as a 
way to identify people with specific skill 
sets and certifications may help you stand 
out in a competitive job market. 

Popular Cybersecurity Certifications  

1.  CompTIA Security+ 
2.  E-C Council Certified Ethical Hacker 

(CEH) 

3.  CompTIA Network+ 
4.  ISC2 Certified Information Systems 

Security Professional (CISSP) 

5.  CompTIA A+ 

Security-related certifications are also a 
prerequisite for many commercial cybersecurity and defense-related IT security jobs.  

 

4 

We’ll go into more detail about certifications and introduce FREE training opportunities 
for you in the next section—ENGAGE.  

 

Long-Term Plan

Certifications are a great way to quickly make you more 
competitive to employers, but many jobs also require a 

cyber-related degree. The list below details general expectations you may face in 
the cybersecurity field. 

  Associate’s Degree: Certain entry-level cybersecurity positions may be obtainable 
with a two-year associate’s degree in computer science, cybersecurity or a related 
field, plus work experience. Advancing in the Cybersecurity and/or Information 
Technology profession usually requires at least a bachelor’s degree.  

  Bachelor’s Degree: Plan on obtaining a four-year degree to compete for most 

cybersecurity jobs. A bachelor’s degree in computer science, information 
technology, engineering or a related discipline can be a good start. Some employers 
may also look for advanced training, industry certifications or work experience. 

  Master’s Degree: Some employers hiring for cybersecurity positions may require 

candidates to have an advanced degree, such as a Master of Science in 
Cybersecurity, Information Assurance, or a related field. An advanced degree 
typically takes an additional two years beyond the bachelor’s level. 

We’ll go into more detail on degrees and explain how you can enroll in government-
designated academic institutions and earn scholarships in the next section—ENGAGE. 

 

Cyber Roles

As part of your short- and long-term plan, it will be important to 
identify which cybersecurity area(s) you are most interested in 
exploring.  

The National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework provides a common language on 
cyber roles and helps define professional requirements in cybersecurity. The Workforce 
Framework organizes cybersecurity into seven high-level categories, each comprised of 
several Specialty Areas.  

This organizing structure is based on extensive job analyses that groups together work 
and workers that share common major functions, regardless of job titles or other 
occupational terms. The Workforce Framework includes many categories of work you 
might find familiar from your military career. Click the link to explore the Workforce 
Framework or visit https://niccs.us-cert.gov/training/national-cybersecurity-workforce-
framework.  

 

5 

P 
R 
E 
P 
A 
R 
E 

 

P 
R 
E 
P 
A 
R 
E 

While technical expertise is sought after, not all cybersecurity work opportunities require 
deep technical expertise – there is a strong need for individuals with experience and 
skills in program management, people management, policy development, and training 
– to name just a few.  

For example, when you explore categories like Oversight and Development and Operate 
and Maintain you’ll find less technical roles like: 

  Education and Training (developing, planning, and delivering training on 

cybersecurity subjects) 

  Strategic Planning and Policy Development (defining strategy and policy direction 

as it pertains to cybersecurity standards and operations)  

  Knowledge Management (managing, organizing, and securing access to 

information) 

  Data Administration (Developing and administering databases that allow for the 

storage, query, and utilization of data) 

Exploring the Workforce Framework, its categories and specialty areas will give you a 
good feel for the wide range of options available to you as you prepare to launch your 
new cybersecurity career. 

 

 

 

6 

E
N
G
A
G
E 

LAUNCH YOUR CYBERSECURITY CAREER  

How do I start? 

 
Now that you are familiar with the cybersecurity field and 
where you can fit in, here are some additional practical 
items you can arm yourself with to launch your new career. 

The section below is divided into training (short-term commitment) and degree (longer-
term commitment). We’ll show you how easy it is to complete cybersecurity 
certifications, take training, and enroll in cyber-related degree programs. Many of these 
resources are free for veterans.  

 

Training   

DHS offers you two ways to find thousands of training courses. First, through free online, 
on-demand cybersecurity training. Second, through a larger training catalog of courses 
offered by vendors across the country for those looking for additional training.  

 
Free Training 
DHS and Hire Our Heroes have teamed up to offer veterans 
cybersecurity training through access to the Federal Virtual 
Training Environment (FedVTE). FedVTE includes prep courses for the most popular 
certifications in the industry. As a veteran, you can use this program for free. 

These courses can build your skills to prepare you for cybersecurity jobs. You can access 
the training from any internet-enabled computer and start/stop the courses at your own 
pace.   

FedVTE delivers nearly 35,000 hours of training per month and includes cutting-edge 
training courses, executive-level training, and industry certification preparation courses.  
Some FedVTE courses may count toward continuing education credits with some 
certification or formal education providers.  

Follow these easy steps to get started: 

1.  Sign up for your FedVTE Account  

The FedVTE How-to-Guide provides easy instructions on how you can register for 
your free FedVTE account. 
 

2.  Follow a cybersecurity training pathway 

The FedVTE Training Pathway will help you start training based on your level of 
cybersecurity experience. The pathway also provides a detailed outline of how to 
navigate the training resources available to you and where you can begin in the 
process. 
 

3.  Browse the FedVTE Course Catalog  

The FedVTE Course Catalog includes over 45 cybersecurity training courses and 
certifications. It is updated on a quarterly basis as additional courses are added 
to FedVTE. 

The above resources can also be found at https://niccs.us-cert.gov/training/fedvte  

7 

 

E
N
G
A
G
E 

Vendor-offered Courses 

 
In addition to FedVTE, DHS offers multiple 
training and education resources, including an 
extensive Training Catalog at https://niccs.us-

cert.gov/training/tc/search which maps cybersecurity courses to Specialty Areas you 
learned about in the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework. You can quickly 
identify the courses you need to get started (beginner or advanced) within your specialty 
area or add skills to your resume. 

The Training Catalog organizes more than 2,000 courses provided by several leading 
organizations across the country. Fees might be associated with some training 
providers. A broad range of courses are offered online and across the country to meet 
the needs of anyone interested in training.  

Degree Programs 

 
DHS and the National Security Agency (NSA) jointly 
sponsor the National Centers of Academic Excellence 
(CAE) and designate colleges and universities around the 

country as CAEs for their cybersecurity/information assurance degree programs. This 
enables you to find a school nearby, where you can feel confident in the education you 
receive and be prepared to enter a cybersecurity career.  

CAE institutions offer cyber-related degree programs at two- and four-year colleges and 
universities. Program graduates often develop into cybersecurity experts who help to 
protect national security information systems, commercial networks, and critical 
information infrastructure in the private 
and public sectors. To learn more about 
the CAE program, visit: https://niccs.us-
cert.gov/education/national-centers-
academic-excellence-cae  

Other financial assistance to consider:  
  Yellow Ribbon Program 
  Tuition discounts for veterans at 

some colleges/universities  

Scholarship Opportunities 

  
DHS partners with the National Science 
Foundation on the CyberCorps®: 
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, 

which offers cybersecurity scholarships to outstanding undergraduate, graduate, and 
doctoral students in exchange for service in a federal, state, local, or tribal government 
organization. SFS scholarships may fully fund the typical costs incurred by full-time 
students while attending a participating institution, including tuition and related fees for 
up to two years. Combine this with your GI bill and you might end up with a free 
cybersecurity degree! To learn more about the SFS program, visit: www.sfs.opm.gov. 
 
 

 

 

8 

 

 

THE TIME IS NOW! 

Our country faces a global threat and the new battlefield is online. We are looking to our 
veterans to accept a new challenge and defend our nation’s networks.  
 
This guide has provided you an introduction to a new career path that will help you to 
continue serving your country. Taking the time to assess your skills and crosswalk them to 
cybersecurity traits has allowed you to see whether cybersecurity is a good fit for you.  
 
The prepare section gave you a variety of ways to transfer your skills into the cybersecurity 
workforce and showed you that veterans with technical and non-technical skills can excel 
in cybersecurity careers. It also provided you with multiple options to pursue your career 
through short- and long-term approaches to launching your cybersecurity career. 
 
Finally, the engage section gave you training and education tools— helping you take the 
first steps towards a fulfilling and lucrative career as a cyber warrior.  
 
Come meet the challenge and stand beside us.  Your cybersecurity career awaits! 

 

 

 

9 

Appendix A: FedVTE Training Pathway 

 

 

10 

Appendix B: Register for a FedVTE Account 

 

11 

 

 

12 

 

 

13 

 

 

 

14 

 

 

15 

