 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

Piret Pernik and Emmet Tuohy 
International Centre for Defence Studies 

Toom-Rüütli 12-6, Tallinn 10130,  

ESTONIA 

Piret.Pernik@icds.ee  

ABSTRACT  
As Estonia saw in 2007 cyber attacks on a nationwide scale can affect the whole of society, both public and 
private  sectors  alike.  Accordingly,  addressing the  consequences  of  such  attacks and to  preventing future 
incidents-  requires  a  comprehensive  approach  involving  coordination  both  within  different  government 
institutions and among commercial organisations such as telecommunications companies, internet service 
providers, etc. This paper is intended to illustrate the practice of interagency cooperation in Estonia in the 
field of cyber security. It identifies solution approaches toward enhancing interagency cooperation, thereby 
demonstrating how effective collaborative arrangements can be built and maintained in a domestic setting. 
The  main  part  of  the  paper  examines  how  nationwide  and  international  cyber  exercises  have  improved 
interagency cooperation. Finally, the conclusion identifies lessons learned from the Estonian case and offers 
recommendations applicable not just to Estonia, but to a wider context as well. 

1.0  INTRODUCTION 
The cross-border nature of cyberspace renders cyber security a relevant issue for international and national 
security  &  defence  actors.  Cyber  risks  endanger  everyone  –  individuals,  businesses,  national  and 
international  organisations,  governments,  and  militaries.  The  prevention  and  mitigation  of  cyber  threats 
requires collaboration of all actors; in other words, a truly comprehensive approach across the individual, 
team, organizational, national, and international levels is needed. When the integrity of networks, critical 
infrastructures and industrial control systems is at risk, acting alone pays no dividends (ENISA 2013: 13). 
That greater cooperation at all levels is needed to ensure cyber security has been acknowledged by the EU, 
which from 2014 has started  pan-European cyber exercises that will test technical, operational, and political 
level cooperation procedures and responses in preventing and mitigating cyber incidences (Ibid.: 14). 

Many entities (governments, militaries, and international organisations) have launched policies and strategies 
to prevent and to respond to cyber incidents. These call for broad engagement from the public and private 
sectors  as  well  as  from  civil  society.  Cyber  exercises  and  training  constitute  an  essential  ingredient  for 
successful interagency cooperation in addition to planning, information sharing and personal relationships. 
Cyber exercises make a good test ground for the implementation of the comprehensive approach to crisis 
management, a concept explained in more detail below.  

This  paper  identifies  conditions  for  successful  interactions  in  conducting  cross-sector  cyber  exercises.  It 
reviews the literature on comprehensive approach in emergency and crisis management and identifies key 
requirements relevant to the conduct of exercises. It then considers the experience of Estonia in coordination 
of  national  cyber  security  efforts  and  investigates  lessons  learned  from  its  experience  organizing  and 
participating 
it  concludes  with 
recommendations to policymakers on the use of cyber exercises as a tool for strengthening the collaboration 
that is essential for ensuring cyber security. 

international  cyber  security  exercises.  Finally, 

in  national  and 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 1 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

This research applies qualitative methods (analysis of legal acts, institutional set-up, and after action reports; 
as well as semi-structured interviews with subject matter experts). While there are limitations to qualitative 
data,  the  results  of  this  study  could  be  validated  with  further  research  by  applying  methods  such  as 
observation  (in  roles  such  as    Exercise  Monitor  or  Evaluator),  questionnaires,  and  comparisons  among 
different countries. 

1.1  CA and interagency collaboration: concept and definitions 
The comprehensive approach (hereinafter CA) is rooted in the belief that most conflicts reflect a complexity 
that cannot be solved by military means alone. It brings together a variety of government departments, non-
governmental  organizations,  first  responders,  members  of  the  private  sector,  and  members  of  local 
communities  working  together  to  meet  an  overarching  mission  goal  (Essens  et  al.  2013:  1).  It  has  been 
described as ‘interaction between various actors and organisations with the aim of generating coherent policy 
and action during periods of crises or disaster or in a post-conflict environment’ (Hull 2011: 5).  

While NATO has not  yet adopted a definition of CA1, it understands the concept as ‘an orchestration of 
communication of all activities in a country, coming to a well-defined and well-understood end state’ (Dijk 
2010). NATO circles understand the idea as ‘about how to facilitate coordination with non-military actors so 
as to make the NATO response more effective’ (Tardy 2013: 115). The implementation of CA has been the 
responsibility of NATO member states rather than the Alliance itself; accordingly, national conceptions have 
prevailed  over  the  theoretical  NATO  approach.  This  thus  makes  it  difficult  to  talk  about  a  genuine  CA 
approach of NATO as such (Tardy 2013: 108). 

Within the European Union, CA is used interchangeably with the term ‘whole-of-government’ (Smith 2013). 
CA  is  regarded  a  common  and  shared  responsibility  of  all  EU  actors,  including  member  states.  A  Joint 
Communication  to  the  European  Parliament  and  Council  titled  ‘The  EU's  comprehensive  approach  to 
external conflicts and crises’ describes CA as a tool to make optimal use of all relevant policy instruments 
(European Commission 2013). In spite of this rhetoric, CA is still an idea under development rather than a 
reality in EU security affairs (Smith 2013). What is more, there is a discrepancy between rhetoric on CA and 
actual practice; the EU has thus far been unsuccessful in developing the concept in crisis response planning 
(Mattelaer 2013). 

In regards to NATO member states, President Obama’s administration calls the integration of tools a ‘whole- 
of government’ approach that requires ‘a deliberate and inclusive interagency process, so that we achieve 
integration of our efforts to implement and monitor operations, policies and strategies’ (White House 2010: 
14).2  Some  other  NATO  member  states  (UK,  Canada,  Norway  and  Denmark)  have  developed  CA  on  a 
national scale, while France, Germany and most Southern and Easter European members states have made 
little progress in implementing it (Tardy 2013: 108).  
                                                      
[1] 
2010  NATO’s  Strategic  Concept  stresses  that  ‘a  comprehensive  political,  civilian  and  military 
approach  is  necessary  for  effective  crisis  management.  The  Alliance  will  engage  actively  with  other 
international actors before, during and after crises to encourage collaborative analysis, planning and conduct 
of activities on the ground, in order to maximise coherence and effectiveness of the overall international 
effort.’  (NATO  2010).  Chicago  Summit  Declaration  2012  reaffirms  Lisbon  Summit  decisions  on  a 
comprehensive approach stating that ‘our operational experiences have shown that military means, although 
essential, are not enough on their own to meet the many complex challenges to our security.’ (NATO 2012). 

[2] 
According  to  the  US  military’s  joint  doctrine  a  whole-of-government  approach  ‘integrates  the 
collaborative efforts of the departments and agencies of the US Government to achieve unity of effort’. It 
identifies combinations of the full range of available government capabilities and resources that reinforce 
progress and create synergies (Armed Forces of the United States 2011). 

 

9 - 2 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

CA has been mainly used  in crisis response, stabilisation, peacebuilding, and other out-of-area-operations, 
while at domestic level interagency cooperation and ‘total defence’ have been utilized more frequently. The 
common denominator of out-of-area & domestic operations is that they involve multiple actors and combine 
many dimensions (political, military, technological, informational, human, environmental, economic, etc.) 
and deal with a great number of dynamic factors and uncertainties. It is therefore assumed that the conditions 
for interagency cooperation and collaboration are relevant in both settings (Jermalavičius 2014: 10).  

In  the  future,  highly  complex,  smaller-scale,  and  collaborative  operations  are  likely  to  become  an 
international  norm;  meanwhile,  at  the  domestic  level,  crises  and  national  emergencies  will  necessitate 
effective collaboration among the joint, interagency, and public spheres (Essens et al. 2013: 1). Since the 
nature of cyber risks requires a multilevel and multi-stakeholder structure to detect the risks and meet cyber 
challenges, CA is relevant in this domain as well. Cyber attacks may originate anywhere in the world, with 
their source often difficult or impossible to identify. Cross-border cyber risks erode or eliminate traditional 
distinctions  between  homeland  security  and  military  defence,  and between  public  authorities  and  private 
enterprise (Bendiek and Porter 2013: 166). They transgress national legal jurisdictions and render separation 
between  domestic  and  foreign  policy  futile.  Hence  a  response  to  cyber  attacks  requires  cross-sector  and 
cross-border cooperation among all actors.  

Cyber  security  that  encompasses many  social  domains  (diplomatic,  political,  military,  economic,  internal 
security and so on) requires a truly comprehensive approach to crisis management. In order to keep ahead of 
impending  threats,  private  sector  collaboration  and  public-private  information  sharing  are  urgent 
requirements (Rendon Group 2011: iii). There is a broad consensus among experts that cyber exercises help 
to enhance the preparedness, responsiveness and knowledge of stakeholders in responding to cyber incidents 
(ENISA  2012).  Thus,  cyber  exercises  work  simultaneously  to  strengthen  cyber  security  and  enhance 
implementation of CA. 

1.2  Key CA requirements  
Pivotal  factors  determining  the  effectiveness  of  CA  are  tradition  and  culture.  A  common  culture 
underpinning  effective  CA  includes  shared  terminology  and  multiagency  institutions.  It  can  be  generated 
through three elements: education and training, the secondment of personnel, and the creation of joint units 
and  partnerships  among  organizations  (Menhinick  and  Gregory  2011:  166).  ‘Cultural’  interoperability 
among  organisations  stems  from  interagency  understanding,  trust,  and  confidence  that  require  close  and 
ongoing  training,  liaisons,  and  exchanges,  which  are  delivered  by  shared  learning  and  education  (Floyd 
2009:  11).  Exercises  and  training  work  as  bricks  in  building  a  common  interoperable  culture,  the  basic 
foundation of CA. 

Most  people  agree  that  other  fundamental  conditions for  successful  interagency  cooperation  are  personal 
relationships,  information  sharing,  planning,  and  exercises.  Information  sharing  -  which  can  range  from 
episodic  to  more  structured  and  formalised  -  is  essential  for  successful  CA  as  well  as  for  coordinated 
interagency planning (Stickler 2010: 6). While people practice cooperation when taking part in exercises, 
they also form and nurture relationships, share information, and (in the role of planners) engage in collective 
planning, all of which are elements that are rehearsed during exercises. 

The major role of interagency education and training - and the resulting real-world experience with partner 
departments - cannot be underestimated, because immersion in interagency partner environments leads to 
acculturation of all partners (Doughty and Erwin 2013: 249). It has been recommended that key interagency 
personnel must be educated in an interagency environment so that they become acculturated to the point 
where they fully appreciate the culture of their partners and clearly understand how they operate and why 
they do things as they do. They should also have real opportunities to actually work together in exercises that 
are  intended  to  immerse  them  in  an  environment  similar  to  that  which  they  would  face  together  in 
operations’ (Ibid : 260).  

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 3 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

Solution approaches in implementing CA: training and exercises  

1.2 
Many challenges that hinder collaboration in comprehensive environments have been identified by previous 
studies. They include disparate mandates, goals, opinions, ideas, organisational cultures, operational styles, 
and oversight mechanisms. These differences are not only between the military and the civilian sides, but 
also  among  civilian  parties.  Furthermore,  an  effort  to  coordinate  different  actors  requires  financial  and 
human resources and capacity, and these are often underestimated or overlooked (Essens et al. 2013: 2). 

Training  and  exercises  for  CA  operations  is  also  a  challenge.  First,  collective  training  is  complex,  time 
consuming and expensive (Essens et al. 2013: 2). Second, military training has been increasingly streamlined 
due to reduced defence budgets.  In the civilian side, large-scale collective training is even  more difficult 
because civil organisations have less need and fewer human and financial resources for CA-specific training. 
It has been assumed that CA training may be an increasingly ‘hard sell’ in many NATO countries (Essens et 
al. 2013: 2).  

It  is  difficult  to  transfer  the  practice  of  large-  scale  military  training  to  the  CA  context  because  civilian 
agencies have fewer staff (and are unable to leave their desks unattended to participate in joint exercises) and 
because they do not attribute the same value to large-scale standardised and repetitive exercising within their 
organisations  (Baumann  2012:  7).  Civilian  agencies  tend  to  have  smaller  budgets,  and  are  not  used  to 
devoting significant financial and human resources for training and exercises on an annual basis. Thus it is 
logical that the extent and nature of interagency exercises to practice complex operations involving multiple 
agencies  are  often  very  limited  (Stickler  2010:  8).  Given  that  CA-specific  exercises  will  be  increasingly 
difficult to organise in the future, other types of interagency exercises will have to fulfil the role of practising 
CA. 

Against  this  backdrop,  cyber  exercises  -  whether  multilateral,  bilateral,  or  domestic  -  provide  a  testing 
ground for practising CA  because the main part of  society’s critical services depend on security of  ICT. 
Since many ICT networks are interdependent - they depend on other national and international services and 
networks  -  an  effective  response  to  a  cyber  incident  is  not  possible  without  full  scale  national  and 
international cooperation.3  

Exercises work as tools for leveraging personal relationships that will be useful for responding to a real-
world  crisis.  When  military  and  civilian  officials  are  immersed  in  an  interagency  environment  in  which 
solutions are developed by teams, it results in the establishment of relationships among individuals from all 
partner agencies that will prove extremely beneficial in future real-word situations. By becoming educated 
and trained in an interagency environment , an individual organisation’s cultures, policies and philosophies 
become integrated with the missions of partner elements (Doughty and Erwin 2013 : 257).  

Thus,  we  conclude  that  practising  interagency  cooperation  during  cyber  exercises  helps  to  build  CA 
conditions that enable and facilitate cooperation at the team, organisational, national, and international levels. 
For CA multi-organisational teams should have a shared understanding of the problems they are tasked to 
address  as  well  as  use  unified  terminology.  Common  training,  shared  physical  space,  trust-building  and 
appropriate  team  leadership  styles  are  also  extremely  important  elements  (Jermalavičius  et  al.  2014:  15). 
Cyber  exercises  that  reinforce  many  of  these  elements  will  immerse  individuals  into  a  CA  mindset. 
Participation in international exercises supports national competence and practices, reinforces the creation of 

                                                      
[3] 
In Estonia 99.6% of banking transactions are done electronically. Public and commercial e-services 
depend on the functioning of ICT systems and the availability of electricity, including from cross-border 
critical infrastructures. Pursuant to the Emergency Act there are 42 vital services in Estonia and most of them 
are based on the use of ICT systems. Vital service means a service that is essential for the maintenance of the 
society, and the health, safety, security, economic or social well-being of people. 

9 - 4 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

an international network of experts, and provides a reference point to test national preparedness, strengths, 
and weaknesses.  

2.0  INSTITUTIONAL SETUP OF CYBER SECURITY IN ESTONIA 
According to the Estonian Cyber Security Strategy 2008-2013, an advisory body of the government - the 
Cyber Security Council of the National Security Committee of the Government, founded in 2009 - assesses 
progress  in  implementing  the  strategy,  while  the  Government  endorses  the  strategy  and  implementation 
plans.  The  Cyber  Security  Council  is  headed  by  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Economic 
Affairs  and  Communications,  and  its  members  are  representatives  from  seven  ministries,  government 
agencies  within  their  areas  of  responsibility,  the  Government  Office,  and  the  Estonian  Defence  Forces.4 
Based on need, the meetings can be extended to include private sector, academic, and research institutions. 
The Council is served by an expert-level interagency coordination group that meets regularly.  

The  key  government  agencies  responsible  for  implementing  the  national  strategy  are  the  Ministry  of 
Economic Affairs and Communications, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Education and Science. 

•  The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications ensures the continuous operation of vital 
services, and coordinates ICT and state IT-policy actions and development plans in the field of state 
administrative  information  systems.  It  coordinates  the  implementation  of  the  Cyber  Security 
Strategy 2008-2013 and 2014-2017 (including the drafting of the strategy for the period 2014-2017) 
and the Development Plan of Information Society 2020. A subdivision of the ministry, the Estonian 
Information  System’s  Authority  (RIA5)  coordinates  the  development  and  administration  of  the 
state’s information system, organises activities related to information security, and handles security 
incidents  that  occur  in  national  computer  networks.  RIA  advises  and  monitors  the  providers  of 
public  services.  It  also  organises  the  protection  of  Estonia’s  critical  infrastructure.  The  Estonian 
Technical Surveillance Authority, operating in the administrative area of the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Communications, is responsible for monitoring electronic communication services. 

•  The  Ministry  of  Defence  and  its  subordinate  entities,  the  Estonian  Defence  Forces,  the  Defence 
League,  and  the  Information  Board  (external  intelligence  service)  are  responsible  for  military 
aspects of cyber defence. 

•  The Ministry of the Interior is responsible for crisis management and coordinates the operation of 
vital  services.  It  serves  the  Crisis  Committee  of  the  Government.  Its  subordinate  agencies  -  the 
Police  and  Border  Guard Board  and  the  Internal  Security  Service  –  handle  cyber  security  in the 
fields of law enforcement (cyber crime and terrorism).  

•  The Ministry of Justice and its subordinate Prosecutor’s Office enforce the laws concerning cyber 

crimes. 

•  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for Estonian cyber security activities in international 

organisations (the United Nations, International Telecommunication Union, etc.).  

•  The  Government  Office  organises  the  operation  of  the  National  Security  Committee  of  the 
Government, advises the Prime Minister on matters relating to national defence, and coordinates the 
leadership of national security and national defence. 

                                                      
[4] 

The council is served by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications. 

In Estonian ’Riigi Infosüsteemi Amet’ (RIA). CERT is a subdivision of RIA. 

[5] 

 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 5 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

The  National  Security  Committee  of the  Government  assesses  national  security  situation and  advises the 
government  regarding  the  organisation  of  issues  concerning  national  defence.  It  assesses  progress  in 
implementing the Cyber Security Strategy and implementation plans before the Government endorses them. 
The Committee has six members: the Prime Minister, and the Ministers of Defence, Foreign Affairs, Interior, 
Justice and Finance;  the Minister of Economic Affairs and Communications  (MEAC) will also become a 
member in the near future. The advisory body of the Committee, the Cyber  Security Council, provides inter-
agency  cooperation.  It  is  headed  by  the  Secretary  General  of  MEAC  and  its  members  come  from  seven 
principal ministries and government agencies within their administrative areas, from the Government Office 
and  the  Estonian  Defence  Forces.  The  extended  format  of  the  Council  includes  also  private  sector 
stakeholders. The Council is served by an expert-level inter-agency coordination group. 

A  subdivision  of  MEAC,  the  Estonian  Information  Systems  Authority,  coordinates  the  development  and 
administration of the state’s information system. It advises and monitors the providers of public and vital 
services  and  organises  the  protection  of  critical  infrastructure.    The  Authority  encompasses  a  Computer 
Emergency  Response  Team  (CERT),  which  handles  security  incidents  that  occur  in  Estonian  computer 
networks. 

2.1  How cooperation is consolidated in Estonia  
In Estonia cyber security is considered part of an integrated national defence that calls for a comprehensive 
effort involving all sectors of national society (Ministry of Defence 2010). The underlying principle of the 
strategy is that cyber security shall be ensured through effective co-operation between the public and private 
sectors and through the  co-ordinated efforts of all concerned stakeholders, including civil society.  In this 
respect, as a small country Estonia has an edge over bigger countries – the small size of its cyber security 
community  and  the  limited  number  of  state  authorities  responsible  for  ensuring  cyber  security  produce 
favourable conditions for easier public-private cooperation. In smaller countries organisations tend to be less 
hierarchical  and  rigid.  As  people  know  each  other  personally,  they  tend  to  trust  others  more  than  in 
impersonal interactions, and greater flexibility enables them to share information swiftly as cyber incidents 
evolve very fast. 

In Estonia, public-private cyber security cooperation among commercial, governmental and academic bodies 
is well-established, spanning over nearly two decades (Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 7; 37).6 The response 
to  cyber  attacks  against  Estonia  in  2007  was  coordinated  by  CERT,  a  structural  entity  of  RIA  that  is 
responsible for the management of security incidents in national computer networks, with assistance from 
experts from private and public sectors within and outside of the country.  

A key factor to the success of responding to the attacks was effective horizontal public-private cooperation 
(Tikk, Kaska, Vihul 2010: 34; Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 7). A year before the attacks, a working group 
was formed whose aim was to prepare the establishment of NATO CCD COE (Äripäev 2007). Public and 
private sector members of the working group formed an informal network of the cyber security community. 
In the opinion of Hillar Aarelaid, then the head of CERT, Estonia’s weapon to combat cyber attacks against 
national  networks  was  the  size  of  the  country  and  the  enthusiasm  of  Estonian  IT-specialists.  In  a  small 
community  people  from  public  and  private  sector  are  able  to  call  each  other  instantly  when  something 
happens to ask for advice – something that is impossible in bigger countries (Ibid.). 

                                                      
[6] 
A  public-private  cooperation  intended  to  enhance  the  security  of  e-services  and  promote  public 
awareness about protecting information systems was established in 2006 involving the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs  and  Communications,  largest  telecoms,  commercial  banks  and  later  joined  by  the  largest  energy 
supplier,  largest  governmental  e-service  providers  and  others  (Kaska,  Osula,  Stinissen  2013:  7). 
Memorandum of Understanding for ‘Computer Security 2009.’ 

9 - 6 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

In 2007 the Estonian cyber security community as well as the Minister of Defence welcomed a proposal to 
establish a Cyber Defence League along the lines of the existing Estonian Defence League, and shortly after 
the proposal an informal cooperation network was initiated by the Estonian Defence League. Cooperation 
was  in  the  beginning  based  at  informal  cooperation  network  (called  by  one  interviewed  expert  a 
‘gentlemen’s club’). A few years later, in 2009, the first territorial units were formed and in 2011 a Cyber 
Defence Unit (CDU) was established by a legal act.7 In the early years the aim of the network was to share 
technical  competence  and  information,  thereby  increasing  the  knowledge  and  skills  of  its  members.  The 
network provided for its members the opportunity to consult each other. It was expected that the aggregation 
of expert know-how would result in ‘collective brain that works better than adversary’s’ (Padar 2014).  

In addition to the CDU’s unique cooperation model that brings together public and private sectors as well as 
the civilian and military spheres, RIA has played a major role in maintaining close relationships with private 
sector,  including  critical  infrastructure  owners.  Since  the  establishment  of  RIA  in  2011  comprehensive 
approach in domestic cyber security cooperation has significantly improved. RIA has initiated a number of 
informal, subject-matter-specific cooperation networks to facilitate smooth cooperation between public and 
private actors. These partially overlapping informal networks enable actors to share information on their area 
of expertise. Some examples are regular meetings and e-mail list exchanges for information security chiefs 
from government agencies, a CERT-network with members from public and private sectors, a Committee for 
the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructure, and a network for ISKE8 experts. Close public-private 
cooperation has contributed to raising awareness among these actors. According to one expert interviewed 
for the present analysis, even as late as 2010 some government agencies believed that cyber incident would 
not concern them, but today all actors realise that their involvement is necessary to ensure cyber security. 

Close personal relationships among cyber security community enable and facilitate cooperation, and it is 
believed  that  this  constitutes  an  advantage.  One  expert  illustrated  this:  ‘if  a  proposal  is  addressed  to  the 
organisation’s  general  email  address,  expect  no  response;  but  when  it  is  emailed  to  a  person  you  know, 
you’ll get immediate reaction’. 

Other good examples are numerous public-private cooperation projects to educate, train and raise awareness. 
To bring some examples: in 1996 the Tiger’s Leap Program was established with the aim of supporting ICT 
education and infrastructure in high schools. In 2002 a similar project, the Tiger University Program, was 
created for universities.9 In 2009 a public-private awareness raising program known as Computer Security 
2009  was  launched,  and  a Memorandum  of  Understanding  for  the establishment  of  an  IT  Academy  was 
signed in 2009; it began operation in 2012. More recent years examples include the Smart Labs in 2012 and 
Raising Awareness of the Safe Use of Mobile Phones in 2013 campaigns. 

2.2  Cyber Defence Unit of the Estonian Defence League  
The  CDU  has  refined  earlier  looser  consultation  and  cooperation  models  into  an  advanced  collaboration 
system  that  could  be  applied  in  other  countries  to  strengthen  cooperation  among  volunteers.  The  model 
enables to create a cooperative network to combine expertise from public and private sectors to facilitate the 
response to a cyber crisis. 

The  CDU  is  a  national  collaboration  model  integrated  into  the  voluntary  paramilitary  national  defence 
organisation, the Estonian Defence League. The unit seeks ‘to protect Estonia’s high-tech way of life by 
                                                      
[7] 

For overview see Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 7-8. 

[8] 

State agencies ensure information security through the three-level baseline security system, ISKE. 

For  more 

[9] 
management/the-tiger-university/the-tiger-university-program/. 

http://www. 

information 

see 

http://www.itcollege.ee/en/it-college/foundation-

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 7 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

protecting  information  infrastructure  and  supporting  the  broader  objectives  of  national  defence’ (Defence 
League 2014). The objectives of the unit are to develop a cooperation network of cyber experts, strengthen 
the security of critical information infrastructure, and promote cyber security awareness. The CDU works to 
ensure  the  secure  functioning  of  national  information  infrastructure,  enhance  national  cyber  security 
cooperation, and strengthen cyber defence support capabilities that can be provided in time of crisis. The unit 
participates in training and education with the aim of improving the knowledge and skills of its members as 
well as of increasing cyber awareness and cyber security among the population as a whole. Membership in 
the unit is strictly voluntary, as is participating in any of its activities (Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 37-38).  

Today the CDU aims to work as a reserve resource pool of well-trained IT specialists who can be deployed 
to manage domestic crises to assist in the protection of critical infrastructure both in the public and private 
sectors.  To  enhance  cooperation  with  critical  infrastructure  owners  the  unit  plans  to  establish  special 
arrangements with them (e.g. identify which skills are required and designate accordingly individuals with 
specific IT-profile to enterprises). While the CDU seeks to provide a training platform for its members, in 
promoting cyber security awareness its approach is targeted  more broadly (Padar 2014).  It offers regular 
training and exercise opportunities for its members, organises and participates in national and international 
exercises,  and  holds  seminars  for  government  institutions  (Kaska,  Osula,  Stinissen  2013:  22).  Formal 
cooperation agreement is place with NATO CCD COE; and a joint Protocol for Intention with RIA and other 
cyber  security  actors  has  been  signed.  At  international  level  the  unit  cooperates  with  the  US  Maryland 
National Guard by, inter alia, mutual participation in cyber exercises (Estonian Defence League 2013). In 
the Baltic Ghost regional cooperation format, which brings together the US European Command and  the 
voluntary national defence organisations of the Baltic states, the CDU has invited its partners to observe its 
exercises (Cavanaugh 2013). 

It  is  worth  noting  that  key  public  and  private  cyber  security  community  actors  (including  the  top 
management of enterprises and of government agencies) belong to the CDU; this overlap facilitates the swift 
flow of new creative ideas between the subject- matter expert and management levels of public and private 
sector bodies.  

According to a draft legal act (Ministry of Defence 2013), the CDU can be charged by a competent agency 
(RIA, the Ministry of Defence and agencies under its authority) with ensuring cyber security and providing 
assistance to specific government institutions, critical infrastructure owners, and in some cases also to other 
organisations.  The  tasks  of  the  unit  in  such  cases  could  include  penetration  testing,  response  to  cyber 
incidents, and monitoring & analysis of digital data, as well as analysis of malware, spyware and viruses 
(Ibid.). Apart from a rapid response and reserve role of the CCDU in case of cyber incidents, the unit also 
works closely with RIA in its everyday operation. 

As discussed above, the CDU has grown out of informal coordination and cooperation network in which 
most  members  knew  each  other  personally,  thereby  functioning  as  a  building  block  for  trust.  Evidently, 
private  sector  cyber  security  community  relies  on  trust  mechanisms  to  ensure  their  data  and  ideas  are 
guarded (Rendon Group 2011: 36). By participating in training and exercises and providing assistance to 
governmental  bodies  and  critical  infrastructure  owners  the  CDU  creates  the  informal  communication 
channels  and  relationships  of  trust  that  are  central  to  effective  cooperation  in  the  case  of  a  major  cyber 
incident (Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 27). Similarly, the Estonian cyber security experts interviewed for 
this paper believe that good cooperation is primarily based on close personal relationships, a shared feeling 
of community, enthusiasm, and willingness of individual members to cooperate. That being said, to maintain 
this momentum, the government should proactively promote voluntary contribution by various incentives 
that will be discussed later in this paper. 

9 - 8 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

2.3  National and international exercises in 2010-2013  
Since  2010  Estonia  has  conducted  and  participated  in  15  national  and  international  interagency  cyber 
exercises. The planning of future exercises is based on the principle of integrating national and international 
level cyber crisis regulation exercises to use financial and human resources more efficiently. At the national 
level, the cyber component is integrated into existing military and civil crisis management exercises. The 
principal national level coordinator of cyber exercises is RIA. 

Since 2010 three national exercises have been conducted with whole-of-government participation: first, the 
CDU organised Cyber Hedgehog to test and train for the use of the e-voting system; also in 2010, a table-top 
crisis management exercise for the protection of critical infrastructure called Tallinn CIIP was organised the 
Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Communications.  Third,  in  2012  a  table-top  strategic  level  decision 
making exercise of responding to a cyber incident known as Cyber Fever, was organised by the CDU. The 
private sector was engaged in the planning of Cyber Fever, and participated in Tallinn CIIP. In addition, the 
CDU took part of the planning process of the international exercise Baltic Cyber Shield in 2010. As early as 
2009  the  CDU  was  an  observer  at  NATO’s  technical  level  exercise,  Cyber  Coalition,  where  it  has 
participated annually since 2010. In 2012 a cyber component organised by the CDU, was introduced to the 
annual military exercise of the Estonian Defence Forces, Spring Storm. This was repeated in 2013, and is 
planned for 2014.  

At the international level, government institutions have participated at the EU/ENISA cyber exercise Cyber 
Europe (2010 and 2012), and in a joint EU-US exercise Cyber Atlantic (2011). In 2012 CERT participated at 
the EU cyber exercise Eurospe. RIA has since 2011 participated in the NATO’s annual technical exercise 
Cyber Coalition, and starting from 2013 has also served as an Exercise Controller in the planning process. 

The  private  sector  (in  this  case,  the  largest  telecommunications  companies  and  commercial  banks)  has 
participated in international level exercises (Cyber Europe 2012), even if only in activities at the national 
level.  The  private  sector  was  also  consulted  concerning  the  scenario  development  of  Cyber  Europe.  In 
addition, commercial enterprises contributed to the planning process of Cyber Coalition in 2012 and in 2013. 
An Estonian team comprised largely of private sector representatives participated at Locked Shields 2013, a 
technical exercise  organised by the NATO CCD COE, (commercial banks, telecoms), while the CDU and 
RIA were involved in the planning process (both helped to organise Locked Shields the  in the previous year 
as well).10  

In  2013,  for  the  first  time  Estonia  hosted  Cyber  Coalition  -  the  largest  exercise  of  its  kind  in  terms  of 
participating  countries.  While  the  private  sector  was  not  directly  involved  in  the  planning,  since  many 
members from the CDU’s organising team have daily jobs in commercial enterprises, their experience thus 
spread to the private sector. For the first time in a NATO exercise, an Exercise Controller came from the 
civilian side (RIA), a fact that  was regarded by experts as useful practice, as  civilian involvement in the 
planning  and  execution  of  military  exercises  helps  transmit  knowledge  to  the  civilian  side.  It  was  also 
regarded as a useful reference point, since the same official participated in the planning of EU exercises - 
something that allows for the comparison and evaluation of best practices of both organisations.  

Government experts interviewed for this paper believed that the conduct of the exercises has matured over 
the past years. As one put it, he would give an assessment of ‘a solid three plus on a scale of one to five’ of 
the Estonian contribution to NATO crisis management exercises. Overall, those we consulted were satisfied 
with  Estonian  performance,  stressing  that  considering  the  more  limited  financial  and  human  resources 
relative to larger member states, Estonia has done quite well.  

                                                      
[10] 
will also take place in 2014 and in 2015 Estonia will participate at Cyber Coalition. 

Private sector will be engaged also in Cyber Europe 2014 exercise. Annual exercise Locked Shield 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 9 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

3.0  EVALUATION OF CYBER SECURITY EXERCISES11 

3.1  Lessons identified relevant to enhancing interagency cooperation  

Planning process 

3.1.1 
At the beginning of the planning process, it is important to establish points of contact in all national agencies 
responsible  for  the  planning  of  an  exercise.  A  National  Exercise  Controller  must  attain  a  thorough 
understanding  of  the  diverse  mandates,  responsibilities,  and  internal  work  procedures  of  the  participating 
government agencies. For example, at the beginning of planning for the EU exercise Cyber Europe 2014, the 
principal national coordinator RIA engaged experts from the largest national electricity network operator. 
The controller must make sure that - appropriate officials (from technical, operational, and strategic levels) 
for a given scenario will be engaged, in order to eliminate the risks that the scenario would not match local 
circumstances (legal framework, institutional setup, etc.). Another important issue to be considered is that 
national planning teams should include a range of necessary experts (e.g. public relations and legal advisers).  

As Exercise Controller for international exercises, RIA shares information with other government agencies 
as well as private and civil sector organisations, plans national-level activities originating from EU or NATO 
scenarios, and coordinates the tailoring of these scenarios to local specifics. Its role is to engage and establish 
links with all relevant national agencies, and build up knowledge on each agency’s role, responsibilities and 
tasks in a particular scenario in order to select the right agencies for the needs of each exercise.  

3.1.1.1  Scenarios 
It is critical that scenarios be realistic and adjusted to local conditions. It is difficult to attract interest from 
the political and strategic levels; if decision-makers are not convinced that events enacted in the scenarios 
can happen in the real-world, it is even more challenging. To ensure maximum realism for the scenarios, the 
CDU involves technical and other experts from public and private sector in the design process. These experts 
then assess and evaluate aspects of the scenarios (for example in case of cyber events pertaining to critical 
infrastructure, industrial control system experts).12 The planning process also identifies the lessons that to be 
tested in the exercise. 

If scenarios contain information about vulnerabilities, they should be classified. It should also be ensured that 
people involved in the planning process refrain from disclosing details about scenarios to their peers, as their 
supervisors may pressure them to reveal such information in advance in order to improve their organisation’s 
performance during the exercise.  

Involving  more  actors  from  governmental  and  nongovernmental  organisations  in  the  planning  phase, 
including any test runs, allows participants to harmonise divergent expectations and create a common culture 
(including shared terminology). Participants will gain understanding of the objectives of the endeavour as 
well as the mandates, roles, and responsibilities of other actors. 

                                                      
[11] 
the Ministry of Defence, RIA, and the CDU. 

This part of the paper is based on after action reports and interviews with government officials from 

[12] 
Industrial  Control  Systems  are  command  and  control  networks  and  systems  designed  to  support 
industrial processes in such industries as gas and electricity distribution, water treatment, oil refining and 
railways.  Industrial  control  systems  constitute  a  strategic  asset,  with  a  rising  potential  for  catastrophic 
terrorist attacks affecting these critical infrastructures. These systems have often been the target of malicious 
actors in cyber-attacks (ENISA 2013: 17). 

9 - 10 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

Execution  

3.1.2 
Interactions  and  teamwork  during  the  exercise  engender  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  strong 
personal relationships. Face to face contacts and opportunity to discuss issues off the record was regarded by 
the experts to be very important for the success of the exercise. In addition to benefits for the exercise itself, 
such personal interaction improves inter-agency cooperation in the long run. Teamwork offers a chance to 
discuss issues to actors who otherwise have little daily contact with each other. For example, during the 
exercises IT experts from commercial banks and the central bank, Bank of Estonia can discuss also broader 
issues  related  to  their  cooperation.  Even  though  the  establishment  and  the  advancement  of  personal 
relationships are fundamental for success in the planning and execution phases, they are not sufficient to 
maintain experiences and institutional knowledge in the longer term. Thus informal relationships should in 
time be solidified into formal interagency agreements (e.g. Memorandums of Understanding that describe 
interagency information sharing, roles, responsibilities and tasks of actors, points of contact, etc.).  

Evaluation  

3.1.3 
After  action  reports  are  completed  for  all  domestic  and  international  cyber  exercises.  Each  institution 
contributes to a national report that is completed by RIA. In case of domestic exercises, an after action report 
is  normally  distributed  to all  involved  parties,  while for  international  exercises  a  comprehensive  national 
report is assembled by RIA and submitted to the EU and NATO. A final consolidated EU or NATO report 
that includes contributions from other member states is normally distributed only to main domestic actors.  A 
further national distribution list will be composed according to a need-to-know basis - reports are sent to 
actors whose duties require their knowledge of EU and NATO.  

Concerning  lessons  identified  issues  that  require  immediate  action  or  urgent  improvement  (e.g.  if  the 
leadership or decision making structures of agencies or the government, internal working procedures or legal 
framework need to be altered) will normally be adopted. Some legal acts have been amended in the past 
years and further steps have been planned (updating a national response plan for a major cyber incident, 
augmenting  a  list  of  vital  services).  Still,  some  lessons  have  been  repeatedly  identified  in  consecutive 
exercises. This can happen if an issue seems to have little relevance to the real world, and thus the altering 
the status quo is considered not to be worth the effort. While the slogan ‘don’t fix  what isn’t broken’ may in 
some cases be justified given  limited financial and human resources to do the necessary spadework, in other 
cases this unwillingness to implement improvements may be problematic, especially if the changes could 
have prevented damage from happening.    

For improved crisis preparation, it is crucial to develop feedback mechanisms to ensure that lessons will be 
learned and implemented (ENISA 2012). A remedy would be to design, in addition to generic after action 
reports,  more  detailed  implementation  plans  that  will  identify  takeaway  tasks  and  deadlines,  as  well  as 
organisations and individuals responsible for implementation in agencies. Such implementation plans should 
set  out  a  monitoring  process  for  future  progress.  This  has  been  done  in  the  CDU,  which  has  created  a 
standardised format for after action reports that includes distinct domains (e.g. amendments of legal acts and 
work procedures, in public communication scheme, etc.), different versions with appropriate levels of  detail 
(for Exercise Controllers, domestic players, international partners, etc.), and with different security levels 
(for public use, classified). The format includes also a requirement to conduct a hot wash-up (discussion by 
participants conducted immediately after the exercise).  

It is assumed that each agency will take the initiative to implement the takeaway tasks that concern them, 
and thus a centralised monitoring system does not exist. There is a need for greater formalisation, as the 
implementation of lessons identified currently depends too much on the will of an individual. Here a greater 
push from the senior leadership to establish clear procedures would be welcome. 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 11 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

A related challenge is a need to feed lessons learned into national strategy and policy making processes. It is 
unfortunately common that individuals who participate in cyber exercises at the national, EU, and NATO 
levels are often not the same officials responsible for formulating and implementing cyber security strategy, 
and regular information sharing between these two groups is not systematic. It is recommended that these 
processes    be  synchronised  -  that  way,  exercises  and  training  will  match  the  ends,  means,  and  available  
financial and human resources of the strategy; and takeaways from the exercises will be taken into account in 
the review and implementation of the strategy.  

Even though post-exercise analysis of lessons learned is customary, such analysis has not had much concrete 
impact. Lessons are not learned until behaviour is changed and new thinking is institutionalised. Without 
this, lessons will continue to be observed and re-observed (Wells II L, Pudas T. J., McNitt B 2011: 217). 

Cyber  exercises  have  prompted    tests  of  other  crisis  response  capabilities.  In  2010 the  government-level 
table-top  exercise  Cyber  Fever,  which  tested  the  decision  making  process  in  response  to  cyber  event, 
provided the impetus for a regional-level crisis management exercise that involved the consequences of a 
cyber incident.  

Yet, a number of important lessons that require political or legislative action have yet to be implemented. In 
any case, these issues (e.g. if the present composition of the Crisis Committee is optimal for cyber crisis 
management;  how  information  is  shared  among  strategic  level  bodies  that  handle  security  and  crisis 
management  -  the  Government  and  its  advisory  bodies,  the  Crisis  Committee  and  the  National  Security 
Committee) should be discussed at the strategic and political levels.13  

While there might be well-justified reasons for this lack of progress it may also be related to inertia and 
desire to maintain the status quo that is intrinsic to bureaucracies in general. Additionally, senior officials or 
cabinet members may be reluctant to bring issues to the cabinet level out of fear that this will result in new 
responsibilities  for  them.  Obstacles  that  prevent  a  leader  from  accepting  the  need  for  change  are  time, 
resources, skills, community values, policies, and lack of desire (Cambron-McCabe 2008). 

3.2  Cross-cutting lessons learned  

Interagency information sharing and joint crisis communication  

3.2.1 
International exercises have demonstrated that teams are willing to share information if they do not need to 
consider  the  potential  negative  aspects  of  sharing,  such  as  legal  and  political  implications.  Collaborative 
initiatives during the exercises have been seen even in the absence of a specific incentive in the exercise (e.g. 
blacklisting services, malware analysis, and sharing of tips and tricks to protect other teams) (NATO CCD 
COE 2013: 122). Since people attending the exercise get to know each other and develop trust, it is expected 
that they will be more confident about sharing share information with their peers from the exercise teams in 
the real world as well. 

In regards to international cooperation, civilian agencies tend to favour civilian counterparts as their first 
choice of partners, in the same way that militaries prefer to cooperate within military structures (i.e. NATO 
bodies and NATO member states’ militaries). If a joint national response is required, this diverse choice of 
                                                      
[13] 
The Crisis Committee is headed by the Minister of the Interior. It was suggested by one expert that 
in  case  of  a  cyber  event  that  involves  the  area  of  responsibility  of  other  ministries,  respective  ministers 
should lead the meeting of the Committee; currently other ministers are not members. With regards to the 
National Security Committee, the Minister of Economic Affairs and Communication is not a member of the 
committee, though this is expected to change in the near future. The National Security Committee endorses 
the Cyber Security Strategy, while the Crisis Committee monitors and analyses the organisation of national 
crisis management, including the assurance of the continuous operation of vital services. 

9 - 12 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

partners may cause discrepancies in a coordinated national crisis response. Therefore, Standard Operational 
Procedures  should  determine  crisis  regulation  procedures  across  the  civilian  side  and  in  relation  to  civil-
military interaction at the national level, including a crisis communication plan.  The plan with domestic 
actors and with bilateral and multilateral partners outside the country should describe information-sharing 
procedures  to  ensure  that  national  players  know  and  follow  them.14  Timely  information  flow  between 
technical and strategic levels is a must.  It is crucial for the success of the exercise that both levels have 
identical and timely information.  

The transition from a civilian emergency to a military crisis is not clear-cut. Therefore a crisis communication 
plan for national cyber exercises should include the military side even if the scenario does not foresee a role 
for the military in response to the crisis. A public communication scheme must be drafted for each exercise, 
and a direct communication link between technical level and public relations officers set up to ensure coherent 
public messages.  

Concerning international exercises, there has to be a predetermined procedure about the sharing of national 
information  with  international  players,  including  a  single  national  point  of  contact  to  whom  all  national 
players are obliged to submit their feedback. Conversely, this single national point of contact should distribute 
information from EU/NATO bodies to other domestic players. 

It  was  noted  by  the  Estonian  experts  consulted  for  this  paper  that  international  coordination  during  the 
exercise  functions  well  between  agencies  that  are  used  to  working  together  daily  in  the  real  world,  e.g., 
national  CERTs.  This  implies  that  cooperation  routines  should  remain  the  same  during  daily  business, 
exercises  and  the  real-world  cyber  incidents.  The  underlying  principle  of  inter-agency  cooperation  (that 
applies also to information sharing) is that competences and working procedures should overlap as much as 
possible  during  normal  conditions  and  emergency  situations  alike;  in  other  words,  authorities’  modus 
operandi should be the same during emergencies as it is in normal conditions).  

Another challenge in international exercises is intelligence sharing. Key national players should have lawful 
access to classified information during the exercise. Intelligence agencies generally resist sharing exercise-
related  intelligence  gained  from  international  partners  with  domestic  players  even  if  exercise  procedures 
require it (in general, intelligence services tend to gather as much information as possible and share as little as 
possible). While there is no panacea, the situation could be improved - in addition to the efforts to create trust 
- the loosening of normally rigid agency protocols that require information to flow first to the senior levels of 
agencies  from  which  it  will  then  be  distributed  to  the  lower  levels  (Stickler  2010:  7).  Coordination  and 
information-sharing meetings may also be helpful, although during the execution of the exercise it may be 
difficult to organise them due to limited time and resources.  

Intelligence sharing with private sector poses also a challenge. Some classified information can be redacted 
and made unclassified. Commercial enterprises could be motivated to obtain security clearances if they have 
the incentive of gaining classified government information that will help them to reduce business costs.  Some 
NATO  member  states  have  established  public-private  fusion  centres  and  platforms  to  facilitate  greater 
information and intelligence sharing, and have launched incentives for industries to encourage them to join. 
However, business enterprises calculate their risks first and foremost from the standpoint of continuity and 
profit; accordingly,  cyber risks that are deemed significant from governments’ viewpoint tend to have much 
smaller value according to the  risk assessment scale of commercial organisations. 

                                                      
[14] 
ENISA has developed a good practice guide to improve information sharing among CERT teams 
that  could  be  used  as  guidance  to  develop  national  procedures  for  national  and  international  levels 
information  sharing.  See  more  in  Cybersecurity  Cooperation.  Defending  the  Digital  Frontline  (ENISA: 
2013). 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 13 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

Coordination  committees  that  enable  timely  information  exchange  should  be  established  at  all  levels 
(technical,  operational/tactical,  strategic).  Real-time  communication  at  a  technical  level  is  crucial  for  the 
success of the exercise (e.g. an organized mailing list, data sharing hierarchy, real-time chat room, a wiki15, a 
voice communication system), however these forums shall not be flooded with too much information.16 It is 
recommended  utilize  an  infrastructure  with  a  central  set  of  resources  that  enables  clear  and  effective 
communication (Rendon Group 2011: iv).  

All players should have at least an elementary knowledge about the roles and responsibilities of decision 
making structures at the strategic level. To be able to develop and execute realistic scenarios, planners in 
particular  must  have  a  clear  understanding  of  the  crisis  management  structures  and  decision-  making 
procedures across all agencies and at all decision-making levels. 

The engagement of participants  

3.2.2 
Public-private  partnerships  during  cyber  exercises  are  essential  due  to  private-sector  ownership  of  most 
critical  information  infrastructure.  In  pan-European  cyber  exercises  public-private  cooperation  should  be 
intensified 
(technical, 
operational/tactical, strategic) necessary cooperation models can be developed.  

involving  diverse  organisations  at  different 

(ENISA  2012).  By 

levels 

The interviewed  Estonian experts  believed  that  voluntary  contribution  to  cyber  security  in the  country  is 
primarily  based  on  the  goodwill  and  enthusiasm  of  individuals.  To  maintain  momentum  the  government 
should  motivate  and  offer  new  incentives  to  the  CDU  volunteers.  Presently,  incentives  offered  to  CDU 
members are attractive training opportunities, possibility to gain new information and share experiences, and 
being part of a ‘community feeling’.17  

The experts stressed that voluntary participation should not be ‘over-exploited’ in government’s attempt to 
reduce  costs  by  utilizing  an  unpaid  workforce.  With  reference  to  exercises  private  sector  should  not  be 
overloaded by various events (as one expert put it, they should not become a ‘nuisance’), but private sector 
representatives  should  only  be    invited  to  training  sessions  at  which    they  can  learn  something  new  and 
useful. The time of players should be used effectively during the exercise.  

Private  enterprises  can  be  motivated  to  participate  in  exercises  by  providing  attendees  further  training 
opportunities.  Another  incentive  is  the  possibility  of  testing  the  resilience  of  their  critical  infrastructure, 
funded  by  the  EU  structural  funds  of  the  government.  Further  incentives  include  various  informal  social 
networking events, support to families of the volunteers, access to classified information, and others. 

As pointed out by Stickler (2010: 8) key civilian players in exercises are frequently surrogate stand-ins for 
principal officials. This is understandable especially with regards to the senior level, since cabinet members, 
high-ranking government officials, and senior corporate officers are reluctant to spend more than a few hours 

                                                      
[15]  A wiki is a web application that allows people to add, modify, or delete content in collaboration with 
others, e.g. Wikipedia. 

[16] 
In  the  context  of  collaborative  defence,  high-volume  detailed  information  is  harder  to  share  and 
utilize.  It  would  be  better  to  aggregate  observations  to  fewer  separate  incidents,  in  order  to  build-up  an 
incident history and share clever tips and tricks (NATO CCD COE 2013: 121). 

[17]  However, the use of CDU members in the exercises and crisis response may be inhibited due to their 
day-to-day professional jobs in other organisations; it is thus important that their employers support their 
work.  

9 - 14 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

at exercise, especially if the real-world relevance of the scenario is not clearly apparent.  18 When cabinet 
members or senior officials are replaced by junior officials or technical level experts, there is a risk that the 
exercise will not accurately practice real-world procedures. It is also essential that information from technical 
level be ‘translated’ into comprehensible conceptions and terminology for political-level officials (so as not, 
as  put  by  the  interviewed  Estonian  expert,  to  use  the  ‘language  of  butterflies’).  The  interviewed  experts 
believed that in order to attract attention from political and strategic level, a long-term, high-level lobbying 
effort is necessary.  

With regards to international exercises, senior national players should not be replaced by substitutes. This may 
cause  misunderstandings  in  bilateral  member  state  cooperation  and  hinder  decision  making  during  the 
exercise,  especially  in  asymmetrical  cases  in  which  a  key  decision  making  role  is  played  by  a  junior 
government official in one country, and in the other by the incumbent head of agency. Since civilian and 
military agencies in charge of cyber security are different in each country, some mismatch is inevitable (a 
four-star general may be talking to a less-senior civilian official), but the establishment of national points of 
contact would help to reduce surprises. 

Finally, the EU and NATO should invite each other to observe cyber exercises. Cyber crisis management is 
likely to encompass both civilian and military aspects (partly because in some member states militaries have a 
greater role in cyber security than civilian agencies). As noted previously civilian crises may have military 
consequences  as  military  networks  depend  on  privately-owned  critical  infrastructure,  and  since  a  civilian 
emergency can easily escalate into a military crisis. 

Ad-hoc operation vs formalised networks  

3.2.3 
Ad hoc and informal cooperation bestows many benefits. Informal organisations can adapt more easily as the 
nature of threats changes (Rendon Group 2011: 30). Informal social networks allow stakeholders to connect 
with  each  other  efficiently  with  trust  and  validation,  even  though  it  may  also  result  in  the  unintended 
omission of other potential stakeholders from which the network can benefit (Ibid.: 36). 

The drawbacks of ad-hoc arrangements are the lack of transparency and accountability regarding decision-
making procedures. Personal relations are prone to discontinuity resulting from the choices of individuals. In 
informal networks personality conflicts tend to be more pronounced, especially in an ad-hoc organization 
with a minimally defined leadership (Ibid.: 33). Personal relations are difficult to sustain and maintain over 
time,  thereby  undermining  the  creation  and  sustainment  of  trust  (Stickler  2010:  7-8).  Accordingly,  some 
degree of institutionalisation and formalisation will be necessary in the longer term.  

In  addition  to  interference  from  individual  personal  inclinations  (interests,  priorities,  sympathies  and 
antipathies),  ad-hoc  cooperation  formations  tend  to  be  temporary.  When  individuals  who  initiated  or  are 
responsible  for  coordination  of  meetings  are  seconded  or  leave  their  current  positions,  meetings  tend  to 
become less frequent as the group gradually fades from existence. Thus, ad hoc formations should in time be 
formalised into more enduring and less malleable forms. 

Some Estonian experts stressed that while informal community is fundamental for cooperation (and other 
people  allege  that  it  is  the  best  cooperation  form  for  cyber  space),  from  a  national  security  viewpoint  it 
should be structured into legislation and institutions so that the government has the right to require private 
and  nonprofit  entities  to  fulfil  their  duties  in  case  of  crisis.  If  capabilities  are  voluntary  and  cooperation 
formations largely informal, it is difficult to formulate a meaningful role for them in national security and 
defence policies and strategies. 

                                                      
[18] 
scarce at political level, they may reduce the possible consequences of a cyber incident. 

Since understanding the implications of cyber risks assumes some technical- level knowledge that is 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 15 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

Decision-making in response to cyber incidents  

3.2.4 
Even though internal decision making structures and processes to respond to cyber incidents are in place in 
many agencies, since cyber events evolve fast and decisions are required immediately, action is often taken 
outside  of  these  structures.  Formal  procedures  are  still  used,  but  primarily  for  the  purposes  of  crisis 
communication and information sharing. Again, to ensure flexible decision making and agile responses to an 
incident, this practice may be better than following predetermined formal procedures.  

Whether through formal or informal procedures, it is advisable that crisis decisions, be taken by those with a 
good understanding of the nature of an incident, including its possible technical, legal, political, and other 
implications. Therefore, in some cases it may be feasible to delegate interagency decision making from a top 
senior or management level to the next level below, while keeping the upper level well informed. 

4.0  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
This paper has explored the challenges of inter-agency cooperation in the field of cyber security. First, on the 
basis of a literature review, it has identified requirements for successful interaction relevant to cyber security 
communities.  The empirical  part  of  the  paper  investigated  the  practice  of  organising  and  participating  in 
national and international cyber exercises in Estonia.  

In comparison with other activity areas of integrated (previously called ‘total defence’) security and defence 
in Estonia, cyber security cooperation is among the most advanced fields.19 Interactions and coordination 
among  cyber  security  community  have  developed  from  cooperation  on  the  elementary  level  (personal 
relationships,  limited  information  access,  and  unstructured  interagency  process)  to  coordination  at  the 
intermediate level (organisational interagency relationships, actors willing to share information about future 
plans,  and  organised  interagency  process)  (Stickler  2010:  7).  Within  the  CDU,  public-private  and  civil-
military  engagements  have  reached  the  most  advanced  cooperation  form  -  collaboration.  Personal 
relationships have been institutionalised in terms of membership, information access is extensive, ends and 
goals  of  the  CDU  reinforce  objectives  of  national  cyber  security  policy  and  of  individual  agencies,  and 
interactions with other actors are systematic.  

On the basis of the paper’s findings, it is recommended that interagency cooperation in cyber security be 
regularly practiced in national, EU, and NATO exercises. In addition, the following should be considered: 

•  Through educational programmes and training, continue to raise awareness among cyber security 
stakeholders (especially at the political and strategic levels) of the arrangements, mechanisms, and 
measures needed to ensure effective cyber security collaboration. 

•  Evaluate  management  structure  to  ensure  it  allows  for  optimal  decision-making  and  management 
models during a cyber incident, while designing and reviewing agency and inter-agency contingency 
plans to ensure adequate response to a cyber incident.  

•  Clarify legal mandates, duties, responsibilities, and decision making procedures throughout the whole 
spectrum of cyber incidences and crisis management (from normal conditions up to a cyber attack 
equivalent to an armed conflict).  

                                                      
[19] 
The activity areas of integrated national defence in Estonia are: military defence, civil support to 
military  defence,  international  efforts,  ensuring  internal  security  and  sustainability  of  vital  services  and 
psychological defence (National Defence Strategy 2010: 4). Other areas where inter-agency cooperation is 
more advanced are the process of the risk analysis of emergency situations and host nation support for the 
reception of allied military force. See Jermalavičius et. al 2014: 54.  

9 - 16 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

•  Develop exercise scenarios that include transition from civilian crisis to military in order to practice 

civil-military cooperation, including decision making procedures.  

•  Ensure that cyber exercises are followed by substantial after-action reports and implementation plans, 
and  monitor  progress  towards  implementation.  Develop  feedback  mechanisms  for  ensuring  that 
lessons  learned  are  distributed  to  all  actors  and  implemented,  and  monitor  progress.  Feedback 
mechanisms  include  after  action  reports  as  well  as  empowerment  of  the  actors  to  allow  them  to 
implement  the  changes.  Verify  that  behaviour  is  ultimately  changed  and  that  changes  are 
institutionalised.   

•  Engage  all  relevant  stakeholders,  especially  from  the  private  sector,  early  on  into  the  planning 
process, thereby helping to  build a sense of common purpose, disseminate knowledge, homogenize 
actors’ expectations,  and eliminate possible mistakes in the scenario.  

•  Develop  and  update  Standard  Operating  Procedures  for  cooperation  governing  stakeholder 
interactions  and  coordination  in  cyber  crisis  management.  Clarify  the  roles,  responsibilities, 
authorities of actors, as well as the leadership arrangements for cyber security emergencies.  

•  Prepare  and  execute  cyber  exercises  in  accordance  with  ends  and  means  of  the  Cyber  Security 
Strategy,  and  subsequently  take,  lessons  learned  into  account  when  reviewing  strategy  and 
contingency  plans. National contingency plans should be developed and tested on a regular basis 
through exercises. 

•  Use exercise management (tools to support preparation, execution and evaluation), monitoring (real-
time, periodic status reports), and evaluation tools (debriefing workshops, after action reports, hot 
wash-up sessions). The planning, execution and evaluation processes can be more efficient if they use 
well defined methodologies and tools to support them. 

•  Consider drafting political guidance for the arrangement of joint civilian-military crisis management 

exercises and hold frequent and regular exercises. 

Consider  the  establishment  of  a  joint  authority  that  plans  and  organises  joint  crisis  management 
exercises to  respond  to  the  whole  spectrum  of  civilian  and  military  emergencies,  including  cyber 
security.20 Such an authority could assemble lessons learned from exercises and real-world incidents, 
preparing an annual report with recommendations to the government. 

                                                      
[20]  In  Finland  the  Security  and  Defence  Committee  directs  joint  exercises  of  the  government.  The 
committee is responsible for monitoring and development of Finland’s Security Strategy for Society 
that is based on comprehensive security concept and provides basis for crisis management (Resolution 
of the Finnish Government 16.12.2010).  

 
 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

9 - 17 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

REFERENCES 
[1] 

Armed Forces of the United States, Joint Publication 3-16. Multinational Operations. 13 July 2013. 
https://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/jp3-16.pdf 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

Äripäev,  Eestist  saab  NATO  kübersüda  (Estonia  will  become  NATO’s  cyber  heart).  18.05.2007. 
http://leht.aripaev.ee/publicationimages/pdf/lehed/3589.pdf 

Cambron-McCabe N., Preparation and development of school leaders: Implications for social justice 
policies.  In  Marshall  C.,  and  Oliva  M.,  Leadership  for  social  justice:  Making  revolutions  in 
education  (2nd  ed.),  2008.  Boston:  Allyn  &  Bacon,  35–54,  Cited  in:  Lape  E.,  Comprehensive 
Approach on UNSCR 1325: Why the U.S. and Others Should Follow. In: Neal D. J, and Wells II L. 
(eds.),  Capability  Development 
in  Support  of  Comprehensive  Approaches  Transforming 
International Civil-Military Interactions. Center for Technology and National Security Policy, INSS, 
December 
2011. 
http://www.ndu.edu/CTNSP/docUploaded/ITX2_Capability%20Development%20for%20CA.pdf 

Cavanaugh  S.,  Baltic  Ghost:  Regional  Cyber  Defense  Cooperation  between  the  Baltic  States, 
EUCOM  and  the  SPP,  EUCOM.  June  11,  2013.  http://www.eucom.mil/blog-post/25209/baltic-
ghost-regional-cyber-defense-cooperation-between-the-baltic-states-eucom-and-the-spp 

Baumann  A.  B.,  Silver  Bullet  or  Time  Suck?  Revisting  the  Role  of  Interagnecy  Coordination in 
Complex  Operations.  Prism  vol.  3,  no.3,  INSS,  2012.  http://  www.isn.ethz.ch/Digital-
Library/Publications/Detail/?ots591=0c54e3b3-1e9c-be1e-2c24-
a6a8c7060233&lng=en&id=143972 

Bendiek  A.,  Porter  L.  A.,  European  Cyber  Security  Policy  within  a  Global  Multistakeholder 
Structure, European Foreign Affairs Review 18, no.2 (2013): 155-180.  

Dijk G., Comprehensive Approach: why it is a big NATO issue. Interallied Confederation of Reserve 
Officers (CIOR) Symposium on NATO’s Comprehensive Approach and the Role of Reservists, held 
on  11  August 
in  Stavanger,  Norway.  http://www.cior.net/News/2010/COMPREHENSIVE-
APPROACH-%E2%80%A6--and-why-it-is-a-big-NATO.aspx 

Doughty  R.O,  Erwin  R.M.,  Building  National  Security  through  Interagency  Cooperation: 
Opportunities  and  Challenges.  In  Wells  II  L.,  Hailes  T.  C.,  and  Davies  M.C.  (eds.).  Changing 
Mindsets to Transform Security: Leader Development for an Unpredictable and Complex World. 
Center for Technology and National Security Policy. INSS, 2013.  

Essens,  P.J.M.D.,  Febbraro,  A.  R.,  Thompson  M.  M,  and  Baranski  J.V.,  Collaboration  in  a 
Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations:  Introduction,  in  Collaboration  in  a  Comprehensive 
Approach  to  Operations:  Effective  Collaboration  in Joint,  Multinational,  Multiagency  Teams  and 
Staffs, STO-MP-HFM-204, NATO Science and Technology Organization, October, 2013. 

[10] 

Essens, P.J.M.D., Febbraro, A. R., Thompson M. M, and Baranski J.V., Epilogue: Collaboration in 
a  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations,  in  Collaboration  in  a  Comprehensive  Approach  to 
Operations: Effective Collaboration in Joint, Multinational, Multiagency Teams and Staffs, STO-
MP-HFM-204, NATO Science and Technology Organization, October, 2013. 

9 - 18 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

Estonian  Defence  League,  Küberkaitse  on  valdkond,  kus  Ameerika  Ühendriigid  õpivad  Eesti 
kogemusest (Cyber Security is the field where the US learns from Estonian experience). 01.03.2013, 
http://www.kaitseliit.ee/et/kindral-kiili-kuberkaitse-on-valdkond-kus-ameerika-uhendriigid-opivad-
eesti-kogemusest 

European Commission, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. 
Joint  Communication  to  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  –  The  EU’s  comprehensive 
approach  external  conflict  and  crises.  JOIN/2013/030 
-  http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:52013JC0030:EN:NOT 

final.  11.12.2013. 

European  Union  Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security  (ENISA),  On  National  and 
International  Cyber  exercises,  Survey,  Analysis  and  Recommendations.  October  2012.  http 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/cce/cyber-
exercises/exercise-survey2012 

European  Union  Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security  (ENISA),  Cybersecurity 
Cooperation.  Defending 
http:// 
www.enisa.europa.eu/media/key-documents/cybersecurity-cooperation-defending-the-digital-
frontline  

the  Digital  Frontline.  ENISA,  October 

2013. 

Finnish  Government,  Strategy  for  Security  in  Society.  Resolution  of  the  Finnish  Government 
16.12.2010. 
http://www.defmin.fi/en/publications/strategy_documents/the_security_strategy_for_society 

Floyd N, How Defence can contribute to Australia’s national security strategy. Lowry Institute for 
International  Policy,  Sydney,  August,  2009.  Cited  in:  Menhinick  R.  T.,  and  Gregory  N.  R., 
Educating and Training for a Comprehensive Approach: An Australian Perspective. In Neal D. J, 
and  Wells  II  L.  (eds.),  Capability  Development  in  Support  of  Comprehensive  Approaches 
Transforming International Civil-Military Interactions. Center for Technology and National Security 
Policy, INSS, December 2011. 

[17]  Hull, C, Focus and Convergence through a Comprehensive Approach: but which among the many? 

Swedish Defence Research Agency, 2011. 

[18] 

Jermalavičius, T., Stakeholder Interactions in Comprehensive Security – Conditions for Success, in 
Jermalavičius, T, Pernik, P, Hurt M with Breitenbauch H and Järvenpää P. Comprehensive Security 
and  Integrated  Defence:  Challenges  of  implementing  whole-of-government  and  whole-of-society 
approaches. ICDS report, December 2013, published February 2014. 

[19]  Kaska, K., Osula, A.-M., Stinissen, J. The Cyber Defence Unit of the Estonian Defence League - 

Legal, Policy and Organisational Analysis. NATO CCD COE Publications, 2013. 

[20]  Mattelaer, A., The Empty Promise of Comprehensive Planning in EU Crisis Management. European 

Foreign Affairs Review 18, Special Issue (2013): 125-146.  

[21]  Menhinick R. T., and Gregory N. R., Educating and Training for a Comprehensive Approach: An 
Australian Perspective. In Neal D. J, and Wells II L. (eds.), Capability Development in Support of 
Comprehensive  Approaches  Transforming  International  Civil-Military  Interactions.  Center  for 
Technology and National Security Policy, INSS, December 2011. 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

9 - 19 

 

Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model 

 

 

 

[22]  Ministry  of  Defence,  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  a  draft  regulation  on  the  Estonian  Defence 
http:// 

engagement 

02.04.2013. 

security. 

League 
cyber 
http://eelnoud.valitsus.ee/main#KBab1QqK  

in 

MOD, 

[23]  Ministry  of  Defence 

(MOD),  National  Defence  Strategy.  MOD,  2010.  http://  www. 

www.kaitseministeerium.ee/files/kmin/img/files/KM_riigikaitse_strateegia_eng(2).pdf  

[24]  NATO,  Strategic  Concept:  For  the  Defence  and  Security  of  the  Members  of  the  North  Atlantic 

Treaty Organisation, 2010. 

[25]  NATO, Chicago Summit Declaration, 20.05.2012. 

[26]  NATO CCD COE. Cyber Defence Exercise Locked Shields 2013 After Action Report. Tallinn 2013. 

http://www.ccdcoe.org/publications/LockedShields13_AAR.pdf 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

Padar, A. Interview with the author. February, 2014. 

Rendon Group, Conficker Working Group: Lessons Learned, June 2010, published January 2011. 
http://www.confickerworkinggroup.org/wiki/uploads/Conficker_Working_Group_Lessons_Learned
_17_June_2010_final.pdf 

Riigikogu, Emergency Act (RT I 2009, 39, 262), 2009 
http://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/530102013054/consolide  

Smith M. E.,  Institutionalizing the ‘Comprehensive Approach’ to EU Security. European Foreign 
Affairs Review 18, Special Issue (2013): 25-44. 

Strickler, T Interagency cooperation: Quo vadis? Interagency Journal, Vol. 1, Issue 1, 2010, pp. 3-9. 

Tardy T., NATO and the Comprehensice Approach. Weak conceptualisation, political divergences, 
and implementation challenges. In Herd G.B. and Krindler J (eds.). Understanding NATO in the 21 
Century. Allience Strategy, Security and Global Governence. Routledge, 2013. 

[33] 

Tikk,  E.,  Kaska  K.,  Vihul  L.,  International  Cyber  Incidents:  Legal  Considerations.  CCD  COE, 
2010. 

[34]  Wells II L, Pudas T. J., McNitt B., Linking NATO Capacity to Local Stakeholders. In: Neal D. J, 
and Wells II L., Capability Development in Support of Comprehensive Approaches Transforming 
International  Civil-Military  Interactions.  Center  for  Technology  and  National  Security  Policy, 
INSS, December 2011 

[35]  White House, National Security Strategy, May 2010. 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/national_security_strategy.pdf 

9 - 20 

STO-MP-HFM-236 

 

