 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Inter-Agency Cooperation:  

The New Security Paradigm in the 

21st Century 

by 

Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek 

United States Army 

 

United States Army War College 

Class of 2012 

DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT: A 
Approved for Public Release Distribution 

is Unlimited 

This manuscript is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of 
Strategic Studies Degree. The views expressed in this student academic research paper 

are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government. 

The U.S. Army War College is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States 

Association of Colleges and Schools, 3624 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, (215) 662-5606. The Commission 
on Higher Education is an institutional accrediting agency recognized by the U.S. Secretary of Education and the 

Council for Higher Education Accreditation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time fo r reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate or an y other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing 
this burden to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA  22202- 
4302.  Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a curren tly 
valid OMB control number.  PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
22-03-2012 
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

2. REPORT TYPE 
Strategy Research Project 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

Inter-Agency Cooperation: The New Security Paradigm in the 21st  Century 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Colonel Jeffrey W . Jurasek 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT 

NUMBER 

William J. Flavin 
US Army Peacekeeping Stability 
Operations Institute 

9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 

U. S. Army W ar College 
122 Forbes Avenue 
Carlisle Barracks, PA 17013 

12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Distribution A: Unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 

NUMBER(S) 

14. ABSTRACT 
The security paradigm has changed. W e no longer face a conventional threat that could match the military might of the United 
States.  W ith globalization affecting all areas of the world, new threats have risen. These new threat takes the form of weak 
governments, lagging economies, religious extremists, and youth bulgesi. To confront this new threat the United States must 
use all elements of its national power, and for this power to be used successfully, it must be coordinated and work in tandem to 
ensure unity of effort. The Military will assume new mission that involve not only defense, but development and diplomacy (3D) 
as well. The 3D’s will be used to strengthen partner nation security in an attempt to face this new security threat before it 
escalates into another 9/11 event.  Interagency cooperation will be critical as this new paradigm comes on line and all parties 
learn to understand each other’s culture and how best to work together to achieve the desired effects/outcomes that will 
secure our national objectives, as we face this new security challenges of the 21st  century 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 
Irregular W arfare, whole of government, 3D paradigm 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

a. REPORT 
Unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 
Unclassified 

17. LIMITATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 

Unlimited 

24 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area 
code) 

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

USAWC STRATEGY RESEARCH PROJECT 

INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION:  

ST CENTURY 

THE NEW SECURITY PARADIGM IN THE 21

by 

Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek 

United States Army 

William Flavin 
Project Adviser 

This SRP is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of Strategic 
Studies  Degree.  The  U.S.  Army  War  College  is  accredited  by  the  Commission  on 
Higher  Education  of  the  Middle  States  Association  of  Colleges  and  Schools,  3624 
Market  Street,  Philadelphia,  PA  19104,  (215)  662-5606.    The  Commission  on  Higher 
Education  is  an  institutional  accrediting  agency  recognized  by  the  U.S.  Secretary  of 
Education and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation. 

The  views  expressed  in  this  student  academic  research  paper  are  those  of  the  author 
and  do  not  reflect  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Department  of  the  Army, 
Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government. 

U.S. Army War College 

CARLISLE BARRACKS, PENNSYLVANIA 17013 

 

AUTHOR: 

Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek 

ABSTRACT 

TITLE: 

Inter-Agency Cooperation: The New Security Paradigm in the 21st
 
Century 

FORMAT: 

Strategy Research Project 

DATE: 

22 March 2012 

WORD COUNT: 5,490 

PAGES: 24 

KEY TERMS: 

Irregular Warfare, Whole of Government, 3D Paradigm 

CLASSIFICATION:  Unclassified 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

The security paradigm has changed. We no longer face a conventional threat 

that could match the military might of the United States.  With globalization affecting all 

areas of the world, new threats have risen. These new threat takes the form of weak 

governments, lagging economies, religious extremists, and youth bulges1. To confront 

this new threat the United States must use all elements of its national power, and for 

this power to be used successfully, it must be coordinated and work in tandem to 

ensure unity of effort. The Military will assume new mission that involve not only 

defense, but development and diplomacy (3D) as well. The 3D’s will be used to 

strengthen partner nation security in an attempt to face this new security threat before it 

escalates into another 9/11 event.  Interagency cooperation will be critical as this new 

paradigm comes on line and all parties learn to understand each other’s culture and 

how best to work together to achieve the desired effects/outcomes that will secure our 

national objectives, as we face this new security challenges of the 21st  century. 

 

INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION:  

THE NEW SECURITY PARADIGM IN THE 21

ST CENTURY 

 
 
 

 

There is an understanding that there is a need for interagency cooperation and 

collaboration to ensure that all elements of the U.S. Government are consistent as to 

our foreign policy and to maximize unity of effort but before we can talk about the need 

for inter-agency cooperation and collaboration, we will need to discuss how this need 

came about. The word has changed. With the end of the cold war, old adversaries are 

now on friendly terms. Technological advancements in the inter-net and social media 

have connected people around the world in a way that has never before been seen. 

Globalization of the world is the new norm and countries are now interconnected both 

economically as well as politically. It is safe to say the globalization has ―directly or 

indirectly influenced the politics, environment, geopolitics and economics of virtually 

every country in the world‖2

 

With the cold war everything was held in order through the nation state. ―The 

Cold War was primarily a drama of states confronting states, balancing states and 

aligning with states, and as a system, the cold war was balanced at the center by two 

super powers: the United States and the Soviet Union.‖3   Both super powers had stable 

governments and institutions that assisted other nation states in maintaining control of 

the populations. However, with globalization, the balancing of the two super powers is 

not there, but rather, globalization has its own systems that balance out the world, those 

being between nation-states, nation-states and global markets and individuals and 

nation states.4   With the different forces balancing out the globalized world, developing 

states are finding it hard to maintain good governance and sustain adequate institutions, 

to maintain control over their territories. It is this lack of control over large areas within a 

nation state that is ―becoming safe havens for violent political actors‖5   It is these violent 

political actors that are able to disrupt governments through political violence and 

through their actions is able to weaken a state and make it more vulnerable to civil war 

and insurgency.6

 

The new threats facing the United States in the 21st century are many, but the 

one that stand out as the most critical if left unchecked, is trans-national threats. Trans- 

national threats are ―non-military threats that cross borders and either threaten the 

political and social integrity of a nation or the health of that nation’s inhabitants.‖7   The 

new threat, that is the root enabler for terrorist and other international crimes, is the 

failed and failing states.  It is these failed or failing states that are considered a national 

security issue for the United States. They are such a concern that they have been 

mentioned in the U.S. National Security Strategy since 19988. 

The problems associated with failed and failing states, which makes them a 

national security issues for the U.S. is that these states ―provide safe havens for 

terrorists, organized crime, and other illicit groups; causing or exacerbating conflict, 

regional instability and humanitarian emergencies; and undermine efforts to promote 

democracy, good governance and economic stability.‖9   For the U.S. to address this 

problem effectively, we have adopted the ―whole of Government Approach‖10. This 

approach uses all the powers of the U.S. in consort, in an attempt to maximize the unity 

of effort against the enemies of the U.S. The whole of government approach was 

brought about with the understanding that, no one agency, can manage the threats of 

today on its own. Case in point is the piracy off the coast of Somalia. The counter piracy 

2 

 

 

effort involve the DoD as the lead on identifying and capturing pirates, while the State 

Department is addressing the causes that lead Somalis to piracy as a source of income. 

The Treasury Department is involved in tracking monies that have been paid to pirates 

by the ship owners for the release of their ships and crews, and the Justice department 

has been involved in finding solutions on how to prosecute the pirates once they are 

captured, which involves U.S. and other nation state actors.  President Obama spelled 

out this whole of government approach in his 2010 National Security Strategy (NSS) of 

the United States. In the NSS it states that ―To succeed, we must update, balance, and 

integrate all of the tools of American power and work with our allies and partners to do 

the same.‖11  The tools referred to by President Obama are: Defense, Diplomacy, 

Economic, Development, Homeland Security, Intelligence, Strategic Communications, 

The American People and the Private Sector. 

Military Engagements Other Then War 

With the new threats to the United States in mind, the Department of Defense 

has adjusted its doctrine and adopted the Development, Diplomacy and Defense (3D) 

paradigm for addressing these new threats. This 3D paradigm requires the DoD to 

develop new ways of coordinating and cooperating with agencies, such as the 

Department of State, before, during and after any operation that may have parallel line 

of operations. The goal is to work in conjunction with, not against each other to 

maximize efforts and reduce costs. 

The 3D paradigm is nested in the 2010 NSS and the whole of government 

approach in dealing with the threats facing the U.S. today.  As the militaries are now 

faced with threats that are no longer Nation State legitimate militaries, in which they can 

use their technologically advanced equipment in which they could quickly meet and 

3 

 

 

defeat quickly.  The military now has to adapt to a new ways of defeating the threats to 

the U.S. that requires more than the use of advanced weapon systems. The military’s 

best bet now is to prevent a conflict before it happens.  The 3D paradigm is best used 

in a non-kinetic environment, Phase Zero or shaping operations.  These new type of 

operations involve cooperation from many actors in the geographic area of operation. 

These new operations involve assisting partner nations develop their capacity in 

governance, legitimacy, infrastructure, rule of law, defense, and professionalization to 

their militaries. The end result being that they would have the tools to solve their own 

problems before they escalate to a point that would involve a military confrontation. 

USAFRICOM and USSOUTHCOM are two unified commands that are using this 3D 

paradigm to assist in stabilizing countries that have weak governments and may pose a 

threat to the U.S. and its interests in the future. Somalia, Uganda, and Colombia are just 

a few countries where these operations are being conducted. 

Some actors that are involved in the 3D operations are the State Department, 

United States Agency for International Development (USAID), international 

organizations, government and Non-government organizations. All of these actors, if 

working together, can accomplish more than if they act independently.  For the military 

this inter-agency coordination and execution of 3D type operations takes place during 

the phase zero and is called shaping operations. 

Within the whole of government 3-D paradigm, there are many agencies that are 

well suited to take the lead with these operations. The DoD is well manned and 

equipped to engage quickly and have the institutional knowledge to assist in developing 

a partner nations security forces.  The State Department is already actively involved in 

 

4 

diplomacy and has the expertise to assist nations in democratization and building 

infrastructure through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) 

office which operates from U.S. Embassies around the world.  OSD and USAID both 

have the technical capacity, but lack the man power to fully engage at the level needed 

to address the new threats facing the U.S. However, most 3D operations are taking 

place in non-combat zones, and as such, DoD would not be the lead agency but rather 

control would fall under the direction of the U.S. ambassador in the state in question 

The DoD components will be answering to civilian control and will assist in meeting the 

national security objectives of all parts of the executive branch of the U.S. Government. 

With these types on mission coordination and cooperation will be paramount for 

success. The current operations being carried out by the Combined Joint Task Force – 

Horn of Africa is an excellent example where this well orchestrated coordination and 

cooperation is proving successful for the U.S. and is a model that other unified 

commands within the DoD are looking to incorporate into their mission sets. 

Phase Zero / Shaping Operations 

The definition of phase zero or shaping operations can be found in Joint 

Publication 5-0: Joint Operations Planning, 11 August 2011. In this publication it states 

that: 

relationships  with 

Shape  (Phase 0).  Joint  and multinational operations—inclusive  of  normal 
and  routine  military  activities—and  various  interagency  activities  are 
performed  to  dissuade  or  deter  potential  adversaries  and  to  assure  or 
solidify 
friends  and  allies.  They  are  executed 
continuously  with  the  intent  to  enhance  international  legitimacy  and  gain 
multinational  cooperation  in  support  of  defined  national  strategic  and 
strategic  military  objectives.  They  are  designed  to  ensure  success  by 
shaping perceptions and influencing the behavior of both adversaries and 
partner nations, developing partner nation and friendly military capabilities 
for   self-defense   and   multinational   operations,   improving   information 

5 

 

 

exchange  and  intelligence  sharing,  and  providing  US 
peacetime and contingency access.12

 

forces  with 

Phase zero or shaping operations, to be effective, take a lot of coordination with 

many different actors. However the main lead in these types of operations, where they 

are employed to prevent conflict or assist in a humanitarian operation, is not the military, 

but as mentioned earlier is the U.S. ambassador. With the ambassador being the lead 

representative of the United States in a partner nation with internal security problems, 

he sets the ground rules that all DoD units operating within his country must follow. 

Along with this, all commanders who are conducting phase zero / shaping operations in 

a country must ensure that their operations are paralleling and supporting U.S. 

government initiatives within the country.  The country teams Mission Strategic 

Resource Plan (MSRP) spells out all the U.S. initiatives currently being carried out 

within any given country. 

Before any phase zero military mission can begin, there is a large amount of 

coordination that has to be carried out to synchronies the unity of effort.  The State 

Department, through their ambassadors sets the stage for U.S. involvement in any 

country. The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has the lead 

on all development issues within any country and it is through the interaction between 

the ambassador and USAID representatives with a partner nation’s government or 

ministries that an MSRP is put together. The military, although following the guidance 

and U.S. interests in an area, does have its own distinctive military purpose for being in 

an area.  For a commander to be successful in a phase zero operation, he must 

continuously coordinate his mission and objectives with his state department counter 

parts to ensure he is within compliance with the MSRP, as well as, continue to 

6 

 

 

encourage and influence the open dialogue between all  agencies with an interest in the 

area, something that is difficult at best. 

A good example of the 3D or whole of government operation that has proven to 

be a role model of success, and it is something I have firsthand knowledge of is the 

Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa.   I was the commander of the 402nd Civil 

Affairs Battalion and was the commander of all Civil Affairs assets assigned to the task 

force, and saw firsthand how critical inter-agency coordination was for the success of 

our mission, as well as the difficulties associated with any coordination between two 

very different institutional cultures.  The Area of operations for the CJTF-HOA included 

18 nations however, all of the Civil Affairs teams (CAT) operated in only six of those 

nations to include, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and the Comoros 

Islands.  The geographic size of the area my teams were operating in was about the 

size of the continental United States. 

Each country posed its own unique challenges, and had its own requirements 

before the CJTF-HOA was granted access.  There were two types of mission being 

conducted by the CJTF-HOA, those being:  professional military to military training that 

was being conducted under the United States Code title 22 Foreign Relations and 

interaction, which covers military assistance.  This military to military training was lead 

by the Department of State and generally fell within the African Contingency Operations 

and Assistance (ACODA) program.  The military to military training was generally given 

to those forces that were being deployed to the African Union Mission in Somalia 

(AMISOM).  This military to military meet the definition found in Joint Publication 5-0: 

 

7 

Joint Operations planning, in that we were ―developing partner nation and friendly 

military capabilities for self-defense and multinational operations‖13
 

The other mission set involving the CJTF-HOA was that of civil-military 

engagements and projects.  Most of these civil-military engagements and projects were 

focused along those countries that bordered Somalia.  Rear Admiral Brian L. Losey, the 

commander of the Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa, states in his Prism 

article, Conflict Prevention in East Africa, the Indirect Approach, that civil-military 

engagements involved more than just U.S. CAT’s but included partners, such as Non 

Governmental Organizations, USAID, DoS, International Organizations,  as well and 

―focus on meeting basic human needs and on providing essential services through 

development projects that build trust and confidence between host nation government, 

military and populations vulnerable to the influence of extremist groups and their 

ideology‖14

 

USAID is the lead agency on any development projects that the CJTF-HOA Civil 

Affairs Teams thought were justified or needed in any country.  There was a substantial 

amount of coordination between the CA teams and their USAID director in each country 

before any project was nominated for funding and execution.  For the CJTF-HOA, any 

project had to meet some basic criteria before it was brought to USAID for approval. 

That criterion was that the project had to meet a basic need for the population, such as 

a medical clinic, school or well. It had to be sustainable by the partner nation 

government or local village elders, and it had to be something that would not have been 

funded by USAID due to limited budge. If the project meets these criteria, it would be 

cleared through the Civil Affairs battalion commander, and then passed to the Staff of 

8 

 

 

the CJTF-HOA to see if it meet their military objectives and could be funded. When this 

was all done, final coordination was done with USAID and the Embassy to ensure the 

project fell within their MSRP guidelines and if so, they would intern coordinate with the 

partner nation government to ensure it was needed and that the respective ministry 

within the government could sustain the final project.  There were some instances 

where additional approval was needed by the partner nations military to ensure 

continues access to an area for the duration of the project. 

If a project was cleared through all the different parties, which constituted a 

tremendous coordination and cooperation effort by all parties concerned, construction 

could be scheduled within weeks if the dollar amount was below ten thousand dollars 

($10,000.00). For larger amounts funding would take some time, but usually 

construction could begin within a year. 

Other then development and military to military projects, the CJTF-HOA also 

conducted medical and veterinarian exercises in conjunction with partner nation medical 

institutions to assist in developing their capacity to provide those services to their 

populations.  As CJTF-HOA provided training in basic medical and veterinarian 

services, to isolated civilian populations, we were giving the partner nation government 

the opportunity to build trust and confidence with their populations, something that was 

critical for the stability of the region, as many civilians who would be susceptible to 

violent extremist groups propaganda, were in many instances felt that their government 

didn’t care about them and as such they had no loyalty to their government.  For these 

operations, coordination between the CJTF-HOA, U.S. embassy and partner nation 

governments was critical. The State department is the lead agency in diplomacy, but 

 

9 

was not manned to take on any operation that would reach isolated villages, and it was 

through the CJTF-HOA medical exercises that these disenfranchised populations were 

introduced to their governments in a positive way. All concur that these operations were 

successful and was an excellent avenue for partner nation governments to engage with 

their populations in a way that was unknown until CJTF-HOA and the U.S. Government 

introduced the 3-D paradigm mission sets to the Horn of Africa. 

Each country team had its own requirements for CAT to operate within their 

countries, which mostly fell in line with their published MSRP.  However, due to the 

specific military purpose and geographic locations of the CAT’s, there were some issue 

between the State Department, DoD and Non-governmental organizations (NGO), that 

continue to plague the CJTF-HOA till this day.  Most of these issues are a product of the 

ingrained institutional cultures, and the difficulties of some military commanders 

accepting that others can assist them in accomplishing their mission, that are not 

military. 

Opposition to the Use of Military in Non-Military Operations 

There is a wide array of opinions on the use of the military outside of their 

traditional role of combat.  H. Allen Irish, in his paper titles ―Peace Corps with Guns: 

Can the Military be a Tool of Development‖ states that ―development activities are not a 

core military competency, and that there is neither a need for nor a comparative 

advantage to using military assets in that capacity.‖15  This single statement sums up the 

opposition to the use of military for anything other than combat.  General Anthony Zinni 

(Ret.) states that ―American officers lack the strong mix of non-combat skills needed in 

order to engage arrays of cultures and organizations.‖16

 

10 

 

 

Deborah Avant states in her article ―Losing Control of the Profession through 

Outsourcing‖ that it’s all a matter of money and that there is not enough soldiers to carry 

out missions that are not linked to their traditional combat role. She states that it is 

cheaper to outsource to private contractors to do missions that are not a part of the 

traditional military combat role.  Some of the mission that are being passed to private 

contractors are all ―non-core tasks such as training.‖ 17  She points out that private 

military training in Africa as a case in point, where the African Contingency Operations 

Training Assistance (ACOTA) is being carried out with a large role being provided to 

private contractors, who are successful in carrying out these tasks.  She also states that 

with the shrinking military, it will have to rely on private contractors to carry out these 

non-traditional roles so that the U.S. can meet its foreign policy goals while the military 

focuses on training for its traditional combat roles. 

I would agree with Deborah Avant, that there is some training being conducted in 

the Horn of Africa by contractors, but I do disagree that training is not a core task of the 

military. Special Operations Forces (SOF) have been training foreign militaries  for a 

long time and has proven to be a valued asset available to the DoD  when assisting 

other nations in developing their security forces, not only in Africa, but in Iraq and 

Afghanistan as well.  To be frank, one could argue that training is what the military does 

the most, and as such has perfected many aspects of military training that can be easily 

passed to other militaries, without the bureaucratic limitations associated with private 

contractors. 

With all the discussions about the military being used in non-military operations, 

there is a greater need for all parties to meet and discuss the future missions that the 

 

11 

military should be training for in the future. With the issues of transnational crime and 

the associated problems with failed and failing states and the rise of ungoverned 

spaces, there are more players in the foreign policy arena that are affected other then 

the military. There needs to be consensus from all parties, that are now involved with 

the national security of the United States, to include the State Department, the 

Department of the Treasury, USAID, Department of Justice, Department of Energy, 

Department of transportation, Department of Homeland Security, the Environmental 

Protection Agency, the Department of Commerce and the Office of Director of National 

Intelligence. All of the above mentioned agencies and offices will need to be involved in 

providing input into the future uses and roles of the Department of Defense assets, 

outside of their traditional roles in combat. As the CJTF-HOA has proven, military forces 

can be incorporated into the cultures of other agencies and can work successfully 

towards meeting the national security objectives of the U.S. 

There will be continued opposition, both within the DoD and from other agency 

partners and NGO’s about the use of the military in non-traditional roles.  However, with 

the shrinking budgets, all will be affected to some extent. As such, effective interagency 

coordination and cooperation will be essential for the United States to meet its national 

security objectives in the coming future.  Only time will tell if all parties can reach a 

consensus as to the proper role of the military and how it can best be employed to meet 

the national security challenges we will face in the future. All one has to do is look at the 

successes of the CJTF-HOA to see how effective non-traditional military mission can be 

in furthering the national security objectives of the U.S. without firing a single shot. 

 

12 

Militarization of Humanitarian Operations 

The argument around the militarization of humanitarian operations comes from 

those who are engaged in this type of operations. The main critics of militaries being 

involved in humanitarian operations comes from non-governmental organizations 

(NGO).  Karen Guttieri, in her article, ―Humanitarian Space in Insecure Environments: A 

Shifting Paradigm‖, discusses the principals that all humanitarian actors follow to carry 

out their efforts in humanitarian assistance. Those principals are: 

Humanity:  The  principle  of  humanity  requires  the  preservation  of  the 
humanitarian nature of operations—i.e., to protect life and ease suffering. 

Independence: The principle of independence implies independence from 
political as well as military actors. 

Impartiality:   Impartiality   in   principle   requires   that   humanitarian   action 
respond according to need, and without discrimination. 

Neutrality:  The  principle  of  neutrality  requires  outside  actors  to  avoid 
giving military or political advantage to any side over another.18
 

The above listed principals are pretty much straight forward, and give the 

humanitarian assistance organization a large amount of neutrality when they are 

distribute their assistance. This is something that is essential for these organizations to 

have to be effective in their efforts, without it there would be a degradation of their 

physical security. 

When the military is conducting humanitarian operations, there is a perception 

that they are operating with other motives other then humanitarian or a ―political 

signature‖19  attached to their operations. This is something that they are aware of; as 

they use significant force protection measures to secure their immediate area and the 

soldiers conducting the humanitarian operation. Other then humanitarian assistance 

after a natural disaster, the United States Government does not deploy its military 

13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

forces just to help, but rather there must be something gained for the U.S. and its 

national security or national interest. This is something that all the NGO’s are aware of 

and take into account when doing humanitarian missions located close to military units. 

De-militarization of the Military Mission 

The issue associated with the de-militarizing of the military mission revolves 

around the idea of the security assistance.  Though not a new idea or a foreign type 

mission for the Special Operations community, we have seen a rise in this type of 

mission since 9/11. The basics premise for the security assistance is where DoD and 

other interagency organizations work side by side to bring together all the elements of 

our national power. Security assistance is defined as: 

Group  of  programs  authorized  by the  Foreign  Assistance  Act of  1961,  as 
amended, and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976, as amended, or other 
related  statutes  by  which  the  United  States  provides  defense  articles, 
military training,  and  other  defense-related  services  by  grant,  loan,  credit, 
or  cash  sales  in  furtherance  of  national  policies  and  objectives.  Security 
assistance is an element of security cooperation funded and authorized by 
Department    of    State    to    be    administered    by    Department    of 
Defense/Defense Security Cooperation Agency. 20
 

Because of the nature of security assistance DoD has been involved heavily in 

the defense related services not only in Iraq and Afghanistan, but other friendly nations 

throughout the world. Former Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates, mentioned in an 

article titled ―Helping others Defend Themselves‖21  that  the ―military was designed to 

defeat other armies, navies and air forces, not advise, train, and equip them.‖   This 

sums up the feeling from the DoD on how the military is being used outside of its 

traditional roll and placing them into training and assist projects that could be better 

served by civilian institutions outside of DoD.  One would ask the question is this due to 

the old school department of defense leadership holding onto out dated ideas about the 

14 

 

 

 

threats facing the U.S. or is it that they cannot understand the changing world dynamics 

that will leave the U.S. vulnerable if we do not adapt to meet these new challenges? 

Andrew Krepinevich states in his Article ―Strategy for the Long Haul: An Army at 

the Crossroads‖ that soldiers are not diplomats but that they may be called upon to fill 

that role due to the limited size of some civilian agencies. He states, 

The army and its sister services must be prepared to conduct training and 
advising of  host  nation militaries and  where necessary,  allied  and  partner 
militaries.  If  the  Army’s  partners  in  the  U.S.  government’s  interagency 
element  –e.g.,  the  State  Department,  intelligence  community,  USAID  – 
Prove unable to meet their obligations as partners in restoring stability, the 
Army  must  also  be  prepared  to  engage  in  operations  to  help  restore  the 
threatened state’s governance, infrastructure and the rule of law.22

 

So the necessity of the U.S. Military to take on rolls other that are not focused on 

combat may justify a whole new skill set to meet these new challenges in the future. 

Irregular warfare (IW) is the new buzz word that has put to rest some of the 

issues associated with the idea we are de-militarizing the military. IW involves using the 

military and other agency capabilities to limit an enemy’s will, power or influence within 

a geographic area.  Within the Quadrennial Roles and Missions Review Report, January 

2009, irregular warfare is a core competencies and function of the Department of 

Defense and will expand beyond its war fighting mission to include ―winning the support 

of the relevant populations, promoting friendly political authority, and eroding adversary 

control, influence and support‖23     This can also be summed up as the core mission of 

the CJTF-HOA and its execution of the 3-D whole of government paradigm.  As we 

become more focused on our new emerging missions within the irregular warfare arena, 

the mind set of those who would argue that we are de-militarizing the military will come 

to pass, for the simple reason, if successful, conflict will not come to pass, and peace 

will prevail. 

15 

 

 

 

Implications for the Future 

The implications for the future of interagency cooperation are written on the wall 

so to speak.  The end of the Cold War has placed the U.S. military in a unique position. 

With the current U.S. military structure still in place, and after having fought two wars 

over the past ten years, the military is the most tactically trained operational force in the 

world.  The Army has embraced Irregular warfare and phase zero operations as they 

allow the geographic combatant commanders the ability to expand their operations 

beyond traditional combat rolls to achieve their military objective. With the man power 

coming from the DoD, other agencies will need to adapt their internal cultures and 

organizations to work along with the military in this new environment of cooperation and 

coordination. Cooperation and coordination will be paramount to be successful over the 

challenges of the future and all agencies will have to change, much like the Army, to 

meet them head on. 

The Military and other Agencies 

The military will have the greatest challenges to overcome to remain relevant in 

the future.  There are several key areas that will have to be addresses by all 

Department of Defense services to be successful in their interagency cooperation 

efforts.  The biggest obstacles were identified by the United States Government 

Accounting Office (GAO) in their testimony before the Subcommittee on National 

Security and Foreign Affairs, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House 

of Representatives back in July of 2010. The subject of their brief was national security, 

interagency collaboration practices and challenges at DoD’s Southern and African 

Commands.  In this brief it was brought to light that there is a shortage of interagency 

personnel needed to embed into the command structure, due mainly on resourcing from 

16 

 

 

 

other government agencies. Another issue that is proving to be a big challenge for the 

military is the need for additional training to develop a ―well trained workforce.‖24   As 

stated in the start of this paper, there is an understanding that there is a need for 

interagency collaboration to ensure that all elements of the U.S. Government are 

consistent as to our foreign policy and to maximize unity of effort. However, the GAO 

points out that DoD has dropped the ball on adequate training for military members in 

how to work with U.S. Embassies as well as cultural training specific to the geographic 

area the military is operating, Africa was named specifically, and additional language 

training.  It is because of these shortfalls by the DoD that has led to ―a lack of 

understanding of other agencies’ cultures, processes and core capabilities can hamper 

U.S. national security partners ability to work together effectively.‖25   AFRICOM as well 

as SOUTHCOM have been working diligently to correct this shortfall in training of its 

staffs on interagency cultures and cooperation, and a more standardized training 

program should be forthcoming in the near future. 

As we have seen in the implications for the military, other U.S. government 

agencies are grossly under manned and resourced to meet the national security threats 

of today. It is because of this shortfall in manning that DoD has stepped in to assist as 

they have large amounts of underutilized man power and are resourced more freely by 

congress that any other agency within the Government. 

Agencies will have to begin restructuring their organizations to adequately man 

any positions that are available within a geographic combatant commands staff, as well 

as take the lead on training all DoD personnel on their agencies cultures and operations 

and how best to integrate DoD manpower effectively into their organizations to secure 

 

17 

unity of efforts.  This will prove to be difficult and more than just an academic change as 

many personnel within other U.S. agencies have personal biases against those who 

wear uniforms and will no doubt push back on any integration with DoD. 

There is a need for a ―Central Coordinating Authority‖ for security cooperation to 

be successful within the interagency, as suggested by Randal Walsh in his,‖ Security 

Cooperation and New Functional Command.‖26  In his article Walsh states that 

USSOCOM would be the best choice for creating a functional combatant command 

dedicated to security assistance, which involves coordination within and between 

agencies within the U.S. Government.  I will concur that there does need to be a central 

coordination authority for the way forward, and It would be the most practical use of our 

military forces if there was a military lead in the coordinating efforts, as they would make 

up the majority of the work force employed to counter the new security threats, and they 

have the man power and equipment to rapidly employ to meet any challenge. Couple 

these resources with a well coordinated inter-agency operation and success is assured. 

Conclusion 

This paper has shown how the need for interagency cooperation and 

coordination are paramount for the United States to meet its national security as well as 

its foreign policy objectives.  Without unity of effort, that combining all the all the national 

power of the U.S., we will not be able to address the new threats and emerging 

transnational environments that we are facing today. 

We will need to rethink our current thoughts on the use of military forces, and may 

have to stand down our obsolete fighting force and reorganize it into a new construct 

that is adaptable and able to work alongside all of the inter-agencies within the U.S. 

Government.  Where ever the seeds that threaten the U.S way of life are sown, we 

18 

 

 

will meet these new threats and challenges head on and will prevail over those who 

would try and do us harm, as I’m sure we will set our own personal biases aside and will 

fully integrate into a super agency that is fully coordinated and operates with great 

cooperation from all parties. 

Endnotes 

1  National Security Council. Mapping the Global Future; Report of the National Security 

Council 2020 project. (Washington D.C: National Security Council, 2004),14 

2 Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York, Anchor books, April 

2000) P. IX. 

3  Ibid., 13 

4  Ibid., 13-14 

5  Derek S. Reveron, Exporting Security. Washington, D.C. Georgetown press, 2010. P.18 

6  Ibid., 18 

7  Paul J. Smith, Transnational Security Threats and State Survival: A Role for the Military, 

Parameters (Autumn 2000): 78 

8 White house, National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: White 

House, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010.) 

9  Liana Sun Wyler, Weak and Failing States: Evolving Security Threats and U.S. Policy 

(Washington D.C: Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, 2008), 1 

10 White house, National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: White 

House, May 2010.) 

11  Ibid., 14 

12  Department of Defense, Joint Publication 5-0. (Washington D.C: Department of Defense, 

2011), III-42 

13  Ibid., III-42 

14  Brian L. Losey. Conflict Prevention in East Africa, The indirect Approach  Prism 2, no.2 

(March 2011): 81 

19 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15  H. Allen Irish. 2007. Peace Corps with Guns: Can the Military be a Tool of Development. 
Strategic Research Paper. United States Army War College.  (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic 
Studies Institute): 72. http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles/pub828.pdf 

16  General (ret.) Anthony Zinni, speaking at the Marine Corps and U.S. Naval Institute 

Forum 2003, September 4, 2003, Arlington, Virginia, quoted in Laurent Guy, ―Competing Visions 
for the U.S. Military,‖ Orbis (Fall 2004), 705-706. 

17  Deborah, Avant. ―Losing Control of the Profession through Outsourcing‖ in The future of 

the Army profession. 2ed. Don M. Snider (Boston: Custom Publishing, 2005) 276 

18  Guttieri, Karen, Humanitarian Space in Insecure Environments: A Shifting Paradigm. , 

Strategic Insights (Monterey, CA) IV, no. 11 (November 2005): 1 

19  Ibid:, 2 

20  JP 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of military and Associated Terms 

(Washington, DC: The Joint Staff, January 31, 2011), 325 

21  Robert M. Gates, Helping Others Defend Themselves, Foreign Affairs 89, no 3 (May- 

June 2010) 2-5. 

22  Andrew F. Krepinevich, Strategy for the Long Haul: An Army at the Crossroads 

(Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and Budegtry Assessments, 2008), 63 

23  Quadrennial Roles and Missions Review Report, January 2009. P5 

24  GAO, National Security Interagency collaboration practices and challenges at DOD’s 

Southern and Africa Commands, July 12, 2010. 2 

25  Ibid., 3 

26 Walsh, Randal M. Security Cooperation A New Functional Command. Joint Forces 

Quarterly, 64. (1st Quarter 2012): 52 

20 

