 

 

 

 
 

 

Inquiry into Cyber Safety Issues 
Affecting Children and Young People 

 

 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee 
on Cyber Safety 

 

 

 

 July 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

GPO Box 5218 SYDNEY NSW 2001 • Enquiries Line 1300363992 • www.privacy.gov.au 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

Key recommendations 

The Office of the Privacy Commissioner (the Office) welcomes the opportunity to 
provide comments to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety about cyber safety 
issues affecting children and young people.    

We believe privacy awareness is an important element of improving cyber safety for 
children and young people.  The proliferation of online activities and associated 
privacy risks, coupled with the fact that young users are often less aware of the risks, 
suggests that there is a particular need for educational activities aimed at raising 
privacy awareness amongst children and young people.    

The Office’s main suggestions for improving cyber safety for children and young 
people are:  

1.  Education is the key to empowering individuals to protect their privacy online 

and, more broadly, to establishing good cyber safety behaviours.  This is 
especially important for more vulnerable individuals such as children and young 
people.    

2.  Our Office would generally be supportive and welcome involvement in future 

educational activities. 

3.  Cyber safety is a national problem and requires a coordinated approach across 

portfolios and jurisdictions.  Ensuring that various education and awareness 
programs are complementary and co-ordinated is important to promoting a 
cyber safe community. 

4.  The Office supports Australia’s continuing involvement in initiatives of 

international forums. 

5.  The Office considers that privacy should be treated as a separate topic within 

broader cyber safety education activities and not bundled with other concepts. 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  2 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner   

1.  The Office of the Privacy Commissioner (the Office) is an independent statutory 
body whose purpose is to promote and protect privacy in Australia.  The Office, 
established under the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (the Privacy Act), has responsibilities 
for the protection of individuals' personal information that is handled by 
Australian and ACT Government agencies, and personal information held by all 
large private sector organisations, health service providers and some small 
businesses.   

The Privacy Act 

2.  The Privacy Act generally covers the protection of people's personal information. 

‘Personal information’ is defined in section 6 (1) of the Act as information or an 
opinion, whether true or not, about an individual whose identity is apparent or 
can be reasonably ascertained from that information. Under the Privacy Act, 
personal information can exist in a number of different forms, including in 
images such as photographs. 

3.  The Privacy Act is also intended to be principle based and technology neutral.  

What this means is that the Privacy Act does set out prescriptive rules about how 
information should be handled in particular situations, such as online 
environments.  Instead it offers principles about the way in which personal 
information should be handled according to the particular situation.  

About this submission 

4.  The Office of the Privacy Commissioner (the Office) welcomes the opportunity to 

comment on the Australian Parliament’s Joint Select Committee inquiry into the 
safety of children and young people on the internet. 

5.  The Office notes the terms of reference that have been provided for this review of 

cyber safety.1 Cyber safety is a broad concept that concerns minimising the risks 
to children online from a range of negative influences including inappropriate 
social behaviours, abuse, identity theft and breaches of privacy. These negative 
cyber incidents can potentially have broader long term effects for both children 
and their families.  

                                                 

1 The terms of reference for this inquiry are available at: 
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/jscc/tor.htm (as at 1 June 2010) 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  3 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

6.  As cyber activity very often involves personal information there is a strong 

connection between privacy and cyber safety issues. Personal information is 
increasingly becoming digitised and transmitted online increasing the risk of 
privacy breaches and identity theft. Privacy and security of personal information 
in online environments are therefore important elements of cyber safety.  

7.  The Office considers that educating young people about privacy could assist in 
improving cyber safety outcomes. Our submission focuses on issues related to 
privacy as an important component of cyber safety. Throughout this submission 
the Office provides examples of cyber safety initiatives currently in place and 
comments on future initiatives. 

8.  This submission draws on previous comments we have made about the 

important role privacy protections can play in minimising risks online including 
our comments to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s (ALRC) review of 
privacy law in Australia.2  

Children and young people’s privacy   

9.  Children are particularly vulnerable due to their limited capacity to make 

decisions about their own information and their reliance on others to ensure that 
their interests and rights are protected. The potential consequences on a child or 
young person of a breach of their privacy rights at this developmental stage of 
their lives include the risk of trauma, embarrassment or stigmatisation and even 
the possibility of identity theft. 

10. The Privacy Act does not currently make special reference to children and young 

people, and instead operates on the basis that children and young people have 
the same rights to privacy as adults.   In practice however, a child’s primary care 
giver will usually be responsible for exercising the child’s rights under the 
Privacy Act until the child reaches a level of maturity and understanding to make 
independent decisions.   

11. The Office considers that this approach to the privacy of young people is 

appropriate, as it accommodates different rates of development. Mature young 
people are entitled wherever possible, to make decisions about their personal 
information as soon as they are able, rather than on reaching a prescribed age. It 
is the Office’s view that this level of autonomy should be maintained in respect of 
young people’s privacy.  

                                                 
2ALRC, For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice, ALRC 108 
(http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/alrc/publications/reports/108/) 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  4 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

Level of understanding  

12. There has been little Australian research on the awareness or attitudes of children 

and young people to privacy issues. However, initiatives such as recent 
conference in Victoria3 and the work of the New Zealand Youth Advisory Group4 
have sought to gain further insight into what privacy means to children and 
young people today and how it affects them. In particular, the conference hosted 
by Privacy Victoria also considered the potential risks associated with the use of 
information technologies and what educators, policy makers, parents and even 
young people themselves can do to educate young people about privacy 
protection. 

13. The available evidence suggests that more effort needs to be directed to ensuring 

young people gain the skills needed to make sensible decisions around privacy 
and to understand their rights and obligations under the Privacy Act.   

14. Results from the Office’s 2007 Community Attitudes Survey5 suggested that 

while awareness of privacy issues has increased overall in comparison to 2004, 
younger respondents (in this case, aged 18-24) continue to be less aware of their 
privacy rights than older respondents. This may correspond with levels of 
awareness of legal rights more generally.  The survey also showed that 50% of 
respondents were more concerned about providing information over the internet 
than they were two years earlier. However, a higher proportion of respondents 
aged 18-24 claimed to be less concerned than other age groups. 

15. The survey also indicated that young people were less concerned about 

disclosing their financial information and are much more likely to disclose their 
personal information in order to receive a discount or to win a prize. These types 
of behaviours, and being less informed about privacy issues could put young 
people at risk of identity theft. Another recent survey by Galaxy Research6 has 
also shown that young people (in this case, aged 18-24) were most at risk of 
identity fraud and were more complacent about checking for enhanced security 
features before providing sensitive information online.  

16. The Office believes that identity theft constitutes a serious interference with 
                                                 
3 See http://www.privacy.vic.gov.au/privacy/web.nsf/content/conferences 

4 See http://www.privacy.org.nz/youth/ 

5 Wallis Consulting Group, Community Attitudes Towards Privacy 2007 [prepared for the 
Office of the Privacy Commissioner] (2007) available at 
http://www.privacy.gov.au/publications/rcommunity07.pdf  

6 VeriSign Online Fraud Barometer, compiled by Galaxy Research as at 6 July 2010 
available at http://www.verisign.com.au/press/2010/20100706.html 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  5 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

individuals’ privacy and is becoming an increasingly important issue. Identity 
theft occurs where an individual obtains personal information (e.g. credit card, 
drivers licence, passport or other personal identification documents) and uses 
that information to fraudulently obtain a benefit or service for themselves. Whilst 
identity theft is often associated with the financial loss of adults, identity theft 
can also have serious consequences for young people when their identity is stolen 
for the purposes of fabricating fake documents such as passports or to commit 
further cyber crime.   

17. Based on the available evidence, it is our view that young users are at risk of 

inadvertently becoming victims of cyber incidents as a result of inadequate cyber 
safety skills. The proliferation of online activities and associated privacy risks, 
coupled with the fact that young users are less aware of the risks, suggests that 
there is a particular need for educational activities aimed at raising privacy 
awareness among this group. Such measures will assist in building a sound 
foundation for children and young people to make informed decisions about 
protecting their own privacy and respecting the privacy of others. 

End user empowerment 

18. The Office believes education is the key to empowering individuals to protect 

their privacy online. We consider this also extends to cyber safety.  People of all 
ages need to be equipped with the necessary cyber safety skills to safely navigate 
the online environment.  The Privacy Commissioner has a statutory function to 
promote the protection of individual’s privacy by undertaking educational 
programs either solely or in co-operation with other parties.7  

19. For example, the Office promotes secure and safe online behaviour and secure 

information exchange by advising on social networking, online privacy tools and 
internet privacy.8   Much of this advice for individuals is provided in a series of 
‘frequently asked questions’ and is designed to be easily accessible. 

20. In the Office’s view, a range of measures are required to empower individuals to 

protect themselves in online environments and are essential to promoting 
effective privacy and cyber safety.  These measures can include promoting 
education and awareness of the: 

                                                 
7 See section 27(1)(m) of the Privacy Act 

8 For more information see following links to the Office’s website in regards to: FAQs on 
social networking  http://www.privacy.gov.au/faq/individuals#social_networking, Online 
Privacy Tools http://www.privacy.gov.au/topics/technologies/security, and Protecting 
your privacy on the internet http://www.privacy.gov.au/topics/technologies/privacy 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  6 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

  risks posed by various ICT environments and interactions 

  measures that can be taken to mitigate risk, whether through technology 

or individual behaviour 

  remedies available should something go wrong 

21. Children and young people can potentially be exposed to the same range of risks 

online as older people but may be more vulnerable to online risks.  Recognising 
this, the Office has created some materials targeted specifically towards young 
people.   

22. In particular, we have developed a Youth Portal, released during Privacy 

Awareness Week 2009 which allows young people to learn about current privacy 
issues.  The portal includes Private i- Your Ultimate Privacy Survival Guide and a 
short animated video, Think Before You Upload (a joint initiative of the Asia Pacific 
Privacy Authorities).   

23. These publications highlight the possible risks of using online technologies such 

as social networking and gaming sites and suggest how young people may 
protect their personal information when accessing these technologies.9 Further, 
they seek to build awareness of the Office and its website as a resource for young 
people, including material that sets out their privacy rights and how to exercise 
them10.  In our view, whilst regulatory approaches can help to control 
inappropriate online behaviours, legislative mechanisms are not always an 
effective response to regulating online risks. We consider that education is key to 
helping children and young people gain lifelong cyber safety skills and develop 
respect for privacy. Our Office would generally be supportive and would 
welcome involvement in any future educational activities. 

Cross-jurisdictional co-operation 

24. Cyber safety is a national problem and an important way to minimise cyber 

safety risks is to adopt a coordinated approach across portfolios and jurisdictions.  
Cross-portfolio co-operation enables agencies specialised in particular areas to 
collectively consider different aspects of information communications technology 
initiatives and their associated privacy and security risks, and to develop an 
appropriate responses. Ensuring that various education and awareness programs 
are complementary and co-ordinated is key to promoting an empowered 
community. 

                                                 
9 See http://www.privacyawarenessweek.org/topics/youth/index.html  

10 See http://www.privacy.gov.au/privacy_rights/complaints/index.html 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  7 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

25. As part of this year's Privacy Awareness Week, the Office partnered with 

Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy (DBCDE), 
as well as the Australian Communications and Media Authority, to promote key 
messages that are of common concern.  In particular, to encourage Australians to 
think about privacy and cyber security when using mobile phones a pocket-sized 
quick reference guide titled Mobilise Your Mobile Phone Privacy11 was produced. 
The guide gives mobile users ten simple, easy to understand tips for protecting 
their privacy and security when using their mobile phones.  

26. In our view, a range of initiatives and channels are required to ensure an effective 
response to cyber safety issues.  For this reason, the Office has been supportive of 
the cyber safety and e-security activities undertaken by Government agencies.  
For example, the e-security education and training materials developed by the 
DBCDE,12 as well work done by NetAlert,13 and resources such as 
www.staysmartonline.gov.au and www.cybersmartkids.com.au (provided by the 
Australian Communications and Media Association).  A further example is the 
National Cyber Security Awareness Week, an initiative of DBCDE’s ‘Stay Smart 
Online’ program.  This event is a collaborative effort between government, 
industry and community groups, which urges both organisations and 
individuals to be aware of e-security risks and how to interact securely online.14 

27. The Office believes that there is also a need to ensure a consistent and 

collaborative approach to cyber safety across different levels of government.  In 
our view, appropriate forums for such initiatives could be inter-jurisdictional 
forums, such as the Privacy Authorities Australia (PAA) forum.  The PAA forum 
is made up of state, territory and federal privacy authorities.  This collaborative 
forum, which meets biannually, discusses issues of common interest, including 
privacy law reform and technology advances and their impacts on privacy and 
discusses on co-ordinated approaches to issues affecting individuals’ personal 
information. 

28. Notwithstanding this inter-jurisdictional co-operation, a significant issue in 

privacy regulation in Australia is the need for greater consistency, simplicity and 
clarity between jurisdictions.  Currently, the privacy protections afforded to 
personal information may vary significantly as it is exchanged between 
jurisdictions. 

                                                 
11 Copies of the pocket guide are available from the Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

12 More information on this initiative is available at 
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/communications_for_consumers/security/e-security 

13 See http://www.netalert.gov.au/  

14 See http://www.privacy.gov.au/materials/a-z?fullsummary=7090 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  8 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

29. The Office supports achieving national uniformity in privacy regulation, as 

recommended by the ALRC in its review of privacy law and supported by the 
Australian Government in its first stage response.15 The Office considers that 
greater consistency in privacy regulation would enhance security for information 
flowing across State and Territory boundaries which in turn can aid improved 
cyber safety outcomes. 

International co-operation 

30. In the Office’s view, an important component to promoting effective online 
privacy and cyber safety is to recognise the international cross-jurisdictional 
nature of many modern information flows. In turn, this requires international co-
operation to foster good privacy outcomes and the promotion of cyber safety.   

31. Forums such as the Asia Pacific Privacy Authorities, the Organisation for 

Economic Cooperation and Development  Working Party of Information Security 
and Privacy (WPISP) and work done by Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) economies on developing an APEC privacy framework all provide 
tangible examples of how such an objective can be progressed. 

32. The Office supports Australia’s continuing involvement in the privacy initiatives 

of the following international fora. 

33. WPISP develops policy options to encourage privacy protection in a networked 

society.16 Some of WPISP’s work has included looking at the future of the internet 
economy from a privacy and security perspective and policy approaches for the 
protection of children online. The Office continues to provide input into the work 
of WPISP. 

34. APEC has a number of initiatives aimed at protecting information privacy and 
maintaining information flows among APEC economies. A key initiative is the 
APEC Privacy Framework, agreed in 2004. The Privacy Framework contains nine 
high level Privacy Principles that represent a minimum standard. The Privacy 
Frame work aims to promote a consistent approach to information privacy 
protection across APEC member economies, while avoiding the creation of 
unnecessary barriers to information flows.   

35. The Office is a member of the Asia Pacific Privacy Authorities (APPA) forum. 

                                                 
15 ALRC, For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice, recommendation 3-
4, recommendation 3-5, recommendation 3-6 

16 For information on OECD WPISP, see 
www.oecd.org/department/0,3355,en_2649_34255_1_1_1_1_1,00.html  

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  9 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

APPA membership includes similar regulators from other Australian 
jurisdictions, as well as New Zealand, Hong Kong, South Korea and Canada, 
including both the Federal Office and the province of British Columbia.17  APPA 
is the principal forum for privacy authorities in the Asia Pacific Region to form 
partnerships and exchange ideas about privacy regulation, new technologies and 
the management of privacy enquiries and complaints. 

36. APPA members have undertaken a number of joint initiatives such as Privacy 
Awareness Week to promote awareness of privacy rights and responsibilities. 
Specifically for young people, a short animated video and accompanying teacher 
resources warning of the dangers of social networking websites was released by 
APPA members in May 2009.  

37. APPA members also developed an online self help identity theft prevention tool 

for Privacy Awareness Week 2010.18 It is an interactive quiz-based tool which 
helps individuals to work out how likely they are to be a victim of identity theft. 
The tool also includes separate ‘read and learn’ pages with practical tips and 
ways to improve identity security.  

38. Whilst not specifically aimed at young people, the tool considers situations that 

are also applicable to young people particularly as they gain greater financial and 
social independence. For example, young people need to aware of the risks of 
identity theft associated with wallets, driver’s licences, online shopping, mobile 
phones and personal computers. 

Future initiatives 

39. The ALRC in its review of privacy recommended that the Office, in consultation 

with ACMA, should ensure that specific guidance on the privacy aspects of using 
social networking sites is developed and incorporated into publicly available 
education material.19 The ALRC also recommended that State and Territory 
education departments should incorporate education about privacy and, in 
particular privacy in the online environment, into school curricula.20  

40. The Office agrees with these proposals in principle, and welcomes and 

encourages initiatives which bring the research community together with other 
key education stakeholders to deepen understanding of key and emerging issues 

                                                 
17 See http://www.privacy.gov.au/aboutus/international/appa 

18 Available at http://www.privacyawarenessweek.org 
19 ALRC, For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice, recommendation 67-
3 

20 Ibid, recommendation 67-4 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  10 

Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

and educational needs facing young people. 

41. The Office considers that privacy should be treated as a separate topic within 

broader cyber safety education modules and not bundled with other concepts. 
Education activities should help children to start thinking about themselves as 
individuals with an identity that is linked to their personal information such as 
their name, address, telephone number, birth date and school. Children should 
be made aware of the reasons why they need to protect their personal 
information, and that of others, especially online, along with practical steps they 
can take to protect their privacy. Education activities should also include advice 
about how, where and when to get help if they are unsure about providing or 
protecting their personal information online. 

42. The Office notes that education and awareness programs for privacy and online 

safety should take into account the increasing ubiquity of ICT in many day to day 
transactions. The use of mobile phones to connect to the internet and facilitate 
online services is ever increasing along with the increased use and dependence 
on mobile phones by children and young people. Young users need to be aware 
of how to protect their privacy when using mobile phones. This is particularly 
important as mobile phones can store large amounts of personal information and 
are easily lost or stolen. The Office has recently partnered with other Government 
agencies to raise community awareness about privacy and security when using 
mobile phones.21 

                                                 
21 Mobilise Your Mobile Phone Privacy a pocket-sized quick reference guide available from 
the Office of the Privacy Commissioner 

 

Submission to the Joint Select Committee on Cyber Safety – Inquiry into Cyber Safety 

  11 

