International Cyber Norms:
Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives, 
Anna-Maria Osula and Henry Rõigas (Eds.),
NATO CCD COE Publications, Tallinn 2016

Permission to make digital or hard copies of this publication for internal 
use within NATO and for personal or educational use when for non-profit 
or non-commercial purposes is granted providing that copies bear this 
notice and a full citation on the first page. Any other reproduction or 
transmission requires prior written permission by NATO CCD COE.

C H A P T E R   1 1

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: 

Towards a Common Policy  
and Technology Context  
for Cyber Security Norms

Claire Vishik, Mihoko Matsubara, Audrey Plonk

1. Introduction

1.1 Definition of Cyber Security
Cyber security is a complex subject and has a number of definitions, such as this 
from the National Initiative for Cyber Security Careers and Studies (NICCS):

‘The activity or process, ability or capability, or state whereby information 
and communications systems and the information contained therein are pro-
tected from and/or defended against damage, unauthorized use or modifica-
tion, or exploitation.’1

The same source also offers an extended definition:

‘Strategy, policy, and standards regarding the security of and operations in 
cyberspace, and encompassing the full range of threat reduction, vulnera-
bility reduction, deterrence, international engagement, incident response, 
resiliency, and recovery policies and activities, including computer network 
operations, information assurance, law enforcement, diplomacy, military, 

1  NICCS, ‘Explore Terms: A Glossary of Common Cybersecurity Terminology,’ https://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary.

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  221

and intelligence missions as they relate to the security and stability of the 
global information and communications infrastructure.’2

1.2 Multidisciplinary Context for Cyber Security Norms
In this chapter, we do not attempt to offer a comprehensive analysis of various cyber 
security contexts, but rather to compare common elements in a set of representative 
documents and explore the connection between shared principles and domain-specific  
norms in a context that encompasses policy, technology, and societal issues.

The white paper adopted by several industry associations in Europe, Asia, and 
the US, entitled Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry and Govern-
ment Approaches to the Continued Growth and Security of Cyberspace, observes: 
‘Technology and services change and evolve rapidly, and policymaking related to 
cyberspace must also be innovative to support growth, security, trust and confi-
dence, and stability’. All stakeholders (government, industry, academia, and civil 
society) must work together to ensure that the benefits of cyberspace are accessi-
ble to citizens, and that major challenges are addressed.3 While a government is 
responsible for developing policies, strategies, and regulatory conditions for the 
development of cyber security, industry is the source of cutting-edge technolo-
gies, technical expertise, deployment and operational experience, and, in many 
countries, owns major components of critical infrastructure. Multi-stakeholder 
cooperation requires a common context to enable the participants to collaborate 
constructively. Industry owns and operates a significant part of the Internet infra-
structure and develops and deploys technologies responsible for the operations 
and evolution of cyberspace. For both industry and government, the shared con-
text is important because it permits regulators to design policies consistent with 
the technology space and flows of information and allows industry to introduce 
products and solutions that are aligned with high-level principles and based on 
specific norms and best practices. A richer context proposed in this paper could 
explain, for example, why an implementation of a network service is compliant 
with generally accepted privacy requirements, and what best practices and tech-
nology  norms,  such  as  the  use  of  privacy-preserving  cryptographic  protocols, 
have been employed to achieve these goals. In another example, rich context can 
provide practical guidance on solutions available to increase the reach of cyber-
space to areas with limited infrastructure based on the standards and technologies 
available today. The need for the shared context in cyber security and challenges 
associated with its creation are also highlighted in research.4

2 
3 

4 

Ibid.
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry and Government Approaches for the Continued Growth and Security of 
Cyberspace’ (BSA | The Software Alliance, et al, Seoul Conference on Cyberspace 2013, October 2013), 1-2, http://www.itic.
org/dotAsset/9/d/9dede1e6-0281-4c19-84c5-00b8209b7bea.pdf.  Adopted  by  five  industry  associations  in  conjunction  with 
the Cyber Space Conference in Seoul in 2013.
Jeffrey Hunker, ‘Policy Challenges in Building Dependability in Global Infrastructures,’ Computers & Security 21 (2002): 705-
711; Bruce L. Benson, ‘The Spontaneous Evolution of Cyber Law: Norms, Property Rights, Contracting, Dispute Resolution 
and Enforcement without the State,’ Journal of Law, Economics and Policy 269 (2005).

222 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

There are a number of multi-disciplinary principles or guidelines that should be 
approached as a whole, to ensure that societal, policy, and technology aspects are 
integrated; this is illustrated in Table 1, which is based on the example offered by 
OECD Guidelines for cyber security.

Table 1. Nine Principles from the OECD Guidelines.5

Type of Elements
Policy,  
organisational 

Technology

Principles
Awareness

Responsibility

Response

Description 
Needs and requirements for security of information systems and 
benefits of their implementation should be recognised
Responsibility for the security of information systems and net-
works should be shared by all
Timely and co-operative way to prevent, detect and respond to 
security incidents is necessary
Regular structured risk assessments should be conducted
Security should be incorporated as an essential element of infor-
mation systems and networks

Risk assessment
Security design and 
implementation
Security management A comprehensive approach to security management should be 

Reassessment

Societal

Ethics

Democracy

adopted
Appropriate modifications to security policies, practices, 
measures and procedures should be made as the environment 
changes
Legitimate interests of others should be respected; work should 
be conducted in an ethical manner
The security of information systems and networks should be 
compatible with essential values of a democratic society

While the development of high level concepts and guidelines has been relatively 
successful, it has proved a challenge to define a multi-disciplinary integrated model 
that could allow technologists and policy-makers to easily collaborate on develop-
ing viable cyber security policies and approaches to cyber norms that are compati-
ble with a quickly evolving technology environment. The global nature of the Inter-
net and the ubiquitous use of cyberspace worldwide require the amalgamation of 
various disciplines and the collaboration of academia, government, industry, and 
civil society organisations. However, the research and practitioners community has 
not developed a mechanism to link more concrete and frequently domain-specific 
norms to the high-level principles in a scientific and predictable fashion.

The lack of a rich common context, comprising both principles and norms, has 
delayed the emergence of harmonised mechanisms which would enable the multi- 
stakeholder community to build on the shared values associated with the societal, 
policy, and technological aspects of cyber security. It has also led to weaknesses in 
the technology space, where policy requirements are not always adequately incor-
porated,  and  in  policy  design,  where  technology  constraints  are  not  always  well 
understood.

5 

‘OECD Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a Culture of Security’ (Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, 25 July 2002), 10-12, http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/15582260.pdf. 

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  223

1.3 Principles and Norms
As the article focuses on establishing a common context, it is necessary to use broad, 
all-encompassing  definitions.  A  norm  is  simply  defined  as  a  standard,  model  or 
pattern, in reference to technology norms and best practices discussed in this chap-
ter. These norms are based on high-level principles, defined as basic truths, theo-
ries or ideas that form a basis of something.6 This chapter discusses policy princi-
ples. Multi-stakeholder groups frequently focus on the development of principles 
because the high level of generalisation permits diverse participants to form con-
vergent views. Norms, especially technical norms, are more frequently defined by 
communities with specialised knowledge and expertise. Although efforts are made 
to design technical norms and best practices based on accepted policy principles, 
the link between the norms and the principles and between the technology and the 
policy space is highly abstract. This level of abstraction simplifies consensus, but 
also complicates discussions on design and implementations of cyber security poli-
cies that take into consideration both norms and principles.

The typical (and constructive) approach in multi-stakeholder efforts in cyber 
security is to propose common high-level policy principles and to ensure that the 
technical norms are developed in accordance with them. This top-down view leads 
to positive results for agreeing on industry norms. An example of such consensus 
achieved on high-level principles in a complicated area is the encryption principles 
developed by the World Semiconductor Council.7 However, this approach is not 
always sufficient for the incorporation of the requirements defined by the technol-
ogy space and technology constraints into the policy design process. The limitations 
are due in part to the complexity and dynamism of the technology environment and 
relative slowness of the policy response. It is not realistic to expect expert knowledge 
of technology from the policy-makers and an expert knowledge of policy from the 
technologists. We hope that the ontology proposed here can provide both philos-
ophy and tools for defining a broadly applicable richer shared context that helps 
multi-stakeholder efforts to agree on the principles and provide operational context 
for norms.

The  absence  of  mechanisms  to  transition  more  objectively  from  principles 
to  norms  hinders  the  development  of  common  ground  in  complex  and  multi- 
disciplinary fields, like cyber security. As an example, support for privacy is a shared 
principle in most cyber security strategies, but the nature of technical standards, 
norms, and best practices that are necessary in different technology contexts and 
the constraints imposed by technologies are not clear to the policy-makers, lead-
ing to imperfect regulations that are difficult to harmonise internationally. In other 
words, recognition of the essential character of privacy in connection with cyber 
security  is  not  actionable  without  a  predictable  linkage  to  best  practices  (norms 

6  Definition from Merriam-Webster, ‘Principle,’ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/principle.
7 

‘WSC  Encryption  Principles’  (World  Semiconductor  Council,  Lisbon,  23  May  2013),  http://www.semiconductors.org/
clientuploads/Trade%20and%20IP/May%202013%20WSC%20-%20WSC%20Encryption%20Principles-%20FINAL.pdf.

224 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

and standards), such as data anonymisation techniques or obfuscation of unique 
identifiers. In a different example, understanding of technology constraints, such 
as the impossibility of complete anonymity in today’s computing environment, is 
necessary in order to create regulations and policies that are effective, such as guide-
lines for data protection. The introduction of a scientific reasoning process based 
on ontology that links policy principles and technical best practices would improve 
regulatory design and extend opportunities for self-regulation. Predictability would 
also increase trust in industry norms and best practices through the recognition of 
their connection to generally accepted principles in situations ranging from policy 
implementation to support for self-regulation.

The level of complexity of multi-disciplinary issues in cyber security also requires 
decision and dialogue support tools, and an ontology linking principles and norms 
can provide a foundation for such a mechanism.

1.4 Ontology as a Consensus-Building Tool
Ontology in computer science can be defined as ‘a formal naming and definition of 
the types, properties, and interrelationships of the entities that really or fundamen-
tally exist for a particular domain of discourse’.8 Ontology permits us to highlight 
connections and relationships between terms, identify constraints, and to reason 
about a topic. Ontologies are commonly used in a variety of settings in cyber secu-
rity, such as creating threat and vulnerability models for innovative fields.

Ontologies enable a structured organisation of knowledge and creation of a mul-
tifaceted context with reasoning capabilities. The complexity of the field of cyber 
security and the need to formulate relatively simple technical norms and best prac-
tices that are connected to general policy principles point to ontology as the tool of 
choice to capture relationships between concepts, principles, and their attributes 
and to enable robust modelling of constraints and complex situations.

While ontologies have been used in a number of fields, from e-commerce to enter-
prise systems, they have not yet been employed as a ‘dialogue support’ mechanism 
for multi-stakeholder initiatives in complex fields. For examples of ontologies used in 
knowledge engineering of diverse domains, repositories such as the Protégé Ontol-
ogy Library9 are recommended. Ontologies for cyberspace have also been created by, 
for example, Kopsell.10 The introduction of a well-designed ontology could help the 
participants to create a framework for reasoning about cyber security norms in con-
nection to shared principles, and to understand the mutual connections of the best 
practices, thus improving the efficiency of outcomes. The benefits will be significant 
for policy-makers and policy theorists, allowing them to improve their understanding 
of the complex technology space, and for industry, to support design and positioning 
of norms and best practices in a correct policy context.

See, for example, Wikipedia, ‘Ontology (Information Science),’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology_(information_science).
Protégé Ontology Library, ‘OWL Ontologies,’ http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/Protege_Ontology_Library.

8 
9 
10  David R. Koepsell, The Ontology of Cyberspace: Law, Philosophy, and the Future of Intellectual Property, (Peru, Illinois: Open 

Court Publishing, 2000).

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  225

Although we do not propose a concrete design for a ‘multi-stakeholder dialogue 
support’ ontology in this paper, we can identify foundations, upon which it can be 
built:

•  High level policy principles (top layer) can be derived from commonly 

accepted key concepts identified by earlier efforts. This chapter is 
primarily focusing on this area.

•  Technology characteristics can be established based on the accepted 

attributes of the technology environment and input from various 
experimental frameworks developed to analyse it.

•  Norms, standards and best practices can be developed by the 
communities of experts and incorporated into the ontology.

The  resulting  ontology  can  arm  multi-disciplinary  initiatives  with  the  ability 
to conduct in-depth conversations that rely on consistent background knowledge 
and do not over-simplify key issues, leading to better results. As an example, the 
Public Initiative on Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) convened by NIST11 proposed 
a risk-based framework for CPS that links risk domains of privacy, security, safety, 
resilience, and reliability in one integrated model. The insights resulting from this 
work can inform regulation and standardisation for the Internet of Things (IoT). 
The integrated risk model represents a set of general principles that can be used 
to analyse risk for the IoT. The reference framework produced by the same public 
working group extracts concrete elements that can make future IoT systems trust-
worthy. An ontology can link the high-level risk principles and concrete technical 
norms in this and similar initiatives, in order to permit technologists and regulators 
to jointly reason about optimal technology environments and the policy approaches 
that govern them.

Although a consistent shared context has not yet been generally adopted, even 
at the level of principles, some fundamental concepts have been defined as part of 
a number of industry- or government-led efforts. Incorporation of these elements 
of shared vision could speed up the creation of the body of knowledge to support 
consensus-building on major issues in cyber security. The section below describes 
these common elements as a potential foundation of a future shared context in an 
ontology to be used in multi-stakeholder initiatives. We start the discussion with the 
analysis of the most pertinent characteristics of the technology environment since 
they provide additional linkage between high level principles and norms.

11  Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group, http://www.cpspwg.org/.

226 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

2. Technology Environment

Today’s dynamic technology environment supports seamless functioning of all soci-
eties around the globe. This section attempts to extract key characteristics of the 
technology environment that are also pertinent to policy-making in cyber security. 
We describe key characteristics that have been commonly recognised and that are 
broadly applicable. Broad categorisation of these attributes is illustrated in Table 2 
below, and they form a foundation for technology principles to be used in the ontol-
ogy we are describing.

Table 2. Key characteristics of the technology space by broad category.

Category
Technology

Societal

Attribute
Universal Connectivity
Complexity and dynamic nature
Influence on the physical environment
Shared nature of infrastructure 
Global and universal use of cyberspace
Broad economic impact of cyberspace

2.1 Ubiquitous Connectivity and Interoperability
The modern computing environment is characterised by ubiquitous connectivity 
and  interoperability  between  heterogeneous  networks  and  diverse  systems  and 
devices. The numbers of connected devices cannot be estimated with great preci-
sion, but is extremely large. EMC Corporation estimates over 7 billion people will 
use 30 billion Internet-connected devices by 2020,12 whereas Cisco and DHL pre-
dict a higher number – 50 billion connected devices by the same date.13 Disparate 
computing and network domains of fifteen years ago have merged into an inter-
connected space that supports multiple models of use, connectivity, and access via 
shared infrastructure. The diversity of connected devices is enormous, including 
everything from data centres and full PC platforms to tablets, industrial control 
systems, disposable sensors and RFID tags, and it is matched by the diversity of 
the networks. Ubiquitous connectivity is beneficial for the users of the technolo-
gies and for the economy, leading to new efficiencies and increased productivity, 
and providing a platform for widespread innovation. The challenges created by this 
environment are well known. Universal connectivity and interoperability compli-
cate the analysis of threats and vulnerabilities, lead to uneven levels of protection 
in interconnected systems and elements of infrastructure, and, in many cases, can 
increase attack surfaces.

Ubiquitous connectivity and broad interoperability support movements of data 

12  EMC²,  New  EMC  Innovations  Redefine  IT  Performance  and  Efficiency,  4  May  2015,  http://www.emc.com/about/news/
13  Cisco, ‘Internet of Things (IoT),’ http://www.cisco.com/web/solutions/trends/iot/portfolio.html.

press/2015/20150504-01.htm.

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  227

over  diverse  networks  and  are  important  for  numerous  areas  of  policy-making, 
including  standards  policies,  network  and  information  security  regulations,  and 
data protection. Policy developments that hinder the open nature of the Internet, 
such as data localisation or reliance on indigenous standards, can become obstacles 
to global interoperability and inhibit the role of cyberspace as a powerful engine of 
economic growth.

2.2 Intrinsic Complexity and Dynamism of the Technology Environment
Interoperable frameworks that form the foundation of the modern technology envi-
ronment are likely to contain unknown vulnerabilities due to the effects of compo-
sition of diverse security models.

We  have  not  yet  developed  mechanisms  to  analyse  the  composite  picture  of 
infrastructure  that  is  today’s  reality.  Complexity  is  obvious  in  the  multi-domain 
processes typical of today, as there are a number of technical domains employed to 
achieve one operation. Although the process is designed to reach one operational 
goal, their security capabilities are different at different stages of the process. Defin-
ing ‘trust evidence’ for this environment has proved very challenging.14

With  no  objective  approaches  to  estimating  the  security  of  complex  systems 
under operational conditions and no standards to apply to diverse environments 
where they operate, it is difficult to comprehend the consequences of system level 
or environmental changes. This complexity and ambiguity also applies to data and 
data protection, making it necessary to re-think a number of fundamental concepts 
such as anonymity and data interoperability.

Complexity of the computing environment is the result of the aggregation of 
various frameworks and underlying security and privacy models that were designed 
in isolation. The impact of complexity needs to be well understood in order to cor-
rectly inform the development of effective cyber policies. Policy-makers frequently 
examine cyber security concerns at a simplified level, making generalisations that 
become  disconnected  from  the  evolving  capabilities  of  the  complex  technology 
space.  These  policies  need  to  be  technology-neutral,15  but  also  aware  of  the  key 
characteristics of the technology space in order to incorporate the crucial relation-
ships between norms and best practices in cyber security.

2.3 Intermingling of Cyber and Physical Components
Another important characteristic of cyberspace is the connection between cyber 
and physical environments, as exemplified in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), sys-
tems of systems that have computing components, communication capabilities, and 

14  Claire Vishik, Anand Rajan, Chris Ramming, David Grawrock, and Jesse Walker, ‘Defining trust evidence: research directions,‘ 
Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Research (CSIIRW ‘11), Frederick 
T. Sheldon, Robert Abercrombie, and Axel Krings, eds. (ACM: New York).

15  Technological  Neutrality  is  ‘the  freedom  of  individuals  and  organizations  to  choose  the  most  appropriate  and  suitable 
technology to their needs and requirements for development, acquisition, use or commercialisation, without dependencies 
on  knowledge  involved  as  information  or  data’:  Wikia,  ‘Technology  Neutrality,’  http://itlaw.wikia.com/wiki/Technology_
neutrality.

228 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

physical subsystems.16 CPS, now ubiquitous, requires more complex and integrated 
security and risk models. For CPS, the traditionally separated domains of safety, 
resilience, reliability, security, and privacy, are intertwined.17 Separate assessment of 
these domains is insufficient to address the risks, because requirements optimised 
for one domain can be detrimental to the composite risk picture of a system or 
an area of infrastructure. Characteristics of CPS such as the presence of a physical 
subsystem and real-time controls may demand a departure from traditional views 
on security or privacy requirements and instead put an emphasis on safety and reli-
ability, such as when developing risk models for nuclear power station management, 
where privacy concerns are minimal while safety and reliability requirements are 
crucial.

Stuxnet  is  an  example  of  an  attack  carried  through  cyber-physical  environ-
ments18  that  illustrates  the  need  to  analyse  the  requirements  for  all  relevant  risk 
domains using an integrated process. Only collaboration between multidisciplinary 
policy and technology teams can help address these risks. Tools supporting aggre-
gation  of  different  fields,  such  as  the  proposed  ontology,  can  help  in  developing 
complex norms that span several risk domains, like privacy, cyber security, safety, 
and reliability.

2.4 Shared Global Infrastructure Based on Open Standards
The benefits of the shared global infrastructure and open standards are clear to all. We 
can use the same devices, applications, networks, and processes in France and Japan, 
China and Egypt; for the most part, technology now speaks a common language.

The consensus on the importance of the global shared infrastructure and open stand-
ards predates the commercial Internet, but concerns about its dependability emerged 
early in the Internet history and crystallised into a separate area of research in the mid-
1990s.19 Strong focus on the protection of critical infrastructure has led some researchers 
such as Dunn Cavelty to assert that ‘militarisation of cyber security’ was under way.20

The infrastructure is shared among the different users of cyberspace from edu-
cation to transportation and energy, and by different geographic regions underlying 
the functionality of generic systems and processes. Uneven availability of expertise 
and resources has resulted in varying levels of cyber security and privacy protec-
tions in the infrastructure, stressing the need for policy-makers and technologists 
to continue to focus on capacity-building in cyber security.

16  See for example definitions at the Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group.
17  See deliverables of the NIST from Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group.
18 

[Stuxnet] ‘was a 500-kilobyte computer worm that infected the software of at least 14 industrial sites in Iran, including a 
uranium-enrichment plant. … The key compromise was that Stuxnet placed itself in a critical path where it could not only 
disrupt the plant process, but also disrupt/manipulate the information flow to the system operator. In this particular instance 
of Stuxnet, it caused the fast-spinning centrifuges to tear themselves apart, while fabricating monitoring signals to the human 
operators at the plant to indicate processes were functioning normally.’: David Kushner, ‘The Real Story of Stuxnet: How 
Kaspersky Lab Tracked Down the Malware that Stymied Iran’s Nuclear-Fuel Enrichment Program,’ IEEE Spectrum. IEEE, 
February 26, 2013, 49-53. http://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet#.
Jeffrey Hunker, ‘Policy Challenges in Building Dependability in Global Infrastructures.’

19 
20  Myriam Dunn Cavelty, ‘The Militarisation of Cyber Security as a Source of Global Tension,’ in Strategic Trends 2012, ed. Daniel 

Möckli (Zurich: Center for Security Studies, 2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2007043. 

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  229

2.5 Global Use of Cyberspace and Its Significant Impact on the Economy
Around 40% of the world’s population used the Internet in 2014.21 Twenty years 
ago, in 1995, the level of connectivity stood at 1% of the population. The number of 
Internet users grew at 7.9% in 2014, more than seven times faster than the popula-
tion growth of 1.14%. Some 78% of the populations of developed countries and 31% 
of those of the developing world were connected in 2014.22 With such a large pop-
ulation of users, cyberspace-dependent processes permeate the fabric of everyday 
life. The global nature and scope of cyberspace require strong understanding of the 
complex underlying technologies and patterns of use as well as policy frameworks 
enabling cyberspace use. Norms and best practices created in this context need to 
be actionable and broadly applicable.

The ICT sector has a significant impact on the global economy. By 2010, it rep-
resented 6% of global GDP and accounted for 20% of employment in OECD coun-
tries.23 The sector is responsible for increasing productivity and improving efficiency 
in other sectors, and its impact on all aspects of everyday life and commerce is enor-
mous. Although the development of the technology is rapid, the process of building 
a unified economic theory for cyber security and providing recommendation on 
optimal economic models to achieve improved security coverage has been slow.24

The digital economy magnifies the efficiencies achieved by monetary economies 
and creates economies of scale and scope via intermediation and aggregation of 
resources. Novel use models emerge and quickly become mainstream, providing a 
constant source of innovation and alleviating information asymmetry, as illustrated 
by Akelof’s model.25 Despite the rapid pace of change, there is limited theoretical 
work to address key economic issues, such as design of viable economic incentives 
for the development of secure infrastructure.26 Slow development of the economic 
theory for cyber security is an inhibitor for the design, implementation, and harmo-
nisation of broadly applicable policies, metrics and the model necessary for building 
and evaluating cyber security norms.

23 
24 

21  Statistics from Internet Live Stats, ‘Internet Users,’ http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users/.
22 

International Telecommunications Union (ITU) estimate: Wikipedia, ‘Global Internet Usage,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Global_Internet_usage.
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry.’ 
Johannes M. Bauer and Michel J. G. Van Eeten, ‘Cybersecurity: Stakeholder Incentives, Externalities, and Policy Options,’ 
Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009): 706-719; and Eric Luiijf, et al, ‘Ten National Cyber Security Strategies: A Comparison,’ 
in Critical Information Infrastructure Security: 6th International Workshop, CRITIS 2011, Lucerne, Switzerland, September 8-9, 
2011, Revised Selected Papers, ed. Sandro Bologna et al. (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2013), 1-17.

25  George A. Akerlof, ‘The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,’ The Quarterly Journal of 

Economics 84 (1970): 488-500.

26  Claire  Vishik,  Frederick  Sheldon  and  David  Ott,  ‘Economic  Incentives  for  Cybersecurity:  Using  Economics  to  Design 
Technologies  Ready  for  Deployment,’  in  ISSE  2013  Securing  Electronic  Business  Processes,  eds.  Helmut  Reimer,  Norbert 
Pohlmann and Wolfgang Schneider (Springer Vieweg, 2013), 133-147.

230 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

3. Extracting High Level Concepts for the Ontology

Section 2 explored fundamental technology characteristics of cyberspace. The goal 
of section 3 is to extract high-level common elements from diverse sources that 
address  both  policy  and  technology  aspects  of  cyberspace  and  that  can  be  used 
to populate top levels of the proposed ontology. With no accepted framework in 
place for the co-development and analysis of technology and policy approaches for 
cyber security, we find useful input in related research, policy analysis, and indus-
try papers. These common elements reflect shared interests and concerns among 
industry and government, and thus should form a foundation for an ontology sup-
porting multi-disciplinary work on cyber security policy approaches and norms, by 
allowing industry to design best practices (technical and process norms) consistent 
with the accepted high level principles, and by enabling the policy community to 
understand the connection between the principles and best practices guiding their 
concrete implementation. It is not a comprehensive list of sources and key concepts, 
but it is representative, and the sources that we evaluated produced overlapping sets 
of high-level concepts, suggesting shared views on many aspects in cyber security.

3.1 Theoretical Research Frameworks
A number of technology and policy frameworks have been proposed to enable or 
facilitate the examination of multidisciplinary subjects in security and privacy. A good 
example is Technology Dialectics,27 a model developed by Professor Sweeney to mit-
igate conflicts between requirements of technology and context of use in society. The 
goal is to detect potential social and adoption issues early in the technology cycle and 
resolve them by creating tools to determine whether a technology is demonstrably 
appropriate for a certain society or context. Although the framework focuses on pri-
vacy, it can be used for broader analysis and easily applied to cyber security.

Similar single-domain technology and policy frameworks have been proposed 
by various researchers, including Golubchikov and Deda for the study of low-en-
ergy housing,28 and Ananda, Pandy, and Punia for the analysis of the power sector 
in India.29 The shared elements found in this work are summarised in Table 3 below.

27  Latanya Sweeney, ‘Technology Dialectics: Constructing Provably Appropriate Technology,’ Data Privacy Lab (2006), http://

dataprivacylab.org/dataprivacy/projects/dialectics/index.html.

29  V. Ananda Kumar, Krishan K. Pandey and Devendra Kumar Punia, ‘Cyber Security Threats in the Power Sector: Need for a 

Domain Specific Regulatory Framework in India,’ Energy Policy 65 (2014): 126-133.

28  Oleg  Golubchikov  and  Paola  Deda,  ‘Governance,  Technology,  and  Equity:  An  Integrated  Policy  Framework  for  Energy 

Efficient Housing,’ Energy Policy 41 (2012): 733-741.

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  231

Table 3. Relevant components of technology/policy frameworks.

Category
Technology

Societal

Approach

Key concepts
Broad applicability
Rapid innovation
Shared infrastructure and context requirements
Diverse operational models
Evolving use models and context
Complex requirements for adoption
Economic considerations
Connection to fundamental rights (e.g., privacy)
Actionable (rather than observational)
Capable of evolution
Provably effective

The  characteristics  found  in  the  technology  and  policy  frameworks  that  we 
examined are consistent with those we discussed in section 2. These concepts are 
useful to inform ontology development, and they point to ontologies as support 
tools  linking  technology  and  societal  issues.  Similar  frameworks  are  frequently 
employed to support technology development processes in industry.

3.2 Cyber Security Strategies
Another source of shared high-level concepts is found in cyber security strategies 
formulated by different countries. The OECD’s report, Cyber Security Policy-Making 
at a Turning Point: Analysing a New Generation of National Cyber Security Strategies 
for the Internet Economy and Non-governmental Perspectives on a New Generation 
of National Cyber Security Strategies: Contributions from BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC, 
reveals that cyber security strategies developed by different nations share a num-
ber of common elements. Shared approaches include the stated need for enhanced 
internal operational coordination; reliance on private-public partnerships, interest 
in  improved  international  coordination,  the  need  to  protect  fundamental  values 
in cyberspace,30 as well as reliance on flexible policies for cyber security, support-
ing the economic development associated with the ICT sector, and engagement in 
multi-stakeholder dialogue. Other researchers such as Kshetri and Murugesan, who 
compared the US and EU cyber security strategies,31 and Luiijf, who examined ten 
cyber security strategies, highlight similar elements of shared cyber security vision. 
Common elements of cyber security strategies are summarised in Table 4.32

Private  ownership  and  operation  of  critical  infrastructure  mean  that  all  the 
stakeholders (government, academia, industry, and non-profits) need to collaborate 

30 

‘Cybersecurity  Policy-Making  at  a  Turning  Point:  Analysing  a  New  Generation  of  National  Cybersecurity  Strategies  for 
the  Internet  Economy  and  Non-Governmental  Perspectives  on  a  New  Generation  of  National  Cybersecurity  Strategies: 
Contributions from BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC’ (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 16 November 
2012), 9, http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/cybersecurity%20policy%20making.pdf. 

31  Nir  Kshetri  and  San  Murugesan,  ‘EU  and  US  Cybersecurity  Strategies  and  Their  Impact  on  Businesses  and  Consumers,’ 

Computer 46 (2013): 84-88.

32  Luiijf, et al, ‘Ten National Cyber Security Strategies: A Comparison,’ 1-17.

232 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

on cyber security issues in order to mitigate cyber threats and enhance resiliency 
and security while maintaining the interoperability and open Internet.33 But diverse 
stakeholders cannot acquire expertise in all the relevant topics. Arming multi-stake-
holder initiatives with tools such as a comprehensive ontology, in addition to the 
typical high level deliverables of multi-stakeholder dialogue, e.g., position papers, 
can bring more efficiency to the process, allowing industry to elucidate the viability 
of norms and best practices in a broader context that is easier to understand.

Table 4. Common elements shared by cyber security strategies based on OECD34 report  
and other analyses.

Type of Elements
Societal/economic

Common Elements
Economic impact 

Organisational/policy

Enhanced government cooperation

Public-private cooperation

International cooperation 

Division of responsibility among 
various government organisations 
and sovereignty
Support for fundamental values

Technology-related

Innovation

Comprehensive coverage

Description
Quantification of economic benefits of cyber 
security into the strategy
Better policy level and operational coordina-
tion among multiple agencies
Engagement of all stakeholders (government, 
industry, non-profits) in policy and solutions 
development
Collaboration with other countries on a range 
of cyber security issues
Operational role of agencies responsible for 
national security

Recognition of fundamental values, such as 
freedom of expression, privacy protection and 
the free flow of information as essential
Preservation of open Internet as a platform for 
innovation and economic growth
Strategies address the full range of ICT com-
ponents

3.3 Industry-Led Initiatives
Another source of high-level concepts is furnished by documents created by indus-
try and industry associations. The white paper prepared by five industry associations 
for  Cyber  Seoul  2013  provides  useful  categorisation  of  areas  of  focus:  economic 
considerations,  social  and  cultural  benefits,  cyber  security  proper,  international 
security, cyber crime, and capacity-building as summarised in Table 5.35 The paper, 
which is based on a number of earlier sources, indicates high-level areas which are 
important for industry and to which more specific norms need to be anchored.

‘Cybersecurity Policy-Making at a Turning Point,’ 10-15.

33 
34  Eric Luiijf, Kim Besseling and Patrick de Graaf, ‘Nineteen National Cyber Security Strategies,’ International Journal of Critical 
Infrastructure Protection 9 (2013): 7-26; ‘An Evaluation Framework for National Cyber Security Strategies’ (European Union 
Agency for Network and Information Security, 11 November 2014), 30-31, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-
and-CIIP/national-cyber-security-strategies-ncsss/an-evaluation-framework-for-cyber-security-strategies-1/an-evaluation-
framework-for-cyber-security-strategies; ‘Cybersecurity Policy-Making at a Turning Point,’ 9, 24-52. 
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry.’

35 

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  233

Table 5. High-level categories from Seoul industry paper (2013).

Type of Elements
Economic

Key Area
Economic growth and development

Policy  
(legal, organisational)

Development of legal frameworks

International cooperation

Capacity-building

Response to cyber threats

Response to cyber crimes

Societal

Societal and cultural benefits

Description
Economic growth is the key contribution of the 
ICT sector
Criminal statutes to clarify and enhance law 
enforcement’s ability to prosecute bad actors, to 
combat cyber crime and enhance international 
cooperation are available
Cooperation to advance social, economic, and 
cultural goals, given cyberspace offers a unique 
global commons
Cooperation to develop additional capabilities in 
legal, policy, and technology areas
Cooperation to prevent, detect, and respond to 
cyber security threats.
Work to deter cyber threats, implement tools to 
identify criminal activities, and carry out coor-
dinated action
Increased access to education, influence on the 
political process, and support for human rights

The paper illustrates a significant level of convergence on high-level principles 
between the industry and governments that participated in the Seoul Conference on 
Cyberspace 2013, based, for example, on the similarities between these approaches 
and the approaches reflected in cyber security strategies produced by various gov-
ernments, as described above. An ontology linking these key concepts and more 
concrete best practices could enable diverse communities to collaborate in greater 
depth and develop more actionable norms and policies.

3.4 Global Digital Infrastructure Work
Industry, academia and government have developed a number of position papers 
that provide insights into novel policy approaches that support key trends in tech-
nology evolution. Among these documents, Intel’s Sponsoring Trust in Tomorrow’s 
Technology:  Towards  a  Global  Digital  Infrastructure  Policy36  explains  the  founda-
tional nature and importance of Global Digital Infrastructure (GDI) and the need 
to develop policies that support GDI-based innovation and preserve the users’ trust 
in the digital economy. These policies should support the environment that ensured 
the success of GDI; openness, interoperability, and economic growth potential and 
should  be  technology  neutral,  based  on  open  standards,  fostering  international 
cooperation and strong accountability. The underlying concept is ‘the triangle of 
trust’ – a collaboration of industry, government, and NGOs on broadly applicable 
policy principles, including self-regulation and consumer awareness and education.
Other recent research efforts have studied other aspects of GDI, describing GDI 
evolution and associated metrics.37 Max Craglia (2015), editor of the joint project of 
John Miller and David Hoffman, ‘Sponsoring Trust in Tomorrow’s Technology: Towards a Global Digital Infrastructure Policy,’ 
36 
Intel Corporation (2010), http://blogs.intel.com/wp-content/mt-content/com/policy/Global%20Digital%20Infrastructure%20
Policy%20Merged.FINAL.PDF.

37  Ola Henfridsson and Bendik Bygstad, ‘The Generative Mechanisms of Digital Infrastructure Evolution,’ MIS Quarterly, 2013, 

(37: 3), 896-931.

234 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the European Commission on Digital Earth 
2020, stressed the importance of incorporating policy constraints when developing 
specific technologies, in order to avoid complications and speed up adoption, echo-
ing the main thrust of the Technology Dialectics framework.

Table 6. GDI and GDI policy: principles.

Type 
Technology

Broadly applicable principle
Interoperability

Openness

Foundation in open standards

Description
Seamless interoperation among the components of 
infrastructure and ecosystem
Free flow of data across borders and global access to and 
sharing of innovation
Support for innovation, collaboration, and openness 
without relying on particular technologies

Dynamic nature and rapid evolution Quick pace of innovation affecting technology and use 

Societal

Economic growth potential

Policy

Self-regulation

Multi-stakeholder international  
cooperation
Accountability

models
Strong economic growth with cross-sectoral collabora-
tion
Self-imposed rules based on based practices and optimal 
technology outcomes
Cooperation across borders and sectors to promote 
continued innovations, economic growth and trust
Obligation/willingness to take responsibility for perfor-
mance based on agreed-upon expectations

The high-level common elements and principles discussed in this section form 
an overlapping representative list drawing from diverse sources produced by indus-
try, government, academia, and non-profits. These concepts and the relationships 
between them can be used to populate the top level of the ontology we are propos-
ing to support multi-stakeholder work in cyber security.

4. Major Gaps That We Need to Address

In order to create a viable common context for the diverse stakeholders in cyber 
security, additional research, analysis, and industry assessment efforts are needed. 
Section 4 identifies some of the more important gaps that need to be addressed.

4.1 Scientific Foundations for Cyber Security
The last decade saw several efforts to move cyber security from a practical dis-
cipline to a more theoretical level; to develop a ‘science of cyber security’ that 
could provide a common foundation for the increasingly diverse range of cyber 
security topics. The Federation of American Scientists (FAS) described the issue  
as follows:

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  235

‘The challenge in defining a science of cyber-security derives from the pecu-
liar aspects of the field. The ‘universe’ of cyber-security is an artificially con-
structed environment that is only weakly tied to the physical universe. … 
Cyber-security  requires  understanding  of  computer  science  concepts,  but 
also shares aspects of sciences such as epidemiology, economics, and clinical 
medicine; all these analogies are helpful in providing research directions.’38

The report concludes:

‘There is a science of cyber-security. Because it is a science with adversaries, 
it uses, and will use, many different tools and methods. For the future, as far 
as can be discerned, there will be new attacks on old technologies, and new 
technologies that need to be defended.’39

Cyber security is a science with mature subfields, but lacking accepted definitions of 
fundamental concepts such as security composition, assurance, accountability, or trust. 
Strong and generally accepted scientific foundations for cyber security will be instru-
mental in developing approaches to policy design and norm development based on 
shared principles already defined by earlier efforts. We hope that an ontology that we are 
describing here can be instrumental in unifying definitions and methodologies in differ-
ent areas of cyber security, in addition to linking technical norms with policy principles.

4.2 Standardisation Strategy, Process, and Policy
Open standards enable the foundation of today’s digital infrastructure and are cru-
cial for the seamless operation of cyberspace. Active work on the development of 
international standards is conducted in a variety of settings, from international (for 
example, ISO, IEC, and ITU)40 and national standards bodies (ANSI, BSI, or DIN)41 
to industry standards consortia (IEEE or TCG)42. It is recognised that most gener-
al-purpose technology and governance standards and specifications have to address 
security and, in many cases, privacy in order to be viable. The inventory of poten-
tially relevant standards existing today is enormous. There are solid internationally 
recognised policy mechanisms set up to support the use of open standards, includ-
ing agreement within the World Trade Organization. Standards are necessary to 
enable the foundations of the dynamic and open cyberspace.

However, in the area of cyber security, there is a lingering perception that, in 
order to strengthen national security, open international standards should not be 

38 

39 
40 

Jason, The MITRE Corporation, Science of Cyber-Security, JSR-10-102 (19 November 2010), 1, http://fas.org/irp/agency/dod/
jason/cyber.pdf.
Ibid, 77.
IEC (International Electro-technical Commission), ISO (International Organization for Standardisation), ITU (International 
Telecommunication Union).

41  American  National  Standards  Institute  (ANSI),  British  Standards  Institution  (BSI),  Deutsches  Institut  für  Normung  e.V. 
42  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Trusted Computing Group (TCG).

(German Institute for Standardisation) (DIN).

236 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

used, even in general-purpose technology environments, and that local or regional 
standards provide greater security because knowledge about them is more limited. 
These misconceptions have been disproved by extensive research, and continued 
development  of  indigenous  standards  represents  a  potential  threat  to  the  global 
nature of the Internet and may exclude some constituencies from using the latest 
most robust security technologies. Among the areas in standardisation that require 
further development, the following gaps stand out:

•  The dearth of global cyber security standards strategy that can address 

current priorities, e.g., in the infrastructure area;

•  The absence of faster and more efficient processes and greater directional 
flexibility in standardisation, to match the dynamic nature of today’s tech-
nology environments;

•  A lack of methodologies to address harmonisation of standards policy in 

different countries and regions; and

•  No mechanisms to incorporate regional requirements without jeopardis-

ing the global nature of the cyber security standards.

The gaps in the standardisation approaches stem from structural issues, which 
have  led  to  fragmentation  of  efforts  to  develop  standards.  Many  organisations, 
regionally and internationally, have engaged in developing standards for the same 
or similar spaces. Examples include international (ISO/IEC) and Chinese stand-
ards for a Trusted Platform Module; differing regional approaches to Internet gov-
ernance and numerous overlapping efforts focusing on IoT standardisation in such 
organisations as IEEE, ISO/IEC, or ETSI. An ontology that is proposed here can 
have a unifying influence on both technical and governance standards, allowing the 
stakeholders to address cross-cutting issues in standardisation for cyber security 
instead of treating these issues in isolation for each context.

4.3 Absence of a Common Vocabulary and Reasoning Framework
The dynamic evolution of cyberspace and its global nature require multidisciplinary 
study in a process that can support ideation, harmonisation, deployment, adoption, and 
maintenance of cyber security technologies and policies in a multi-stakeholder setting.
Policy  and  technology  communities,  government,  and  industry  use  different 
paradigms to address shared concerns. Cultural gaps can result from different back-
grounds, traditions, and different operational contexts. National security commu-
nities,  energy  and  finance  sectors,  high-tech  industry,  and  other  key  players  use 
different frameworks to address similar security issues. While policy researchers 
and policy-makers look at the cyber security landscape from a strategic perspective 
based on general philosophy of the subject, engineers tend to focus on technology 
considerations and are frequently unaware of the impact national or international 
regulations and geopolitical concerns could have on their work. Technologists have 

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  237

different work cycles and objectives, and use different language to policy researchers 
and policy-makers to describe similar issues.

In  order  to  overcome  cultural  and  knowledge  gaps  between  policy  research-
ers, regulators and the technical community, a common framework and common 
vocabulary need to be developed. The lack of this shared context is a major stum-
bling block leading to the fragmentation of the work of different communities of 
research and practice. An ontology can furnish reasoning and analysis capability 
in addition to a common vocabulary, providing a mechanism to overcome cultural 
differences.

5. Towards a Shared Context:  
Connecting Principles and Norms

Analysis of literature on different aspects of cyber security furnished us with a list of 
multi-disciplinary fundamental concepts and principles for the integrated analysis 
of cyber security issues. These elements could serve as a foundation for an ontology 
to support more efficient multi-stakeholder dialogues in policy, technology, stan-
dardisation, and other areas, and for studying cyber security as a multi-disciplinary 
scientific subject, incorporating societal, technology, and policy contexts.

The  lack  of  a  provable  ontology-based  connection  between  high  level  princi-
ples and recommendations, technical feasibility of proposals, pace of innovation, 
efficiency, and enforceability plays a role in complicating negotiations on complex 
issues, such as the new Data Protection and Network and Information Security reg-
ulations in the European Union. The complexity of the issues requires unrealistic 
knowledge of the broader context from all the participants. Availability of a broadly 
applicable ‘dialogue ontology’ would allow industry to demonstrate how technical 
norms and best practices support high-level principles and recommendations. Such 
tools would also help illustrate technology constraints in proposed approaches and 
find remedies to eliminate contradictions. An ontology would help reduce ambigu-
ity by establishing definitions and relationships between concepts and permitting 
the stakeholders to reason about consequences of the proposed regulations or the 
requirements of the current technology solutions and processes, such as interna-
tional data flows. Most importantly, an ontology linking high-level principles and 
concrete technical or process norms and best practices would be instrumental in 
outlining a clearer direction towards the implementation of accepted policy pro-
posals. It would permit the participants to speak the same language, to use the same 
decision support tools, and to define problems and solutions in the same or similar 
terms without acquiring comprehensive knowledge of issues.

238 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

The use of key concepts as the highest level of the ontology can speed up its 
development and shorten the discussions associated with the structure of the ontol-
ogy.  An  ontology  will  help  avoid  over-simplification  of  cyber  security  principles 
and provide a framework to incorporate norms and best practices, linked with the 
principles in a predictable fashion.

In order to create the common context for in-depth reasoning in support mul-
ti-stakeholder  discussions,  we  need  to  link  abstract  ideas  and  concrete  actiona-
ble concepts, account for dynamisms and rapid evolution of cyberspace, address 
governments’ concerns and users’ requirements, and understand the implications 
created  by  the  technology  space.  We  need  to  be  able  to  make  sense  of  regional 
differences  and  complex  patterns  of  adoption,  understand  limitations  of  current 
approaches, and be able to model radically new solutions.

From the technology point of view, cyberspace is rooted in shared global dig-
ital  infrastructure  (GDI)  and  includes  a  variety  of  technology  domains  that  can 
form a large number of dynamic contexts. Among these contexts, we can identify 
smart grid, connected transportation and energy, online education, social networks, 
organisational  and  government  environment,  as  well  as  broader  foundations  of 
these  contexts,  such  as  ‘cloud’  or  the  ‘Internet  of  things’.  The  environment  com-
prises multiple interconnected technology components such as networks, devices, 
and data, and also possesses user interfaces and, in some case, physical subsystems.
The technology space has a number of important characteristics that have strong 
impact on the development of policies and technical norms. They include intrinsic 
complexity, interoperability, ubiquitous connectivity, and intermingling of diverse 
contexts, such as cyber and physical. These characteristics need to be taken into 
consideration in every policy and technology strategy initiative. Over-simplification 
of cyberspace, while helpful in some contexts, is a poor initial premise for a policy 
discussion and limits the necessary assessment of constraints and interdependen-
cies impacting the effectiveness of an approach, a legal framework, or a regulation.
The technology space brings significant societal benefits, but its continued suc-
cess depends on the acceptance of innovation by the society. It has been an economic 
driver and engine of innovation since its emergence, and has acquired an enormous 
user base, with 40% of the global population connected, providing access to edu-
cation, information, and entertainment, supporting consumer and work environ-
ments, and underlying every element of critical infrastructure. The consequences of 
even a small failure of this system of systems are hard to quantify.

The  technology  environment  is  based  on  fundamental  characteristics  linking 
the technology environment with the policy space and providing a foundation for 
the development of industry norms and best practices for cyberspace. Because of 
the  complexity  of  the  environment,  cyber  security  risks  are  multi-faceted,  com-
prising the adjacent domains of security, privacy, safety, reliability, and resilience. 
These risk domains can be addressed through private-public collaboration, inter-
national cooperation, national coordination, and multi-stakeholder efforts, the key 

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  239

Policy Principles and Activities:
• Enhanced internal government cooperation
• International cooperation
• Public-private & multi-stakeholder cooperation
• Flexibility
• Multi-domain risk models
• Ability to address national security and citizens’  

concerns

• Basis in fundamental democracy values
• Accountability
• Development and harmonisation of appropriate  

legal frameworks, e.g., for fighting cyber crime

• Self-regulation

Technology Characteristics:
• Intrinsic complexity
• Universal connectivity
• Shared infrastructure
• Global interoperability
• Openness
• Reliance on open standards
• Rapid evolution and adaptability
• Rapid innovation

Societal Benefits:
• Strong and broad economic impact
• Increase in productivity
• Universal and globally diverse user base
• Rapid evolution of usage models
• Broad benefits for access to education, 

training, general information

• Broad adoption of new communication 

models and paradigms

Figure 1. Consolidated graphic of key concepts and principles –  
high level of the proposed ontology.

240 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

approaches shared by cyber security strategies of multiple countries such as Infor-
mation Sharing and Analysis Centre (ISAC) efforts.

Policies necessary to support the rapid development of the technology space 
and the societal benefits it fosters have to be based on the integrated character-
istics of the cyber environments, and the attributes and principles upon which 
these  characteristics  are  built.  They  need  to  include  a  well-defined  connection 
between technology norms and best practices, and high-level policy principles. 
Such a connection is necessary in order to define policies and regulations in a way 
that makes them compatible with the technology environment. The meaning of 
key principles such as support for privacy or transparency needs to be reinforced 
by the link with technical and process best practices that is necessary to opera-
tionalise these concepts. A rich ontology linking principles with norms and best 
practices can help in maintaining a unified, but actionable model of cyberspace 
and in forming objective links between the layer of principles and the layer of 
norms and best practices.

6. Conclusions

The international harmonisation of cyber security strategies and visions has not yet 
been achieved, but the analysis of diverse literature on cyber security and cyber-
space shows a degree of coherence for high-level concepts and displays evidence 
of commonality in concepts, principles, and attributes describing various aspects 
of policy, technology space, and societal impacts of cyberspace. This commonality 
provides a reservoir of fundamental concepts and principles that can help industry, 
government, academia, and others to develop an in-depth view of cyberspace.

These common concepts and principles covering technology, policy, and societal 
issues can serve as a foundation of a shared approach to cyber security devised as 
an ontology. The ontology could connect high-level principles developed by policy 
efforts and best practices designed by industry experts. It could be instrumental in 
creating a common context to support multi-stakeholder interactions, could help to 
model and predict the rapid pace of chance in cyberspace and could enable a mul-
ti-disciplinary scientific view of cyber security.

Although we did not build a prototype ontology to support the ontology pro-
posal in this paper, such an ontology could be quickly developed based on the top-
level concepts we proposed and with the use of common ontology tools such as 
Protégé43 and based on the methodology described here. The development of such 
an ontology is a worthy topic for a multi-disciplinary community effort.

43  Protégé, http://protege.stanford.edu/.

Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  241

Industry has developed a set of best practices and norms in cyber security, such 
as technology and governance standards, best practices for privacy and data pro-
tection,  and  secure  technology  development.  They  are  based  on  high-level  prin-
ciples evolved by the global community. However, the connection between norms 
and principles remains abstract, hindering mutual understanding in multi-stake-
holder initiatives and harmonisation efforts. We believe that an ontology permitting 
diverse stakeholders to reason about the complex environment can provide tools 
leading to greater mutual understanding and, as a result, to greater progress in cyber 
security initiatives.

242 

International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives

