Proceedings of the American Society for Engineering Management 2017 International Annual Conference 
E-H. Ng, B. Nepal, and E. Schott eds. 

BENCHMARKING ESTONIA’S CYBER SECURITY: AN ON-RAMPING 
METHODOLOGY FOR RAPID ADOPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION 

 

Ernest Y. Wong*, Nan Porter, McKinnon Hokanson, Bing Bing Xie 

 

United States Military Academy 

 

ernest.wong@usma.edu 

____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Abstract  
In  April  of  2007,  Estonia  fell  victim  to  a  series  of  distributed  denial  of  service  (DDoS)  attacks  that  crippled  its 
government websites, email servers, media outlets, and banking system for nearly a month. Due to the devastating 
effects  of  these  cyber  attacks,  Estonia  took  great  efforts  to  strengthen  its  cyber  security  protocols.  This  research 
analyzes the reforms that Estonia has implemented in its domestic and foreign policies and attempts to determine if 
any of it systemic improvements can help to also bolster cyber security in the United States (US). The findings from 
this research are that Estonia’s policy reforms in cyber security have been the most significant in areas that the US 
currently lacks. Domestically, Estonia has a cyber education program that significantly highlights awareness of the 
risks to its critical cyber infrastructure. Estonia has also promoted public and private partnerships to jointly analyze, 
assess, and defend itself against future  cyber attacks.. In foreign affairs, Estonia has bolstered  its relationship  with 
allied nations in new  ways  and has synchronized its foreign policies to  improve  stakeholder engagement on cyber 
defense.  The  critical  changes  that  Estonia  has  adopted  and  implemented  throughout  the  past  decade  are  what  this 
research  endeavors  to  recommend  for  the  US  to  consider  into  its  defense  of  the  cyber  domain.  Furthermore,  this 
research proposes an on-ramping methodology that helps to frame how an organization can more easiliy integrate new 
processes, practices, and procedures that have worked well for others. 
 
Keywords 
Cyber defense and security, cyber resiliency, on-ramping adoption and implementation framework 
 
Introduction 
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Republic of Estonia’s technological capabilities were virtually non-
existent.  Beginning  in  1992,  an  economic  foundation  established  under  the  new  Estonian  Prime  Minister  allowed 
businesses  to  be  created  without  substantial  delay.  By  1998,  all  Estonian  schools  had  computers  equipped  in  the 
classroom for their students. Soon afterwards, Internet access was considered a critical enabling infrastructure, and 
free Wi-Fi spread throughout the country and became the national standard. In 2007, Estonia became the first country 
to allow online voting in a general election. Today, Estonia is a world leader in technology and is considered one of 
the most wired countries in Europe (Davis, 2007). 

On April 30th 2007, pro-Russian hacktivists showcased the devastating impact that cyber effects can have 
on the world. Never before had an entire nation become rendered completely impotent due to a cyber attack. As a 
result of this unprecedented attack, cyber warfare was quickly added into the military lexicon. No longer were cyber 
attacks merely a nuisance that only banks and e-commerce sites had to contend with; the 2007 Russian cyber attacks 
on  Estonia  showed  to  the  world  just  how  dangerous  and  deadly  a  cyber  adversary  can  be  and  exposed  just  how 
vulnerable nations are to attacks in the cyber domain (Herzog, 2011). In spite of the calamity it suffered, Estonia has 
demonstrated  considerable  resiliency  after  this  attack,  and  the  nation  has  helped  to  spur  a  substantial  amount  of 
significant improvements in cyber defense. In fact, within the span of just one decade Estonia has transitioned into 
becoming one of the most advanced nations in cyber security and  cyber defense. As cyber attacks directed against 
American citizens, campanies, and the government increase, it will prove advantageous to examine the measures that 
Estonia  has  taken  following  Russia’s  cyber  attack  towards  advancing  the  cyber  security  posture  of  the  US.  By 
analyzing and benchmarking the Estonian cyber security strategy after its 2007 cyber attack, this research identifies 
key  lessons  learned  that  can  be  applied  to  improve  the  overall  cyber  security  posture  for  all  nations.  Finally,  this 
research proposes an on-ramping methodology that will help to better frame how any organization looking to adopt 
and implement processes, practices, and procedures that have worked well for others can do so more efficiently and 
effectively. 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

 
Background 
As a result of a massive and sustained cyber attack on its information infrastructure by Russian hackers  and in the 
aftermath of the very first cyber attack directly targeting the national security of a country, Estonia became one of the 
first countries in the world to adopt a national cyber security strategy (Czosseck, Ottis, & Taliharm, 2011). The 2007 
cyber attack directed at computers in the Estonian government, schools, and national media left the country without a 
number  of  essential  services  for  nearly  a  month.  Although  some  of  the  attacks  on  its  system  merely  consisted  of 
vandalism on government websites, the most serious attacks resulted in a series of distributed denial of service (DDoS) 
that left the country without access to the Internet, telephones, bank accounts, and credit cards (Czosseck, Ottis, & 
Taliharm, 2011). However, in the aftermath of this cyber attack,  Estonia  has implemented a number of significant 
structural changes that make it a paragon for cyber security. Accordingly, this research  shows how the US government 
can benefit greatly from by examining the creation of Estonia’s cyber defense strategy and considering the adoption 
of key parts of this strategy for US cyber security. 

 

Republic of Estonia’s Cyber Security Policy 
Estonia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2014-2017 currently guides Estonia’s cyber security program and is an integral part 
of the nation’s broader security strategy (Estonia, 2014). The document helps to highlight key developments, assesses 
cyber threats to the nation, and provides measures to manage these threats as part of a whole-of-government effort. 
This cyber security strategy is similar to the original plan that Estonia put in place immediately after the attacks in 
2007,  and  it  continues  to  promote  efforts  that  enhance  the  nation’s  cyber  security.  The  primary  objective  of  this 
updated strategy is to increase cyber security capabilities and raise the population’s awareness of cyber threats, thereby 
ensuring continued confidence in cyberspace for its citizens. To do so effectively, this strategy outlines several sub-
goals which include ensuring protection of information systems underlying important services, enhancing the fight 
against cyber crime, developing national cyber defense capabilities, managing cyber security threats, and promoting 
and synchronizing international cyber security policy (Estonia, 2014). 

This cyber strategy also dedicates considerable resources on increasing its people’s understanding of cyber 
vulnerabilities. Estonia’s Police and Border Guard Board  has been tasked with elevating the nation’s awareness of 
cyber threats, and as a result, has created web-constables that educate its citizens on the security of the Internet and 
help  protect  its  children  and  young  people  with  their  online  presence  (Estonia,  2014).  In  addition,  this  strategy 
encourages  greater  integration  between  the  private,  public  and  third-party  sectors  in  order  to  promote  a  more 
comprehensive cyber security posture. This has resulted in the creation of the Estonian Defense League’s Cyber Unit 
which is composed of cybersecurity and industry professionals who volunteer their expertise to improve the security 
of Estonian state agencies’ information systems through coordinated exercises and testing of cyber defense solutions 
(Estonia, 2014). With Estonia’s view towards enhancing relationships with allies and promoting international cyber 
security policy, partnerships have extended beyond traditional regional entities, such as NATO, the European Union, 
and the Baltic States; Estonia has created new forms of cyber cooperation such as the Freedom Online Coalition, the 
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts, and the Friends of the Presidency of the European Union in order to 
grow and synchronize mutually beneficial security policies that Estonia wants to promote (Estonia, 2014). 
 
Linkages to the Cyber Security Goals of the US Department of Defense 
In 2015, the US Department of Defense (DoD) published its updated cyber security strategy and placed cyber threats 
as the nation’s number one strategic threat (US DoD, 2015). In this document, the US DoD outlines its three three 
primary cyber missions: 1) to defend its own networks, systems, and information; 2) to be prepared to defend the US 
and its interests against cyber attacks of significant consequence; and 3) if directed by the President or the Secretary 
of Defense, it  must be able to provide integrated cyber capabilities to support military operations and contingency 
plans (US DoD, 2015). The US DoD document also includes a number of strategic goals which include: 1) build and 
maintain ready forces and capabilities to conduct cyberspace operations; 2) defend the DoD information network and 
data as well as mitigate risks to DoD missions; 3) be prepared to defend the US homeland and US vital interests from 
disruptive or destructive cyber attacks; 4) build and maintain viable cyber options and plan to use those options to 
control  conflict  escalation  and  to  shape  the  conflict  environment  at  all  stages;  and  5)  build  and  maintain  robust 
international alliances and partnerships to deter shared threats and increase international  security and stability (US 
DoD, 2015). 

As with in the Estonian strategy, the US DoD cyber strategy places considerable emphasis on international 
alliances and partnerships in order to bolster global cyber security against potential threats and states: “All three of 
DoD’s  cyber  missions  require  close  collaboration  with  foreign  allies  and  partners.  .  .  and  [the  US]  seeks  to  build 
partnership capacity in cybersecurity and cyber defense, and to deepen operational partnerships where appropriate” 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

2 

 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

(US DoD, 2015). And based on the many other similarities and overlapping goals among these two cyber strategies, 
it appears evident that the US DoD has placed meaningful stock in learning from Estonia’s experiences and is putting 
in place defensive measures that will help to prevent a cyber attack as devastating as the one inflicted upon Estonia 
from happening again.  
 
Methodology 
While Estonia endured being  without a number of critical  services  for  over 22 days after the 2007 cyber attack, a 
number of security experts question whether the US, whose dependence on the cyber domain is arguably greater than 
Estonia’s from a decade earlier, can withstand such a calamitous shock (Kaplan, 2016). “The network connectivity 
that the United States has used to tremendous advantage, economically and militarily, over the past 20 years has made 
the country more vulnerable than ever to cyber attacks,” concluded the DoD Defense Science Board Task Force on 
Resilient  Military  Systems  (US  Defense  Science  Board,  2013).  With  cyber  adversaries  becoming  more  and  more 
capable of conducting such attacks and with a computer network infrastructure that was built on inherently insecure 
architectures,  the  US  has  begun  to  realize  that  it  must  quickly  ramp  up  and  seriously  improve  its  cyber  defense 
capabilities. Studying, learning from, and emulating Estonia’s cyber resiliency efforts can help to also reduce the US 
transition period in becoming prepared for a major cyber attack. This research begins first with structuring a functional 
hierarchy that helps define Estonia’s cyber policies,  then progresses to determining the relative values of  Estonia’s 
key cyber security improvement benchmarks, transitions next to a quantitative modeling process that helps to rank 
order  cyber  policies  that  have  the  most  impact,  and  finally  concludes  with  the  introduction  of  an  on-ramping 
framework that helps expedite organizational adoption and implementation. 
 
A Functional Hierachy for Systematically Benchmarking Effective Cyber Policies 
In  order  to  benchmark  the  most  critical  and  applicable  portions  of  the  2014-2017  Estonian  Cyber  Strategy,  this 
research  begins  with  a  functional  analysis  to  identify  those  system  functions  and  system  interfaces  that  have  the 
greatest potential to improve the US cyber security posture (Parnell, Driscoll, & Henderson,  2011). The functional 
hierarchy  depicted  in  Exhibit  1  highlights  those  areas  and  functions  that  this  research  conjectures  would  be  most 
helpful in rapidly maturing the the US cyber strategy through emulating and learning from what Estonia has already    
. 

Exhibit 1.  A Functional Hierachy for Analyzing Estonia’s Post-2007 Cyber Policies 

 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

 

3 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

 
initiated for its cyber strategy. This functional  hierarchy also provides this research with a clear plan of action  and 
road map for analyzing the study’s fundamental goal: how to increase US cyber security by evaluating the post-2007 
Estonian cyber policies. This overarching goal, in turn, breaks down into two distinct  functions—how Estonia  has 
approached its domestic cyber policies and how it has navigated its foreign policies. Doing this permits the researchers 
to more easily compartmentalize the various interactions that define Estonia’s cyber plan. From these two functions, 
the researchers identify six sub-functions and objectives that are detailed in Exhibit 1 and comprise the critical tasks 
which govern the direction of the scope, analysis, and modeling for this study. 

Assigning the Relative Importance of the Sub-Functions and Objectives into a Swing Weight Matrix 
Recognizing that not all value measures have equal importance, the researchers employ the swing weight methodology 
to quantify the tradeoffs between multiple objectives (Parnell, Driscoll, & Henderson, 2011). The matrix in Exhibt 2 
shows  how  the  researchers  have  come  up  with  an  assigned  relative  importance  to  each  of  the  sub-functions  and 
objectives in this study. The top side of the matrix defines the value measure importance and the left side defines the 
impact  of  changing  the  value  measure  range  on  the  decision.  Accordingly,  this  study  arbitrarily  scores  100  to  the 
objective of Education and Awareness, located at the top left quadrant of the matrix, as the most important  measure 
because it has the highest mission criticality and changes the most across its range of values, thereby providing the 
highest degree of variation. The arbitrary non-normalized scores—which are all below 100--for the remaining five 
other sub-functions and objectives are provided in Exhibit  2. What this  matrix reveals is that this research  has the 
Education  and  Awareness  objective  (with  a  score  of  100)  being  weighted  twice  as  much  as  the  International 
Cooperation objective (with a score of 50) and being weighted five times as much as the Public and Private Sector 
Cooperation objective (with a  score of 20). The basic concept of this  method in determining  weights is relatively 
straightforward  with  those  objectives  with  more  importance  having  higher  scores  than  those  with  less  importance 
(Parnell, Driscoll, & Henderson, 2011). 

 Exhibit 2.  A Swing Weight Matrix for Quantifying Relative Importance of the 6 Sub-Functions and Objectives 

 

 
Value Models to Quantify Each of the Sub-Functions and Objectives 
In the next step of this study, the researchers construct value models for each of the sub-function and objective’s value 
measurements. The equations provided for each of the value models in Exhibit 3  represent the best-fitting line for 
each of the 6 value measurements. Exhibit 4 concisely summarizes the key information about the quantitative value 
model from both the swing weight matrix as well as the 6 value models for each of the sub-functions and objectives. 

 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

4 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

Exhibit 3.  Value Models and Functions for Each of the 6 Sub-Functions and Objectives 

  

 

Exhibit 4.  Key Information on the Swing Weight Matrix and Quantitative Value Models 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

 

5 

  

  

 

 

Sub-Function & ObjectiveMeasure TypeValue ShapeSwing WeightGlobal WeightBest Fitting Equation1.1  Cyber Security Ed. and Aware.ProxyConvex1000.274y = 1.3393x3 - 3.8929x + 2.85711.2  Security of Private SectorProxyConcave700.192y = -2.6607x2 + 31.95x + 4.14291.3  Coop. b/w Pri. and Pub. SectorsProxyS-Shape200.055y = -0.1505x3 + 2.5694x2 - 0.7275x + 0.39681.4  Legal ChangesProxyConcave900.247y = -1.942x2 + 27.848x - 3.03572.1  Detecting Cyber AttacksProxyLinear350.096y = 10x2.2  International CooperationProxyS-Shape500.137y = 0.013x4 - 0.5845x3 + 5.7465x2 - 2.5926x + 0.2778Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

Comparing US Cyber Security to Estonian Cyber Security and Recommending an On-Ramp Framework 
In the final step of this study, the researchers approximate the raw input data values to calculate how the overall US 
cyber policy weighted score compares against Estonia’s score. As highlighted in Exhibit 5, the US overall weighted 
score of 45.14 is below Estonia’s score of 76.95. While there may be concern that the US score falls below 50% of 
the Ideal Score, the researchers believe the overarching goal of this analysis is not to debate where the US falls in 
relation  to  other  nations,  but  rather,  to  identify  those  key  areas  where  the  US  can  focus  additional  emphasis  and 
resources to quickly improve its cyber security posture. The radar/web diagram in Exhibit 6 provides a more insightful                      
. 

Exhibit 5.  Comparison of Approximated US and Estonia Cyber Scores 

Exhibit 6.  Radar/Web Diagram Showing 2 Key Sub-Functions to Improve US Cyber Defense the Most 

 

 

 
assessment beyond the calculated overall weighted scores. In order to move US policy towards the ideal perimeter, it 
ought to focus on improving in two key sub-functions and objectives: Cyber Security Education and Awareness and 
Cooperation Between Private and Public Sectors. 
 
In  order  to  help  the  US  more  rapidly  adopt  and  implement  policies  and  activities  that  address  these  two 
objective  shortcomings,  this  research  proposes  that  the  US  ought  to  adopt  a  “fast-lane”  on-ramping  methodology. 
Exhibit 7 depicts two methods that vehicles normally on-ramp on to an expressway: either via the fast-lane or via the 
more traditional slow/merge-lane. Because the US has already adopted and implemented a number of cyber polices 
that Estonia recommends, indicating that it has studied and is learning from Estonia’s 2007 cyber attack, the US ought 
to  have  the  capacity  and  capability  to  more  readily  implement  additional  measures  to  address  its  cyber  defense 
shortcomings. The US has already implemented policies that target the low-hanging fruit most often seen in the slow-
lane; instead it now needs to go after the harder policies that drive cultural shifts and organizational paradigm changes.  

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

6 

 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

Increasing  Education  and  Awareness  as  well  as  the  promoting  Public  and  Private  Partnerships  are  difficult 
undertakings that will require a whole-of-nation strategy. But to ensure the nation is ready for a cyber event along the 
scale of Estonia’s 2007 attack requires difficult and drastic change. The hope is that this research helps spur US policy-
makers to think of a “fast-lane” on-ramp strategy as a viable option for the cyber resiliency of the entire US. 
 

Exhibit 7.  On-Ramping for Rapid Adoption and Implementation--Fast Lane vs Slow Lane On-Ramps 

 

 

 
Conclusion 
What makes Estonia supremely qualified to serve as an excellent benchmark for comparing cyber policies is that in 
April  of  2007,  it  actually  experienced  a  cyber-9/11  attack  that  fundamentally  changed  the  way  the  entire  nation 
approaches  cyber  security.  This  research  acknowledges  and  affirms  that  the  US  has  already  adopted  a  number  of 
domestic and foreign cyber security objectives that Estonia has proposed in its Cyber Security Strategy 2014-2017. 
However, this research concludes the US is deficient in two key objectives and recommends the US adopt a “fast-
lane” on-ramping strategy that addresses how to better educate its citizens on cyber threats and promote the public 
and private partnerships that are critically necessary to ensure a cyber resilient nation. Although increasing awareness 
throughout  the  US  will  be  difficult,  this  is  a  challenge  that  deserves  consideration  if  the  nation  does  truly  wish  to 
improve its overall cybersecurity posture and reduce the attack vectors available to cyber adversaries. Additionally, 
with the US private sector outpacing the public sector in developing new and novel ways for defending and operating 
in cyberspace, it is critically important that the US Government leverage as much technical and operational expertise 
from its own technology industries and companies. By focusing efforts on these two key areas, perhaps then the US 

 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

7 

Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al. 

and its people will be more fully prepared to deal with cyber attacks as a normal part of being connected to the global 
economy rather than simply reacting to the consequences of a critical cyber event that takes the nation by surprise. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The  authors  would  like  to  thank  John  Hennings,  Paul  Dufraine,  and  Dane  Brown  of  the  United  States  Central 
Command’s Joint Cyberspace Center for sponsoring this research. The Systems Engineering Cadet Research Team 
(Team Estonia) is extremely grateful for their insights and guidance, and for taking the time to introduce our team to 
learning about cyber security at the global level. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not 
reflect official policy of the US Army, US Department of Defense, or the US Government. 
 
References 
Czosseck, C., Ottis, R., & Taliharm, A. (2011). Estonia after the 2007 cyber attacks: legal, strategic and 

organisational changes in cyber security. International Journal of Cyber Warfare and Terrorism, 1(1), 24-
34. Retrieved from http://www.irma-international.org/viewtitle/61328/ 

Davis, J. (2007). Hackers take down the most wired country in Europe. Wired. Retrieved from 

https://www.wired.com/2007/08/ff-estonia/ 

Herzog, S. (2011). Revisiting the Estonian cyber attacks: digital threats and multinational responses. Journal of 

Strategic Security, 4(2), 49–60.  

Kaplan, F. (2016). Dark Territory: The Secret History of Cyber War. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Parnell, G. S., Driscoll, P. J., & Henderson, D. L. eds. (2011). Decision Making in Systems Engineering and 

Management, 2nd Edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.  

Republic of Estonia Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications (Estonia). (2014). 2014-2017 Cyber 

Security Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.mkm.ee/sites/default/files/cyber_security_strategy_2014-
2017_public_version.pdf 

United States Department of Defense (US DoD). (2015). The DoD Cyber Strategy. Retrieved from 

https://www.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/2015/0415_cyber-strategy/Final_2015_DoD_CYBER_ 
STRATEGY_for_web.pdf 

United States Deparmtent of Defense Defense Science Board Task Force on Resilient Military (US Defense Science 

Board). (2013). Task Force Report: Resilient Military Systems and the Advanced Cyber Threat. Retrieved 
from from http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA569975 

 
About the Authors 
Ernest Y. Wong is a Military Intelligence Officer in the US Army who is serving as the Chief of Staff at the Army 
Cyber Institute and an Assistant Professor with the Department of Systems Engineering at West Point. He graduated 
from the United States Military Academy with a B.S. in economics, and he holds a M.S. in management science and 
engineering from Stanford University, a M.A. in education from Stanford University, and a Master of Military 
Science from the Mubarak al-Abdullah Joint Command and Staff College in Kuwait. He had the opportunity to 
work as a NASA Summer Faculty Fellow and has served in overseas deployments to Iraq, Kuwait, and the Republic 
of Korea. His research interests include disruptive innovations, cyber resiliency, and the application of systems 
engineering tools for resolving complex real-world problems. 
 
Nan Porter, McKinnon Hokanson, and Bing Bing Xie were Cadets at the United States Military Academy 
who recently graduated and are serving as second lieutenants in the US Army. Nancy majored in Russian language 
and is now a Field Artillery Officer; McKinnon was defense strategy major and is an Infantry Officer; and Bing 
Bing majored in mathematics and is an Armor Officer. Together their capstone team researched how the US could 
best benchmark the cyber advancements that have taken place in Estonia for Lieutenant Wong’s Applied Systems 
Design and Decision Making course. 

 

Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017 

8 

