    

 

 

 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 
Practical Guide on Development and Execution  

 

December 2012 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 

About ENISA 

I  

The  European  Network  and  Information  Security Agency (ENISA)  is  a  centre  of  network  and 
information security expertise for the EU, its Member States, the private sector and Europe’s 
citizens.  ENISA  works  with  these  groups  to  develop  advice  and  recommendations  on  good 
practice  in  information  security.  It  assists  EU  Member  States  in  implementing  relevant  EU 
legislation and works to improve the resilience of Europe’s critical information infrastructure 
and networks. ENISA seeks to enhance existing expertise in EU Member States by supporting 
the  development  of  cross-border  communities  committed  to  improving  network  and 
information security throughout the EU. More information about ENISA and its work can be 
found at www.enisa.europa.eu 

Follow us on Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Youtube and RSS feeds 

 

ENISA project team 

Nicole FALESSI, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA 
Razvan GAVRILA, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA 
Maj Ritter KLEJNSTRUP, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA 
Konstantinos MOULINOS, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA 
 

Contact details 

For  questions  related  to  this  report  or  any  other  general  inquiries  about  the  resilience 
programme please use the following contact address: resilience [at] enisa.europa.eu 

 

Legal notice 

Please note that this publication represents the views and interpretations of the authors and 
editors, unless stated otherwise. This publication should not be construed to be a legal action 
of  ENISA  or  the  ENISA  bodies  unless  adopted  pursuant  to  the  ENISA  Regulation  (EC)  No. 
460/2004  as  lastly  amended  by  Regulation  (EU)  No.  580/2011.  This  publication  does  not 
necessarily represent the state-of-the-art and ENISA may update it from time to time. 

Third-party sources are quoted as appropriate. ENISA is not responsible for the content of the 
external sources including external websites referenced in this publication. 

This publication is intended for information purposes only. It must be accessible free of charge. 
Neither ENISA nor any person acting on its behalf is responsible for the use that might be made 
of the information contained in this publication.  

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

© European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 2012 

 

II 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

Contents 

Executive summary ....................................................................................................................... 1 

1 

Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 2 

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

The European policy context .......................................................................................... 2 

Scope .............................................................................................................................. 5 

Target audience .............................................................................................................. 6 

1.4  Methodology .................................................................................................................. 6 

1.5  How to use this guide ..................................................................................................... 6 

2  National cyber security strategy lifecycle ............................................................................. 7 

3 

Develop and execute the national cyber-security strategy .................................................. 8 

3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

Set the vision, scope, objectives and priorities .............................................................. 8 

Follow a national risk assessment approach ................................................................ 10 

Take stock of existing policies, regulations and capabilities ........................................ 11 

3.4  Develop a clear governance structure ......................................................................... 11 

3.5 

3.6 

Identify and engage stakeholders ................................................................................ 13 

Establish trusted information-sharing mechanisms .................................................... 15 

3.7  Develop national cyber contingency plans .................................................................. 16 

3.8  Organise cyber security exercises ................................................................................ 17 

3.9 

Establish baseline security requirements .................................................................... 19 

3.10 

3.11 

3.12 

3.13 

3.14 

3.15 

3.16 

3.17 

3.18 

Establish incident reporting mechanisms ................................................................. 20 

User awareness ......................................................................................................... 21 

Foster R&D ................................................................................................................ 22 

Strengthen training and educational programmes .................................................. 23 

Establish an incident response capability ................................................................. 24 

Address cyber crime ................................................................................................. 25 

Engage in international cooperation ........................................................................ 26 

Establish a public–private partnership ..................................................................... 27 

Balance security with privacy ................................................................................... 29 

4 

Evaluate and adjust the national cyber-security strategy .................................................. 30 

4.1 

Evaluation approach ..................................................................................................... 30 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 

III  

4.2 

Key performance indicators ......................................................................................... 31 

5 

Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 34 

Annex I – Glossary of Terms ........................................................................................................ 35 

Annex II – References .................................................................................................................. 38 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

Executive summary 

1  

In order to respond to cyber threats in a constantly changing environment, EU Member States 
need  to  have  flexible  and  dynamic  cyber-security  strategies.  The  cross-border  nature  of 
threats makes it essential to focus on strong international cooperation. Cooperation at pan-
European  level  is  necessary  to  effectively  prepare  for,  but  also  respond  to,  cyber-attacks. 
Comprehensive national cyber security strategies are the first step in this direction. 
At  a  European  and  International  level,  a  harmonised  definition  of  cyber  security  is  lacking.1 
The understanding of cyber security and other key terms varies from country to country. 2 This 
influences  the  very  different  approaches  to  cyber-security  strategies  among  countries.  The 
lack of common understanding and approaches between countries may hamper international 
cooperation, the need for which is acknowledged by all.  

ENISA  has  developed  this  guidebook  aiming  to  identify  the  most  common  and  recurrent 
elements  and  practices  of  national  cyber  security  strategies  (NCSSs),  in  the  EU  and  non-EU 
countries.  ENISA  has  studied  existing  NCSS,  in  terms  of  structure  and  content,  in  order  to 
determine the relevance of the proposed measures for improving security and resilience.  

Based  on  this  analysis,  ENISA  has  developed  a  guide  that  is  aimed  at  Member  State  policy 
makers interested in managing the relevant cyber security processes within their country.  

Within this context, ENISA has identified a set of concrete actions, which if implemented will 
lead to a coherent and holistic national cyber-security strategy. It is worth noting that many of 
the components and issues that should be addressed in such a strategy are horizontal or can 
fall into more than one of the categories you will find in this guide.  

This guide also proposes a national cyber-security strategy lifecycle, with a special emphasis 
on  the  development  and  execution  phase.  For  each  component  of  the  strategy  a  list  of 
possible  and  indicative  Key  performance  indicators  (KPIs)  will  be  described  in  the  chapter 
dedicated  to  the  evaluation  and  adjustment  of  the  NCSS.  Senior  policy  makers  will  find 
practical  recommendations  on  how  to  control  the  overall  development  and  improvement 
process  and  how  to  follow  up  on  the  status  of  national  cyber-security  affairs  within  their 
country.  

In early 2012, ENISA published a white paper on national cyber security strategies. The paper 
includes a short analysis of the status of cyber security strategies within the European Union 
and elsewhere. It also identifies common themes and differences, and concludes with a series 
of observations and recommendations.3  

                                                      

1  H.  Luiijf,  K.  Besseling,  M.  Spoelstra,  P.  de  Graaf,  Ten  National  Cyber  Security  Strategies:  a  comparison,  CRITIS  2011  –6th 
International Conference on Critical information infrastructures Security, September 2011.  

2 The definition of cyber space, cyber-attacks and cyber security policies also varies from country to country.  
3ENISA, National Cyber Security Strategies, http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/national-cyber security-
strategies-ncsss/cyber security-strategies-paper  

2 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

1 

Introduction 

During the last few decades new technologies, e-services and interconnected networks have 
become increasingly embedded in our daily life. Businesses, society, government and national 
defence depend on the functioning of information technology (IT) and the operation of critical 
information  infrastructures  (CIIs).  Transportation,  communication,  e-commerce,  financial 
services, emergency services and utilities rely on the availability, integrity and confidentiality 
of information flowing through these infrastructures.  

As society becomes more and more dependent on IT, the protection and availability of these 
critical  assets  are  increasingly  becoming  a  topic  of  national  interest.  Incidents  causing 
disruption of critical infrastructures and IT services could cause major negative effects in the 
functioning  of  society  and  economy.  As  such,  securing  cyberspace  has  become  one  of  the 
most important challenges of the 21st century. Thus, cyber security is increasingly regarded as 
a horizontal and strategic national issue affecting all levels of society. 

A national cyber security strategy (hereafter 'strategy') is a tool to improve the security and 
resilience  of  national  information  infrastructures  and  services.  It  is  a  high-level,  top-down 
approach to cyber security that establishes a range of national objectives and priorities that 
should  be  achieved  in  a  specific  timeframe.  As such,  it provides  a  strategic  framework  for  a 
nation’s approach to cyber security.  

EU Member States need to have flexible and dynamic cyber-security strategies to meet new 
global threats. In light of this, and to assist the EU Member States, the European Network and 
Information Security Agency (ENISA)4 has developed this guide, which presents good practices 
and recommendations on how to develop, implement and maintain a cyber-security strategy. 

Developing a comprehensive strategy can pose many challenges. A document that ticks all the 
right  boxes  for  what  should  be  included  can  be  easily  made.  However,  this  is  unlikely  to 
achieve any real impact in terms of improving the cyber security and resilience of a country. 
To develop a strategy it is necessary to achieve cooperation and agreement from a wide range 
of  stakeholders  on  a  common  course  of  action  –  this  will  not  be  an  easy  task.  It  should  be 
realised  that  the  process  of  developing  the  strategy  is  probably  as  important  as  the  final 
document.  

 

1.1  The European policy context 

The main regulatory and policy statements governing activities in the cyber-security strategy 
field are briefly summarised below.  

The Strategy for a Secure Information Society 

                                                      
4 https://www.enisa.europa.eu 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

3  

The purpose of this Communication was to revitalise the European Commission strategy set 
out in 2001 in the Communication Network and Information Security: proposal for a European 
Policy approach.5  

The Council Resolution of December 2009 

The  Council  Resolution  on  a  collaborative  European  approach  on  Network  and  Information 
Security  of  18  December  2009  provides  political  direction  on  how  the  Member  States,  the 
European  Commission, ENISA  and  stakeholders can  play  their  part  in  enhancing  the  level  of 
network and information security in Europe.6 

The Council conclusions on CIIP of May 2011 

The  Council  Conclusions  take  stock  of  the  results  achieved  since  the  adoption  of  the  CIIP 
action  plan  in  2009,  launched  to  strengthen  the  security  and  resilience  of  vital  information 
and communication technology infrastructures.7 

The Electronic Communications Regulatory Framework 

The review of the EU electronic communications regulatory framework and, in particular, the 
new provisions of Articles 13a and 13b of the Framework Directive and the amended Article 4 
of  the  e-Privacy  Directive  aim  at  strengthening  obligations  for  operators  to  ensure  security 
and integrity of their networks and services, and to notify breaches of security, integrity and 
personal data to competent national authorities.8  

The CIIP Action Plan 

The  Commission  Communication  Protecting  Europe  from  large-scale  cyber-attacks  and 
disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience calls upon ENISA to support the 
Commission  and  Member  States  in  implementing  the  CIIP  Action  Plan  to  strengthen  the 
security and resilience of CIIs.9 

The  Commission  Communication  on  Critical 
'Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber security' adopted on 31 March 2011 

Infrastructure  Protection 

Information 

This Communication takes stock of the results achieved since the adoption of the CIIP action 
plan  in  2009  launched  to  strengthen  the  security  and  resilience  of  vital  information  and 

                                                      
5 European Commission, A Strategy for a Secure Information Society – ‘Dialogue, partnership and empowerment’, COM(2006) 
251 
6  Council  of  the  European  Union,  Council  resolution  of  18  December,  2009  on  a  collaborative  approach  to  network  and 
information security, (2009/C 321 01) 

7 Council Conclusion on CIIP of May 2011 ( http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/11/st10/st10299.en11.pdf ) 
8 Telecommunications Regulatory Package (article 13a. amended Directive 2002/21/EC Framework Directive) 

9 European Commission, Commission Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection, Protecting Europe from 
large-scale cyber-attacks and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience, COM(2009)149. 

4 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

communication technology infrastructures. The next steps the Commission proposes for each 
action at both European and international level are also described.10 

Review of the Data Protection Legal Framework 

On  25/01/2012,  the  European  Commission  published  its  proposal  for  a  regulation  on  data 
protection. This regulation will replace the existing Data Protection Directive.11 

The Single Market Act 

In April 2011, the European Commission adopted a Communication, the Single Market Act, a 
series of measures to boost the European economy and create jobs. This notably includes the 
key action entitled 'Legislation ensuring the mutual recognition of electronic identification and 
authentication across the EU and review of the Directive on Electronic Signatures'.12 

The Digital Agenda 

The  Digital  Agenda  for  Europe  is  one  of  the  seven  flagship  initiatives  of  the  Europe  2020 
Strategy,  and  provides  an  action  plan  for  making  the  best  use  of  information  and 
communications technology (ICT) to speed up economic recovery and lay the foundations of a 
sustainable digital future.13 

The Internal Security Strategy for the European Union 

The  Internal  Security  Strategy  lays  out  a  European  security  model,  which  integrates  among 
other  things  action  on  law  enforcement  and  judicial  cooperation,  border  management  and 
civil protection, with due respect for shared European values, such as fundamental rights. This 
document includes a number of suggested actions for ENISA.14 

The  Telecom  Ministerial  Conference  on  CIIP  organised  by  the  Presidency  in  Balatonfüred, 
Hungary 

This  conference  took  place  on  14-15  April  2011.  On  this  occasion,  the  Vice  President  of  the 
European  Commission  and  Commissioner  for  the  Digital  Agenda,  Ms  Neelie  Kroes, 
acknowledged  the  progress  made  by  Member  States  but  also  called  for  further  actions  and 
stressed  the  importance  of  international  cooperation.  In  particular,  as  a  follow-up  to  the 
Conference,  Ms  Kroes  called  on  ENISA  to  intensify  its  activity  of  promoting  existing  good 

                                                      
10 Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber security, adopted on 31 March 2011 and the Council Conclusion on CIIP 
of May 2011 ( http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/11/st10/st10299.en11.pdf) 

11  European  Commission,  Proposal  for  a  regulation  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the  protection  of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such  data (General Data Protection 
Regulation), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/document/review2012/com_2012_11_en.pdf  

COM(2012) 

available 

11 

final, 

at 

25 

January 

2012, 

12 European Commission, Single Market Act – Twelve levers to boost growth and strengthen confidence – 'Working Together 
To Create New Growth', COM(2011)467 Final  
13 European Commission, A Digital Agenda for Europe, COM(2010)245, May, 2010. 

14 Council of the European Union, An EU Internal Security Strategy, (6870/10), 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/jha/113055.pdf  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

5  

practice  by involving  all  Member  States  in  a  peer-learning  and  mutual  support  process  with 
the aim to promote faster progress and bring all Member  States on par. Ms Kroes called on 
ENISA to establish a highly mobile dedicated team to support such process. 

European Strategy for Cyber Security 

At  the  time  of  writing,  the  European  Strategy  for  Cyber  Security  is  still  under  development. 
The  text  that  follows  is  therefore  a  reflection  of  the  current  state  of  affairs  and  may  well 
change.  The  goal  of  the  initiative  is  to  propose  a  comprehensive  cyber-security  strategy  for 
Europe.15 

EC proposal for a Regulation on electronic identification and trusted services for electronic 
transactions in the internal market 

The  aim  of  the  European  Directive  1999/93/EC  on  a  community  framework  for  electronic 
signatures was the legal recognition of electronic signatures.16 Assessing the need for secure 
and  seamless  electronic  transactions  as  well  as  the  shortcomings  of  the  Directive,  the 
European  Commission  adopted  on  4  June  2012  a  proposal  for  a  Regulation  on  electronic 
identification and trusted services for electronic transactions in the internal market.17 

1.2  Scope 

This  guide  aims  to  provide  useful  and  practical  recommendations  to  relevant  public  and 
private  stakeholders  on  the  development,  implementation  and  maintenance  of  a  cyber-
security strategy. More specifically the guide aims to:  

  define the areas of interest of a cyber-security strategy;  
  identify useful recommendations for public and private stakeholders;  
  help  EU  Member  States  to  develop,  manage,  evaluate  and  upgrade  their  national 

cyber security strategy; 

  contribute  to  the  Commission’s  efforts  towards  an  integrated  pan-European  cyber 

security strategy. 

The guide describes: 

  a  simplified  lifecycle  model  for  developing,  evaluating  and  maintaining  a  national 

cyber-security strategy; 

  the main elements of each phase; 
  good practices, recommendations and policies for each step. 

                                                      
15 Update on European Strategy for Cyber Security, 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/document/activities/cont/201207/20120712ATT48826/20120712ATT48826EN.pdf  
16 http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&numdoc=31999L0093&model=guichett  
17 http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/esignature/eu_legislation/regulation/index_en.htm  

6 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

1.3  Target audience 

The  target  audience  of  this  guide  is  public  officials  and  policy  makers:  that  is,  those  who 
usually  lead  the  process  of  developing  a  national  cyber-security  strategy.  The  guide  also 
provides useful insights for the stakeholders involved in the lifecycle of the  strategy, such as 
private,  civil  and  industry  stakeholders.  Typical  examples  include  policy  makers,  regulators, 
telecommunication  providers  and  internet  service  providers  (ISPs),  online  banks,  utility 
companies, computer emergency response team (CERT) experts and others. 

1.4  Methodology 

This  guide  was  prepared  by  surveying  and  interviewing  public  authorities,  chief  information 
security  officers,  chief  information  officers,  security  architects  and  other  IT/cyber  security 
experts 
their  experiences,  expertise,  and 
recommendations  for  effective  practices  in  developing,  implementing,  evaluating  and 
maintaining strategies.  

sectors  about 

from  various 

industry 

A questionnaire was prepared and distributed to representatives of the public sectors of EU 
Member  States  and  of  countries  outside  the  EU.  Several  interviews  were  performed  with 
stakeholders  from  the  private  sector.  The  companies  interviewed  were  located  in  nine 
different EU Member States.  

Following  completion  of  this  research,  the  results  were  analysed,  recommendations  were 
identified, and these findings were then prepared in the form of this guide.  
A validation workshop was organised to assess the ENISA initial findings in September 2012.18 
Inputs  and  comments  gathered  during  the  workshop  were  elaborated  and  included  in  this 
guide.  

1.5  How to use this guide 

This guide can be used in a number of ways:  

  as a practical, step-by-step guide for creating a brand new cyber-security strategy; 
  as  an  incentive  for  enhancing  or  complementing  parts  of  an  existing  national  cyber-

security strategy; 

  as  a  benchmark  for  checking  the  effectiveness  of  actions  in  existing  national  cyber-

security strategies;  

  as a basis for improving the maintenance of existing national cyber-security strategies. 

                                                      
18 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/workshops-1/2012/ncss-workshop  

ENISA’s  Workshop 

Strategies, 

National 

on 

Cyber 

Security 

Brussels, 

September 

2012, 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

2  National cyber security strategy lifecycle 

7  

In this guide, there are two key phases in governing a national cyber security strategy:  

  developing and executing the strategy: 
  evaluating and adjusting the strategy. 

This  structure  follows  Deming’s  ‘Plan-Do-Check-Act’  (PDCA)  model  for  governing  a  national 
cyber-security  strategy.  The  PDCA  model  is  also  used  to  check  and  continuously  improve 
strategies, policies, processes and products.19 

In addition, three approaches can be pursued in governing a strategy:  

  a  linear  approach:  the  strategy  will  be  developed,  implemented,  evaluated  and 

eventually terminated (or replaced); 

  a lifecycle approach: the output of the evaluation phase will be used to maintain and 

adjust the strategy itself; 

  a  hybrid  approach:  several  continuous  improvement  cycles  on  different  levels  may 

exist. 

Based  on  insights  from  the  surveys  and  interviews,  we  have  adopted  a  lifecycle  approach 
since  it  better  fits  the  needs  and  nature  of  the  requirements  of  a  national  cyber-security 
strategy.  Normally  such  strategies  should  quickly  respond  and/or  adapt  their  actions  to 
emerging cyber-security issues and emerging threats. 

This report is an overview and the accent is on the development and execution phase of the 
lifecycle.  In  addition,  we  present  high-level  suggestions  of  indicative  key  performance 
indicators that could be used for evaluation purposes. ENISA plans to further pursue this topic 
in the future, with a second edition that will focus on the evaluation and adjustment phase.  

                                                      

19 It is also commonly used for structuring information security management systems, ISO/IEC 27001:2005 

8 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

3  Develop and execute the national cyber-security strategy 

This chapter will aim at providing guidance to the steering and editorial teams of the strategy 
on the main components and actions that should be considered during the development and 
execution phases. Each sub-chapter will focus on specific objectives that require attention and 
a  non-exhaustive  list  of tasks  required to  meet these  objectives. In this sense,  these phases 
will outline the core of the overall ‘national philosophy’ on cyber security. 

3.1  Set the vision, scope, objectives and priorities 

The Oxford Dictionary defines a strategy as a plan of actions designed to achieve a long-term 
or overall aim.20 The aim of a  cyber security strategy is to increase the global resilience and 
security of national ICT assets, which support critical functions of the state or of the society as 
a  whole.  Setting  clear  objectives  and  priorities  is  thus  of  paramount  importance  for 
successfully reaching this aim.  

  

Typical tasks to consider in this step are listed here. 

  Define the vision and scope that set the high-level objectives to be accomplished in a 

specific time frame (usually 5-10 years). 

  Define the business sectors and services in scope for this strategy. 
  Perform a comprehensive national risk assessment for determining the objectives and 

scope of the strategy. 

  Prioritise objectives in terms of impact to the society, economy and citizens. 
  Take stock of the current situation (e.g. policy, regulatory, operational, etc.). 
  Involve the right stakeholders from the very beginning of the process to gain early 'buy 

in'. 

  Define  a  roadmap  for  the  implementation  of  the  strategy,  which  may  involve  the 

following steps. 

o  Define concrete activities that would meet the objectives of the strategy. 
o  Develop  a  governance  framework  for  the  implementation,  evaluation  and 

maintenance of the strategy. 

o  Develop a master plan for the implementation of the strategy. 
o  Develop concrete action plans for each activity. 
o  Define  the  evaluation  of  the  strategy  and  its  main  actions  (e.g.  which  key 

performance indicators (KPIs)) will be performed and by whom. 

 

An example: The vision, principles and objectives of the UK strategy 

The  vision  for  the  UK  in  2015  is  'to  derive  huge  economic  and  social  value  from  a  vibrant, 
resilient  and  secure  cyberspace,  where  our  actions,  guided  by  our  core  values  of  liberty, 

                                                      
20 Oxford English Dictionary, OUP, Oxford; 7th edition, 2012.  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

9  

fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, national security and a strong 
society.' 

The UK strategy includes the following objectives:  

• 
• 

• 

• 

tackling cyber crime and making cyberspace secure in order to do business; 
being more resilient to cyber attacks and be able to better protect the interests of the 
UK in cyberspace; 
helping to shape an open, stable and vibrant  cyberspace that the public can use safely 
and that supports open societies; 
having  the  cross-cutting  knowledge,  skills  and  the  capabilities  to  underpin  all  cyber 
security objectives of the UK. 

The UK strategy includes the following principles: 

• 
• 
• 

a risk-based approach; 
working in partnerships; 
balancing security with freedom and privacy. 

Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, 
Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011. 

 

An example: The use of an action plan to execute the Japanese strategy 

In  December  2000  Japan  formulated  the  Special  Action  Plan  on  Countermeasures  to  Cyber-
terrorism  for  Critical  Infrastructures.  The  action  plan  provided  a  framework  for  public  and 
private  sector  cooperation  in  protecting  seven  critical  infrastructure  sectors.  Because  of  the 
rapid  spread  in  IT  use,  increased  IT  dependence  in  the  critical  infrastructure  sectors  and 
increased interdependence between critical infrastructures, a new action plan was formulated 
based  on  the  document  'Basic  Concept  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical 
Infrastructures' in September 2005. 

In  December  2005  the  Action  Plan  on 
Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical 
Infrastructures  was  adopted.  The  action  plan  provided  an  overall  plan  for  protecting  critical 
infrastructures  against  IT-malfunctions.  In  February  2009  the  Second  Action  Plan  on 
Information Security Measures for Critical Infrastructures was adopted. 

Source:  (1)  Special  Action  Plan  on  Countermeasures  to  Cyber-terrorism  for  Critical 
Infrastructures,  Cabinet  Secretariat,  Japan,  2000;  (2)  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security 
Measures for Critical Infrastructures, The Information Security Policy Council, Japan, 2005; (3) 
The  Second  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical  Infrastructures,  The 
Information Security Policy Council, Japan, 2009. 

 

10 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

3.2  Follow a national risk assessment approach 

One  of  the  key  elements  of  a  cyber-security  strategy  is  the  national  risk  assessment,  with  a 
specific  focus  on  critical  information  infrastructures.  Risk  assessment  is  a  scientific  and 
technologically  based  process  consisting  of  three  steps:  risk  identification,  risk  analysis  and 
risk  evaluation.21  The  scope  of  the  assessment  is  to  coordinate  the  use  of  resources  and  to 
monitor,  control,  and  minimise  the  probability  and/or  impact  of  unfortunate  events  that 
might put at risk the objectives of the vision. 

Risk assessments can provide valuable information for developing, executing and evaluating a 
strategy. By carrying out a national risk assessment and aligning the objectives of the strategy 
with  national  security  needs,  it  is  possible  to  focus  on  the  most  important  challenges  with 
regard to cyber security.  

In most cases, governments adopt an all-hazard approach (i.e. incorporating all kinds of cyber 
threats such as cyber crime, hacktivism, technical failures or breakdowns) when assessing the 
risks at national level.  

Typical tasks to consider in this step are listed below. 

  Agree on a risk assessment methodology to use; if this is not possible, tailor an existing 

one to the specific needs of national risks. 

  Follow an all-hazard approach to risk identification and assessment. 
  Define critical sectors and establish a sector specific protection plan. Activities in this 

task might include the following. 

o 

Identify assets and services critical to the proper functioning of the society and 
economy. 

o  Assess  all  risks  affecting  the  critical  assets,  prioritise  them  according  to  their 

impact22 and calculate the probability of being realised. 

o  Engage  the  right  private-sector  stakeholders,  share  with  them  their  risk 

assessments and correlate them with your findings. 

o  Decide  which  risks  you  mitigate  and  how,  which  risks  you  accept,  and  which 

risks you do nothing about (and be clear why you make these decisions). 

o  Develop a national risk registry to store the identified risks. 
o  Define a recurring process for continually monitoring threats and vulnerabilities 

and updating the national threat landscape. 

 

An example: A risk-based approach as a principle in the UK strategy 

The UK strategy includes a risk-based approach as one of its three underlying principles. The 
strategy  states  that:  'In  a  globalized  world  where  all  networked  systems  are  potentially 
vulnerable  and  where  cyber-attacks  are  difficult  to  detect,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as 

                                                      
21ENISA, Glossary, http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-management/current-risk/risk-management-inventory/glossary   
22Various metrics can be used for the impact assessment e.g. monetary units, people affected. 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

11  

absolute security. We will therefore apply a risk-based approach to prioritizing our response.' 
Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, 
Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011. 

3.3  Take stock of existing policies, regulations and capabilities 

Before  defining  in  detail  the  objective  of  the  cyber-security  strategy,  it  is  important  to  take 
stock  of  the  status  of  the  key  elements  of  the  strategy  at  national  level.  At  the  end  of  this 
activity important gaps must be identified.  

Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following. 

  Take stock of existing policies developed over the years in the area of cyber security 
(i.e  electronic  communications,  data  protection,  information  security);  bear  in  mind 
that cyber security is/should be part of an overall national security policy framework. 

  Identify all regulatory measures applied in different sectors and their impact, so far, in 
in  the  electronic 

incident  reporting 

improving  cyber  security  (e.g.  mandatory 
communications sector). 

  Take stock of existing capabilities developed for addressing operational cyber security 

challenges (e.g. national or governmental CERTs). 

  Identify existing soft regulatory mechanisms (e.g. public and private partnerships) and 

assess the extent to which these have achieved their goals. 

  Analyse the roles and responsibilities of existing public agencies mandated to deal with 
cyber  security  policies,  regulations  and  operations  (i.e  energy  regulators,  electronic 
communications’  regulators,  data  protection  authorities,  national  cyber  crime 
centres); identify overlaps and gaps. 

  Assess the extent to which the existing policy, regulatory and operational environment 

meet the objectives and scope of the strategy; If not, identify the missing elements. 

 

An example: An essential principle in the Strategy of the Czech Republic 

It is highly desirable to support all initiatives, be they of the state (civilian, police, military) or of 
commercial or academic sectors, which have already accomplished  a lot in the field of cyber 
security. Such joint efforts have led to improved  cyber security and in many cases  prevented 
dispersion of resources and unnecessary duplication. Much of the ICT infrastructure and many 
related products and services are provided by the private sector. Mutual trust and sharing of 
information  are  essential  conditions  of  successful  cooperation  between  the  private  and  the 
public sectors. 

Source:  Cyber  Security  Strategy  of  the  Czech  Republic  for  the  2011–2015  period,  Czech 
Republic, 2011 

3.4  Develop a clear governance structure 

The  cyber  security  strategy  will  succeed  only  if  a  clear  governance  framework  is  in  place.  A 
governance  framework  defines  the  roles,  responsibilities  and  accountability  of  all  relevant 

12 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

stakeholders.  It  provides  a  framework  for  dialogue  and  coordination  of  various  activities 
undertaken in the lifecycle of the strategy.  

A  public  body  or  an  interagency/interministerial  working  group  should  be  defined  as  the 
coordinator of the strategy. This will be the entity  that has the overall responsibility for the 
strategy  lifecycle  and  the  strategy  documentation  itself.  The  structure  of  the  coordinating 
entity,  its  exact  responsibilities  and  its  relationships  with  the  other  stakeholders  should  be 
clearly defined. 

Typical tasks to consider in this step are listed here. 

  Define  who  is  the  ultimate  responsible  for  the  management  and  evaluation  of  the 
strategy;  usually it  is a  cyber  security coordinator  –  or the  nation’s  chief  information 
(systems) officer (CIO/CISO) – who is appointed by the prime minister/president and is 
ultimately responsible for managing the cyber-security strategy. 

  Define the management structure i.e an advisory body that advises the cyber security 
coordinator of the strategy. Specify the governmental and private parties taking part in 
this structure. Usually this is done through a national cyber security council, which has 
members  from  both  public  and  private  sectors.  Try  to  cover  the  widest  spectrum  of 
stakeholders involved. 

  Define the mandate (e.g. roles, responsibilities, processes, decision rights) and tasks of 
this  advisory  body  (e.g.  it  manages  the  national  risk  management,  assesses  and 
prioritises  emerging  threats,  responds  to  critical  situations,  manages  the  progress  of 
the strategy, engages relevant stakeholders, fosters international cooperation etc).  

  Define or confirm the mandate and tasks of the entities responsible for initiating and 
developing  cyber-security  policy  and  regulation;  explain  how  these  interact  with 
and/or contribute to the advisory body.  

  Define  the  mandate  and  tasks  of  the  entities  responsible  for  collecting  threats  and 
vulnerabilities,  responding  to  cyber  attacks,  strengthening  crisis  management  and 
others; explain how these interact with and/or contribute to the advisory body. Typical 
examples  include  a  national  cyber  security  centre  (NCSC)  which  is  tasked  with 
protecting the national (critical) information infrastructures.  

  Properly analyse and define the role of existing, , national cyber security and incident 
response teams (CERT) in both public and private sectors. The national/governmental 
CERT may be tasked with monitoring activities, trusted information sharing, providing 
news  on  emerging  threats  and  other  critical  information  infrastructure  protection 
activities.  The  CERT  may  play  a  key  role  in  cooperating and  sharing  information  with 
other similar organizations at national and international level. 

 

An example: A governance framework in practice in The Netherlands  

In  order  to  be  able  to  adequately  respond  to  various  threats  and  to  be  able  to  return  to  a 
stable situation in the event of a disruption of attack, various response activities are necessary. 
The relevant organisation will in the first instance itself deal with ICT incidents which lead to a 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

13  

information 
breach  of  the  availability, 
infrastructure.  The  government  will  respond  adequately  where  incidents  can  lead  to  social 
disruption or harming of vital objects, processes or persons. 

integrity  or  availability  of  the  network  and 

In the strategy of the Netherlands a public-private partnership has been created for the ICT 
Response  Board  which  gives  advice  on  measures  to  counteract  major  ICT  disruptions  to 
decision-making  organisations.  The  Board  began  its  activities  in  2011  under  the  auspices  of 
the National Cyber Security Centre. 

Source: The National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) – Strength through cooperation, Ministry 
of Security and Justice, The Netherlands, The Hague, 2011. 

 

An example: Responsibility for UK cyber security 

The Office of Cyber Security was formed in 2009 and became the Office of Cyber Security and 
Information Assurance (OCSIA) in 2010. OCSIA is located in the Cabinet Office and coordinates 
cyber security programmes run by the UK government including location of the National Cyber 
Security Programme funding. 

The Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC) was formed in 2009. CSOC is housed with GCHQ 
and  is  responsible  for  providing  analysis  and  overarching  situational  awareness  of  cyber 
threats. 

The Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI) provides guidance to national 
infrastructure organisations and businesses on protective security measures, including cyber. 

CESG  is  the  National  Technical  Authority  for  Information  Assurance  and  is  situated  within 
GCHQ.  CESG  provides  information  security  advice  and  a  variety  of  information  assurance 
services to government, defence and key infrastructure clients. 

Computer  emergency  response  teams  (CERTs)  exist  in  a  number  of  public  and  private  sector 
organisations. GovCERTUK is responsible for all government networks,  while CSIRTUK, CPNI’s 
CERT, responds to reported incidents concerning private sector networks in the critical national 
infrastructure.  

Source: Cyber Security in the UK, Postnote No 389, September 2011. 

 

3.5  Identify and engage stakeholders 

A successful cyber-security strategy requires proper co-operation between public and private 
stakeholders.  Identifying  and  engaging  stakeholders  are  crucial  steps  for  the  success  of  the 
strategy. Public stakeholders usually have a policy, regulatory and operational mandate. They 
ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the  nation’s  critical  infrastructures  and  services.  Selected 
private entities should be part of the development process due to the fact that they are likely 
the owners of most of the critical information infrastructures and services.  

14 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following. 

  Identify the owners of all critical infrastructures and services. Typical examples include 

energy, transport, finance, telecommunications, etc.  

  Identify  public  stakeholders  responsible  for  initiating  and  developing  cyber  security 
policy  and  regulation  e.g.  national  telecommunications  regulator,  centre  for  the 
protection of national infrastructures etc.  

  Engage  both  public  and  private  stakeholders  in  the  process  by  clearly  defining  their 
roles  and  responsibilities  (e.g.  private  stakeholders  protect  their  infrastructures  and 
there is a joint responsibility with regard to protecting national security). 

  Define  the  appropriate  incentives  that  allow  private  and  public  stakeholders  to 
participate  in  the  process  (e.g.  no  costly  regulations).  Take  into  account  the  possible 
different or even conflicting interests of the public and private sector. 

  Involve  the  right  stakeholders  at  the  right  time  in  the  process  of  developing  the 
strategy. Stakeholder involvement is necessary from a strategy content point of view 
and in order to gain commitment for executing the strategy later on. 

  Explain how and why these stakeholders contribute to the objectives of the strategy, 
the  individual  tasks  and  the  actions  plans  (e.g.  pursue  a  collaborative  approach 
together  with  critical  infrastructure owners  and critical  service  providers  in  assessing 
threats and risks). 

  Assign the government the role of a facilitator. The government can facilitate activities 
on  a  national  level,  such  as  information-sharing,  (international)  cooperation  and  risk 
management. 

  Involve top-level representatives in order to create ownership and assign an alternate 

for each representative. 

  Involve specific critical infrastructure owners instead of allocating responsibilities to a 
specific sector. By allocating responsibilities to individual companies, these can be held 
responsible and/or even accountable for not taking proper security measures. 

  Include civil society (end users, civilians) in executing the strategy from an awareness 
point of view. By raising awareness at a national level, citizens will better understand 
cyber-security risks and this will enable them to proactively take measures to lessen or 
mitigate risks. 

  Involve  ministries  with  responsibility  for  security,  safety,  crisis  management,  such  as 
defence,  interior,  foreign  affairs,  justice,  national  telecommunication  regulator,  data 
protection authority, and cyber crime unit in developing the strategy. 

  Involve existing national CERTs or CERT communities (of companies) as they may be a 

critical part of the information-sharing capabilities on a national level. 

  Involve  national  interest  groups  in  order  to  incorporate  the  interest  of  different 

stakeholder groups. 

An example: Development of the Estonian strategy based on input from state agencies and 
working groups 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

15  

The Implementation Plan of Estonia’s strategy was developed on the basis of proposals from 
different state agencies and working  groups which have been set up for development of the 
strategy. Attention was given to the actions and funds needed to achieve the objectives of the 
strategy  in  its  various  fields  of  competence.  Implementation  plans  have  been  developed  for 
two periods: 2008–2010 and 2011–2013. 

Source:  Cyber  Security  Strategy,  Cyber  Security  Strategy  Committee,  Ministry  of  Defence, 
Estonia, Tallinn, 2008. 

3.6  Establish trusted information-sharing mechanisms 

Information-sharing among private and public stakeholders is a powerful mechanism to better 
understand  a  constantly  changing  environment.  Information-sharing  is  a  form  of  strategic 
partnership  among  key  public  and  private  stakeholders.  Owners  of  critical  infrastructures 
could  potentially  share  with  public  authorities  their  input  on  mitigating  emerging  risks, 
threats, and vulnerabilities while public stakeholders could provide on a 'need to know basis' 
information on aspects related to the status of national security, including findings based on 
information collected by intelligence and cyber-crime units. Combining both views gives a very 
powerful insight on how the threat landscape evolves.  

These are the typical objectives of an information sharing scheme. 

  Assess  the  impact  of  incidents  (e.g.  security  breaches,  network  failures,  service 

interruptions). 

  Identify,  analyse,  and  adopt 

in  co-ordinated  manner  appropriate,  sector-wide 

minimum security measures to manage the threats associated with the incidents. 

  Set  up  internal  and  joint  procedures  to  continuously  review  the  implementation  of 

adopted measures.  

  Provide unique, strategic insights to policy and decision-makers. 

Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following. 

  Properly define the information-sharing mechanism and the underlying principles and 
rules  that  govern  the  mechanism  (e.g.  non-disclosure  agreements,  traffic-light 
protocol, antitrust rules) 

  Follow  a  sector  approach  to  information  sharing  (e.g.  one  information-sharing 
platform for ISPs, one for energy etc). Make sure that there is enough information flow 
among the different information-sharing schemes. 

  Focus  on  strategic  issues  and  critical  threats  and  vulnerabilities  (e.g.  major/critical 

disruptions). 

  Provide  the  appropriate  incentives  for  stakeholders  (mostly  for  private  ones)  to 
participate and share sensitive information (sharing with the community the results of 
the analysis). 

  Make  sure  that  the  right  experts  with  the  right  profile  take  part  in  the  scheme. 
Normally  participants  are  high-level  security  experts  (e.g.  CISOs)  able  to  share 
information at corporate level. 

16 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

  Decide  whether  experts  from  law  enforcement,  intelligence,  national/governmental 

CERTs and relevant regulatory bodies should be present. 

  Keep the size of the information-sharing scheme relatively small to allow trust among 

experts to flourish. 

  Organise  regular  (face-to-face)  meetings  to  share  sensitive  information.  Government 
should  facilitate  the  process  and  provide  logistical  support.  The  initiative  could  be 
chaired both by the public sector and industry to symbolise the joint responsibility of 
the two stakeholders’ categories. 

  Identify  other  relevant  European  or 

information-sharing 
communities  and  decide  whether  to  engage  with  them  to  expand  your  level  of 
understanding, or not to. 

international  trusted 

  Update  the  national  risk  registry  and  distribute  the  collected  information,  in  an 

anonymous way, to appropriate targeted users through the early-warning systems. 

 

An example: The German Strategy  

Quick  and  close  information  sharing  on  weaknesses  of  IT  products,  vulnerabilities,  forms  of 
attacks and profiles of perpetrators enables the National Cyber Response Centre to analyse IT 
incidents  and  give  consolidated  recommendations  for  action.  The  interests  of  the  private 
sector to protect itself against crime and espionage in cyberspace should also be adequately 
taken  into  account.  At  the  same  time  respective  responsibilities  must  be  observed.  Every 
stakeholder  takes  the  necessary  measures  in  its  remit  on  the  basis  of  the  jointly  developed 
national  cyber  security  assessment  and  coordinates  them  with  the  competent  authorities  as 
well as partners from industry and academia. 

Source: Cyber Security Strategy of Germany, Federal Ministry of the Interior, 2011 

 

3.7  Develop national cyber contingency plans 

National  cyber  contingency  plans  (NCPs)  are  the  interim  structures  and  measures  for 
responding  to,  and  recovering  services  following,  major  incidents  that  involve  critical 
information infrastructures (CIIs).23 A national cyber security contingency plan should be part 
of an overall national contingency plan. It is also an integral part of the cyber security strategy.  

The objectives of a NCP are to: 

  present and explain the criteria that should be used to define a situation as a crisis; 
  define key processes and actions for handling the crisis; 
  clearly  define  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  different  stakeholders  during  a  cyber-

crisis. 

                                                      
23 ENISA, Good Practice Guide on National Contingency Plans for CIIs, 2012, available on request.  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

17  

An NCP should be developed within a lifecycle. In essence, the lifecycle is a quality assurance 
and management cycle for such plans. Following that, the main steps for developing the NCP 
are the following. 

  Perform an initial risk  assessment, which will cover the process of identifying threats 

and vulnerabilities and their potential impact and will define a set of priorities. 

  Engage  the  relevant  stakeholders  in  the  process  and  make  sure  their  roles  and 

responsibilities are clear and not overlapping. 

  Develop the standard operating procedures (SOPs) for use by all relevant stakeholders 

during different crises. 

  Develop  the  necessary  cooperation  and  response  framework  to  be  used  e.g. 

capabilities, procedures, non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) etc. 

  Define  the  procedures  to  be  used  for  dealing  with  the  media  during  emergency 

situations. 

  Test, evaluate and adjust procedures, capabilities and mechanisms; one proven way of 

doing this is through cyber exercises. 

  Train the personnel responsible for offering the capabilities. 
  Organise  and  execute  exercises  that  will  evaluate  the  existing  standard  operating 

procedures, roles and responsibilities and communication mechanisms. 

  Review the contingency plan taking also into consideration lessons learnt from cyber 

exercises. 

For  more  information  on  this  topic,  please  check  ENISA’s  webpage  Good  Practice  Guide  on 
National Contingency Plans.24 

3.8  Organise cyber security exercises 

Exercises  enable  competent  authorities  to  test  existing  emergency  plans,  target  specific 
weaknesses,  increase  cooperation  between  different  sectors,  identify  interdependencies, 
stimulate improvements in continuity planning, and generate a culture of cooperative effort 
to  boost  resilience.  Cyber  exercises  are  important  tools  to  assess  preparedness  of  a 
community against natural disasters, technology failures, cyber-attacks and emergencies. 

Typical objectives for this step are to: 

  identify  what  needs  to  be  tested  (plans  and  processes,  people,  infrastructure, 

response capabilities, cooperation capabilities, communication, etc.); 
  set up a national cyber exercise planning team, with a clear mandate; 
  integrate cyber exercises within the lifecycle of the national cyber security strategy or 

the national cyber contingency plan. 

Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following. 

  Develop a mid-term vision with concrete objectives to be achieved. 

                                                      
24 http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/national-contingency-plans  

18 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

  Identify  the  relevant  public  and  private  sector  stakeholders  to  be  involved  in  the 

process. 

  For each cyber exercise do the following. 

o  Define the manager(s) of the exercise. 
o  Define  concrete  objectives  to  reach;  always  relate  them  to  the  parts  of  the 

contingency plans to be tested. 

o  Establish  a  planning  team  that  will  prepare  the  exercise  and  decide  on 

important issues. 

o  Agree on the scenario of the exercise; make sure that the scenario is pragmatic 

and based on real incidents. 

o  Agree on the evaluation and monitoring approach to be followed. 
o  Define a clear media and public affairs strategy. 
o  Agree on international cooperation and the observers program. 
o 
o  Develop a training program that will familiarise the players with all aspects of 

Identify and engage the players of the exercise. 

the exercise. 

o  Prepare  and  execute  a  dry  run  that  will  ensure  that  the  exercise  is  properly 

prepared. 

o  Run the exercise; evaluate and monitor its progress. 
o  Organise a hot wash the day after the exercise and collect and consolidate the 

main conclusions and the lessons learned.25 

o  Report  about  the  achievements,  key  findings  and  lessons  learnt.  A  small, 
summary  report  can  be  widely  published  while  a  detailed  report  can  remain 
confidential between the players of the exercises. 

o  Follow  up  the  lessons  learned  and  the  key  recommendations  and  make  sure 

the targeted stakeholders implement them. 

  Assess  the  impact  of  one  or  the  series  of  cyber  exercises  and  update  your  vision  to 

better meet the needs of the cyber security strategy. 
 

For more information on this topic, please check ENISA’s publication Good Practice Guide 
on National Exercises.26 
 

                                                      
25 ‘Held immediately following an exercise, a hot wash is a facilitated discussion among exercise players from each functional 
area. It is designed to capture feedback about any issues, concerns, or proposed improvements.’ Source: Information 
Assurance Challenges in an International Environment, IATAC, available online at 
http://iac.dtic.mil/csiac/download/Vol12_No4.pdf  
26 ENISA, Good Practice Guide on National Exercises –Enhancing the Resilience of Public Communication Networks, 2009. 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/exercises/national-exercise-good-
practice-guide  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

3.9  Establish baseline security requirements 

19  

infrastructure  from  threats,  risks  and  vulnerabilities 

All relevant public and private organisations should take necessary measures to protect their 
information 
identified  after  the 
completion of the national risk assessment. Baseline security requirements for a given sector 
define  the  minimum  security  level  that  all  organisations  in  that  sector  should  comply  with. 
Such  requirements  could  be  based  on  existing  security  standards  or  frameworks  and  good 
practices widely recognised by the industry.  

Defining  a  minimum  set  of  security  measures  is  a  complex  exercise  that  should  take  into 
account  the  following  aspects:  the  different  level  of  maturity  among  the  stakeholders,  the 
differences  in  terms  of  the  operational  capacity  of  each  organization  and  the  different 
standards existing in each critical sector under consideration.  

Typical objectives of this phase should be to: 

  harmonise the different practices followed by the organizations both in public and the 

private sector; 

  create  a  common  language  between  the  competent  public  authorities  and  the 

organisations; 

  Enable different stakeholders to check and benchmark their cyber-security capabilities; 
  share information about the cyber-security good practices in every different industry 

sector; 

  help the stakeholders to prioritise their investments on security. 

Typical tasks to consider include the following. 

  Review and then update the existing set of measures. 

o 

o 

o 

Identify the security measures that already described in the existing regulatory 
documents. 
Identify  the  information  security  threats  and  then  map  these  threats  to  the 
existing measures. 
Identify  the  gaps  and  derive  mitigation  measures  from  the  existing  technical 
standards  (like  ISO27001,  ISO27002,  ISO27004,  COBIT,  ITIL).  Where  gaps  are 
found, enhance the list of measures by taking into account the opinion of the 
experts and the relevant standards. 

o  Update the relevant regulatory texts with the new measures. 

  Create  security  maturity  self-assessment  tools  and  encourage  the  stakeholder  to  use 

them. 

  Mandate information security audits to competent authorities based on the list of the 

minimum measures. 

  Update the baseline requirements based on reported incidents of significant impact.  
 

20 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

3.10 Establish incident reporting mechanisms 

Reporting security incidents plays an important role in enhancing national cyber security. The 
more  a  person  knows  about  major  incidents  the  better  they  can  understand  the  threat 
environment.  Incident  reporting  and  analysis  helps  in  adjusting  and  tailoring  the  security 
measures list, referred to in the previous section, to the changing threat landscape. This way, 
the national preparedness, response and recovery capabilities are enhanced.  

Typical tasks of this activity include the following. 

  Identify the need for incident reporting by: 

o  deciding  whether  there  are  incident  reporting  schemes  within  the  already 
existing  national,  European  and  international  cyber  security  landscapes,  and 
identifying  gaps  and  needs  that  are  presently  not  addressed  and  that  a  new 
scheme will have to cover or satisfy; 
identifying the  types  of incidents  to  be  reported  and  the purpose  of the  new 
scheme; 

o 

o  outlining the reporting requirements, especially the scheme’s constituency (the 
potential reporting parties), the reporting obligation and the thresholds beyond 
which incidents should be reported. 

  Engage cooperation with the involved parties by;  

formulating the value proposition of the scheme; 

o  making use of existing arrangements and resources; 
o 
o  raising awareness of the threats; 
o  building trust with the participants; 
o  addressing the private stakeholders’ concerns. 

  Set the reporting procedures by: 

o  setting reporting requirements; 
o  defining the prioritisation of incidents; 
o  establishing follow-up procedures; 
o  developing media policies. 

  Manage  the  scheme:  when  the  reporting  procedures  are  set  and  running,  the 
responsible authorities will need to pay attention to scheme management. The tasks in 
this stage fall into three groups: 

o  analysing and following up on individual incidents; 
o  conducting statistical analysis of a series of incidents; 
o  examining feedback to improve and evolve the scheme. 

  Communicate  the  results  of  the  analysis  to  the  competent  authority  or  authorities 

responsible for updating the set of minimum security measures. 

An example: MIMER/GLU Sweden 

For  their  telecommunications  outage  reporting  scheme,  the  Swedish  Post  and  Telecom 
Agency (PTS)  coordinates  and  cofinances  a  public–private  partnership  formed  together  with 
the  larger  telecommunications  operators  in  Sweden.  The  participants  include  between  five 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

21  

and  seven  large  telecommunications  operators  and  the  members  of  the  Swedish  Urban 
Network Association. The total infrastructure handled within the partnership adds up to about 
80%–90%  within  the  country.  Additional  telecommunications  operators  should  be  able  to 
participate in the future. 

Source: Good Practices on Reporting Security Incidents, ENISA, 2009. 

3.11 User awareness 

Raising awareness about cyber-security threats and vulnerabilities and their impact on society 
has become vital. Through awareness-raising, individual and corporate users can learn how to 
behave  in  the  online  world  and  protect  themselves  from  typical  risks.  Awareness  activities 
occur on an ongoing basis and use a variety of delivery methods to reach broad audiences.27  

Security  awareness  activities  may  be  triggered  by  different  events  or  factors,  which  may  be 
internal or  external  to  an  organisation. Major external  factors  could  include:  recent  security 
breaches, threats and incidents, new risks, updates of security policy and/or strategy. Among 
the internal factors are new laws, new governments etc.28 

Principles  to  follow  in  order  to  support  an  awareness-raising  programme  include  the 
following.29 

  Define the target of the awareness-raising campaign (e.g. citizens, children, end-users). 
  Develop mechanisms for reaching out to these communities. 
  Identify common behavioural problems affecting the target audience or issues that the 

target audience should know about. 

  Create  the  national  information  security unique  identity:  choose  specific  information 
security  topics  that  support  the  strategy  objectives  and  then  organise  and  advertise, 
not  only  in  Europe  but  also  internationally,  local  events  by  using  appropriate 
communication channels. 

  Organise a national cyber-security month, week or day in order to engage the public, 
and private- and public-sector partners through events and initiatives (i.e. campaigns, 
workshops, conferences) with different subject matter each time.30 

  Enhance the content of well-known governmental web sites with information security 

related material e.g. presentations, webinars and lectures. 

  Consider translating the material into other languages. 

ENISA, 

The  new  user’s 

guide:  How 

                                                      
27 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/security-month/deliverables/2010/new-users-guide  
28 See, for instance, the proposal for a regulation ‘on electronic identification and trusted services for electronic transactions in 
the internal market’ http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/esignature/eu_legislation/regulation/index_en.htm  

awareness,  November  2010, 

information 

to 

raise 

security 

29 ENISA, Raising awareness on information security across public and private organisations, 2008. 
30  For  further  information  on  how  to  organise  an  information  security  month,  see  European  Month  of  Network  and 
Information  Security  for  All  –  A  feasibility  study,  ENISA,  2011,  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/security-
month/deliverables/2011/europeansecuritymonth  

22 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

 

  Support  and  brand  European  or  international  information  security  initiatives  like  the 

Safer Internet. 

  Participate in relevant European initiatives and campaigns like the Safer Internet Day, 

International Youth Day, ENISA’s security month etc. 

An example: The Finnish Strategy  

National Information Security Strategy is to integrate information security firmly into the basic 
structures  of  the  information  society.  This  requires  improvements  in  general  information 
security awareness and skills, and better consideration of information security aspects in the 
purchase  of  systems  and  the  procedures  for  making  agreements.  Increasing  information 
security  awareness  and  competence:  the  National  Information  Security  Day  project  will  be 
developed; awareness of information security will be improved, the level of awareness will be 
monitored  and 
information  security  skills  will  be  developed;  a  proactive  plan  for 
communications will be drawn up. 

Source: Cyber Security Strategy of Finland 

 

3.12 Foster R&D 

Our  lives  depend  on  new  IT  tools  and  services.  Before  such  tools  and  services  become 
commercially  widespread,  it  is  important  that  research  activities  cover  the  cyber  security 
requirements. A cyber security strategy should emphasise the importance of including – in the 
research  and  development  lifecycle  –  concepts  such  as  secure  by  design  and  privacy  by 
design. 

Typical objectives of this phase include the following. 

  Identify the real causes of the vulnerabilities instead of repairing their impact. 
  Bring  together  scientists 

from  different  disciplines  to  provide  solutions  to 

multidimensional and complex problems such as physical-cyber threats. 

  Bring together the needs of industry and the findings of research, thus facilitating the 

transition from theory to practice. 

  Find  ways  not  only  to  maintain  but  also  to  increase  the  level  of  the  public’s  trust  in 

existing cyber infrastructure. 

Typical tasks in this step comprise the following. 

  Create a forum for industry and request R&D topics for consideration. 
  Create  an  R&D  agenda  with  topics  that  support  the  objectives  of  the  cyber  security 
strategy with a midterm horizon, of between four and seven years. For each topic the 
following  should,  at  least,  be  described:  the  objective,  the  incentives  and  the 
challenges of the topic. 

  Create a platform for bringing together high-level research and the private sector. This 

platform may take the form of a public–private partnership. 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

23  

  Seek  cooperation  with  similar  European  and  international  relevant  activities  i.e.  the 

European Commission Research and Innovation programme (e.g. FP7/8). 

  Create  a  coordination  research  plan  in  order  to  avoid  overlaps  between  research 

activities undertaken by different institutions and programmes. 

  Develop  effective 

incentives  to  make  cyber-security  research  ubiquitous.  Both 

individuals and organisations might be the beneficiary of these incentives. 

 

An example: The Estonian Strategy 

It  is  important  to  stress  that  when  it  comes  to  cyber  security,  research  and  development 
cannot be separated from defence-related activities. Scientific research is important primarily 
because  the  implementation  of  protective  measures  for  information  systems  is  a  rapidly 
advancing  high-technology  field.  Efficient  protection  against  malware  is  possible  only  if  new 
versions  of  the  threat  are  immediately  identified  and  neutralised.  The  priority  areas  for 
development  include  intelligent  protection  software  and  the  simulation  of  cyber-attacks  to 
ensure cyber security and provide training. This line of research is also supported by the NATO 
Centre of Excellence of Cooperative Cyber Defence, based in Estonia. 

Source: Cyber Security Strategy, Ministry of Defence, Estonia. 

 

 

3.13 Strengthen training and educational programmes 

Unfortunately,  our  universities  and  R&D  institutions  do  not  produce  enough  cyber-security 
experts to  meet the  increasing  needs  of this  sector.  Cyber  security is usually  not  a  separate 
academic  topic  but  part  of  the  computer  science  curriculum.  Cyber  security  is  also  a 
continuously changing topic that requires constant training and education. 

The objectives of a training and education program are to: 

  enhance the operational capabilities of the existing information security workforce; 
  encourage students to join and then prepare them to enter the cyber-security field; 
  promote  and  encourage  the  relations  between 
environments and the information security industry. 

information  security  academic 

Typical tasks in this step include the following. 

  Launch national information security training and educational programmes. 
  Support the security accreditation and certification of skilled personnel in key working 

posts in every industrial sector. 

  Create  a  catalogue  of  roles,  and  the  relevant  educational  background  needed,  with 

information security responsibly. 

  Add information security courses to university curricula – not only to the ones related 
with  computer  science  but  also  to  any  other  professional  speciality  tailored  to  the 
needs of that profession. 

  Create a national register with accredited cyber-security experts with teaching skills. 

24 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

 

An example: United Kingdom 

The  UK  strategy  states  that  'As  for  business,  some  firms  recognize  the  growing  scale  and 
impact  of  the  risks.  However,  some  sectors  of  the  economy,  particularly  small  and  medium 
sized businesses, do not have access to the skills and knowledge to protect themselves online. 
We need to improve our understanding of the threat across the board and manage it more 
effectively.  This  can  mean  relying  upon  skills  and  knowledge,  not  often  found  in  the  same 
place.' 

Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, 
Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011.  

3.14 Establish an incident response capability 

National/governmental CERTs play a key role in coordinating incident management with the 
relevant  stakeholders  at  national  level.  In  addition,  they  bear  responsibility  for  cooperation 
with the national/governmental teams in other countries.31

 

In  order  to  perform  their  tasks  properly,  it  is  important  that  the  national  cyber-security 
strategy empower CERTs with sufficient capabilities in the following categories. 

  Mandate  –  this  relates  to  the  powers,  roles  and  responsibilities  that  need  to  be 

allocated to the team by the respective government. 

  Service portfolio – this covers the services that a team provides to its constituency or is 

using for its own internal functioning. 

  Operational capabilities – these concern the technical and operational requirements a 

team must comply with. 

  Cooperation  capabilities  –  these  encompass  requirements  regarding  information-
sharing  with  other  teams  that  are  not  covered  by  the  previous  three  categories  e.g. 
policymakers,  military,  regulators,  (critical  information  infrastructure)  operators,  law 
enforcement authorities. 

The following tasks should be considered. 

  Take steps to ensure that the CERTs can both carry out their mandate and adhere to 

national and EU data-protection legislation. 

  Define  procedures  and  best  practices  that  require  CERTs  staff  to  handle  data  in 
compliance  with  EU  rules  and  their  Member  State's  laws.  The  risks  to  a  CERT's 
reputation from a data breach or misuse of personal data are too significant for a CERT 
to risk non-compliance with data protection legislation. 

  Establish working groups at international or regional meetings at which CERTs discuss 

best practices and the potential of instituting common data handling protocols. 

                                                      
31 ENISA’s web page on baseline capabilities for national / governmental CERTs: 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/support/baseline-capabilities  

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

25  

  Establish  thematic  working  groups  on  data  protection  to 

interested 
stakeholders,  such  as  the  banking  industry,  and  improve  the  overall  information 
exchange. 

involve 

  Consider hiring or engaging a legal expert specialising in IT security issues in order to 

avoid uncertainty regarding handling of personal data. 

  Create a national vulnerability database and constantly assess the potential impact on 

critical functions or potential disturbance of core operations. 

  Initiate  a national project  on building  an early warning  system for  CIIs.  Such  systems 
require the cooperation of a wide range of stakeholders, both private and public, and 
could potentially be the central capability for handling creeping, slow-burn and sudden 
crises. 

  Create  a  vulnerability  disclosure  framework  that  deals  with  patch  and  vulnerability 
management  (period,  early  warning,  deployment  requirements,  etc.).  Testbeds 
(clones/mirrors) should be considered in order to avoid major disturbances of systems 
after patching essential components of critical applications. 

 

An example: The Finnish Strategy 
 
Securing cyberspace largely relies on the exchange of information which, at the international 
level, is best achieved through co-operation networks. Such networks bolster the ability to take 
immediate actions in ensuring cyber security and combating cyber crime. The professional co-
operation networks of the public and private sectors allow for the exchange of information on 
innovative IT solutions, best practice and other expert information. The exchange of expert 
information on cyber security requires close co-operation between the networks which deal 
with international data security, cyber defence and law enforcement. The most significant of 
these include the international network of national CERTs, the network of government CERTs 
(GovCERT), Interpol and Europol for co-operation in law enforcement, and organisations 
dealing with Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. 
 
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of Finland 
 

3.15 Address cyber crime 

The fight against cyber crime requires the collaboration of many actors and communities to 
be  successful.  In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to address  and  counter the  rise  of  cyber  crime 
and to prepare a concerted and coordinated response with relevant stakeholders. 

Typical tasks that should be considered include the following: 

  Adapt the required legislation and ratify existing international treaties. 
  Create  specialised  national  cyber  crime  units  (law  enforcement  and 

judicial 

authorities). 

26 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

  Ensure  continuous  and  specialised training for police  and  judicial  authority staff  (e.g. 

on digital forensics). 

  Develop  knowledge  and  expertise  on  emerging  cyber  crime-related  threats  and 
vulnerabilities  but  also  attack  methods  through  information  sharing  at  national  and 
international level. 

  Create a harmonised set of rules for police and judicial record-keeping and appropriate 

tools for statistical analysis of computer crime. 

  Establish  forums  to  foster  cooperation  between  the  various  players  (e.g.  CERTs  and 

intelligence communities). 

  Encourage direct action by industry against computer-related crime. 
  Establish  cooperation  with  leading  academic  and  R&D  institutions  on  new  digital 

forensic techniques. 

  Establish  cooperation  between  public  and  private  sector  stakeholders  to  quickly 

identify and respond to cyber crime related issues. 

For  more  on  this  topic,  please  check  the  websites  of  both  ENISA32  and  the  European 
Commission33 on cyber crime.  

An example: The Czech Republic  
 
The Czech Republic will improve legislative and procedural steps so that the cyber security field 
ultimately comprises prevention, detection, reaction and measures designed to identify and 
combat cyber crime. 
 
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic 
 

3.16 Engage in international cooperation 

Cyber security threats and vulnerabilities are international in nature. Engaging in cooperation 
and information sharing with partners abroad is important to better understand and respond 
to a constantly changing threat environment. 

The following points should be followed during the development of the strategy. 

  Use  the  strategy  as  an  instrument  for  fostering  international  cooperation.  A  strategy 

can indicate the Member State’s stance towards international cooperation. 

  Identify  the  countries  you  wish  to  cooperate  with,  explain  why  you  want  to  engage 
with them and clarify the context of cooperation (e.g. cyber crime, operational) with 
each one. 

                                                      
32 http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/support/supporting-fight-against-cyber crime 
33 http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/fight_against_organised_crime/l33193b_en.htm 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

27  

  Assign to a national entity the task of promoting international cooperation. Assigning 
this  task  on  a  national  level  to  a  single  organisation  provides  the  benefit  that  all 
national efforts to cooperate internationally are consolidated. 

  Promote 

international  cooperation  through 

instance 
benchmarking,  technological  knowledge,  and  basic  threat  assessments),  intelligence 
sharing,  top  level  public–private  partnerships  (PPPs)  (multinational),  and  potentially 
information sharing and analysis centres (ISACs). 

information-sharing 

(for 

  Join bilateral, multilateral or international treaties and conventions (e.g. International 
Code  of  Conduct  for  Information  Security,  Convention  on  Cyber  crime)  related  to 
information  security  if  they  are  compatible  with  the  national  regulatory  framework 
and if this does not run counter to the interests of national security. 

  Contribute  to  international  efforts  towards  drafting  standard  operating  procedures 
(SOPs)  to  be  used  for  information  sharing  and  response  to  real,  major  cross-country 
crises. 

  Encourage participation in regional, European and international exercises as a means 

of supporting cooperation with strategic partners. 

 

 

An example: The German Strategy 
 
Given the global nature of information and communications technology, international 
coordination and appropriate networks focusing on foreign and security policy aspects are 
indispensable. This includes cooperation not only in the United Nations, but also in the EU, the 
Council of Europe, NATO, the G8, the OSCE and other multinational organizations. The aim is 
to ensure the coherence and capabilities of the international community to protect 
cyberspace. 
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of Germany 
 

3.17 Establish a public–private partnership 

A  public–private  partnership  (PPP)  establishes  a  common  scope  and  objectives  and  uses 
defined roles and work methodology to achieve shared goals.34 PPPs may focus on different 
aspects of security and resilience; these can be defined as the following:  

  deterring (to deter attackers); 
  protecting (uses research into new security threats); 
  detecting (uses information-sharing to address new threats); 
 
 

responding (to deliver the capability to cope with the initial impact of an incident); 
recovering (to deliver the capability of repairing the final impact of an incident).  

                                                      
34 Cooperative Models for Effective Public Private Partnership - Good Practice Guide- ENISA, October 2011. 

28 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

PPPs addressing security and resilience have evolved in many countries as an efficient means 
of  protecting  their  critical  infrastructure.  Building  up  a  successful  PPP  requires  taking  into 
consideration  different  elements  as  well  as  the  challenges  and  barriers  such  structures  may 
face.  

Typical elements to consider in setting up a successful PPP include the following.  

  Assess the sectors in scope and the types of threat addressed; this will be a defining 
factor  in  shaping  the  membership  and  determining  which  external  links  are  to  be 
forged. 

  Plan how to link the PPP with other organisations to share information and expertise 

and to avoid duplication. 

  Assess the use of high-level strategic partnership at the CEO level in order to support 

senior understanding and awareness. 

  Recruit  real  experts  who  are  empowered  from their organisations  to  act  and  change 

things. 

  Seek  legal  advice  to  ensure  that  the  legal  framework  used  is  suitable  for  the 

jurisdiction in which the PPP operates. 

  Adopt  information  distribution  policies  such  as  the  Traffic  Light  Protocol  to  give  the 

source confidence that the information will be used only as agreed. 

  Prepare together with a legal advisor a sample non-disclosure agreement  (NDA) that 
describes  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  membership.  Use  this  agreement  and  ask 
the parties involved to sign it. 

  Make  sure  that  all  members  of  the  partnership  actively  contribute  in  providing 

information, services and support that are of relevant value to the membership. 

  Look  for  opportunities  to  create  international  links  with  other  PPPs  for  cross-border 

sharing and collaboration. 

 

An example: The Netherlands 
 
ICT infrastructure, products and services are for the greater part supplied by private sectors. 
Continuity and certainty of supply are not only important for the business world in connection 
with their continuity. Society itself has an interest in this, e.g. to prevent social unrest due to 
disruptions. Mutual trust is essential for cooperation and sharing information with each other. 
Government and business communities must work together as equal partners. The relevant 
parties must derive benefit from participation in joint initiatives. A good cooperation model 
with clear tasks, responsibilities, powers and safeguards supports this. 
 
Source: Cyber Security Strategy of the Netherlands 
 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

3.18 Balance security with privacy 

29  

Counter-terrorism  measures  and  tools  that  tackle  cyber  crime  often  invade  privacy  in  the 
most brutal ways and, at the same time, lack of personal online security leads to breaches of 
that same privacy. A cyber-security strategy should seek for the right balance between these 
two concepts. Moreover, the European Commission has provided the regulatory tools in order 
to support the  Member States in facing this challenge. For this reason, every Member State 
should take seriously into account the right of citizens’ privacy. Finally, the reader should bear 
in  mind  that  privacy  is  a  horizontal  issue  that  cuts  across  most  of  the  activities  relevant  to 
cyber strategy. 

Typical tasks to consider include the following. 

  Take into account national legal requirements for data protection when drafting cyber-

security-relevant regulatory texts. 

  Take  the  advice  of  the  data  protection  authority(ies)  on  regulatory  texts  related  to 

cyber security. 

  Consider  data  protection  law  compliance  measures  when  consulting  the  minimum 

security measures. 

  Make  data  protection  supervisory  authority(ies)  part  of 

information  security 

compliance audits to the most critical stakeholders. 

  Support  and  brand,  together  with  the  national  data  protection  authority(ies),  the 

European Data Protection Day (January 28). 

  Involve national data protection authority(ies) in national cyber exercises. 

 

An example: The Czech Republic  

In the Czech Republic strategy it is stated that an appropriate legislative framework for the 
purpose  of  ensuring  cyber  security  will  be  defined.  This  framework  will  not  impose  any 
restrictions  on  rights  to  freedom  of  speech,  will  grant  access  to  information  for  all 
information 
population  segments,  and  protect  the  privacy  and  confidentiality  of 
guaranteed  by  the  national  Constitution,  taking 
international 
commitments of the Czech Republic, in particular to EU and NATO.  

into  account  the 

Also,  the  Czech  Republic  aims  to  actively  participate  in  the  drafting  of  legal  acts  and 
standards, and other forms of cooperation in the field of cyber security in the framework 
of the EU and other international organisations. 

Source: Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic For The 2011  – 2015 period, Czech 
Republic, 2011. 

 

30 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

4  Evaluate and adjust the national cyber-security strategy 

Once  the  strategy  has  been  developed  and  is  being  executed,  the  extent  to  which  the 
objectives are achieved should be assessed. By assessing the achieved results of the activities 
it is possible to take any required corrective and preventative actions in order to align with or 
change the objectives of the strategy. 

This chapter will cover the explicit requirements needed to evaluate and adjust the strategy. 
Evaluation  is  necessary  to  determine  whether  the  objectives  and  the  planned  results  have 
been  effectively  reached.  The  primary  purpose  of  evaluation,  in  addition  to  gaining  insights 
into the status of the existing initiatives, is to identify future objectives and adjust the strategy 
accordingly.  

4.1  Evaluation approach 

There are different methodologies to evaluate a strategy. In this chapter, we will not propose 
a  specific  one  but  rather  focus  on  specific,  practical  actions  necessary  to  perform  an 
evaluation. This process should end with a report on the status of affairs and a list of actions 
that the national cyber-security strategy owner(s) should implement.  

The following suggestions can be considered in defining the strategy evaluation report. 

  Define  the  scope  of  the  evaluation,  the  key  objectives,  the  expected  outcomes  and  the 

 

periodicity of it. 
Implement  the  ‘Segregation  of  duties’  principle:  assign  to  an  independent  entity,  a 
supervisor  or  a  trusted  third  party  (other  than  the  national  cyber  council)  the  task  of 
evaluating the effectiveness of a national cyber-security strategy and its activities (e.g. a 
national cyber security council). 

  Empower the independent entity with the appropriate mandate, role and responsibilities 

to succeed in this operation. 

  Encourage and offer incentives to stakeholders to be involved in the evaluation process. 
  Evaluate not only the strategy but also the individual tasks of it. 
  Follow both a quantitative and qualitative approach giving emphasis on both impact and 

results. 

  Perform  an  internal/self-impact  assessment  for  each  activity  of  the  strategy  taking  into 

consideration the opinion of the stakeholders. 

  Perform  an  external  impact  assessment  for  each  activity  of  the  strategy  taking  into 

consideration the opinion of external and/or affected users/communities. 

  Evaluate  each  activity  against  the  action  plan  and  key  performance  indicators  (KPIs) 
agreed  when  the  activity  kicked  off;  evaluate  KPIs  through  questionnaires  (online)  and 
polls within the stakeholder community. 

  Create  a  data  collection  scheme  for  obtaining  relevant  data  for  the  evaluation  of  the 
strategy  and  the  action  plan.  Effectiveness  of  the  strategy  should  be  measured  at  all 
levels. The data collection process should become comprehensive. 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

31  

 

 

Identify lessons, good practices and bad practices from the internal and external impact 
assessment as well as the evaluation of each activity. 

  Prepare  an  analytical  evaluation  report  describing  the  achieved  results  and  the 

expectations for the next evaluation. 

  Carry  out  benchmarking  studies  in  order  to  compare  strategies  between  different 
Member States. The outcomes of a benchmarking study can be used to identify areas of 
improvement. 

4.2  Key performance indicators 

Both qualitative and quantitative measurements can be used to define KPIs. These KPIs might 
refer  either  to  the  strategy  as  a  whole  or  to  the  activities  of  the  strategy  already  described 
above.  Below,  we  present  a  list  of  possible  and  indicative  KPIs  that  could  be  considered  for 
some of the key strategy components presented in Chapter 3.  

  Set  the  vision,  scope,  objectives  and  priorities:  By  assessing  the  objectives  of  the 
strategy  you  will  remain  focused  and therefore able  to  adjust  and  update  the  action 
plan. The action plan needs to be evaluated, to be followed up and, if necessary, to be 
updated. This is needed to cope with changes in the operational environment, making 
sure that the strategy and action plan are realistic and focused, and making sure that 
the  strategy  includes  the  right  prioritised  objectives.  This  way  you  make  sure  the 
strategy will remain dynamic and up to date. Typical KPIs include: 

o  the number of tasks that have been completed on time according to the action 

plan; 

o  the  level  of  public  trust  in  the  usage  and  security  of  services  targeted  by  the 
strategy  (e.g.  e-banking,  e-government);  this  can  be  gauged  by  performing 
national surveys; 

o  the  existence  of  a  well-established  and  functioning  national  cyber  security 

community (working groups, PPPs, a national cyber security council, etc.); 

o  reports from industry on improved resilience levels. 

  Follow a national risk assessment approach: Each Member State should monitor the 
most  significant  emergencies  as  regards  the  cyber  security  its  citizens  could  face 
through  the  national  risk  assessment.  These  assessments  should  be  conducted  at 
periodic intervals and should draw on expertise from a wide range of departments and 
agencies  of  both  the  government  and  the  critical  infrastructure  owners.  Typical  KPIs 
for this phase include the following. 

o  The  success  of  a  national  risk  assessment  programme  is  measured  by 
the number of incidents that occurred in a specific period and could not 
be addressed by the minimum security measures prepared. An absence 
of  this  type  of  incident  conceptually  mean  that  all  threats  have  been 
identified  and  their  impact  has  been  mitigated.  This  KPI  is  the  ratio of 
the incidents that have not been mitigated using existing measures and 
the total number of known incidents.  

32 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

o  Another  metric  might  be  the  comparison  between  the  calculated  and 
the  actual  impact  of  the  identified  incidents  using  different  evaluation 
units e.g. human lives or monetary values. This way deviation between 
these two metrics can be addressed.  

o  The  number  of  emerging  targets  or  critical  assets  identified  after  the 

completion of the national risk assessment. 

  Take  stock  of  existing  policies,  regulations  and  capabilities:  The  process  of  taking 
stock  of  existing  policies,  regulations  and  capabilities  is  usually  a  tricky  exercise  that 
reveals areas for improvement in the governance model of cyber security. Ideally, this 
process should be straightforward, with minimum cost and without gaps to fill. Typical 
KPIs could include: 

o  the level of complexity (i.e. number of overlaps, gaps, conflicting statements) of 

policy documents and internal procedures; 
the  number  of  inventories  and  directories  of  all  national  cyber  response 
capabilities (public and private); 

o  the number of policy documents adopted after the deployment of the strategy. 
  Develop a clear governance structure: In order to evaluate the governance structure, 
the policy makers should organise national cyber exercises to test the command and 
control and the communications of the existing strategy governance structure. Typical 
KPIs include: 

o  the  number  of  tasks  executed  and  status  of  actions  taken  by  designated 

entities within the strategy; 

o  the  number  of  gaps  (i.e.  tasks/responsibilities/conflicts  unassigned  to  specific 

roles) of the existing governance model; 

o  response time and coherency of the chain of command; 
o  the  number  of  cooperation  mechanisms,  procedures  and  communication 

channels that did not work. 

  Identify and engage stakeholders: A critical mass of stakeholders involved is vital for 

the successful implementation of the strategy. Typical KPIs include: 

o  the  number  of  stakeholders  involved;  sectoral  indexes  have  to  be  developed 

for both the private and the public sector and for each industry field; 

o  the number of entries in a national cyber-security directory; 
o  the number of existing working groups. 

  Establish trusted information sharing mechanisms: At the end of the year, a network 
information security exchange (NSIE) is expected to publish a confidential report with 
minutes and results of its annual work. Typical KPIs include: 

o  a measure of the utilisation of information sharing platforms; 
o  the number of measures and actions taken as a result of the analysis done on 

the data collected; 

o  the number of parties involved; 
o  the number of new vulnerabilities, threats and incidents discussed; 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

33  

 

 

  Develop  cyber-security  contingency  plans:  An  NCP  aims  to  develop  a  national 
response  capability  and  promote  overall  coordination  among  the  hierarchy  of 
emergency  response  organizations  and  response  or  contingency  plans.  Typical  KPIs 
include: 

o  the  number  of  activities  of  a  national  cyber  contingency  plan  that  have  been 

completed on time; 

o  the  number  of  sectors  and  stakeholders  involved  in  the  development  of  the 

plan; 

o  the number of national cyber exercises to test the plan; 
o  the  number  of  sectors  and  stakeholders  involved  in  the  development  of  the 

plan; 

o  the  level  of  preparedness  to  respond  to  a  cyber  crisis  based  on  different 

scenarios (potential causes and different levels of impact); 

o  the existence of crisis management facilities and situation rooms. 

  Organise  cyber  security  exercises:  Exercises  are  an  important  tool  to  assess  the 
preparedness  of  a  community  for  natural  disasters,  technology  failures  and 
emergencies. For this reason, it is important to develop specific metrics to gauge the 
success of the exercises. Typical KPIs include: 

o  the number of cyber security exercises conducted; 
o  the status of actions implemented based on the findings/evaluation reports; 
o  the number of sectors involved; 
o  the number of people involved;  
o  the level of involvement of the private sector; 
o  the number of plans and procedures that have been tested. 

  Establish baseline security requirements: Baseline security measures are the result of 
a  consultation  process  among  the  national  cyber-security  partners.  Moreover,  it  is 
expected  that  competent  authorities  will  monitor  on  a  regular  basis  the 
implementation of these measures. Typical KPIs include: 

o  the number of incidents; individual indexes of this kind might be:  

 
 

the number of incidents that failed to be addressed by the measures; 
the number of incidents that are addressed by the measures. 

o  the  number  of  non-compliant  organisations  identified  within a  specific  period 

of time; 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

34 

 

5  Conclusions 

The  development  of  a  national  cyber-security  strategy  is  a  challenging  effort  that  needs 
coordination  among  different  national  stakeholders  of  the  public  and  the  private  sector. 
Although there are many – and considerably different - definitions, a cyber security strategy 
has  proven  to  be  an  instrument  that  helps  governments  manage  the  efforts  of  all  involved 
parties in order to tackle risks related to cyber at a national level.  

This report has described a set of 20 concrete actions; these called upon policy makers to do 
the following. 

1.  Set the vision, scope, objectives and priorities. 
2.  Follow a national risk assessment approach. 
3.  Take stock of existing policies, regulations and capabilities. 
4.  Develop a clear governance structure. 
5.  Identify and engage stakeholders. 
6.  Establish trusted information-sharing mechanisms. 
7.  Develop cyber-security contingency plans. 
8.  Organise cyber-security exercises. 
9.  Establish baseline security requirements. 
10. Establish incident-reporting mechanisms. 
11. Make citizens aware. 
12. Foster R&D. 
13. Strengthen training and educational programmes. 
14. Establish an incident response capability. 
15. Address cyber crime. 
16. Engage in international cooperation. 
17. Establish a public–private partnership. 
18. Balance security with privacy. 
19. Evaluate. 
20. Adjust the national cyber security strategy. 

The structure of this guide was based on the Deming ‘Plan-Do-Check-Act’ (PDCA) model used 
to control and continuously improve strategies, policies, processes and products. Four phases, 
each  corresponding  to  the  model  steps,  have  been  described  for  the  strategy  lifecycle: 
development, execution, evaluation and adjustment. 

In  the  future,  ENISA  will  follow  up  this  report  with  a  second  edition  that  will  focus  on  the 
evaluation and adjustment phase. Thus, EU Member States will have a complete overview of 
the National Cyber Security Strategy development lifecycle.  

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

Annex I – Glossary of Terms 

35  

Term 

Action plan 

Civil society 

Computer 
emergency 
response team 
(CERT) 

Definition 

The  action  plan  outlines  the  activities  for  delivering  the  priorities  and 
objectives as defined in the strategy.  

society 

Civil 
systems/infrastructures and civilians depending upon them. 

refers 

end 

users 

to 

the 

of 

(information) 

Organisation  formed  to  study  internet  security  vulnerabilities,  and  to 
provide  assistance  to  online  sites  that  become  victims  of  cracker  or 
hacker  attacks.  Commonly,  it  offers  a  24-hour  emergency  response 
service, shares information for improving cyber security, and coordinates 
responses to cyber-security threats. 

Critical 
(information) 
infrastructure (CII) 

The systems, services, networks and infrastructures that form a vital part 
of  a  nation's  economy  and  society,  providing  essential  goods  and 
services. Their disruption or destruction would have a serious impact on 
vital societal functions. 

Cyber security / 
information 
security 

There  is no universally  accepted nor  straightforward  definition of  cyber 
security.  When  comparing  it  to  'information  security'  some  people 
regard  it  as  overlapping,  being  the  same  thing.  Or  they  may  view 
information security as focused on protecting specific individual systems 
and the information within organisations, while cyber security is seen as 
being focused on protecting the infrastructure and networks of CIIs. 

Developing a 
national cyber 
security strategy 

Developing  the  national  cyber  security  strategy  means  specifying  the 
scope,  determining  priorities  and  defining  the  principles  and  objectives 
of cyber security on a national level. 

Evaluating a 
national cyber 
security strategy 

Evaluating  the  national  cyber-security  strategy  means  assessing  the 
results of the activities using a set of objective performance metrics. 

Executing a 
national cyber 
security strategy 

Executing  the  national  cyber-security  strategy  means  specifying  the 
action  plan(s)  and  putting  the  strategy  into  practice  through  executing 
the activities. 

Governance 
framework 

Information 
sharing and 
analysis centre 

The  governance  framework  defines  the  roles,  responsibilities  and 
accountability of all stakeholders and provides a framework for dialogue 
and  coordination  of  various  activities  undertaken  in  the  lifecycle  of  the 
strategy.  

ISAC 

involves 

An 
intelligence,  CERT  communities  and  critical 
infrastructures  stakeholders  in  order  to  facilitate  information-sharing. 
Within  this  structure  the  circulation  of  relevant  information  can  be 

36 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

(ISAC) 

shared within a trustworthy environment. 

Key performance 
indicator or metric 

(KPI) 

is  a 

indicator 

A  key  performance 
type  of  performance 
measurement. KPIs are commonly used by an organisation to evaluate its 
success or the success of a particular activity in which it is engaged. KPIs 
are metrics used to measure important business activities and processes 
of  a  strategic  nature.  The  term  'metric'  is  generic.  A  metric  is  typically 
used  to  mean  just  about  any  sort  of  measurement  applied  to  gauge  a 
particular business process or activity.  

Legal framework 

A  legal  framework  formally  assigns  tasks,  roles/responsibilities  and 
accountability to the different parties by enforcing legal requirements. In 
this  way,  expectations  are  managed  and  the  division  of  tasks  is 
formulated in the strategy. It is the outcome of the process of assigning 
tasks,  roles/responsibilities  and  accountability.  It  can  be  used  together 
with a governance framework. 

Maintaining a 
national cyber 
security strategy 

Maintaining the national cyber-security strategy means taking corrective 
and  preventive  actions  based  on  the  evaluation  results  in  order  to 
achieve the objectives of the strategy.  

National cyber 
security centre 
(NCSC) 

National cyber 
security council 

National cyber 
security strategy 

Network operating 
centers (NOC) 

A national cyber security centre is commonly tasked with protecting the 
national  (critical)  information  infrastructures.  The  NCSC  may  have 
responsibilities  concentrating  on,  for  example,  developing  and  offering 
expertise and advice, supporting and implementing responses to threats 
or incidents, and strengthening crisis management. 

A national cyber security council commonly consists of representatives of 
the public and private sector. A council can advise both government and 
private  parties  on  relevant  developments  in  the  area  of  cyber  security, 
prioritise specific (emerging) IT threats, and ensure that basic values are 
incorporated in the execution of the strategy. 

A national cyber security strategy is a strategic framework for a nation’s 
approach  to  cyber  security.  It  is  a  tool  to  improve  the  security  and 
resilience of national infrastructures and services. It is a high-level, top-
down  approach  to  cyber  security  that  establishes  a  range  of  national 
objectives and priorities that should be achieved in a specific timeframe. 

A  network  operations  centre  (NOC)  commonly  serves  as  a  hub  for 
coordinating the operational management of domestic incidents, as well 
as situational awareness. An NOC is a standing interagency organisation 
that  operates  on  a  24/7  basis,  fusing  law  enforcement,  national 
intelligence, emergency response, and private-sector reporting. An NOC 
commonly 
information-sharing  and 
operational coordination among (international) public and private sector 

facilitates  national 

security 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

37  

 

 

 

Ownership 

PDCA-model 

Public–private 
partnership (PPP) 

RACI 

Risk and crisis 
management 

Risk-based 
approach 

partners. 

Ownership refers to creating commitment in executing the strategy and 
creating passion for the results of the strategy.  

The  Deming  ‘Plan-Do-Check-Act’  (PDCA)-model  is  commonly  used  to 
structure information security management systems.  

There  is  no  common  definition  of  what  constitutes  a  PPP.  However,  it 
can  be  defined  as  an  organised  relationship  between  the  public  and 
private sector, which establishes common goals and objectives and uses 
defined roles and work methodology to achieve shared goals. 

The  RACI  model  (‘responsible-accountable-consulted-informed’)  is  a 
commonly  used  framework  for  clarifying  roles  and  responsibilities.  It 
describes  the  participation  by  various  roles  in  completing  tasks  or 
deliverables for a project or business process. 

Risk  management  is the  identification,  assessment,  and  prioritisation  of 
risks  (the  uncertainty  on  objectives,  whether  positive  or  negative) 
followed  by  coordinated  and  economic  application  of  resources  to 
minimise,  monitor,  and  control  the  probability  and/or 
impact  of 
unfortunate events or to maximise the realisation of opportunities. Crisis 
management commonly represents a failure of risk management since it 
will never be possible to totally mitigate the chances of security breaches 
occurring. 

Risk-based approach is an approach to intelligence analysis that has as its 
objective the calculation of the risk attributable to a threat source or acts 
threatened by a threat source. It provides a means of providing strategic 
intelligence for planning and policymaking. 

Security baseline 

A security baseline describes the measures that should be implemented 
to reach a specific minimum security level.  

Security standard  A  security  standard  is  a  set  of  security  features  to  be  provided  by  a 
system  before  it  can  be  deemed  to  be  suitable  for  use  in  a  particular 
security  processing  mode,  or  in  accordance  with  a  generalized  security 
policy. 

Self-regulation 

Self-regulation  is  the  process  whereby  an  organisation  is  asked,  or 
volunteers,  to  monitor  its  own  adherence  to  legal,  ethical,  or  safety 
standards,  rather  than  have  an  outside,  independent  agency  such  as  a 
governmental entity monitor and enforce those standards. 

 

38 

 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

Annex II – References 

National cyber security strategies 

Czech Republic 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/CZ_Cyber_Security_Strategy_20112015.PDF  
 
Estonia 
http://www.kmin.ee/files/kmin/img/files/Kuberjulgeoleku_strateegia_2008-2013_ENG.pdf   
 
Finland 
http://www.lvm.fi/c/document_library/get_file?folderId=57092&name=DLFE-
5405.pdf&title=Valtioneuvoston%20periaatep%C3%A4%C3%A4t%C3%B6s%20kansalliseksi%20tietotur
vastrategiaksi%20%28su/ru/eng%20LVM62/2008%29  
 
France  
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/french-cyber security-strategy-2011  
 
Germany  
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/german-cyber security-strategy-2011-1  
 
Lithuania  
http://www.ird.lt/doc/teises_aktai_en/EIS(KS)PP_796_2011-06-29_EN_PATAIS.pdf  
 
Luxembourg 
http://www.gouvernement.lu/salle_presse/actualite/2011/11-novembre/23-biltgen/dossier.pdf  
 
Netherlands 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/dutch-cyber security-strategy-2011  
 
Slovakia 
Not available online  
 
United Kingdom 
http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm76/7642/7642.pdf  

2 

National Cyber Security Strategies 

 Practical Guide on Development and Execution 

 

 

P.O. Box 1309, 71001 Heraklion, Greece 

www.enisa.europa.eu 

