 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2016 Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT) 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, 
without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial 
uses  permitted  by  copyright  law.  For  permission  requests,  please  send  to  the  Ministry  of 
Communications and Information Technology, attention to the Chief Executive Officer, at the address 
below. 
 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, 
Private Bag, 
Level 6,  
Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Efi Building,  
Apia, 
SAMOA. 
Telephone: (685) 26117 
Facsimile:  (685) 24671 
Email: www.mcit.gov.ws 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

1 

Minister’s Foreword 
 
Samoans are embracing the many advantages cyberspace offers and our 
economy and quality of life are the better for it. However, as we enjoy 
the  benefits  of  cyberspace,  we  also  recognize  that  it  threatens  us  in  a 
variety  of  ways.  The  increasing  use  of  Information  Communications 
Technology  (ICT)  has  raised  issues  of  security  and  privacy.  The 
exploitation  of  computers  and  telecommunications  technology  for  criminal  activities  has 
increased.  Incident  of  hacking,  virus  attacks,  access  and  dissemination  of  pornographic 
materials  misuse  of  information  and  network  security  can  no  longer  be  ignored.  Cyber 
security has become a  critical issue especially now with the rise of cyber-terrorism and its 
impact on national and global security. 
 
The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  outlines  the  Government‘s  intention  of  harnessing 
resources to protect the public and private sectors. The goals set out in the strategy aims to 
strengthen existing cyber systems and critical infrastructure sectors, support economic growth 
and protect the public in terms of connectivity to each other and to the rest of the world.  
 
Cyber Security is a shared responsibility and this Strategy calls upon all Internet users, to be 
vigilant and informed about online threats, and how their own actions can be the first line of 
defence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________ 
Honorable Afamasaga Lepuia‘i Rico Tupa’i 
MINISTER OF COMMUNCATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

2 

Contents 
 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 4 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 5 
Vision ......................................................................................................................................... 6 
Goals ........................................................................................................................................... 7 
GOAL 1: Organizational Structures ....................................................................................... 7 
GOAL 2: Standardization and Services .................................................................................. 8 
GOAL 3: Strengthening the Legal framework ....................................................................... 9 
GOAL 4: Capacity Building ................................................................................................. 10 
GOAL 5: Cooperation. .................................................................................................... 11-12 
Strategic Priorities ............................................................................................................... 12-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

3 

Executive Summary 
 
The National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016-2021 (the strategy) sets out areas for development 
in Samoa’s cybersecurity. 
 
 The Ministry anticipates within the next five (5) years: 

• 

Individuals become aware of cybersecurity threats and are empowered to exist safely 
in this digital era; 

•  Businesses  become  responsive  to  cybersecurity  issue  and  establish  a  working 
relationship with Government, trade associations and other business partners to tackle 
cyber  threats  so  the  world  will  see  that  Samoa  is  a  safe  place  to  do  business  in 
cyberspace; 

•  Government has: 

  Sharpened law enforcement response to cyber crime;  
  Secure fundings to provide cyber security services;  
  Encouraged business to operate securely in cyberspace;  
  Bolstered defences in our critical national infrastructure against cyber attack;  
  Strengthened our capabilities to detect and defeat attacks in cyberspace; 
  Enhanced education and skills; and  
  Established  and  strengthened  working  relationships  with  other  countries, 
business and organisations around the world to help positively shape an open 
and vibrant cyberspace that supports strong and better societies here and across 
the globe. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

4 

Introduction 
 
“As  Samoa  enters  into  the  new  paradigm  of  globalized  Information  and  Communications 
Technology (ICT) services and telecommunications convergence, attention is needed towards 
developing an enhanced cyber or Internet security framework.”1 
 
Samoa’s connectivity through Internet, access to mobile phones, and broadcast technologies 
continues to increase, warranting the need to promote and establish Cybersecurity measures to 
ensure  that  the  economic,  social,  environmental  and  infrastructure  sectors  are  secure  and 
equipped to address challenges and cyber threats including but not limited to infrastructure 
impairment and criminal activities; to ensure continuity of operations, development and the 
well being of digital citizens. 
 
It is expected that the implementation of this Strategy will ensure a secure cyberspace; Ensure 
a secure cyberspace; that will contribute to improving Samoa’s socio-economic development.  
To achieve this objective, the Strategy is a platform for the common understanding and action 
of all relevant stakeholders. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
1 Samoa National Broadband Policy 2012 Pg 13 
 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

5 

Vision 
For all citizens of Samoa, tourists, businesses and Government to enjoy the full benefits 
of a secure and resilient cyber space 

To achieve this vision, five (5) goals are identified: 
 

i.  Develop  necessary  organizational  structures  with  a  focus  on  utilizing  existing 

structures in Samoa as well as in the region; 

 

ii.  Establish  relevant  technical  measures  (Entities  and  Standards)  to  eliminate  Cyber 

Threats and Attacks, enhance Cybersecurity and promote Cyber Safety. 

iii. 

iv. 

Strengthen  the  legal  framework  to  meet  the  highest  regional  and  international 
standards with regard to protection of fundamental rights as well as criminalization, 
investigation,  electronic  evidence  and  international  cooperation  relative  to  computer 
and electronic crimes;  

(Capacity Building) – Build digital citizens capacity, raising awareness and attaining 
resources to enhance Cybersecurity, combat Cybercrime activities and promote Cyber 
Safety to the highest levels; and  

 

6 

v. 

Strengthen and establish cooperation to respond to the Global nature of Cyber. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

Goals 
 
GOAL 1: Develop necessary organizational structures with a focus on utilizing existing 
structures in Samoa as well as in the region.  
 
Strategy Statement:  
Organisational and Procedural Measures are necessary for the proper implementation of any 
type of national initiative to combat Cybercrime and strengthen Cybersecurity.  
 
Strategy Guidelines: 
 
1.  Strengthen and redefine the National ICT Steering Committee (“NICT”) and its members 
and prioritize Cybersecurity in its mandate. The NICT is to lead the coordination and the 
implementation  of  the  Cybersecurity  strategy  and  the  process  of  carrying  out  the 
necessary tasks.  

 
2.  Establish a Roadmap for Governance of Cybersecurity in Samoa; 

2.1. Identify key stakeholders to develop a culture for Cybersecurity; 
2.2. Identify needs of national critical information infrastructure protection; 
2.3. Foster  information  sharing  within  the  public  sector  and  between  the  public  private 

sector; 

2.4. Establish  process  for  addressing  ICT  security  breaches  and  incident  handling 

(reporting, information sharing, alert management, justice and police collaboration); 

2.5. Ensure effective of the implementation of the national Policy; 
2.6. Ensure Cybersecurity program control, evaluation validation and optimization 

 
3.  Implementation of National Benchmarking scheme to; 

3.1. Ensure Cybersecurity is continuously developed in accordance within internationally 

accepted standards; 

 

3.2. Analyse the effect of Cybersecurity breaches on citizen businesses and Government 

 
4.  The  Office  of  the  Attorney  General  (“OAG”),  Samoa  Law  Reform  Commission 
(“SLRC”);  National  Prosecution  Office  (“NPO”),  Judiciary  and  other  law  enforcement 
agencies must develop a National Crime Prevention Strategy related to Cybercrime; this 
initiative is to be coordinated by NICT to ensure that measures discussed are in line with 
measures to the implemented. 

 
5.  Development of Child Online Protection (“COP”) or Strategy to promote the use of ICT 
and  to  implementation  precaution  and  protection  of  children  users;  in  addition  Child 
Sexual Abuse Material (“CSAM”) Filtering Policy. 

 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

7 

GOAL  2:  Establish  relevant  Technical  Measure  (Entities  and  Standards)  to  eliminate 
Cyber Threats and Attacks, enhance Cybersecurity and promote Cybersecurity.  
 
Strategy Statement: Defining and controlling technical measures to ensure security standards 
are implemented with the required expertise and in accordance with international trends.  
 
Strategy Guidelines:  
 

1.  Establishment  of  a  National  Computer  Incident  Response  Team  (“CIRT”)  that  is 
capable of dealing with relevant Cybersecurity Threats and Attack on citizens, tourist, 
businesses and government in Samoa.  The CIRT must have the capability to identify 
combat,  respond  and  manage  Cyberspace  Threats  or  Attacks;  as  well  as  enhance 
Cyberspace  security  in  Samoa.    Furthermore  CIRT  must  be  responsible  for  the 
computer  forensic  component  of  criminal  investigations  relative  to  computer 
technology or electronic evidence. 

 

 

 

 

 

The  National  CIRT  must  also  gather  its  own  intelligence  instead  of  relying  on 
secondary reporting incidents. 
 

2.  Development  of  a  unit  within  Police  Services  (Ministry  of  Police)  that  serves  as  a 
single  point  of  contact for  Cybercrime  with  the  ancillary  purpose  of  data  collection 
and increasing available information. 

3.  Establishment of a Child Online Protection Working Group (“COPWG”) consisting of 
but  not  limited  to  the  Ministry  of  Police,  (“MOP”);  OAG;  Ministry  of  Education 
Sports  and  Culture  (“MESC”),  Ministry  of  Women,  Community  and  Social 
Development (“MWCSD”), Ministry of Justice and Courts Administrations (MJCA), 
Ministry  of  Communications  and  Information  Technology  (MCIT),  Office  of  the 
Regulator  (OOTR),  Social  Welfare  Services  such  as  Samoa  Victim  Support  Group 
(SVSG), and other child protection NGOs; Internet Service Providers (ISP), Electronic 
Service Providers (ESP); Telecommunications Mobile and Fixed Network Providers; 
other Hi-Tech Companies; Owners of Internet Cafes and other public access providers 
e.g. libraries and telecentres.  

4.  Develop  or  Identify  Standards  to  be  implemented  to  ensure  that  the  rest  of  the 

Cybersecurity related attacks are minimised. 

5.  NICT must carry out assessment and identify the critical processes, standards for the 
introduction of the different security levels.  Furthermore the CIRT and other relevant 
stakeholders must be responsible for the implementation and control of the developed 
standards. 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

8 

6.  MCIT, OOTR, Samoa Qualification Authority (SQA), shall develop a framework for 
the certification and accreditation of national agencies and public sector professions 
by internationally recognized Cybersecurity Standards. 
 

GOAL  3:  Strengthen  the  legal  framework  to  meet  highest  regional  and  international 
standards  with  regard  to  protection  of  fundamental  rights  as  well  as  criminalization, 
investigation, electronic evidence and international cooperation;  

 
Strategy Statement: In order to promote openness and a safe cyberspace environment.  Samoa 
should have a reliable legal framework that reflects its uniqueness as well as international 
best practices.  
 
Strategy Guideline  
 
1.  The MCIT and OOTR will coordinate a diagnostic of Convention and other International 

Instruments appropriate for Government endorsement, ratification and accession. 

2.  MCIT  and  the  OOTR  will  coordinate  a  legislative  compliance  review  in  collaboration 

with Cybersecurity stakeholder to determine all necessary powers exist including: 

 

 

 

2.1. enabling  law  enforcement  and  other  relevant  agencies  to  protection  digital  citizens 

material and intellectual aspects as well vital infrastructure;  
 

2.2. establish or improving definitions, penal legislation, investigation instruments of law 
enforcement,  admissibility  of  electronic  evidence,  liability  of  Internet  Service 
Providers (ISPs), and specific provision children online and international cooperation.   

The review shall include that identification of existing provision that could be utilise 
in  relation  to  Cybersecurity,  a  comparison  with  international  best  practices,  a  gap 
analysis  suggestion  for  amendments  and  the  related  drafting  instructions.    This 
activity  shall  be  carried  out  in  close  collaboration  with  the  OAG  and  built  upon 
existing work carried out in the region (e.g. the assessment of the legislation within 
the ICB4PAC Project). 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

9 

GOAL  4:  Build  digital  citizens  capacity,  raising  awarenes  and  attaining  resources  to 
enhance Cybersecurity, combat Cybercrime activities and promote Cyber safety to the 
highest levels.  

Strategy  Statement:  Ensuring  that  all  relevant  stakeholders  including  citizens,  students, 
businesses, judiciary, and law enforcement receive sustainable trainings.   
 
Strategy Guidelines 
 
1.  The Ministry and NICT to inform all stakeholders involved of the functions and roles of 

NICT and other proposed working groups. 

2.  Identify Cybersecurity stakeholder to coordinate training and awareness on Cyber related 

issues, it may include; 
2.1. the  establishment  and  fostering  of  links  with  village  council  about  recent  ICT 

developments; 

2.2. the  distribution  of  Cybersecurity  information  to  community  through  the  MWCSD 

through the usage of Feso’ota’i Centre Outlets; 

2.3. use of Government media outlet to publicize Cybersecurity information; 
2.4. creation of Internet Safety Messages and material which reflect cultural norms and 

law for postage online and to air on Television; 

2.5. development of Tertiary level Computer Science Curriculum to include Cybersecurity 

 

 

measures; 

2.6. development of School Curriculums concerning Computer Studies in the primary and 

secondary levels; which include a model on Cybersecurity and Cyber safety. 
 

3.  Development  of  sustainable  training  program  for  law  enforcement  officers  (police, 

customs), Finance, Prosecutors, Service Providers; OOTR and Judiciary. 

4.  Development  of  sustainable  training  programs  for  Communication  and  IT  engineers  to 

support and assist managing Cybersecurity programs. 

 
5.  MCIT  and  OOTR  shall  provide  a  list  of  capacity  building  programs  related  to 
Cybersecurity that Samoa should benefit from to avoid an overlapping both entities shall 
develop a roadmap that list the difference capacity activities that Samoa requires. 

 
6.  MCIT,  OOTR,  SQA  shall  develop  for  the  certification  and  accreditation  of  national 
agencies  and  public  sector  professions  by  internationally  recognise  Cybersecurity 
standards 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

10 

GOAL 5: Cooperation; Responding to the global nature of Cybersecurity threats  and 
attacks  through  a  multi-stakeholders  approach  and  strengthing  local  and  global 
partnerships. 

Strategy Statement: To be part of the transnational dimension of cybersecurity incidents and 
benefit from the support of different organizations for developing countries by utilizing means 
of local and international cooperation and support.   
 
Strategy Guidelines 
 

Intra-State Cooperation: 
1.  MCIT to coordinate data collection on Intra-State Cooperation and recommend further 

required partnership stakeholders2 

 

2.  MCIT  and  OOTR  will  make  recommendations  with  regard  to  a  potential  access  to 
international  or  regional  agreements,  current  processes  of  developing  binding 
standards where Samoa should participate, as well as 24/7 networks (such as the G8 or 
Interpol Network). 

 
Intra-Agency Cooperation: 
3.  National  Cybersecurity  Stakeholders  are  encouraged  to  enter  into  partnerships  and 
programs  for  sharing  Cybersecurity  assets  (people,  process,  tools)  within  the  public 
sector  (i.e.  official  partnerships  for  the  cooperation  or  exchange  of  information, 
expertise technology and/or resources between departments ministries and agencies)3 
 

Public and Private Partnerships 
4.  Promote Public and Private Partnership to share Cybersecurity assets (people, process, 
tools)  between  the  public  sectors  (i.e.  official  partnerships  for  the  cooperation  or 
exchange of information, expertise, technology and resources)4 

 
5.  Furthermore  identify  cooperation  partners  (such  as  Matai  and  Fa’afeagaiga)  in rural 
areas that can support the capacity building initiatives by providing information about 
security  within  their  daily  work  and  provide  them  with  necessary  background 
information and training materials for the community. 

 
 

                                       
2 Intra-State Cooperation refers to any officially recognised national or sector-specific partnership for sharing 
cybersecurity assets across borders with other nation state (i.e. signed bi-lateral or multi-lateral partnership for 
the cooperation or exchange of information, expertise, technology and/or resources) 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Document/GCI_conceptual_Framework .pdf. Pg.9. 
3 Ibid…………………………………………………………………………………………..  
4 Ibid………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

11 

 

 
International Cooperation 
6.  MCIT and OOTR to conduct appraisal and make recommendation with regards to 

potential International or Regional Agreements, current process of developing binding 
standards where Samoa should participates, as well as 24/7 networks (such as the G8 
or Interpol Network). 

Strategic Priorities 
 

Activity 

 

NICT redefined roles and 

responsibilities 

 

Establishment of Roadmap for 
Governance of Cybersecurity in 

Samoa 

National Benchmarking scheme 

 

National Crime Prevention 

Strategy 

Development of Child Online 
Protection Policy or Strategy 

Establishment of CIRT 

 

Development of Cybersecurity 
Unit with a Law Enforcement 
Establishment of COPWG 

 

Assessment for standards 

 

Development of standards 

 

Framework for certification and 

accreditation of National 
Agencies and Public Sector 
Professions by Internationally 

Recognized Cybersecurity 

Standards 

Lead Agency 

MCIT 

MCIT 

MCIT/OOTR 

MOP 

Proposed 
Timeframe 
2016 - 2019 

2016 - 2019 

2017 - 2019 

2017 - 2020 

MCIT/OOTR/MWCSD/MOP 

2018 - 2020 

MCIT 

MCIT/MOP 

2016 - 2019 

2017 – 2020 

MCIT/MESC/MWCSD 

2016 - 2019 

MCIT/OOTR 

MCIT/OOTR 

2016 - 2019 

2016 - 2019 

MCIT/SQA/OOTR 

2017 - 2020 

Convention and International 

Instruments Diagnostic 

Legislative Compliance Review 

MCIT/OOTR 

2018 - 2020 

OAG/MCIT/OOTR 

2018 - 2020 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

12 

Inform Stakeholders involved in 
the policy or functions and roles 

of NICT and other proposed 

working groups 

Coordination of trainings and 

awareness 

Development of tertiary level 

Computer Science Curriculum to 
include Cybersecurity measures 
Development of a sustainable 

training program for law 

enforcement officers (Police, 
Customs), Finance, Prosecutors, 
Service Providers; Office of the 

Regulator and the Judiciary. 
Development sustainable 

training programs for 

communication and IT engineers 
to support and assist in managing 

Cybersecurity programs. 

 

 

MCIT 

2019 - 2020 

MCIT/MESC/OOTR/ 

MWCSD/MOP 

Ongoing 

MCIT/OOTR/MESC/SQA 

Ongoing 

MCIT/OOTR/MOP/OAG 

Ongoing 

MCIT 

Ongoing 

MCIT 

MCIT 

Ongoing 

 

Ongoing 

Data Collection and Intra-State 
Cooperation and Partnerships 

Recommendations 

Mobilisation/Strengthening of 

National Cybersecurity 

Stakeholders (Government 

Ministries, Authorities, Offices) 

partnerships 

Mobilisation/Strengthening of 
Public and Private Partnerships 

Identify contact point at the 
community level/village level 
Identification and Establishment 
of International Relationships 

MCIT 

`MWCSD 

2020 

2017 - 2019 

MCIT/OOTR/OAG 

Ongoing 

 
 
 
 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

13 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
             Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021 
 

 

1 

