REPORT BY THE 
COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL
HC 890 
SESSION 2012-13
12 FEBRUARY 2013

Cross-government

The UK cyber  
security strategy: 
Landscape review

Our vision is to help the nation spend wisely.
We apply the unique perspective of public audit 
to help Parliament and government drive lasting 
improvement in public services.

The National Audit Office scrutinises public spending for Parliament and 
is independent of government. The Comptroller and Auditor General 
(C&AG), Amyas Morse, is an Officer of the House of Commons and leads 
the NAO, which employs some 860 staff. The C&AG certifies the accounts 
of all government departments and many other public sector bodies. 
He has statutory authority to examine and report to Parliament on whether 
departments and the bodies they fund have used their resources efficiently, 
effectively, and with economy. Our studies evaluate the value for money of 
public spending, nationally and locally. Our recommendations and reports on 
good practice help government improve public services, and our work led to 
audited savings of more than £1 billion in 2011. 

Cross-government

The UK cyber  
security strategy: 
Landscape review

Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General

Ordered by the House of Commons 
to be printed on 11 February 2013

This report has been prepared under Section 6 of the 
National Audit Act 1983 for presentation to the House of 
Commons in accordance with Section 9 of the Act

Amyas Morse 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
National Audit Office

5 February 2013

HC 890  London: The Stationery Office  £16.00

This landscape review describes government’s evolving 
approach to cyber security and describes the programme 
of work it has under way. 

© National Audit Office 2013

The text of this document may be reproduced 
free of charge in any format or medium providing 
that it is reproduced accurately and not in a 
misleading context.

The material must be acknowledged as National 
Audit Office copyright and the document title 
specified. Where third party material has been 
identified, permission from the respective 
copyright holder must be sought.

Links to external websites were valid at the time 
of publication of this report. The National Audit 
Office is not responsible for the future validity of 
the links.

Printed in the UK for the Stationery Office 
Limited on behalf of the Controller of Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office

2540545  02/13  PRCS

Contents

Key facts  4
Introduction  5
Part One
The UK cyber security strategy  10

Part Two
Challenges for government  24

Annex
Assessing the value for money 
of cyber security  32

Appendix One
Our audit approach  36

Appendix Two
Our evidence base  38

Endnotes  40

The National Audit Office study team 
consisted of: 
Veronica Marshall, Linda Mills, 
Jeremy Weingard and James Young, 
under the direction of Sally Howes

This report can be found on the  
National Audit Office website at  
www.nao.org.uk/cyber-security-2013

For further information about the 
National Audit Office please contact:

National Audit Office 
Press Office 
157–197 Buckingham Palace Road 
Victoria 
London 
SW1W 9SP

Tel: 020 7798 7400

Enquiries: www.nao.org.uk/contactus

Website: www.nao.org.uk

Twitter: @NAOorguk

4  Key facts  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Key facts

Opportunities

3bn 
people will be
using the internet
worldwide by 2016

8%
proportion of UK GDP 
accounted for by 
UK internet economy, 
a greater share than for
any other G20 country

£121bn
value of the UK’s 
internet-based 
economy in 2010 

No.1
UK ranked against
other G20 countries
based on its ability to 
withstand cyber attacks 
and develop strong 
digital economy

Threats 

44m
cyber attacks 
in 2011 in the UK

£18bn–£27bn
estimated annual cost 
to UK of cybercrime

80%
of cyber attacks could 
be prevented through 
simple computer and 
network ‘hygiene’

Cyber attacks 
ranked as one 
of top four UK 
national risks
in 2010 

The UK cyber security strategy and programme 

Additional funding of £650 million to protect and promote

2011-12

2012-13

£105 million 
November 2011 – 
The Cabinet Office 
publishes UK cyber 
security strategy: 
Protecting and 
promoting the UK 
in a digital world

£155 million 
December 2012 – 
The Cabinet Office 
reports progress after 
one year of the UK 
cyber security strategy, 
sets out plans and 
commits to report back 
on progress in 2013

2013-14

£180 million 

2014-15

£210 million 

Fifteen government organisations working together on four objectives 

1  To tackle cybercrime 
and make the UK one 
of the most secure 
places in the world 
to do business

2  To make the UK 
more resilient to cyber 
attack and be better able 
to protect its interests 
in cyberspace

3  To help shape an 
open, stable and vibrant 
cyberspace that the
UK public can use safely 
and that supports 
open societies

4  To build the UK’s 
cross-cutting knowledge, 
skills and capability to 
underpin all cyber 
security objectives

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  5

Introduction

1 
The growth of the internet, or cyberspace, has impacted profoundly on everyday 
life and the global economy. By enabling people to exchange knowledge and ideas all 
over the world, the internet has contributed to a more open society and greater freedom 
of speech. It has transformed the conduct of business and opened up new markets. 
The internet is also making governments more accountable and transparent and is 
changing the way they deliver public services. 

2 
If the internet were a national economy in its own right, it would be the fifth largest 
in the world.1 The internet has evolved from initial experiments to link computer systems 
in the US in the 1960s, to the global interconnected network of systems and information 
that it is today. Commercial investment and technical innovation have driven these 
changes. International governments have intervened little. Nobody controls the internet, 
centrally or globally. Although no one person owns it, 80 per cent of the internet lies in 
the private sector. It is impossible to predict how people will use the internet in the future. 
With digital information growing, combined with new technologies, government, industry 
and citizens are likely to depend increasingly on the internet. Approximately three billion 
people will be using the internet by 2016.2 However, the internet was not designed with 
security in mind. 

An open internet

An open internet that is safe for everyone to use and that supports economic 

3 
growth is central to the government’s vision: 

“… for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a vibrant, 
resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core values 
for liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, 
national security and a strong society.”3 

The UK currently has one of the world’s largest internet-based economies, valued 

4 
at £121 billion in 2010. This is equivalent to 8 per cent of the UK’s GDP, which is a greater 
share than for any other G20 country.4 A secure internet is therefore vital for the UK’s 
economic prosperity and to support government plans to make all public services digital.

6  Introduction  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Threats to the internet

Although providing opportunities, the internet also poses new and growing threats. 

5 
As the internet is borderless and nobody polices it, legitimate users of the internet are 
vulnerable to attack. One report estimated that the UK suffered around 44 million cyber 
attacks in 2011, compared with one billion attacks across the world, although we must 
treat data on such events with caution.5 

The government has recognised the existing and evolving threats to the internet 

6 
and is focusing on:

•	

•	

•	

serious organised crime using the internet to steal personal or financial data to 
commit fraud, steal corporate intellectual property, or launder money;

political activists hacking and using the internet to steal information or damage 
computer systems to serve political agendas; and

state supported espionage and attacks on critical national infrastructure.

In June 2012, the head of MI5 warned that malicious activity in cyberspace had 

7 
increased.6 The Foreign Secretary recently announced that the computer systems 
supporting the London 2012 Olympics and Paralympics were attacked every day during 
the Games. Effective cyber security protected the Games against these threats and 
ensured services were not disrupted.7 

Cyber attacks are easy and cheap to perpetrate compared with traditional crime, 

8 
and attackers can easily evade prosecution by being in countries that will not arrest 
them. Consequently, tackling crime using the internet is a major challenge.

9 
Serious organised crime has developed an internet-based black market for 
criminals, which sells stolen identity information and software products to launch 
cyber attacks as well as technical support for cybercrime.

10  The threat to cyber security is persistent and constantly evolving. The covert 
nature of the threats, however, means people can underestimate the risk to business, 
government and the citizen. Cybercrime currently costs the UK somewhere between 
£18 billion and £27 billion a year.8,9 Consequently, business, government and the public 
must be aware of it and be able to resist the threat of cyber attack. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  7

Government’s response to cyber threats

11 
In line with its vision for an open and trusted internet, the government raised 
cyber security as one of the four top risks for UK national security in 2010. It also 
recognised the opportunities that cyberspace presented to the UK. In the 2010 
Comprehensive Spending Review, announced in October 2010, it therefore committed 
an additional £650 million of funding from 2011-12 to 2014-15 to a cross-government 
cyber security programme. The government already spends significant amounts on 
cyber security through the Single Intelligence Vote and in departments to secure their 
information, networks and systems. However, this departmental spending is highly 
disaggregated and the Cabinet Office does not have full insight into the total level of 
expenditure. The purpose of the additional £650 million was to enable different parts 
of government to work together to boost UK cyber defences and to promote the UK’s 
strong international position. 

In launching the government’s 2011 UK cyber security strategy, the  

12 
Prime Minister said: 

“While the internet is undoubtedly a force for social and political good, as well 
as crucial to the growth of our economy, we need to protect against the threats 
to our security. This strategy not only deals with the threat from terrorists to our 
national security, but also with the criminals who threaten our prosperity as well 
as blight the lives of many ordinary people through cybercrime. Cyber security is 
a top priority for government and we will continue to work closely with the police, 
security services, international partners and the private sector to ensure that the 
UK remains one of the most secure places in the world to do business.”10 

13  The strategy sets out what is at stake as follows: 

“Cyberspace has now grown to become a domain where strategic advantage – 
industrial or military – can be won or lost. It underpins the complex systems used 
by commerce (for example, banking, the delivery of food and the provision of utilities 
such as power and water) and the military. The growing use of cyberspace means 
that its disruption can affect nations’ ability to function effectively in a crisis.”11 

14  The strategy addresses not only the technical aspects of cyber security (protecting 
systems, networks and information) but as importantly, it seeks to change the attitudes 
and behaviours of business, government and the public so that everyone uses the 
internet safely.

8  Introduction  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Parliament’s increasing interest in cyber security

15  Parliament has shown an increasing interest in cyber security. In 2010, the 
House of Lords EU Committee reported that the UK was reasonably well-placed to 
deal with cyber attacks and was ‘a leader in the EU, with developed practices that set 
benchmarks for others to adopt’.12 

16 

In 2012 and 2013, the following committees reported:

•	

•	

•	

•	

The Science and Technology Committee called for government to do more to 
help the public understand how to stay safe online;13 

The Defence Select Committee published a report on cyber security in relation 
to the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces;14 

The Intelligence and Security Committee praised work on the defence and 
security of computer networks, but were concerned that delays in developing 
national capabilities will give the UK’s enemies an advantage, given the rapid rise 
in cyber threats;15 and 

The Home Affairs Select Committee held an inquiry into cybercrime.

17  The Committee of Public Accounts has not examined cyber security specifically, 
although it did point to a lack of detail on cyber security plans in the government’s 2011 
ICT strategy, given the government’s aim to move more services online.16 In March 2012, 
it also raised concerns about cyber security in the government’s plans for smart electric 
and gas meters, which will enable suppliers to collect meter readings over the internet.17 

Purpose of this landscape report

18  An effective UK response to cyber threats is essential for future economic prosperity, 
making public services digital by default, and maintaining the values and freedom of an 
open society. This landscape review describes government’s evolving approach to cyber 
security and describes the programme of work it has under way. It sets the scene in an 
area likely to interest the Committee of Public Accounts. It does not conclude on the 
value for money of the government’s cyber security strategy at this early stage. 

•	 Part One describes the cyber security strategy published in 2011 by the Cabinet 

Office. It describes what 15 different parts of government are doing together to 
deliver the strategy and explains how the unclassified part of the £650 million 
budget is being spent. 

•	 Part Two identifies the challenges that government faces in delivering its strategy. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  9

Our approach

19  This report draws on our work as auditors of central government, past government 
publications, research from think tanks and data from the Cabinet Office. We interviewed 
lead officials, industry representatives, academics and citizens’ groups during July to 
October 2012 and held a round table with leading cyber academics. We have also drawn 
on the Cabinet Office’s progress report published in December 2012.18 We explain our 
methodology in Appendix One.

10  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Part One

The UK cyber security strategy

In this part of our report, we describe the background to the 2011 UK cyber 

1.1 
security strategy and its scope. We set out the government’s spending and the progress 
it has made to date. 

Evolution of the UK cyber security strategy

1.2  The government’s 2011 strategy builds on ten-years’ experience of seeking to 
protect government information, systems and networks (Figure 1 on pages 12 and 13). 
In 2001, the Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG) (within GCHQ) first 
recognised the importance of protecting the security of data. The group recommended 
the appointment of a central sponsor to determine policy on managing and securing 
government data. 

1.3  By 2004, the government had published a national strategy for information 
assurance and established a network of Senior Information Risk Owners. They aimed 
to lead and foster a culture that valued and protected information. 

1.4  Two serious losses of data in HM Revenue & Customs in 2007, and the 
Ministry of Defence in 2008, damaged the reputation of the government and demonstrated 
the importance of managing information risk. Reviews of these incidents found that 
information security had not been a management priority. 

1.5 
In 2009, the government recognised the emerging and significant risks of cyber 
threats and published its first cyber security strategy. The aim was to broaden its role 
beyond that of protecting government information and systems. It also wanted to work 
with industry and citizens to protect the wider UK economy and society from cyber 
threats. As part of its strategy, the government set up the Office of Cyber Security in the 
Cabinet Office. 

In 2009, the government ranked cyber attacks on the UK below climate 

1.6 
change, terrorism, failed states and the banking crisis as key risks to UK national 
security. By 2010, it had raised cyber attacks to one of the four top national risks, 
alongside international military crises, terrorism, and major incidents such as natural 
disasters or influenza pandemics.19 In response to the rising risks of cyber attacks, 
in November 2010, the government announced an additional £650 million of funding 
for a four-year National Cyber Security Programme.20 The Home Office transferred 
responsibility for cyber security in government to the Cabinet Office in 2011. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  11

In November 2011, the government published a new cyber security strategy.21 

1.7 
This set out how the government planned to deliver the National Cyber Security 
Programme through to 2015. 

The new strategy

1.8  The strategy differs from the previous one. For example, the strategy places greater 
emphasis on the role and responsibilities of the public and industry in helping secure the 
UK against attacks. It also recognises that existing legislation and education at all levels 
should incorporate cyber security within mainstream activities.

1.9  The strategy sets out four key objectives. Six central departments and nine other 
government organisations (including those in the Intelligence and Security Agencies) 
are responsible for delivery as shown in Figure 2 on page 14.

1.10  In the strategy, the government describes what success will look like for the UK.

It has a growing international market in cyber security products and services. 

It is recognised as a safe place to do business in cyberspace.

Its law enforcement has been sharpened to tackle cybercrime.

Individuals know how to protect themselves online.

•	
•	 Businesses operate securely in cyberspace. 
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	 Skills and capability, research and development and all levels of education 

Its capabilities to detect and defeat attacks in cyberspace are stronger.

Its critical national infrastructure is protected against cyber attack.

effectively support cyber security.

•	 Working relationships with other countries, business and organisations around 

the world are strong and well established.

Governance 

1.11  The strategy sets out how the government will deliver the 2010 National Cyber 
Security Programme. The Office of Cyber Security and Information Assurance (OCSIA), 
among other responsibilities, manages and coordinates the programme which the 
Minister for the Cabinet Office oversees as shown in Figure 3 on page 15. Six Cyber 
Delivery Capability Groups manage activities at a working level and the Cyber Delivery 
Management Group, representing all 15 delivery partners, meets quarterly to review the 
programme and address cross-cutting issues. The programme is included within the 
governance arrangements for the government’s Major Projects Portfolio and participates 
in annual Gateway reviews by the Efficiency and Reform Group to ensure that it follows 
best practice.

12  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  13

Figure 1
Information assurance and cyber security reports, events and key changes in strategic direction

The government’s approach to cyber security has developed since 2001

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

 

The Communications-
Electronics Security 
Group (CESG) Review 
recommending 
Central Sponsor for 
Information Assurance

Increasing use of 
online services 
requires development 
of security measures. 
Outcome of CESG’s 
review was to 
recommend a 
central sponsor for 
Information Assurance

Report

Event

Key changes 
in strategic 
direction

E-envoy appointed as 
Central Sponsor for 
Information Assurance 
(CSIA) 

Central Sponsor for 
Information Assurance 
(CSIA) secretariat 
established

This new role provides 
focus for Information 
Assurance activity 
and development of a 
National Information 
Assurance strategy

Information Assurance

National Information 
Assurance Strategy

Updated 
National Information 
Assurance Strategy 

A network of Senior 
Information Risk 
Owner’s (SIROs) 
across government 
established

This is the first 
framework for 
departments and 
public bodies, to help 
them understand 
ICT risks. It sets 
out government’s 
approach to dealing 
with risks facing 
information systems

HMRC loses disc 
containing Child 
Benefit data of 
25 million people

Ministry of Defence 
loses  personal 
records of around 
600,000 people 

Single Information 
Assurance framework 
for the whole of the 
UK extended beyond 
confidentiality of 
information to cover 
availability, integrity, 
non-repudiation 
and authentication

Cyber Security

The National Security 
Strategy: A Strong 
Britain in an Age of 
Uncertainty 
This outlines 
reappraisal of Britain’s 
role in the world, the 
risks to our security 
and their implication 
for the UK

The Strategic Defence 
and Security Review

UK cyber 
security strategy
This sets out the 
objectives and tasks to 
be undertaken as part 
of the National Cyber 
Security Programme

Ministerial 
responsibility for cyber 
security moved from 
the Home Office to the 
Cabinet Office

Cyber security 
elevated to one of the 
four key risks to UK 
national security

Strategic Defence 
and Security Review 
announce £650 million 
of additional funding 
for National Cyber 
Security Programme

Cyber security 
strategy now includes 
how the UK will tackle 
cyber threats to 
promote economic 
growth and to protect 
national security and 
the UK’s way of life

First cyber 
security strategy

Coleman Report: 
Protecting government 
information

Data Handling 
Procedures in 
Government: 
Final Report and 
Poynter Review of 
information security 
at HM Revenue & 
Customs

The Office of Cyber 
Security formed in the 
Cabinet Office

Government responds 
to increasing risks 
of cyber threats by 
broadening its role 
beyond Information 
Assurance to 
cyber security

Protection of 
government 
systems and critical 
infrastructure part 
of the strategy. Also 
recognition that cyber 
protection requires 
a multi-stakeholder 
approach and action 
at many levels 

Sources: 1–6, 9–11 The Cabinet Ofﬁ ce. 1. National Information Assurance Strategy, 2003; 2. Protecting our information system, 2004; 3. A National Information 
Assurance Strategy (revision), 2007; 4. Protecting Government Information; The Coleman Report, 2008; 5. Data Handling Procedures in Government: Final 
Report, 2008; 6. Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, 2009; 7. HMRC – Poynter  Recommendations – ICO Audit, ICO, 2010; 8. Securing Britain in an 
Age of Uncertainty: The Strategic Defence and Security Review, The Ministry of Defence, 2010; 9. Protecting government information, 2010; 10. The National 
Security Strategy “A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty”, 2010; 11.The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, 2011

14  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Figure 2
Strategic objectives and responsibilities for the National Cyber Security Programme

Objective
1  To tackle cybercrime and make 
the UK one of the most secure 
places in the world to do business

Organisations
Home Office, Serious Organised 
Crime Agency, Child Exploitation 
and Online Protection, Police 
Central e-crime Unit, police forces, 
National Fraud Authority

Responsibilities

Tackling cybercrime:
•	 Reducing online vulnerability
•	 Restricting criminal activity online
•	 Promoting effective partnerships

Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills, Technology 
Strategy Board, UK Trade and 
Investment

2  To make the UK more resilient to 
cyber attack and be better able to 
protect its interests in cyberspace

The Cabinet Office and the 
Intelligence and Security Agencies

Ministry of Defence

3  To help shape an open, stable 
and vibrant cyberspace which the 
UK public can use safely and that 
supports open societies

Department for Culture, Media 
and Sport

Foreign and Commonwealth Office

4  To build the UK’s cross-cutting 
knowledge, skills and capability 
to underpin all cyber security 
objectives

Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills

Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills

The Cabinet Office

Making it safer to do business in cyberspace:
•	 Increasing awareness and visibility of threats
•	 Improving incident response
•	 Protecting information and services
•	 Fostering a culture that manages the risks
•	 Promoting confidence in cyberspace

Defending national infrastructure:
•	 Strengthening defences in cyberspace
•	 Improving resilience and diminishing the impact 

of cyber attacks

•	 Countering terrorist use of the internet

Ensuring that the UK has the capability to protect 
UK interests in cyberspace:
•	 Improving our ability to detect threats in cyberspace
•	 Expanding our capability to deter and disrupt attacks 

on the UK

Helping to shape the development of cyberspace:
•	 Promoting an open and interoperable cyberspace
•	 Promoting our fundamental freedoms and rights 

Protecting our way of life:
•	 Ensuring our security without compromising our values

Extending knowledge:
•	 Building a coherent research agenda
•	 Understanding threats, vulnerabilities and risks

Enhancing skills:
•	 Building a culture that understands the risks 
•	 Improving skills at all levels

Expanding capability:
•	 Building technical capabilities
•	 Increasing ability to respond to incidents

Source: UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, 2011

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  15

Figure 3
Governance of the National Cyber Security Programme 

The National Cyber Security Programme 
(2010-11 to 2014-15)

The programme and strategic implementation 
board: chaired by Minister for the Cabinet Office

Cyber delivery management group (CDMG): 
all delivery partners represented

Theme-based cyber delivery capability groups 

Office for Cyber Security and Information 
Assurance manages the overall programme

Government’s major
projects portfolio

Efficiency and 
Reform Group

Annual 
gateway 
review

Source: National Audit Ofﬁ ce

Funding 

1.12  In 2010, the Office of Cyber Security allocated additional funding of £650 million 
to the National Cyber Security Programme. The government has published provisional 
allocations for this funding as set out in Figure 4 overleaf and plans for future years 
are indicative. Only a portion of future spend has been committed, to allow flexibility to 
respond to developments in what is a fast-moving area. Allocations are agreed on an 
annual basis.

1.13  In addition to the £650 million of funding shown in Figure 4, departments and 
agencies are allocating funding from their operational budgets to cyber security. The figure 
of £650 million does therefore not include spending in support of cyber objectives that the 
National Cyber Security Programme does not fund. Such expenditure, however, is not 
always separately identified in departmental budgets and is not therefore readily quantified.

16  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Figure 4
Breakdown of £650 million funding for the National Cyber Security Programme (2011-12 to 2014-15)

Funding has been allocated to six areas over the four years 

2011-12 
£105m 

2012-13 
£155m 

2013-14 
£180m 

2014-15
£210m

£650 million

 
 

(£m)

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Security and
intelligence
agencies

Ministry of
Defence

Government

ICT

£ million 

Percentage 

384 

59% 

90 

14% 

65 

10% 

Home
Ofﬁce

65 

10% 

Cabinet
Ofﬁce

33 

5% 

Department 
for Business, 
Innovation 
and Skills

13

2%

NOTES
1  Nominal values.
2  The funding shown for each department is the total amount allocated over the four years 2011-12 to 2014-15.

Source: UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, Cabinet Ofﬁce, November 2011

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  17

Progress 

1.14  The government reported progress after one year in December 2012.22,23 
Figure 5 on pages 18 to 21 describes the government’s progress against its strategic 
objectives and details of the government’s plans. Activities are already beginning to 
deliver benefits. For example, the government has reported the following:

•	

•	

in 2012, the Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) took down 36 website 
domains that were selling compromised credit card and financial data. This was 
part of an international operation with the FBI and US Department of Justice. 
According to the SOCA this operation prevented international fraud estimated 
to be over £500 million; and

in the past year, Action Fraud, managed by the National Fraud Authority, has 
received over 46,000 reports of cybercrime from the public. This amounted to 
fraud that would have cost £292 million.

Spending to date

1.15  We show outturn and forecast spending during the first two years of the National 
Cyber Security Programme in Figure 6 on page 22. This is within the budget of 
£260 million allocated for 2011-12 and 2012-13 as shown in Figure 4. Spending has 
supported a broad range of cyber activities shown in Figure 5. In some areas, such as skills 
and awareness, the government will spend more in the next two years as initiatives expand. 
We can only comment on the unclassified part of the overall £650 million budget and are 
unable to show a breakdown of ‘sovereign capability’ spend in the Intelligence Agencies. 
However, developing this capability supports activity across all strands of the programme.

18  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  19

Figure 5
Figure 5
The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)
The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)

Progress 
Progress 

Objective 1: To tackle cybercrime and make the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business

Tackling cybercrime

Action Fraud (managed by the National Fraud Authority) became 
the UK’s national reporting centre for fraud and financially motivated 
cybercrime. It has received 46,000 reports of cyber-enabled crime 
amounting to £292 million of attempted fraud.

National Fraud Authority and industry partners delivered ‘The Devil’s 
in Your Details’ cyber security awareness campaign that it claims 
reached over four million people. 

The Police Central e-crime Unit has trebled in size and developed a 
framework for cyber specials (volunteer police officers with specialist 
cyber skills). 

New regional cybercrime teams created in Yorkshire and the 
Humber, The North West and East Midlands. 

The Home Office issued strategic policing requirements, which 
included major cyber incidents. 

The Serious Organised Crime Agency increased its cyber 
capability to support international liaison and mainstreaming cyber 
investigations across the agency.

The Crown Prosecution Service enhanced its cybercrime 
prosecution capability. At end of September 2012, the service was 
prosecuting 29 ‘live’ cybercrime cases.

The Crown Prosecution Service expanded its in-house cybercrime 
training programme. 

The Police Central e-crime Unit, with other international agencies, 
suspended over 15,000 websites engaged in fraud. 

The Serious Organised Crime Agency led a day of global action 
to tackle automated vending carts websites selling compromised 
financial data. 

The Serious Organised Crime Agency and The Police Central 
e-crime Unit started joint operations as part of the transition to the 
new National Cyber Crime Unit.

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office contributed £100,000 to 
support a Council of Europe global project on cybercrime. 

The Serious Organised Crime Agency worked with international 
partners such as the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN) and the Commonwealth cybercrime initiative on 
internet security. 

HM Revenue & Customs established a cybercrime team to tackle tax 
fraud by organised criminals, which went live in time to protect the 
self-assessment filing peak. 

Making the UK one of the most secure places in the 
world to do business

The Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), Centre 
for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI), the Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills, and OCSIA produced Cyber 
Security Guidance for Business (the Ten Steps)1 aimed at providing 
advice to chief executives and board members. 

CPNI expanded its scope to include companies not traditionally part 
of the critical national infrastructure.

The Serious Organised Crime Agency repatriated over 2.3 million 
items of compromised card payment details back to the financial 
sector in the UK, and internationally, since 2011, preventing potential 
economic loss of over £500 million. 

The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills produced a 
report identifying growth potential of the UK cyber security sector.

A pilot joint public-private sector cyber threat information-sharing 
scheme, led by GCHQ completed.

Plans
Plans

Objective 1: continued

Tackling cybercrime

To launch the national cybercrime unit in 2013 as part of the new 
National Crime Agency. 

For government to continue to enable law enforcement and industry 
to cooperate and share information. The UK Cyber Information 
Sharing Partnership is an example of this.

For government to continue to build relationships with international 
law enforcement agencies to undertake more joint operations. 

To enhance Action Fraud to make it easier for businesses to report 
repeat cases of fraud.

To launch a new Cybercrime Reduction Partnership between 
government, law enforcement, industry and academia.

For government to continue to engage with institutional investors, 
professional and representational institutions and auditors to help 
company boards see cyber security as a significant business risk 
requiring action. 

For an annual information security breaches survey to be 
introduced between 2013 and 2015 to enable organisations and 
sectors to benchmark performance against peers to drive up 
industry standards. 

For the government to support development of industry-led cyber 
security standards and kitemarks for products and services. This will 
help clarify what good cyber security practice looks like and enable 
companies to differentiate themselves in the marketplace. 

Making the UK one of the most secure places in 
the world to do business

For the government to use its procurement frameworks to share 
information securely across supply chains. 

For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to work with 
businesses and their representatives to communicate messages 
from Cyber Security Guidance for Business (the Ten Steps).1 

GCHQ will promote and extend its commercial product assurance 
scheme, which gives institutions confidence that the security features 
of the products they buy to manage their cyber risks are effective. 

For CPNI to expand its cyber risk management advice to business. 

For government to roll-out a programme of small and medium-sized 
business (and public) awareness drives in 2013. The Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills to provide targeted information 
and advice for small and medium-sized enterprises using existing 
channels such as ‘Get Safe Online’ and ‘Business in You’.

For government to mainstream cyber security messages across the 
breadth of its communication with business.

For defence and security procurements to embed cyber security 
best practice requirements in future contracts. 

For CPNI to publish research with Oxford University to help reduce 
risk of cyber attacks by company insiders. 

To launch a ‘Cyber Growth Partnership’ in conjunction with Intellect 
UK (which represents the UK technology industry and has over 
850 members) to identify how to support the growth of the UK cyber 
security industry. 

The government will increase the number of cyber security contracts 
going to small and medium-sized businesses. At least 25 per cent 
of GCHQ’s procurement budget will be spent through small and 
medium-sized businesses.

To encourage smaller firms to innovate through initiatives such as 
the ‘Finding the Threat’, a call to small and medium-sized businesses 
requesting innovative ideas to address a set of security and 
intelligence challenges. 

Objective 2: To make the UK more resilient to cyber attack and be better able to protect its interests in cyberspace

Objective 2: continued

GCHQ has invested in new capabilities to identify and analyse hostile 
cyber attacks on UK networks. This includes hosting the new Joint 
Cyber Unit in partnership with the Ministry of Defence to help counter 
cyber threats to the UK.

The Security Services developed additional capability to investigate 
cyber threats from foreign intelligence agencies and terrorists. 

GCHQ and CPNI launched the cyber incident response pilot 
scheme to provide links to organisations certified to deal with 
cyber security attacks. 

CPNI commissioned a major research programme with Oxford 
University to provide advice, guidance and products to reduce risk 
of cyber insider acts. 

CPNI commissioned cyber security research to help enhance the 
advice it provides to industry on effective cyber protection. 

The government developed a new security model to protect the 
Public Services Network. 

The Cabinet Office and the security and intelligence agencies 
developed new ways of working to engage with business to protect 
the 2012 Olympic Games from cyber threats. 

For the government to increase security of its computer networks 
with the next phase of the Public Sector Network. 

For a government pilot information scheme, the Cyber Information 
Sharing Partnership, to be launched in 2013. 

For lessons learned from the Olympics to be used to review and 
strengthen protection and resilience of the UK to cyber attack. 

For the government to establish a UK national computer emergency 
response team in conjunction with industry. This will improve national 
coordination to respond to incidents and enable international sharing 
of technical information on cyber security.

For the government to continue to work closely with key allies and 
like-minded partner countries on developing cyber security policy 
sharing information and coordinating responses. 

20  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  21

Figure 5 continued
Figure 5 continued
The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)
The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)

Progress 
Progress 

Objective 3: To help shape an open, stable and vibrant cyberspace which the UK public can use safely and that
supports open societies

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office organised 2011 and 2012 
London Conferences on Cyberspace attended by 60 countries 
and worked with Hungary to deliver the Budapest Conference in 
October 2012. 

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office funded the new international 
Cyber Security Capacity Building Centre to tackle global cybercrime. 

The Cabinet Office and its industry partners delivered a ‘Get 
Safe Online’ week as part of the global ‘Cyber Security Month’ in 
October each year. 

The government worked with NATO and the EU to develop their 
emerging cyber strategies. 

Government departments and law enforcement agencies worked 
with international partners to encourage countries to sign up to the 
Budapest Convention on Cyber Crime.2

Government departments played a prominent role in working with 
the UN Government Group of Experts and the Organisation for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe to improve cyber security.

Plans
Plans

Objective 3: continued

For government to continue to expand and strengthen the UK’s 
bilateral and multilateral networks, and to collaborate internationally 
through the work of the EU, NATO and other bodies. 

The government will continue to work with other international 
organisations and countries to develop the ‘rules of the road’ 
for cyberspace. 

The government will continue to work for trans-border law 
enforcement cooperation on cybercrime. With more countries 
intending to sign up to the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime 
in the coming year, UK law enforcement agencies will continue to 
expand partnership building and joint operations. 

For government to extend its advice and guidance to other countries 
to help them build capacity to tackle cyber threats and deny safe 
havens for cybercriminals through the new international Cyber 
Security Capacity Building Centre.

Objective 4: To build the UK’s cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all cyber security objectives

Objective 4: continued

GCHQ launched a scheme to certify information assurance and 
cyber security professionals in the UK. 

GCHQ, in partnership with the Research Councils’ global 
uncertainties programme and the Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills awarded ‘academic centre of excellence in 
cyber security research’ status to eight UK universities and launched 
a research institute for the science of cyber security. 

GCHQ launched a programme to develop cyber security talent in 
schools and universities. 

The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills commissioned 
e-skills to produce cyber security learning materials as part of the 
‘Behind the Screen Pilot’. Schools can download this material.

Joint public and private sector initiative ‘Cyber Security Challenge 
UK’ launched a new framework to enable people to move into 
cyber security mid-career. 

The government delivered ‘Protecting Information’ levels 1 to 3 
and ‘Fraud and Corruption’ e-learning packages for the wider 
public sector. 

Cyber security training for the civil service, law enforcement and the 
military rolled out.

NOTES
NOTES
1  Cyber Security Guidance for Business. September 2011 available at: www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/
1  Cyber Security Guidance for Business. September 2011 available at: www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/

0-9/12-1120-10-steps-to-cyber-security-executive
0-9/12-1120-10-steps-to-cyber-security-executive

2  Convention on Cybercrime, Budapest, 23 November 2001 available on the website of the Council of Europe.
2  Convention on Cybercrime, Budapest, 23 November 2001 available on the website of the Council of Europe.

Sources: Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012; Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, 
Sources: Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012; Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, 
The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on Progress – December 2012: Forward Plans
The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on Progress – December 2012: Forward Plans

For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to continue 
to work with institutions to ensure undergraduates taking technical 
degree courses receive adequate training in cyber security. 

For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to launch 
two centres of doctoral training to fund 48 PhDs on multidisciplinary 
cyber topics. 

For GCHQ to sponsor 30 PhDs. 

For government to continue to identify and develop cyber security 
talent in school and university and support innovation through 
initiatives such as the ‘Cyber Security Challenge UK’. 

For the Ministry of Defence to launch a ‘Cyber Reservists’ 
programme to recruit cyber security experts.

For GCHQ, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
to extend the Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security 
Research Programme to other universities. This will benefit 
the UK by enhancing the UK’s cyber knowledge base through 
original research; providing top quality graduates in the field of 
cyber security; supporting GCHQ’s cyber defence mission; and 
increasing innovation.

For a second Research Institute to be set up in 2013 to focus on 
automated program analysis and verification. 

For a new multidisciplinary academic cyber journal to be launched in 
2013 to publish a broad range of cyber security research from both 
UK and international universities. 

For GCHQ to put in place a scheme to certify cyber security training 
courses to develop and certify professionalism in cyber security.

For the government to mainstream cyber security messages across 
the breadth of communications with citizens. 

For the government to roll-out a programme of public awareness 
drives in 2013, building on ‘Get Safe Online’ and the work of the 
National Fraud Authority.

22  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Figure 6
Spending on the National Cyber Security Programme – includes actual 
spend in 2011-12 and forecast spend in 2012-13 (£ million) 

4 2

9

12

17

28

31

157

National sovereign capability to detect and defeat high end threats – 
Security and Intelligence Agencies

Mainstreaming cyber throughout defence – Ministry of Defence

Enforcing laws and combating cybercrime – Home Ofﬁce

Engaging with the private sector – Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

Improving the resilience of the Public Sector Network – The Cabinet Ofﬁce

Coordinating programme, analysing trends and managing and 
responding to incidents – The Cabinet Ofﬁce

Education, skills and awareness – The Cabinet Ofﬁce

International engagement and capacity building – 
Foreign and Commonwealth Ofﬁce

Source: Cabinet Ofﬁce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012 

International comparison

1.16  Many countries have developed cyber security strategies reflecting their national 
policy priorities, an assessment of cyber risks and their economic position. 

1.17  We reviewed the cyber security strategies of nine countries to compare with the 
UK’s strategic objectives. We found the UK’s strategy to be unique in terms of the weight 
given by the UK government to promoting and securing commercial opportunity for 
UK business in the growing international cyber security market. What the UK shares with 
other countries is shown in Figure 7:

•	

•	

four countries’ strategies share the UK’s focus on tackling cybercrime as 
an objective;

all countries have stated objectives of working towards improving resilience to 
cyber attacks and protecting national security;

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  23

•	

•	

only one other country, the USA, shares the UK’s objective of helping to shape an 
open vibrant cyberspace to support open societies; and

all countries aim to build cross-cutting knowledge and skills and capability in 
cyber security.

1.18  The UK therefore has one of the most wide-ranging cyber security strategies. 
Research by Booz Allen Hamilton and the Economist Intelligence Unit also shows that 
the UK leads other G20 countries in its ability to withstand cyber attacks and to develop 
a strong digital economy.24 This is based on assessing each country’s legal and regulatory 
frameworks, economic and social issues, technology infrastructure, and industry.

Figure 7
The number of countries of the nine reviewed that share the 
UK’s cyber security objectives

Two of the UK’s cyber security strategic objectives are common to the strategies of 
all nine of the countries we reviewed

Key objectives of the UK’s cyber security strategy

Tackling cybercrime

4

Improving resilience to cyber attack
and protecting interests in cyberspace

Helping shape an open, 
vibrant and stable cyberspace

1

Building cyber security knowledge, 
skills and capability

9

9

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Number of countries currently working in policy area

NOTE
1  We reviewed the cyber security strategies of Australia, China, Estonia, France, Germany, India, Japan, 

Russia, and the USA.

Source: National Audit Ofﬁce 2012

24  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Part Two

Challenges for government

In this part, we describe six key challenges the government faces in implementing 

2.1 
its cyber security strategy:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

influencing industry to protect and promote itself and UK plc;

addressing the UK’s current and future ICT and cyber security skills gap;

increasing awareness so that people are not the weakest link;

tackling cybercrime and enforcing the law at home and abroad;

getting government to become more agile and joined-up; and

demonstrating value for money.

Influencing industry 

Forming effective partnerships with industry to reach a common understanding of 
risks and share the costs of protecting UK plc 

2.2  The UK has one of the world’s largest internet-based economies, valued at 
£121 billion in 2010. This is equivalent to 8 per cent of the UK’s GDP. The cost of 
cybercrime is also significant and estimated to cost the UK, mainly industry, between 
£18 billion to £27 billion a year.25,26,27

2.3  At risk of cyber attack is the UK’s economy including the nation’s critical national 
infrastructure. This infrastructure includes the networks, computer systems and electronic 
data that underpin government, emergency services, communications, utilities, financial 
services, food, health, and transportation. These services are essential to daily life, owned 
mostly by the private sector and their protection from cyber attacks is crucial.

2.4  The government has recognised that it needs to work in partnership with industry. 
It considers, for example, that cyber security is not well understood at board level and 
executives have difficulty assessing the impact of cyber security risks.28 For this reason, 
GCHQ, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, CPNI and the Cabinet Office 
published advice for boards in September 2012 on the risks of cyber security and how 
to mitigate them.

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  25

2.5  Identifying how much investment the UK needs can be difficult as information 
on cyber threats is often unreliable. Reporting cyber attacks is not mandatory for public 
or private sector organisations. Many incidents go unreported, as news of them could 
damage corporate reputation and customers could lose confidence in using online 
services. For example, Sony’s share price fell by 5 per cent in 2011 when the personal 
details of 77 million of its online PlayStation customers were stolen. 

2.6  To advise industry and counter the lack of accurate threat information, the 
government has launched a number of new initiatives. For example, CPNI and the 
Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG) inform industry on cyber threats 
and advise on cyber security. In November 2012, the government launched the Cyber 
Security Incident Response Service, which provides access to quality assured industry 
and government expertise for organisations after a cyber attack. While aimed at public 
sector organisations, the government also expects that the service will benefit the private 
sector. Figure 5 shows more initiatives.

2.7  The government has recognised the need to develop cyber security standards 
to help it, industry and citizens make informed choices about security products and 
services. It is working with the British Standards Institute to encourage the development 
of industry-led standards, kitemarks and best practice advice on cyber security. This 
covers products, processes and principles for cyber security. The government is also 
considering incorporating cyber security standards in its procurement frameworks to 
help secure its supply chain.29 

2.8  The government considers that developing industry-led standards would help 
promote the UK as a safe place for internet trade and commerce and assist UK businesses 
to promote their products or services within both domestic and overseas markets. 

2.9   Those we interviewed from government, academia and industry were generally 
positive about how government is working with industry and providing help and 
guidance. Many observed that the government advice released so far targets larger 
businesses. The government is aware of this and of the need to get its message across 
to small and medium-sized businesses too. It is tailoring its guidance accordingly. 
The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills will include messages on cyber 
as part of its mainstream communications with small and medium-sized businesses. 
The government has said it intends to target these businesses as part of the public 
awareness campaign it is planning for 2013.

2.10  Most interviewees thought that the introduction of industry-led cyber security 
standards to be beneficial, especially to the citizen and small and medium-sized 
businesses, but many considered that progress on standards was too slow. The 
government agrees and to encourage faster progress, ministers announced in 
December 2012, that the government will develop and make public in early 2013 
a ‘meta-standard’, characterising what it believes a robust organisational standard 
should include. The government has said it will look to endorse and support the first 
standard coming to market that meets these criteria. 

 

26  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

2.11  Interviewees also highlighted the risk supply chains posed and suggested that 
government and large companies make sure that their suppliers implement minimum 
standards for managing cyber risks. The Ministry of Defence has been working with its 
suppliers to develop such requirements for companies bidding for defence contracts. 
A number of interviewees suggested that larger businesses could help small and 
medium-sized businesses, particularly where there was an existing relationship such 
as a supply chain. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is working with 
the Confederation of British Industry and others to encourage this.

Addressing the UK’s current and future ICT and  
cyber security skills gap

Ensuring the UK has enough skilled people and the right research and development 
to plug the immediate skills gap and address longer-term needs in the public and 
private sector 

2.12 According to the government, the number of ICT and cyber security professionals 
in the UK has not increased in line with the growth of the internet.30 This shortage of ICT 
skills hampers the UK’s ability to protect itself in cyberspace and promote the use of the 
internet both now and in the future. The skills the UK needs to design and implement 
cyber security policy are not only technical, there is also a need for psychologists; law 
enforcers; corporate strategists and risk managers. Other professionals such as lawyers 
and accountants also need to understand cyber security in order to assess, manage 
and mitigate the business risk of cyber threats.

2.13 In April 2012, the Minister for Business, Innovation and Skills referred to 
‘a decade long’ decline in ICT and computer science in schools and universities.31 
The government’s special representative to business for cyber security also commented 
on the lack of younger people working in the area of cyber security. In 2011, the 
Committee of Public Accounts raised concerns about cyber security skills in government 
and recommended that the government needed to employ more people with these 
skills. Attracting and retaining talent is also a concern. In 2012, the Intelligence and 
Security Committee highlighted GCHQ’s inability to retain internet specialists in the face 
of competition from the private sector.32 

2.14 In 2012, the government established a Research Institute in the Science of 
Cyber Security and awarded ‘Academic Centre of Excellence in Cyber Security 
Research’ status to eight UK universities to boost research and to expand the UK’s 
cyber skills base. We describe the government’s activities in this area in Figure 5. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  27

2.15  Interviews with government, academia and business representatives confirmed that 
the UK lacks technical skills and that the current pipeline of graduates and practitioners 
would not meet demand. A number of government departments commented that the 
UK depended on a small number of highly skilled people to participate in developing 
international technical standards. The government has introduced a range of initiatives 
aimed at broadening the pipeline as summarised in Figure 5.

2.16 Interviewees were concerned about a lack of promotion of science and technology 
subjects at school resulting in the reported lower uptake of computer science and 
technology courses by UK students. Those we interviewed from academia considered 
that it could take up to 20 years to address the skills gap at all levels of education. 
The government is working to address this and has said that it intends to overhaul ICT 
teaching in schools to make it genuinely about computer science rather than office 
skills. It expects cyber security to be a strong strand of the future GCSE computer 
science syllabus.

Increasing awareness so that people are not the weakest link

Raising awareness of online risks and individual responsibilities right across the 
UK so that people are not the weakest link for the security of their families or 
their employers 

2.17  Cyber attacks exploit vulnerabilities in human behaviour and lack of awareness 
of risk. If people are not aware of threats and of how to stay safe online, they can put 
themselves, their children, their employers or even the nation at risk. 

2.18 In 2011, 77 per cent of UK households, 19 million in total, had internet access 
compared to 73 per cent in 2010.33 Twenty-one per cent of UK internet users, 
however, do not think they have sufficient skills to protect their personal data.34 
GCHQ estimates that 80 per cent of cyber attacks could be prevented through simple 
computer and network ‘hygiene’, such as using ‘strong’ passwords,35 but in 2012, the 
top three passwords were password, 123456 and 12345678.36 In 2011, the Science 
and Technology Committee reported that the most common form of cyber threat 
experienced by people was malicious software (malware) followed by online credit card 
fraud and social network profile hacking.37 

2.19 The increased use of social media and unsupervised child access to the internet 
is also leading to greater child exploitation according to the Child Exploitation and 
Online Protection Agency. It has reported receiving 1,300 reports of child exploitation 
on average each month, 263 per cent more than two years ago.38 

 
 
 
 
 
 

28  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

2.20  As more public and private sector services move online, the government has 
recognised the risk of a lack of public awareness and the need for behavioural change. 
It has already allocated £6 million to public education, including the public-private sector 
initiative ‘Get Safe Online’. The government launched this initiative in 2005 to provide advice 
to small and medium-sized businesses and the public on internet security ranging from 
prevention of email frauds to how to protect networks. The programme also sponsored 
the ‘Devil’s in Your Details’ campaign in spring 2012, run by the National Fraud Authority, 
which estimated that the campaign reached over four million individuals. Two-thirds of those 
surveyed said they would change their behaviour as a result. The government intends to 
roll-out from spring 2013, a significantly expanded programme of public awareness drives, 
building on the work of ‘Get Safe Online’ and the National Fraud Authority. 

2.21 Many of our interviewees highlighted the need for better targeting of public 
awareness campaigns to address the needs of different users, particularly those from 
lower socio-economic groups and those less competent with ICT. On behalf of the 
National Cyber Security Programme, the National Fraud Authority has carried out a 
market segmentation exercise to ensure that the next stage of public awareness work 
is properly grounded in an understanding of what works for different groups.

Tackling cybercrime and enforcing the law at home and abroad 

Enabling the police and encouraging the judiciary to make greater use of 
existing laws in the UK to deal with cybercrime and continuing to influence the 
international community for increased cooperation 

2.22 Criminals use the internet for a variety of crimes including fraud, identity theft, 
theft of financial information and corporate intellectual property and child exploitation. 
Many criminals view the internet as a profitable and low-risk channel for committing 
crime and because it is borderless they can base themselves in countries that are 
unlikely to prosecute them. 

2.23 In the UK, the government is working to ensure that law enforcement agencies and 
the judiciary use existing legislation to tackle cybercrime and protect the public. Such laws 
include Conspiracy to Defraud, the Data Protection Act 1998 and the Computer Misuse 
Act 1990. Courts are also able to monitor or restrict the computer use of cyber criminals. 

2.24 Figure 5 sets out other actions government is taking which includes implementing 
a new national cybercrime capability. This will bring together work of the e-crime unit in 
the Serious Organised Crime Agency and the Police Central e-crime Unit. The new unit 
will deal with the most serious national-level cybercrime and provide cybercrime support 
to other police forces. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  29

2.25 The internet is borderless so many cyber attacks on the UK come from overseas. 
The government is working to tackle this. For example, it is seeking to influence the 
international community through its involvement in cyber security conferences, including 
in London and Budapest in 2011 and 2012, and by providing cyber security advice 
to other countries. It is also working with other countries to cooperate more on law 
enforcement to catch cybercriminals and with internet governing bodies and internet 
service providers to improve internet security. However, we found that this work relies 
on a small number of highly skilled people. The government told us they were working 
to broaden and make efficient use of the available pool of talent, for example through 
apprenticeship schemes and the use of special police officers and reservists (Figure 5).

2.26 Most of our interviewees from government, academia and industry said that 
existing legislation was adequate to tackle cybercrime, although government needs to 
ensure that current legislation remains applicable in the face of increasing technology 
change and rapidly evolving cyber threats. The Draft Communications Bill divided 
opinion: some interviewees doubted it would have much impact on serious organised 
crime, while others said it was essential for fighting cyber criminals and protecting 
the UK. In December 2012, the Joint Committee on the Draft Communications Data 
Bill published its report and concluded that the draft bill needed to be ‘significantly 
amended’ to deliver only necessary data that law enforcement required.39 

2.27 The formation of a specialist cybercrime capability was welcomed by everyone. 
However, they also stressed the need for government to do more to increase public 
awareness of safe behaviour on the internet. The government has said it intends 
to roll-out a significantly expanded programme of public awareness drives from 
spring 2013. This will be delivered in partnership with the private sector. The aim is to 
increase cyber confidence and measurably improve the online safety of consumers 
and small and medium-sized enterprises. There were different views on the role of 
the internet service providers: some considered that they should be responsible for 
providing greater protection for their customers while others said it should be left for 
customers to decide.

Getting government to become more agile and joined-up 

Keeping pace with the evolving threats facing the UK and being able to respond 
in a fully joined-up and agile way – especially when resources are stretched and 
skills are in short supply 

2.28 Successfully implementing this strategy with such broad aims, requires many 
government organisations to work together effectively, many for the first time. 
Given the increasing threat from cyberspace, these organisations need to develop 
roles and relationships among themselves and with industry quickly.

30  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

2.29 Cyber threats are continuously evolving and the pace of technology change is 
rapid, so the government needs to be agile to adapt to this dynamic environment. 
This will mean a culture change for many departments and being more open, sharing 
information, working with others and communicating in different ways, including on 
related cross-government strategies such as those on digital, transparency and ICT.

2.30 Those we interviewed from academia and industry were positive about government 
efforts to work with industry on cyber security as it demonstrated a more joined-up 
approach. Many acknowledged the progress government had made during 2012 in 
working together across departmental and agency boundaries to coordinate activities 
and messages about cyber security. Nevertheless, it was emphasised that efforts to 
coordinate and strengthen leadership should continue to be a priority. For example, 
several people spoke about the need to for all government websites to provide links to 
the ‘Get Safe Online’ website as the single source of cyber advice and information. 

2.31 Interviewees also stated that the government needed to demonstrate the progress 
it was making in applying the cyber advice and guidance, it gives to business, to 
improving the protection of its own systems and data. This was considered necessary for 
government to maintain its leadership role and engagement with business and the public. 

Assessing value for money 

Having strong management and decision-making in place to demonstrate 
success and provide accountability across many different organisations 
delivering a broad range of activities

2.32 For the government to protect and promote the UK in cyberspace, it needs to be 
able to measure and demonstrate the success of its strategy. However, demonstrating 
the optimal use of resources on cyber security may not be easy in terms of measuring 
outcomes when the desired result is for nothing to happen. In addition, if cyber 
attacks do not occur, it does not necessarily follow that it was because of programme 
investment or activity. 

2.33 Although it is difficult, the government has demonstrated it is possible to 
measure value for money from similar activities to cyber security delivered by different 
organisations such as those related to counterterrorism. For example, in this case the 
government has stated that it intends to assess the progress of its counterterrorism 
strategy, known as CONTEST, against a set of performance indicators, complemented 
by evaluating specific programmes.40 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  31

2.34 OCSIA has identified the benefits of the National Cyber Security Strategy and 
has work under way to measure them. The approach taken is to develop a logical 
relationship between strategic objective and strategic benefit, activities under way, 
deliverables committed and measurable benefits. The strategic benefits build on 
government’s description of what success of the strategy will look like in 2015, as 
shown in paragraph 1.10. Measurable benefits are being designed to meet four criteria: 
accurate, reliable, credible and readily available from public or government sources, at 
low cost. A pragmatic process is also being agreed for benefit owners to forecast and 
report on benefits realisation through the established governance structure (Figure 3) so 
that the Cyber Delivery Management Group can focus on red or amber rated benefits.

2.35 To support government efforts in demonstrating its success, we set out our 
thinking on an approach assessing the value for money of the cyber security strategy 
in the Annex.

32  Annex  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Annex

Assessing the value for money of cyber security

This annex sets out roles and responsibilities in relation to measuring and 

1 
demonstrating value for money. We set out the key steps the government should 
consider in seeking to achieve this; discuss some of the particular challenges in 
assessing the value for money of the government’s cyber security strategy; and 
make some observations on government’s progress to date.

Value for money and the role of government and the NAO 

The HM Treasury publication, Managing Public Money, states “government 

2 
departments are responsible for efficiency, economy, effectiveness and prudence 
in the administration of public resources, to deliver value for money. This means 
departments ensuring that procurement, projects and processes are systematically 
evaluated and assessed to provide confidence about suitability, effectiveness, 
prudence, quality, good value and avoidance of error and other waste.”41 

3  Managing Public Money also explains that the C&AG’s role is to examine and 
report to Parliament on the delivery of value for money by government through assessing 
the economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which government deploys public money 
in selected areas of public business.42 We, in common with the Treasury, define good 
value for money as “the optimal use of resources to achieve the intended outcomes”.

Key steps in establishing value for money

4  We have set out the following key steps for establishing value for money. 
This draws on HM Treasury guidance on evaluation for Central Government in the 
Magenta Book43 and our own analytical framework for assessing value for money. It also 
draws on our experience of how similar cross-departmental strategies, for example on 
counterterrorism and on tackling problem drug use, have been, or are being, evaluated.

•	 Define what good looks like. The first step is to define what will constitute 

success, in terms of outputs and outcomes, and at which points in time. Although 
the definition of value for money above refers to the ‘optimal’ use of resources, 
in practice this will be interpreted differently in light of the particular circumstances. 

 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Annex  33

•	

Identify and collect the data and evidence required, including on resources. 
This requires clarity on the ‘logic chain’ of the intervention or strategy – how the 
inputs, activities and outputs will link together to deliver the desired outcomes. 
It is particularly important to agree a robust process for collecting reliable 
and timely information on expenditure, both for project management and 
accountability purposes. 

•	 Decide comparators and evaluate performance. The third key step is to 

consider the range of possible comparators or benchmarks against which success 
will be assessed, and establish the evaluation arrangements accordingly. The first 
step above will have established the ‘internal’ benchmark for assessing success. 
But progress and success can also be assessed relative to:

baseline performance before the intervention or strategy;

•	
•	 what is happening in other (similar) countries; and
•	

counterfactual scenarios that try to establish what would have happened 
without the intervention of strategy, perhaps by modelling.44 

Assessing the value for money of cyber security

5  We recognise that there are some challenges in establishing the value for money 
of cross-government strategies such as the cyber security strategy, where success 
depends on many disparate players and factors outside the control of the government. 

6  On the value side, there is the conceptual problem that success will be in terms 
of events not happening. If cyber attacks do not occur, it will be difficult to establish 
the extent to which that was due to the success of the strategy and its implementation 
rather than because of other factors. Assessing how different components of the 
strategy have contributed to the overall success of it is also a challenge. Moreover, even 
if the contribution of the strategy and its components can be identified, there is then the 
challenge of assigning a value to that outcome, to set against the cost of the strategy. 

7  On the cost side, the challenges are more practical than conceptual. 
First, the majority of spend is classified. Second, the non-classified expenditure is 
channelled through many different organisations for many different types of activities. 
Third, to the extent that existing financial and management reporting systems do not 
generate the required information on expenditure, effective reporting arrangements will 
have to be put in place. 

34  Annex  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Some observations

To establish the value for money of the cyber security strategy, there are 

8 
precedents and similar examples, which can be drawn upon, as well as government 
guidance such as the Magenta Book. We would highlight two instances, related to 
counterterrorism and preventing drug use:

•	 On counterterrorism, the government has stated that it intends to assess the 

progress of CONTEST, its counterterrorism strategy against a set of performance 
indicators, complemented by evaluating specific programmes.45 

•	 On the drugs strategy, the Committee of Public Accounts recommended that the 

Home Office should publish annual reports on progress against the strategy’s 
action plan, setting out expenditure on each measure, the outputs and outcomes 
delivered, and progress towards targets.46 Estimating the crime reduction benefits 
of drug treatment and recovery, was published by the National Treatment Agency in 
May 2012 to address the Committee’s recommendation.47 

9  Our own work on regulation in the UK also provides examples of measuring 
performance in a similar area. In our report on Ofcom we developed a ‘sphere-of-influence’ 
model to recognise that Ofcom has more direct control over some areas (for example, 
its own management and use of resources) than others (such as complaints from 
consumers).48 In the case of cyber security, government similarly has different levels of 
influence. For example it has more control over UK law enforcement than the activity of 
the private sector or other countries.

In terms of the three key steps outlined in paragraph 4, we have noted some 

10 
progress already made by the cyber strategy, and some areas, which require 
further attention.

•	 Define what good looks like. The government has articulated what success 

will look like at the end of the programme for the UK, as shown in paragraph 1.10. 
For example, it has defined high-level outcomes such as individuals knowing 
how to protect themselves from crime online; businesses operating securely in 
cyberspace; and the UK having a growing international market in cyber security 
products and services. The next step will be to identify potential comparative 
measures of good performance against which to judge whether these success 
factors have been met. As noted in paragraph 2.34, the government has this 
work in hand.

 
 
 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Annex  35

•	

Identify and collect the data and evidence required, including on 
resources. In its strategy, the government set out the activities to be delivered 
and committed to reporting progress against these activities on an annual basis. 
In December 2012, the government reported on progress against the objectives 
of the strategy including work completed and spend to date. It also reported 
on its forward plans for implementing the strategy. Given the cross-government 
nature of the strategy, it will also be important for the government to provide an 
assessment of the success of joined-up working.

•	 Decide comparators and evaluate performance. The government has 

articulated its ‘internal’ comparator, in terms of intended outcomes, outputs 
and activities. The next step is to consider other potential comparators and 
benchmarks, and the evaluation approach more generally. In the case of its 
counterterrorism strategy, the government aims to commission a small number 
of evaluations of key programmes, focusing on those which are judged most 
important to its mission on counterterrorism and which attract the greatest 
investment. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport has also developed 
an evaluation approach for the Olympics, which will integrate a number of 
separate evaluations of different aspects of the overall programme.49 

36  Appendix One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Appendix One

Our audit approach

This landscape report examined the government’s implementation of the UK cyber 

1 
security strategy, which it published in November 2011. This was an early review of the 
strategy as the government will not implement it in full until 2015. We examined:

•	

•	

•	

the rationale for the government developing an approach to cyber security given 
the current opportunities and threats;

the details of the strategy and the progress that the government is making in 
implementing the strategy; and

the challenges the government faces in delivering the strategy.

2  We have also set out in an annex guidance for government on measuring the value 
for money of its cyber security programme.

3  Given the sensitivities of this area, we did not set evaluative criteria for judging the 
success of the strategy as it is at an early stage. Our report is a landscape review and 
does not conclude on the value for money of the strategy.

4  Our audit approach is summarised in Figure 8. We describe our evidence base 
in Appendix Two. 

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix One  37

Figure 8
Our audit approach

The objective 
of government

How this will 
be achieved

Our review

Our evaluative 
criteria (or key 
questions if a 
landscape report)

Our evidence
(see Appendix Two 
for details)

The government’s strategic vision is “for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a vibrant, 
resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core values for liberty, fairness, transparency 
and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, national security and a strong society”.1 

Through implementing the National Cyber Security Programme, which comprises a broad range of activities from 
tackling e-crime through to promoting the UK as a safe place to do business. Six departments are implementing 
the programme.

This landscape review introduces the cyber security strategy published in 2011 by the Cabinet Office and identifies 
the challenges that the government faces in implementing its strategy.

What opportunities and threats 
does the internet present to 
the UK?

What is government’s approach 
to cyber security?

What challenges does 
government face in delivering its 
cyber security strategy?

We identified opportunities and 
threats by:
•	 monitoring media reports; 

and 

•	 conducting desk research.

We identified the challenges the 
government faces by:
•	 holding a round table of 

academics; and

•	 interviewing representatives 

from industry.

We examined the government’s 
approach by:
•	 reviewing key government 

documents; 

•	 interviewing senior staff 

in departments; 

•	 drawing on evidence from 

select committees; and

•	 reviewing other countries’ 
cyber security strategies.

NOTE
1 

 Cabinet Ofﬁ ce, UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world. November 2011.

38  Appendix Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Appendix Two

Our evidence base

1  Our review of the UK’s Cyber Security Strategy was completed following our 
analysis of evidence collected between July and October 2012.

2  Our audit approach is outlined in Appendix One.

To support our review we appointed Deloitte, one of our Strategic Partners, 

3 
to prepare an early draft of a report, which provided a basis for our interviews with 
government during fieldwork. We then developed this report based on the evidence 
we collected. 

4  We examined why cyber security is important to the UK.

•	 We monitored the media on a daily basis to keep up to date with cyber-related 

incidents such as attacks on organisations and individuals; and also 
announcements from government on the progress in delivering the strategy, 
including for example its launch of new initiatives to address cyber security.

•	 We conducted desk research of both UK and international reports from 

government and private sector on the digital economy, the growth of the internet 
and on cyber attacks, to identify the opportunities and threats the internet presents 
to the UK.

5  We examined the government’s approach to cyber security and in particular the details 
of the UK Cyber Security Strategy published in November 2011 and progress to date.

•	 We reviewed key government documents including the National UK Cyber 

Security Strategies in 2009 and 2011.

•	 We interviewed senior staff in eight departments and agencies with 

responsibilities for delivering elements of the strategy to understand their roles 
and responsibilities; details of the activities for which they were responsible; and 
the challenges they faced in delivering the activities.

•	 We drew on evidence from select committees, which had previously examined 
elements of the government’s approach to cyber security, including the Intelligence 
and Security Committee; the Defence Select Committee; and the Committee of 
Public Accounts.

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix Two  39

•	 We reviewed the cyber security strategies of other countries including USA, 
and Australia as well as the reviews from the Supreme Audit Institutions in each 
of those countries to identify lessons on delivering similar strategies.

6  We identified the challenges government faces in implementing the strategy:

•	 We held a round table of academics from eight universities, who are experts 

in cyber security. We discussed their response to the government’s strategy and 
asked them to identify the key challenges the government faced in delivering 
the strategy.

•	 We interviewed six representatives from industry including from the banking, 

defence and security, and ICT sectors. 

•	 We also drew on the evidence from our interviews with senior staff in eight 

departments and agencies.

40  Endnotes  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Boston Consulting Group, The $4.2 Trillion Opportunity, March 2012.

Boston Consulting Group, The Connected World, January 2012.

Cabinet Office. UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the 
UK in a digital world. November 2011.

See endnote 1.

Kaspersky Security Bulletin, Statistics 2011.

Lord Mayor’s annual defence and security lecture, The Olympics and Beyond, 
June 2012, available at: www.mi5.gov.uk

Foreign Secretary speech, Budapest Conference on Cyberspace, October 2012, 
available at: ukingermany.fco.gov.uk

Detica and the Cabinet Office, The Cost of Cyber Crime, February 2011.

Cambridge University, Measuring the Cost of Cyber Crime, June 2012.

10  Available at: www.number10.gov.uk/news/cyber-security-strategy

11  See endnote 3.

12  House of Lords European Union Committee, Protecting Europe against large‑scale 

cyber‑attacks, Fifth Report, 9 March 2010.

13  House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, Malware and 

cybercrime, Twelfth Report of Session 2010–2012, HC 1537, 2 February 2012.

14  House of Commons Defence Select Committee, Defence and Cyber‑Security, 

Sixth Report of Session 2012-13, HC 106, 9 January 2013.

15 

Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 2011‑12, July 2012.

16  HC Committee of Public Accounts, Information and Communications Technology 

in government, Fortieth report of Session 2010–2012, HC 1050, June 2011.

17  HC Committee of Public Accounts, Preparations for the roll‑out of smart meters, 

Sixty-third Report of Session 2010–2012, HC 1617, January 2012.

18  Cabinet Office, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security 

Strategy, December 2012.

The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Endnotes  41

19  HM Government, A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The National Security 

Strategy, Cm 7593, October 2010.

20  HM Government, Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: Strategic Defence 

and Security Review, Cm 7948, October 2010.

21  See endnote 3.

22  Cabinet Office, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security 

Strategy, December 2012, available at: www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk

23  Cabinet Office, The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on progress – 
December 2012. Forward Plans, available at: www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk

24  Booz Allen Hamilton and the Economist Intelligence Unit, The Cyber Power 

Index 2012, January 2012, available at: www.cyberhub.com

25  See endnote 9.

26  See endnote 8.

27  PricewaterhouseCoopers, Global Economic Crime Survey 2011 – UK report, 

November 2011.

28  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills Press Release, The UK’s most 

senior business leaders are getting new advice on how to better tackle the 
growing cyber threats to their companies, 5 September 2012, available at:  
news.bis.gov.uk

29  Cabinet Office, Government ICT Strategy, March 2011.

30  Speech by Minister Chloe Smith at the Cyber Security Summit on 6 November 2012.

31  Business Technology, Getting serious about security, 8 April 2012.

32  See endnote 15.

33  ONS, Internet Access – Households and Individuals, 2011, August 2011.

34  See endnote 33.

35  See endnote 15.

36  SplashData Press Release, Worst Passwords of 2012 – and How to Fix Them, 

23 October 2012, available at: www.splashdata.com

37  See endnote 13.

38  Ofcom, Children and Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report, 23 October 2012.

39  House of Lords, House of Commons, Joint Committee on the Draft 

Communications Data Bill, Draft Communications Data Bill, Session 2012-13, 
HL Paper 79, HC 479, December 2012.

42  Endnotes  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review

40  HM Government, CONTEST: The United Kingdom’s Strategy for Countering 

Terrorism, Cm 8123, July 2011.

41  HM Treasury, Managing Public Money, May 2012.

42  See endnote 41.

43  HM Treasury, Magenta Book: Guidance for Evaluation, April 2011.

44  The Magenta Book provides extensive guidance on different approaches to, 

and techniques of, evaluation.

45  See endnote 40.

46  HC Committee of Public Accounts, Tackling problem drug use, Thirtieth Report 

of Session 2009-10, HC 456, April 2010.

47  The National Treatment Agency for Substance Misuse, Estimating the crime 

reduction benefits of drug treatment and recovery, May 2012.

48  Comptroller and Auditor General, Ofcom – The effectiveness of converged 
regulation, Session 2010-11, HC 490, National Audit Office, November 2010.

49  The Department for Culture, Media and Sport, London 2012 meta‑evaluation,  

available at: www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/research_and_statistics/7605.aspx

Design and Production by 
NAO Communications 
DP Ref: 10057-001

This report has been printed on Evolution 
Digital Satin and contains material sourced 
from responsibly managed and sustainable 
forests certified in accordance with the FSC 
(Forest Stewardship Council).

The wood pulp is totally recyclable and 
acid-free. Our printers also have full ISO 14001 
environmental accreditation, which ensures 
that they have effective procedures in place to 
manage waste and practices that may affect 
the environment.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:

Online  
www.tsoshop.co.uk

Mail, telephone, fax and email 
TSO 
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN 
Telephone orders/general enquiries: 0870 600 5522 
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline  
Lo-Call 0845 7 023474 
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533 
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk 
Textphone: 0870 240 3701

The Houses of Parliament Shop 
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square,  
London SW1A 2JX 
Telephone orders/general enquiries: 020 7219 3890 
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866 
Email: shop@parliament.uk 
Internet: http://www.shop.parliament.uk

TSO@Blackwell and other accredited agents

£16.00

ISBN 978-0-10-298128-5

9 780102 981285

