A  Crazy  Cyber  World:  Construction  of  a  Composite  Index  for  Measuring  Child Online Protection (COP)   Ada S. Peter, PhD ada_peter@biari.brown.edu;  ada.peter@covenantuniversity.edu.ng;   Tolu Kayode-Adedeji kehinde.kayode-adedeji@covenantuniversity.edu.ng;  tolulopekayodeadedeji@gmail.com      Covenant University, Ota Ogun State Nigeria  Word count: 5070  Presented at the 66th International Communication Association Conference (ICA), Fukuoka Japan,  2016.
Abstract   On  17th  November  2010,  the  international  telecommunications  union  (ITU)  launched  a  new  Child Online Protection (COP) phase.
Years after setting up these guidelines, it is important to  develop a composite measure that provides an intuitive understanding of the gaps in child online  protection  system,  creates  cross  national  comparisons  for  advocacy  and  action.
These  areas  include:  nationally  recognized  child  online  protection  strategy/ legislations; Collaboration, cooperation and partnerships; information sharing/reporting  mechanism; and capacity building/institutional support.
Each sub index is  in turn measured by five categorical indicators.
The indicators are derived or adapted from key  institutions active in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child  online safety issues.
Introduction   The International Telecommunications Union (ITU), a lead facilitator for World Summit on the  Information Society (WSIS) action line C5 for assisting stakeholders in building confidence and  security  in  the  use  of  ICTs  at  national,  regional  and  international  levels,  and  a  team  of  contributing authors from institutions active in the information and communications technologies  (ICT)  sector  and  in  child  online  safety  issues  (including  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition  on  Internet  Safety  (CHIS),  Child Helpline  International  (CHI),  International Centre  for Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice  Research Institute (UNICRI), prepared action guidelines for key actors in child online protection  (ITU, 2009).
The  new phase aimed to encourage the development of national COP centers, awareness campaigns  and community forums to create a safe environment for young users of the Internet.
The launch  of COP initiative is not unlikely related to the addictive use of the internet even among children.
As at 2009, over 60 percent of children and  young people at least use chat rooms daily and 75  percent of these children online are willing to share personal information about themselves and  their family in exchange for goods and services.
Over half a decade after setting up such guidelines, it is pertinent to measure the performance of  member states based on their subscribed obligations to protect and realize the rights of children  online  as  laid  out  in  the  UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child,  adopted  by  UN  General  Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20  November  1989  and  the  World  Summit  on  Information  Society (WSIS).
However,  to  the  best  of  the  researchers’  knowledge,  there  is  no  existing  composite  indicator  exclusively measuring the performance of member states on the seven critical constructs of child  online protection.
Thus the objective of this study is to construct a composite measure which provides an intuitive  understanding of the gaps in child online protection system, creates cross national comparisons  for  advocacy  and  action  and  explores,  clarifies  and  summarizes  in  a  simple  manner,  the  complexities and multi-dimensional issues surrounding the child online protection.
More  so,  converting  child  online  protection  from  being  largely  a  catchphrase  to  a  measurable  term,  can  spur  fruitful  process  of  dialogue  over  policy  development  and  policy  implementation.
In  the  long-term,  the  commitment  to  regularly  produce  and  update  the  quantitative  ratings  of  various  countries  based  on  child  online  protection  may  facilitate  communication with ordinary citizens including stakeholders in countries with both high and low  internet penetration.
Conceptual Framework   The  adoption  of  the  Rio  de  Janeiro  Declaration/Call  for  Action  to  Prevent  and  Stop  Sexual  Exploitation of Children and  Adolescents at the 3rd World  Congress  Sexual  Exploitation of Children and  Adolescents,  in  November,  2008  is  partly  an  evidence  of  the  global  recognition  of  the  critical  importance  of  child  online  protection  in  the  era  of  massively- available  broadband  Internet.
The  Rio  de  Janeiro  Declaration  and  other  considerable  body  of  international  laws  and  instruments  including  the  UN  convention  on  the  rights  of  the  child,  mandates global action to protect children both generally, and also specifically in relation to the  internet.
against   the   While  specific  approaches  to  child  protection  vary  by  jurisdiction,  efforts  to  date  to  protect  children  online  have  focused  on  four  key  actors  namely  Government/Policymakers,  Industry,  Parents/Guardians/ Educators and Children.
For instance, specific guidelines were prepared for  these  four  key  actors  by  the  International  Telecommunications  Union  (ITU)  and  a  team  of  contributing  authors  from  leading  institutions  active  in  the  information  and  communications  technologies  (ICT)  sector  and  in  child  online  safety  issues  such  as  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition on Internet Safety (CHIS), Child Helpline International (CHI), International Centre for  Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice Research Institute (UNICRI).
Government  actors  refers  to  national  governments and policy making institution that are member states with subscribed obligations to  protect and realize the rights of children as laid out in the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child, adopted by UN General Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20  November  1989  and  the  World  Summit  on  Information  Society  (WSIS).
The  industry  captures  companies  that  are  developing or providing new technology products and services.
Parents, guardians and educators  captures  all  individuals  in  these  category  including  organizations  such  as  schools,  public  libraries, health centers, shopping malls and major retail centers since they all provide accessible  venues for the presentation of safety information.
The guidelines developed for these key actors address issues facing all persons under the age of  18 in all parts of the world since the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child defines a child as  being any person under the age of 18.
The UN convention on the rights of the child also applies  to  every  child  without  discrimination,  whatever  their  ethnicity,  gender,  religion,  language,  abilities or any other status and places key importance on parents, caregivers, governments and  service providers   Hence  the  COPI  framework  is  based  the  UNHR  Optional  Protocol  to  the  Conventions  of  the  Rights  of  the  Child,  the  Child  Pact  Coalition  for  Child  Protection,  the  ITU  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  Guide  Framework/Country  Profiles  and    the  Child  Online  Protection  (COP) guideline for key actors prepared by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)  and institutions active in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in  child  online  safety  issues  such  as  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition  on  Internet  Safety  (CHIS),   Child  Helpline  International  (CHI),  International  Centre  for  Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice  Research  Institute  (UNICRI).
These critical pillars include  declaration of a national child online protection strategy and policies, availability of information  sharing  and  reporting  mechanism  between  actors,  availability  of  technical  tools  for  children  to  stay safer, public education/awareness and capacity building on child abusive materials.
National  strategy  for  COP:  The  national  child  online  protection  strategy  describes  the  the  possession, production and distribution of  child abuse materials (CAM) in each of the countries  understudy  and  outlines  the necessary steps, programs, initiatives and  other strategic plans  that  must  be  implemented  to  address  the  the  demand  for  CAM.
Ideally,  it  captures  outlawing  “grooming”  or  other  forms  of  remote  enticement  of  legal  minors  into  inappropriate  sexual  contact  or  sexual  activity;  outlawing  the  possession,  production  and  distribution  of  CAM,  irrespective  of  the  intent  to  distribute;  taking  additional  steps to  disrupt  or  reduce  the  traffic  in  CAM,  for  example  by  establishing  a  national  hotline  and  by  deploying  measures  which  will  block access to web sites and Usenet Newsgroups known to contain or advertise the availability  of CAM.
Information sharing and reporting mechanism   Information  sharing  enables  the  exchange  of  actionable  intelligence/information  between  government and all key actors.
Individual nations are expected to employ cross-sector and cross-  stakeholder  coordination  mechanisms  to  address  critical  interdependencies,  including  incident  situational awareness and cross- sector and cross-stakeholder incident management.
Ideally each  nation should have a strong in rapid assistance mechanisms such as a  “Notice and Takedown”  regime which allows ISPs, ESPs, domain registrars and web hosts to close an offending site or  cancel an email account upon request    Legislations, regulations and policies   This concept captures the existence of specific legislations that criminalize CAM which includes  offences  specific  to  the  use  of  technology  and  the  Internet  as  it  relates  to  CAM.
Ideally  the  legislations  should  also  make  provisions  in  the  law  for  a  greater  commitment  of  resources  in  order to enforce these specific laws and for  training  law  enforcement officials who will invariably be challenged to keep up with the use of technology by  offenders.
judicial,  prosecutorial  and   for   Collaborations,  cooperation,  and  partnerships:  This  refers  to  officially  recognized  local  and  international public and private sector partnerships; inter alia, information exchange, creation of  knowledge, sharing of best practices, assistance in developing multi-stakeholder  and provisions  of bilateral mutual legal assistance treaties or multilateral conventions.
Technical Measures and Standards: This captures access to technical tools for children to stay  safer E.g.
child safety soft wares, age verification, filtering programs, parental control tools, age- differentiated  experiences  with  password-protected  content,  block/allow  lists,  purchase/time  controls, opt-out functions, filtering and moderating.
Public education and Awareness: this pillar captures evidence of established Public Education  and  Awareness  Activities  by  government  and  industry,  existence  and  publication  of  codes  of  good  practice  for  all  relevant  stakeholders,  evidence  of  customer  education  on  how  to  manage  concerns relating to internet.
Method of computation and structure of the Child Online Protection Index  (COPI)   In  accordance  with  previous  work  in  the  field  of  child  online  protection,  the  Child  Online  Protection  Index  (COPI)  is  essentially  a  composite  indicator,  aggregating  39  indicators  within  seven  sub-indexes  for  an  objective  assessment  of  where  each  country  stands  in  child  online  protection across seven critical priority areas.
To  construct  the  sub-index,  the  study  simply  adapts  elements  that  appear  at  least  in  two  of  all  four  ITU  COP  initiatives  and  guidelines  for  key  actors  and  in  at  least  two  of  the  following  frameworks:  ITU’s  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  Guide  Framework/Country  Profiles,  the  UNHR Optional Protocol to the Conventions of the Rights of the Child the Child Pact Coalition  for Child Protection, the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children (ICMEC) annual  reports  on  “Child  Pornography:  Model  Legislation  &  Global  Review,  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition on Internet Safety (CHIS), Child Helpline International (CHI), International Centre for  Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice Research Institute (UNICRI).
Accordingly,  COPI  implements  an  objective  assessment  of  where  each  country  stands  in  child  online  protection  across  four  critical  priority  actors  and  seven  pillars.
The  actors  include  government/ policy makers, industry, parents/guardian/ educators and children while the pillars  include  nationally  recognized  child  online  protection  strategy;  legislations,  policies  and  regulations;  collaboration,  cooperation  and  partnerships;  technical  measures;  information   sharing/reporting  mechanism;  public  education  and  awareness;  capacity  building/  institutional  support,.
These  seven  pillars  are  reflected  in  the  COPI  structure  which  comprises  seven  sub- indexes measured by 39 categorical indicators.
What is the nature of legislative provisions for COP in each country  c.  What technical measures and standards exist in the country?
d.  Has  the  country  ratified  or  acceded  to  cooperation,  collaborations,  international  treaties   and or multilateral conventions to combat child abusive materials (CAM)?
e.  Is  there  an  information  sharing  and  reporting  mechanisms  between  the  government  and   industry?
Existence of a national strategy for child online protection the sub-index is measured   with the following  items:   1.
Have commercial-sector entities affected by and responsible   for implementation of the plan been identified?
Does  the  COP  strategy  include  law  enforcement  crime  prevention  strategies,  school- based and social programs, and awareness strategies especially on the criminality of the  production, possession or distribution of CAM?
Does the COP strategy include long term support for victims?
Is there an officially  recognized agency  responsible for implementing the national  COP   strategy, roadmap and policy?
Are  there  officially  and  nationally  recognized24  hours/7  days  a  week)  national  hotlines   and reporting requirements?
Is there a well-established mutatis mutandi (body of laws which makes it clear that any  and  every  crime  that  can  be  committed  against  a  child  in  the  real  world  can  also  be  committed on the Internet or on any other electronic network?
Are  there  evidences  of  existing  collaborations  between  government,  industry  and  educators  to  build  parents’  abilities  to  support  and  speak  with  their  children  about  being responsible digital citizens and ICT users?
d.  Information sharing and reporting mechanisms: The following questions explore the   sub-index in greater detail.
Are  there  mechanisms  (reporting  schema,  technology,  etc.)
for  cross-sector  incident-   information sharing, both operational (near-real-time) and forensic (post-facto)?
Is there established and widely promoted means for reporting illegal content found on the   Internet e.g.
e.  Technical  measures  and  standards:  This  sub-index  is  explored  in  greater  detail  by   addressing the following  questions:   1.
An  existing  access  to  technical  tools  for  children  to  stay  safer?
child  safety  soft  wares,  age  verification,  filtering  programs,  parental  control  tools,  age-differentiated  experiences  with  password-protected  content,  block/allow  lists,  purchase/time  controls,  opt-out functions, filtering and moderating?
Are there articulate findings on child rights impacts on different age groups as a result of  company  operations  and  the  design,  development  and  introduction  of  products  and  services – as well as opportunities to support children’s rights online?
Have codes of good practice for all relevant stakeholders been formulated and published   via various forms of media?
Are  existing  public  education  efforts  educating  customers  on  how  to  manage  concerns  relating to  Internet usage – including spam, data theft and inappropriate contact such as  bullying and grooming?
Are  the  public  education  mechanisms  educating  parents  on  how  to  become  involved  in  their  children’s  ICT  activities,  particularly  those  of  younger  children,  for  example,  providing  parents  with  the  ability  to  review  children’s  privacy  settings  and  with  information on age verification?
Are  there  provisions  of  local  materials  for  use  in  schools  and  homes  to  educate  and  enhance children’s use of information and communication technologies and help children  develop critical thinking that enables them to behave safely and responsibly when using  ICT services?
Is  there  an  officially  recognized  national  or  sector-specific  research  and  development   (R&D)?
Is there a well-established process for training of law enforcement officials investigating   Internet for CAM?
Is  there  access  to  appropriate  forensic  facilities  to  enable  law  enforcement  officials  to   extract and interpret relevant digital data?
Are there officially recognized national or sector-specific university/ professional training  programs/degree  in  child  online  protection/information  security  or  similar  program  for  online  child  protection  standards,  best  practices  and  guidelines  to  secure  technical  standards?
Is  there  an  annual  child  online  protection  report,  threat  assessment  of  security  and   protection defying CAM?
That is each sub-index was measured through another 4-8 sets questions (also referred  to  as  items  or  indicators).
For  each  of  the  items  measuring  a  sub-  index,  the  highest  possible  score is the division of 1 by the total number items measuring that sub-index.
For instance, there  are 8 items measuring the legislation sub index, thus the highest possible score for each indicator  measuring  legislation  is  calculated  as  1÷8  (1  divided  by  8)  =  0.125.
Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  sum  of  items  measuring  each  sub-index,  such  as  legislation,  the  highest  possible  score  is  1  and  the  lowest  possible  score  is  zero  (zero  at  each  sub-index  level  indicates insignificant performance for the country).
Summarily,  all  the  indicators  shown  in  table  1  are  measured  on  a  scale  of  0  -  1,  were  0  corresponds to non-existence (or non- availability) and 1 to best possible outcome.
It is important however to state that another phase of this study accounts for series of diagnostic  tests  to  demonstrate  the  robustness  of  the  new  measure  and  assess  the  degree  of  construct  validity.
Sub index     Declaration  of a  national strategy  for child online   protection   Indicators   Weights   Few Data Sources   Primary sources:   field survey, content  analysis of selected   internet-related  national and    company policies and   internet related   regulatory   organizations   Secondary sources:  National data sets on   child online   protection; (ITU)   National Cybersecurity   Strategy Guide   Framework/Country   Profiles;    The International   Centre for Missing &   Exploited Children  (ICMEC) annual  reports on “Child   Pornography: Model  Legislation & Global   Review    ?
Existence of an officially  recognized and operational  national child online safety  strategy that captures multi- stakeholders interest and   identifies the need to commit   limited resources (e.g., political  will, money, time, and people)  Identification of  commercial- sector entities affected by and  responsible for implementation   ?
Evidence that COP strategy  includes law enforcement  crime prevention strategies,   school-based and social  programs, and awareness  strategies especially on the   criminality of the production,  possession or distribution of   CAM   ?
Evidence that the strategy   includes long term support for   victims   ?
Evidence of an officially and   nationally recognized24   hours/7 days a week) national   hotlines and reporting   requirements       ?
An officially recognized  agency responsible for   implementing the national COP   strategy, roadmap and policy        1/8                              1/8                    1/8        1/8            1/8              1/8                  1/8        2.
Collaborations,  cooperation, and   partnerships      Primary sources:   field survey, content  analysis of selected   internet related   national/regulatory  and company policies   Secondary sources:   National   /international data  sets on child online  protection, (ITU)   National Cybersecurity   Strategy Guide   Framework/Country   Profiles;  The   International Centre   for Missing &   Exploited Children  (ICMEC) annual  reports on “Child   Pornography: Model  Legislation & Global   Review        1/8              1/8      1/8                 1/8        1/8              1/8                    1/8      ?
An existing well-established  mutatis mutandi (body of laws  which makes it clear that any  and every crime that can be  committed against a child in   the real world can also be   committed on the Internet or on   any other electronic network.
Evidences of existing  collaborations between                1/4          1/4      Primary sources:   field survey, content  analysis of selected   internet related   company policies and   internet related   regulatory   organizations   Secondary sources:   National   /international data  sets on child online  protection; (ITU)      4.
Information  sharing and  enforcement  mechanism     5.
Technical   Measures and   Standards   National Cybersecurity   Strategy Guide   Framework/Country   Profiles   Primary sources:   field survey, content  analysis of selected   internet related   company policies and   internet related   regulatory   organizations   Secondary sources:  National data sets on   child online  protection,       government, industry and  educators to build parents’   abilities to support and speak  with their children about being  responsible digital citizens and   ICT users    ?
Existence of mechanisms   (reporting schema, technology,  etc.)
for cross-sector incident-   information sharing, both  operational (near-real-time)   and forensic (post-facto)      ?
An evidence of an established  and widely promoted means for  reporting illegal content found  on the Internet e.g.
An existing access to technical  tools for children to stay safer?
child safety soft wares, age  verification, filtering programs,   parental control tools, age-  differentiated experiences with   password-protected content,   block/allow lists, purchase/time   controls, opt-out functions,  filtering and moderating.
Existing articulate findings on   1/5   child rights impacts on   different age groups as a result  of company operations and the   design, development and   introduction of products and   services – as well as   opportunities to support                  6.
Evidences of established Public   1/6    Education and Awareness   Activities by government and   industry   ?
Existence and publication of  codes of good practice for all   relevant stakeholders      ?
Evidence of customer  education on how to manage  concerns relating to Internet  usage – including spam, data  theft and inappropriate contact  such as bullying and grooming   –    .
Evidence of parent public   education on how to become   involved in their children’s ICT  activities, particularly those of  younger children, for example,   providing parents with the  ability to review children’s  privacy settings and with   information on age verification.
Existing provision of local            1/6          1/6          1/6                  1/6                      1/6   Primary sources:   field survey, content  analysis of selected   internet related   company policies and   internet related   regulatory   organizations   Secondary sources:  national data sets on   child online  protection,    materials for use in schools and  homes to educate and enhance  children’s use of information  and communication  technologies and help children  develop critical thinking that  enables them to behave safely  and responsibly when using  ICT services      ?
An officially recognized  national or sector-specific child  online protection research and   development (R&D)  programs/projects at   universities with a dedicated   percentage of GDP or  Government Project.
An officially recognized  national or sector-specific   university/ professional   training programs/degree child  online standards, best practices   and guidelines to secure   technical standards         1/5                        1/5                  ?
Evidence of a well-established   1/5   process for training of law   enforcement officials   investigating Internet for   CAM?
Existing access to appropriate  forensic facilities to enable law  enforcement officials to extract   and interpret relevant digital   data   ?
Evidence of an annual child   online protection report, threat   assessment of security and  protection defying CAM             1/5                               1/5                      7.
Capacity  Building               Conclusion   It  suffices  to  state  that  COPI  only  seeks  to  measure  the  existence  of  each  indicator  in  each  country  and  thus  ranking  should  be  based  on  existence  not  the  quality  or  effectiveness  of  such  indicators to protecting children online in  any nation.
More so, the seven pillars outlined above do not constitute the only means of dividing the broad  construct of child online protection, but one that is conceptually coherent and in accordance with  previous work in the field      References   International  Telecommunication  Union.
The  ICT  Development  Index.
Measuring  the  https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-  society.
information  D/Statistics/Documents/publications/mis2009/MIS2009_w5.pdf   Retrieved   from   United Nations Human Right (2000) UNHR Optional Protocol to the conventions of the rights of  the child.
Retrieved from www.ohchr.org/EN/professionalinterest/Pages/OPACCRC.aspx   International  Telecommunication  Union.
Retrieved  from   www.itu.int/en/cop/Pages/defaault.aspx   Wamala,  F.   (2011)   ITU  National  Cyber   security   strategy  guide.
International    Telecommunication  D/cyb/cybersecurity/docs/ITUNationalCybersecuritystrategyGuide.pdf   Retrieved   Union.
from   www.itu.int/ITU-  International  Telecommunication  Union  (2010).
Retrieved  from  www.itu.int/dms-pub/itu-d/opb/ind/D-IND-COP.01-11- 2010-PDF-E.pdf   International  Telecommunication  Union  (2009)  Guidelines  for  Policy  Makers  on  Child  Online  https://www.itu.int/en/cop/Documents/guidelines-  Retrieved   from   Protection.
policy%20makers-e.pdf   International  Telecommunication  Union  (2014)  Guidelines  for  Industry  on  Child  Online  from   Protection.
https://www.itu.int/en/cop/Documents/bD_Broch_INDUSTRY_0909.pdf   Retrieved   Dasuki,  M.,   S.,   (2014)  National   Cybersecurity   Policy.
Retrieved   from    https://cert.gov.ng/images/uploads/NATIONAL_CYBESECURITY_POLICY.pdf   International  Telecommunication  Union.
Retrieved from https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/material/Telecom09_flyer.pdf                                 GUIDELINES FOR INDUSTRY ON CHILD ONLINE PROTECTION    Respecting and Supporting Children’s Rights       Input Requested on the Draft Guidelines      Initiative Overview     The ITU Child Online Protection (COP) (http://www.itu.int/osg/csd/cybersecurity/gca/cop/) is a  multi-stakeholder initiative to promote awareness of the importance of child safety in the online  world and to develop practical tools to assist governments, industry and educators in this domain.
As part of the initiative, a set of Child Online Protection Guidelines has been prepared by ITU in  collaboration with the COP partners for the following stakeholder groups: Children, Parents,  Guardians and Educators, Industry, Policy Makers.
The current “Guidelines for Industry on Child  Online Protection (COP)” were introduced four years ago and the need for an updated and  broader set of guidelines has been evident for some time due to substantial advances in  technology, convergence and regulation.
The review process to update the current COP Guidelines  for Industry was initiated in early 2013 by the COP members together with UNICEF and ITU taking  the lead in editing, co-ordination and consultation.
The draft guidelines have been developed through an initial consultation of the ITU COP members  and it was agreed that a broader consultation is needed to gain more feedback especially on the  sub-sector elements of the guidelines, and to gain support for the document.
The public online consultation process is  hosted via the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre website http://www.business- humanrights.org and in addition to the online consultation, the draft Guidelines will be presented  and are open for a public consultation at the IGF 2013 (Internet Governance Forum) in Bali,  Indonesia in October and at the ITU Telecom World 2013 in Bangkok, Thailand in November 2013.
Instructions for feedback     Please find following the Draft Guidelines for Industry on Child Online Protection and a set of  questions at the end to facilitate your input and feedback on the draft.
The partner organizations  are looking forward to receiving your responses by 20 December 2013.
This feedback will provide input into the  development of the final Guidelines for Industry on Child Online Protection, which will be released  in January 2014.
2   GUIDELINES FOR INDUSTRY ON CHILD   ONLINE PROTECTION    The following organizations have contributed to the drafting of these Guidelines:                                                                                                                                         3           Glossary of terminology    Internet and associated technologies: Depending on the context in this document,  the term “Internet and  associated technologies” refers to a broad range of companies that not only provide Internet services but  develop products or services that make use of Internet platforms.
Internet Service Providers  (ISPs) aside from continuing to offer access to cyberspace will also often provide facilities to allow for the  publication of user generated content.
More and more companies are offering their customers a number of  options to take advantage of an array of devices, software and services.
Therefore, depending on the  context, the following terms are often used interchangeably: “Internet and associated technologies”, “ICT  and online industries”, “Internet-based services” to encompass the rich and complex tapestry that is the  modern internet.
These guidelines will also have some relevance to sectors which straddle or are outside of  a number of the traditional ICT industries, in particular media and other companies which provide online  content.
Child rights impacts: Companies can impact the rights of children, either positively or negatively, through  the ways in which they operate their facilities; develop, deliver and market their products; provide their  services; apply leverage through business relationships with key stakeholders and partners; and exert their  influence on economic and social development.
Under the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human  Rights, companies have a responsibility to take adequate measures to identify, prevent, mitigate, and  where appropriate, remediate their potential or actual negative impacts on human rights.
In  addition, the Principles encourage companies to support children’s rights by taking voluntary actions that  seek to advance children’s rights through core business operations, products and services, strategic social  investments, advocacy, public policy engagement and working in partnership and other collective action.
While the term “child pornography” is used commonly in legislation and international conventions, this  term is not used in the guidelines because “pornography” is commonly understood to be associated with  depictions of sexual activity between consenting adults.
2 Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989,http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx       4         Purpose and Background     Purpose    The Guidelines for Industry on Child Online Protection have been prepared in the context of the Child  Online Protection (COP) Initiative in order to establish the foundations for safer and more secure Internet- based services and associated technologies not only for today’s children but also for future generations.
These guidelines apply to the safety of children when using Information and Communication Technologies  (ICTs).
They provide advice on how industry can work to help ensure children’s safety when using the  Internet or any of the many associated technologies or devices which can connect to it or use it, including  mobile phones and games consoles.
The purpose of this document is to:     -   -   -   -   Establish a common reference point and guidance to the ICT and online industries and relevant  stakeholders.
Suggest common principles that, though requiring different models of implementation for different  industry players, could potentially form the basis of national or regional pan-industry  commitments.
This document is divided into two parts: Part 1 outlines broad guidelines for industry on the protection of  children’s safety when using ICTs, and also provides advice on the role that technology can play in positively  promoting responsible digital citizenship among children and young people.
Part 2 offers sector specific  checklists for ICT industry that recommend actions to respect and support children’s rights for the following  sectors:      Internet access in public spaces  ISPs   ?
Content providers, online retailers and apps developers  ?
Hardware manufacturers        Background    Over the past twenty years, new information and communication technologies (ICTs) have profoundly  changed the ways in which today’s young people interact with and participate in the world around them.
The proliferation of Internet access points, mobile technology and the growing array of Internet-enabled  devices combined with the immense resources to be found in cyberspace provide children and young  people with unprecedented opportunities to learn, share and communicate.
The benefits of ICTs, among other things, include broader access to social services, educational resources  and health information.
ICTs also help to protect children from violence, exploitation and abuse since  children and families use the Internet and mobile phones to seek information and assistance, and to report  violence.
Increasingly ICTs are also used to gather and transmit data by child protection service providers,     5      facilitating for example birth registration, case management, family tracing, data collection and mapping of  violence.
Moreover, the Internet has increased access to information in all corners of the globe, offering  young people the ability to research virtually any subject of interest, access worldwide media, pursue  vocational prospects, and harness ideas for the future.
Yet despite the profound benefits of the Internet, children and young people nonetheless can face a  number of risks through using ICTs.
Children can be exposed to inappropriate content for their age or to  inappropriate contact, including from potential perpetrators of sexual abuse.
They can suffer reputational  damage associated with publishing sensitive personal information either online or through ‘sexting’, having  failed to fully comprehend the implications for their long-term ‘digital footprints’.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which is the most widely ratified international human  rights treaty,3 protects children from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse, including sexual  exploitation and abuse.
It also establishes that all children have a right to education, leisure, play and  culture; the right to obtain appropriate information and to express their views in matters that affect them  as well as to freedom of thought and expression, privacy and non-discrimination..
While Governments have  the primary responsibility to ensure that children’s rights are met, other stakeholders such as parents and  other caretakers, teachers, community leaders, civil society actors and the private sector including the ICT  industry, all have a responsibility in fulfilling children’s rights.
Finding an appropriate balance between ensuring that all children have access to ICTs and at the same time  as ensuring that they are protected from violence, abuse and exploitation while using ICTs, can be  challenging.
There is growing consensus that industry should not only tackle problems in relation to  children’s use of ICTs but should proactively promote digital citizenship among children, and help to  facilitate children’s positive use of ICTs.
Traditional distinctions between different parts of the  telecommunications and mobile phone industries, and between Internet companies and broadcasters are  fast breaking down or becoming irrelevant.
Co-operation and  partnership are the keys to establishing the foundations for safer and more secure use of the Internet and  associated technologies not only for today’s children but also for future generations.
Industry can act  in five key areas: 1) Integrate child rights considerations into all appropriate corporate policies and  management processes; 2) Develop processes for handling child sexual abuse content; 3) Develop safer and  age appropriate online environments; 4) Educate children, parents, and teachers about children’s safety  and responsible use of ICTs ; 5) Promote digital technology as a mode to further positive civic engagement.
1)  Integrate child rights considerations into all appropriate corporate policies and management   processes   Integrating children’s rights considerations requires that companies take adequate measures to identify,  prevent, mitigate, and where appropriate, remediate potential and actual risks to infringing on children’s  rights.
The Principles articulate the  difference between companies’ responsibility to respect children’s rights—the minimum required of  business to avoid causing harm to children; and support them—for example by taking voluntary actions  that seek to advance the realization of children’s rights.
Rather than taking a compliance-based, or do-no- harm approach towards children’s rights and ICT safety, companies that are providing Internet-based  services and associated technologies to children have the opportunity to advance children’s development  and well-being in ways that facilitate their rights, not least their rights to access information, freedom of  expression, participation, education and culture.
They can also carry  out due diligence with respect to child rights impacts by including such considerations into human rights,  social or product-level assessments, then integrating and acting upon the findings, tracking responses and  communicating how impacts are addressed.
Finally, where businesses have identified that they have  caused or contributed to adverse impact, then they should provide for or cooperate in their remediation  through internal processes or by working with appropriate external agencies, or both.
2)  Develop processes for handling child sexual abuse content    The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution  and child pornography defines child abuse material as any representation, by whatever means, of a child  engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activities or any representation of the sexual parts of a child for  primarily sexual purposes.
Of all child sexual abuse content analysed by the Internet Watch Foundation in  2012, 81 per cent of child victims appear to be 10 years of age or under and 53 per cent of the images  depicted sexual activity between adults and children including rape and sexual torture.
4  These disturbing  facts underscore the importance of collaborative action amongst industry, government and law  enforcement to combat child sexual abuse content.
Mechanisms are required in each country to enable the reporting of child abuse content by members of the  public.
Industry, law enforcement and governments should work closely with each other to ensure that the  necessary legal framework is in place and that reporting, investigative and content removal processes work  as efficiently as possible.
Responsible companies are taking a number of additional steps to help prevent their networks and services  from being misused to disseminate child sexual abuse content.
These may include placing additional  language in Terms and Conditions or Codes of Conduct that explicitly forbid child sexual abuse content,  developing robust Notice and Take Down processes5, deploying hashing technologies to automatically  locate images of child sexual abuse content that is already known to law enforcement/hotlines  and  working with and supporting national hotlines.
Additionally, Internet companies should provide  mechanisms for customers to report abuse and invest in innovation for improved detection.
A growing  number of ISPs are also now blocking access to URLs confirmed by an appropriate authority as containing  child sexual abuse content if the material is hosted in another country where processes are not in place to  ensure it will be deleted rapidly.
3)  Develop a safer and age appropriate  online environment   Very few things in life can be considered absolutely safe and risk-free all of the time.
Even in cities where  the movement of traffic is highly regulated and closely controlled accidents still happen.
The risks that children face can be categorized into three areas that include:    ?
Children and adults too, may use the Internet to harass or exploit other  people.
Both adults and young people can use the Internet to seek out children or  other young people who are vulnerable.
Frequently their goal is to convince them that they have a  meaningful relationship but the underlying purpose is to manipulate them into performing sexual  or other abusive acts either in real life following a meeting, or online using a web cam or some  other recording device.
Online safety is a community challenge, and industry, governments and others should work together to  establish safety principles.
Industry can offer an array of technical approaches, tools and services for  parents and children.
These might include offering tools for parents and caregivers to place restrictions on  their child’s consumption of content and services, or to restrict the people with whom their children might  have contact or the times at which they may go online.
If the report comes from a member of the public, the information  is passed on to law enforcement or national hotline, as appropriate, for confirmation of whether the content is illegal or to take any  further legal action.
8      Online content and service providers can develop methods to describe the nature of content or services  they are providing and the intended target age-range.
Wherever possible these should be aligned with the  pre-existing relevant national standards or advice made available by the appropriate classification bodies.
via message boards, chat rooms, and social networking services) this becomes a lot more  difficult.
When companies specifically target children and young people and when services are  overwhelmingly aimed at younger audiences, then the expectations in terms of content and security will be  that much higher.
Companies  can commit to providing transparent, clear and age appropriate information about the costs of products or  services which children might buy and be clear about what data is being collected and how it will be used.
Moreover, online advertisers are encouraged to adopt the highest privacy standards when it comes to  collecting, processing and storing data of, from or about children.
Furthermore, reporting needs to be followed up appropriately,  with information about the status of the report being provided in a timely way.
There should be a clear  time frame for responses, information about the decision made about the reporting and a possibility to  follow up should the response not satisfy the user.
NOTE: Companies can vary the implementation of the  above follow-up mechanisms on a case-by-case basis.
4)  Educate children, parents, and teachers about children’s safety and responsible use of ICTs   Technical measures such as filtering software can play an important part in ensuring that children are  protected from the potential risks they face online, but these are only one part of the equation.
These will help empower and inform children, parents,  other caregivers and educators.
Industry, parents, schools and children and young people themselves all have a key part to play.
Companies do invest in education programs designed to enable users to make informed decisions about  the content and services they use.
Efforts also include assisting parents, caregivers and teachers to guide  young children and adolescents towards safer, more responsible and appropriate online and mobile phone  experiences.
This includes signposting age-sensitive content, but also ensuring clarity of communication  with regard, for example, to pricing of content, subscription terms and how to cancel subscriptions.
It is also important to provide information directly to children on safer use of ICTs and encouraging positive  and responsible behaviours in their digital lives.
Beyond raising awareness about safety, companies can  help facilitate positive experiences by developing content for children about being respectful, kind, and  open minded when using ICTs and keeping an eye out for friends.
They can provide information about  actions to take if they have negative experiences such as online bullying or grooming, making it easier to  report such incidents and providing a function to opt out of receiving anonymous messages.
Parents sometimes have less understanding and knowledge of the Internet and mobile devices than  children themselves.
Moreover, the convergence of mobile phones and Internet services makes parental  oversight much more difficult.
Industry can work in collaboration with government and educators to  strengthen parents’ abilities to support their children to behave as responsible digital citizens.
Information can be transmitted online and offline through multiple media channels - some parents     9      do not use Internet services—so collaborating with school districts to provide curricula for online safety  and responsible use of ICTs for children and educational materials for parents is important.
Examples  include explaining the types of services and the options available to apply monitoring activities, actions to  take if a child is experiencing  online bullying or grooming, how to avoid spam, and manage privacy settings.
5) Promote digital technology as a mode to further positive civic engagement     Companies can also go beyond a “do-no-harm” approach to proactively support the rights of children to  express their opinions and access appropriate information through their use of the Internet and associated  technologies.
Companies can emphasize the Internet’s capacity to facilitate the positive engagement of  children and young people in broader civic life and in contributing towards finding solutions to the many  challenges facing us all in the modern world.
Article 13 of the s Convention on the Rights of the  Child articulates that “The child shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall  include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers,  either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of the child’s choice.”      Digital and mobile technology, when used safely, can give children and adolescents the chance to make a  difference.
They can access  information about their rights and make demands for information, whether in terms of political and  government accountability or the right to information on matters that affect them, such as their sexual  health.
Companies can proactively support children’s rights to participation by offering mechanisms and  tools for youth participation and working to close the digital divide.
They can support the development of  technology and content that encourages and enables young people to innovate, create solutions, drive  social progress and directly influence the sustainability and resilience of their communities.
With the right  tools and information, young people are better placed to access opportunities for healthcare, education  and employment, to voice their opinions in schools, communities and countries.
Children’s participation requires digital literacy and the ability to understand and participate in the digital  world.
filing taxes, supporting political candidates, signing  online petitions, registering a birth, or simply accessing commercial, health, educational or cultural  information, and the list goes on).
The gap between citizens who are able to access these fora and those  that cannot due to a lack of Internet access or digital literacy will widen placing the latter groups at a  significant disadvantage.
10   General Guidelines for all Related  Industry    The following table outlines broad guidelines for the ICT industry for identifying, preventing and mitigating  any adverse impacts of their products and services on children rights and the promotion of children’s  positive use of ICTs.
Integrate child rights  considerations into  all appropriate  corporate policies  and management  processes    Industry should identify, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of ICTs on children’s  rights, and identify opportunities to support the advancement of children’s rights   Ensure that responsibility for this area lies with a specific individual and/or ream who has  access to the necessary internal and external stakeholders and has been given sufficient  authority to take a lead in raising the profile of child online protection across the  organization Hire more staff to moderate content and provide adequate training.
Identify child rights impacts on different age groups as a result of company operations, and  the design, development and introduction of new products and services, as well as  opportunities to support children’s and young people’s rights through the company’s  service provision.
Draw upon internal and external expertise and consult with key stakeholders, including  young people, on child online safety mechanisms to ensure that services that are seen as  effective and easy to use by young people.
Develop processes for  handling child sexual  abuse content   In collaboration with governments, law enforcement and hotline organisations, industry  has a key role to play in combating child sexual abuse content by engaging in the  following actions:   Put in place internal procedures to ensure compliance under local and / or international  laws with regard to child sexual abuse content.
Develop reporting processes that allow users to report child sexual abuse content and the  specific profile / location where it was discovered.
Develop a safer and  age appropriate  service environment      Industry can help to offer a safer, more enjoyable digital environment through the  following actions:   Employ appropriate technical measures such as age-verification, block/allow lists,  spend/time controls, opt out functions, filtering and moderating to prevent under age  access and exposure to age-inappropriate content or services; work to keep services  provided exclusively for children adult-free.
In addition to the Terms and Conditions, communicate clear house rules by emphasizing in  accessible and easily understood language what behavior is and is not acceptable on the  service, particularly for young users and for their parents and caregivers, and the  consequences of any breach.
Ensure that content and services that are not age-appropriate for all users are classified in  line with national expectations, are consistent with existing standards in equivalent media,  and are offered together with age-verification, where possible.
Educate children,  parents, and teachers  about children’s  safety and  responsible use of   ICTs    Industry can complement technical measures with educational and empowerment  activities through the following actions:   Clearly describe the content that is available and the corresponding parental controls or  family safety settings.
Make language and terminology accessible and visible, clear and  relevant for all users, including children, young people, parents and caregivers, especially in  relation to the Terms and Conditions, costs involved in using the content or services, privacy  policy, safety information and reporting mechanisms.
Educate customers on how to manage concerns relating to Internet usage generally –  including areas such as Spam, data theft, and inappropriate contact e.g.
ability to review their children’s  privacy settings, working age-verification, etc.).
Work in collaboration with government and educators to build parents’ abilities to support  their children to behave as responsible digital citizens and ICT users.
12      Based on an understanding of the local context, provide materials for use in schools and  homes to educate and enhance children’s use of ICTs and develop their critical thinking  that enable them to behave safely and responsibly when using ICTs.
Promote digital  technology as a mode  to further positive  civic engagement   Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:    Establish written procedures that ensure consistent implementation of policies and  processes that protect freedom of expression for all users, including children, and  documenting compliance with these policies.
Develop content and applications that promote children’s rights to express themselves,  facilitate participation in public life, and encourage learning, creative thinking, problem  solving, collaboration, entrepreneurship and civic participation.
Collaborate with local civil society and government on national/local development  priorities on expanding universal and equitable access to ICT technologies, platforms and  devices and the underlying infrastructure to support them.
Part 2, below, outlines how the common principles and approaches in the table above might be  implemented more specifically as they affect organisations in different sectors.
The ‘checklist’ below will help those mobile operators who are just beginning to develop their COP  programme to focus on key areas as they get started.
associated with many of the items listed below – this can be accessed by following the  relevant links.
Mobile Operator Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies   Integrate child  rights  considerations  into all  appropriate  corporate  policies and  management  processes   Develop  standard  processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content      Industry should identify, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of ICTs on children’s rights,  and identify opportunities to support the advancement of children’s rights   Refer to General Guidelines      In collaboration with government and law enforcement, mobile operators can play a key role in  combating child sexual abuse content by the following actions:   It is vital to collaborate with Law Enforcement (LE)  and appropriate  hotlines in order to effectively handle issues related to child sexual  abuse content.
If your organisation does not yet have working relationships  with LE and (if applicable) the national hotline in this area, you  will need to engage with them and develop processes together.
The GSMA has  developed LE training  materials relating  specifically to mobile:  Mobile operators can  contact Samantha  Lynch  sam.lynch@gsma.com  for access to the  materials.
You will also need to work with the appropriate functions within your  organisation (e.g.
customer care, fraud / security) to ensure that you are  able to:        14      ?
Check whether your organisation’s ToS / T&C adequately  reflect the following:   o   Illegal content, including child sexual abuse content,  will not be tolerated   o  Your organisation will collaborate fully with LE   investigations in the event that illegal content is  reported / discovered   Promote reporting mechanisms for child sexual abuse content:     ?
If your country does not have a hotline, are there  opportunities to set one up or develop internal  processes for customer care staff to pass on reports  of suspect content to LE?
Have processes in place to swiftly remove or block access to child sexual  abuse content:     GSMA Mobile Alliance-  Notice and Take Down  Paper   ?
Develop Notice and Take Down processes to remove illegal  content as soon as it has been identified, and confirmed as  illegal and appropriate to remove.
Contact Samantha Lynch sam.lynch@gsma.com, if you would like a copy  of ‘Toolkit: Responsible approach to combating the use of mobile  services to access child sexual abuse content’.
Mobile operators can help to offer a safer, more enjoyable digital environment through the  following actions:   Developing a clear set of “House Rules”, reflected in Terms of Service  and Acceptable Use Guidelines (which echo key points from the ToS in  user friendly language, placed prominently within the service) for  services they offer, which define:          15   Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  service  environment      ?
It is important to be transparent, giving your customers clear  information about the nature of the services you are offering, for  example:     ?
What is the minimum age required to access this service?
What user information is collected and how is it used?
If you offer parental controls, what is covered (e.g.
network)  and what is not (e.g.
What technical controls might be appropriate for the services you have  on offer and how easy it is for these to be adopted or implemented by  end users?
The ability to block or filter access to the internet through your  networks (whether ‘own brand’ or third party services that you  could promote from your site)   ?
which may only be legal or  appropriate for adult users    Privacy Design  Guidelines for Mobile  Application  Development              Educate  children,  parents, and  teachers about  children’s  safety and  responsible use  of ICTs       Mobile operators can complement technical measures with education and empowerment  activities through the following actions:   Tell customers (parents, carers, children) what they need to know about  your services specifically, for example:        ?
What type of content is on offer, what corresponding parental   controls are available   ?
managing reputation and ‘digital footprint’,  harmful content, grooming), it might be helpful to partner with local  experts (e.g.
children’s NGOs / charities, parenting groups) to help  shape your messaging and help you reach your audience.
If your  organisation already works with children or schools (e.g.
through CSR  programmes) you could investigate whether the scope of these  engagement could be extended to include educating children / teachers  on COP messages.
Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation  by:    Refer to General Guidelines   Promote digital  technology as a  mode tofurther  positive civic  engagement           GSMA mEducation   GSMA Mobile for  development   Apps for Good                         17   Internet access in public spaces   It is becoming increasingly common for municipalities, retailing businesses, transportation companies,  hotel chains and other organizations to provide internet access via Wi-Fi hotspots.
Typically such access will  be free or it will be provided at minimal cost and perhaps with minimal sign on formalities.
The internet  access is provided either as a public service or as a way of attracting more customers to a company’s  premises or of persuading more people to use their services.
Promoting Wi-Fi is a great way to spread the availability of the internet in a given area.
However, where  such access is being provided in public spaces where children and young people are likely to be present on  a regular basis care needs to be taken.
The WiFi provider will therefore not always be able to  support or supervise the use of an internet connection they have supplied.
Users need to take precautions  not to share sensitive information over publicly available Wi-Fi.
In public spaces Wi-Fi providers will not want to provide children or young people with the means to access  age-inappropriate material.
Neither will they want to risk their internet connection being used by anyone  else to expose children and young people to age inappropriate content.
In some countries major retailers  and transportation companies have understood the importance of this issue and have decided to do two  things:        Public Access Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies   Integrate child  rights  considerations  into all  appropriate  corporate  policies and  management  processes   Develop  processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content   Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  service      Industry should identify, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of ICTs on children’s rights,  and identify opportunities to support the advancement of children’s rights   Refer to General Guidelines         In collaboration with government and law enforcement, companies and organisations offering  Internet access in public spaces can play a key role in combating child sexual abuse content by  the following actions:   Block access to web addresses known to contain illegal content      Companies and organisations offering Internet access in public spaces can help to offer a safer,  more enjoyable digital environment through the following actions:   Include in Terms and Conditions of Use clauses which forbid the use of  WiFi service to access or display any material which may be unsuitable  for display in an environment where children and young people are        18   environment   present.
Companies and organisations offering Internet access in public spaces can complement  technical measures with education and empowerment activities through the following actions:   Refer to General Guidelines      Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:    Refer to General Guidelines        19   Educate  children,  parents, and  teachers about  children’s  safety and  responsible use  of ICTs    Promote digital  technology as a  mode to  further positive  civic  engagement                                 Internet access: Internet Service  Providers   Internet Service Providers have long accepted that they have a distinct responsibility with regards to child  online protection.
This is largely due to the fact that ISPs act as both a conduit, providing access to and  from the Internet, and a repository because of the hosting, caching and storage services which they provide.
The ‘checklist’ below will help those internet service providers who want to develop their COP programme  to focus on key areas as a good starting point of their policies.
associated with many of the items listed below – this can be accessed by  following the relevant links.
Internet Service Providers Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies   Integrate child  rights  considerations  into all  appropriate  corporate  policies and  management  processes   Develop  standard  processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content         Industry should identify, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of ICTs on children’s  rights, and identify opportunities to support the advancement of children’s rights   Refer to General Guidelines         In collaboration with government, law enforcement, and hotline organisations, internet  service providers can play a key role in combating child sexual abuse content by the  following actions:   Prohibit uploading, posting, transmitting, sharing or making available  content that would constitute or instruct for a criminal offence,  violate the rights of any party or any local, state, national or  international law.
Do you have internal procedures in place to ensure that they   comply with their responsibilities under local and / or  international laws?
Develop Notice and Take Down processes to remove illegal content as  soon as it has been identified, and confirmed as illegal and  appropriate to remove.
You should link reports of abuse to “Notice and Take Down”              20   Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  service  environment   processes – with a public service level agreement on the  response or take down times   ?
Internet Service Providers can help to offer a safer, more enjoyable digital environment  through the following actions:   Wherever possible and appropriate identify the age of customers.
Implement a suitable solution appropriate to the individual  service (this will be particularly important where the service  in question is subject to legal restrictions based on age).
A common, recognisable button could be developed which   will be always in the same location on every screen.
A proper web form, which is accessible via specific links in the   footer of the institutional sites.
The reporting mechanism should offer indications and clear  information for its usage: for example, it could give clear guidance on  the material to be reported; moreover, it should clarify when some  materials cannot be attached to avoid any distribution on the web.
Consider having mechanisms, such as parental control software,   which enable parents to manage their children’s access to Internet  resources.
Some examples could be: White Lists, Content filters, Usage  monitoring, Contact management, Time/program limits, “safe search”    (Practice varies and attitudes towards it vary.
In the UK every mobile  phone provider has restricted access to adult content by default since  2005.
Internet Service Providers can complement technical measures with education and  communication activities through the following actions:   Echo key messages from their Terms and Conditions in user-friendly  language in community guidelines (including children, young people,  parents and caregivers ) and ‘reminders’ that sit within the service  itself – for example, by reminding users of the types of content which  are considered inappropriate at the point of uploading content.
Provide parents with the necessary information to understand how  their children are using ICT services (e.g.
including issues such a  bullying) and be well-positioned to guide them towards responsible  usage.
Children can be also provided with information related on safer  Internet use.
Internet Service Providers could for example provide  information in their landing page such as:          ?
your mobile phone number”       “Never agree to meet anyone you have met online in  person, especially without consulting an adult first”      “Do not respond to inappropriate (bullying, obscene, or  offensive) messages and save the evidence, don’t delete it”     “Tell an adult if you are uncomfortable or upset about  something or someone”      “Never give away your account password or username; and   be aware that other players may give false information  about real-world characteristics.”   Where possible, you should also promote national support services  where children may report and seek support in the case of abuse and  exploitation.
Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:    Refer to General Guidelines   FOSI’s Platform for  Good      22   Empower and  educate children,  parents, other  caregivers, and  teachers about  children’s safety  and responsible  use of  ICTs        Promote digital  technology as a  mode to further  positive civic  engagement                Public Broadcasting Service Providers   Public broadcasting (and broadcasting sector in general) has been traditionally one of the most controlled  and regulated sector of the industry.
But since when the broadcasting signals and its contents are distributed or made accessible also on-line,  new problems arise and potential areas of risk emerged.
The Broadcasting sector (and especially PSBs) are  re-elaborating all previous defences in order to continue to ensure the level of security that they provided  through TV and radio signals, also in the on line world.
Public Broadcasting Service Providers Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies   Integrate child  rights  considerations  into all  appropriate  corporate  policies and  management  processes   Develop  standard   Industry should identify, prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of ICTs on children’s  rights, and identify opportunities to support the advancement of children’s rights   Refer to General Guidelines         In collaboration with governments, law enforcement and hotline organisations, industry has  a key role to play in combating child sexual abuse content by engaging in the following  actions:                                                    6 A “Child”, usually in Europe, is someone under the age of 14-15 years, while “Young people” are those  aged 15, 16 and 17.
These definitions reflect the OFCOM Broadcasting Code which classifies "Children" as  "people under the age of fifteen years", but these terms need to be adapted to national legislations: in  Austria, for instance, the right to vote has been recently extended to 16 years old people, while major US  Social networks sites fixes the minimum age at 13 years.
'Parental consent' is normally required before  involving anyone under 16 in PSB output.
23      processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content   Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  service  environment   Refer to General Guidelines      Public Broadcasting Service providers can help to offer a safer, more enjoyable digital  environment through the following actions:   The overall parameters, purpose and benchmarks of any project  should be discussed with a relevant senior editorial figure.
Any proposal to use a chat room, message board, microblog or social  networking site to find contributors must be referred to the relevant  Editor   You may put broadcaster branding on a third party site, but the  associated content should bring credit to the brand.
Advertisements  on broadcaster-branded social networking pages should be monitored  to check that they are appropriate.
Before uploading broadcaster material onto a social networking site,  you should make sure that you are aware of, and comfortable with,  the site's own terms and conditions.
Broadcaster should not seek to duplicate measures of protection and  intervention already established by a particular social networking site.
There will, however, be times when the broadcaster may implement  "light touch" intervention.
Broadcaster should be sensitive to the minimum age requirements on  different social networking sites.
24   Empower and  educate children,  parents, other  caregivers, and  teachers about  children’s safety  and responsible  use of  ICTs        Public Broadcasting Service providers can complement technical measures with education  and communication activities through the following actions:   ?
Never give out personal contact details, and do not 'friend' or   'follow' children you are working with on social networking  sites.
Always act within professional boundaries; ensure all contact  with children is essential to the programme / event / activity  / project you are working on.
Promote digital  technology as a  mode to further  positive civic  engagement      Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:    Refer to General Guidelines                           25   Content Providers, Online Retailers and  Apps Developers   The Internet provides all types of content and activities that are entertaining and educational for children.
This checklist has been created for content providers, online retailers and app developers that focus on  adults and young people.
Content Providers and Retailers Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies     Identify, prevent,  and mitigate the  adverse impacts  of ICTs on  children’s rights,  and identify  opportunities to  support  children’s rights        Develop  processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content         Content providers and retailers can help identify, prevent, and mitigate adverse impacts of  ICTs by taking the following actions:   Building age-appropriate tools (e.g., tutorials, tools, help centres).
Where relevant, work with online/in-person prevention  programs and counselling clinics.
For example, an online  game site may link an online clinic to help with issues of  “addiction,” which refers to the way in which some  children and young people can become obsessively  engaged with technology in such a way as to present an  obstacle or a barrier to them developing normal  relationships with other people or taking part in healthy  physical activities.
In collaboration with government and law enforcement, content providers can play a key  role in combating child sexual abuse content by the following actions:   Ensure that contracts with third parties such as developers,  aggregators etc.
specifically prohibit illegal content, including child  sexual abuse content.
Such identification processes must be  proactive—for example, using a scanning technology or  human review.
Have processes in place to swiftly remove or block access to illegal        26   content:   ?
Develop Notice and Take Down (NTD)7 and ensure that   third parties with whom your organisation has a  contractual relationship have similarly robust NTD  processes in place.
Document your practices for handling child   pornography, beginning with any monitoring you do and  extending to the final transfer and destruction of the  content.
The documentation should include a list of all  personnel responsible for handling the content.
If your organisation does not yet having working  relationships with LE and (if applicable) the national  hotline in this area, you will need to engage with them  first, and develop processes together.
Where possible work with the appropriate functions within your  organisation (e.g.
customer care, fraud / security) to ensure that you  are able to:   ?
Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  online  environment     Content providers and retailers can help offer a safer, more enjoyable digital environment  through the following actions:   Work with reputable ‘trusted brand’ content providers where  possible – especially when dealing with potentially higher risk types of  content such as erotic content.
a game or film which differs solely  in terms of the access channel), it is possible to re-use existing ratings  or classifications.
If your organization offers audio-visual and multimedia services, the  company where applicable may want to provide a specific PIN to  users which intend to use adult content or other value added  services, whose content can be harmful for children.
7 Please see the ISPs checklist for further information   8 Please refer to the checklist on Mobile Operators for further information         27   Ensure transparency in terms of pricing of services and information  collected about users.
Is parental consent  required before commercial or other concerns can collect  personal information from a child?
Supervise the (commercial) content made available online via your  service (online forums, social networks, online gaming)     ?
It is vital to adapt your services and content to the user  groups that access the services.
For instance, if your website  is accessed by a very young public, then some necessary  changes are needed such as appropriate advertising and data  handling policies, content management, etc.
If and where possible adopt appropriate age verification methods to  prevent children accessing age-sensitive content, sites or interactive  services, such as chat rooms, etc.
Where possible, work together with other industry players to   agree on content classification systems that are based on  accepted national standards and consistent with approaches  taken in equivalent media (e.g.
Where possible, content classifications from other industries   should be re-used.
Promote content control options at the point of sale, as part of the  set-up process or when the content service is initially accessed.
Content providers, online retailers and apps developers can complement technical measures  with education and empowerment activities through the following actions:   Display age ratings and describe the nature of the content alongside  the description of the content.
To help parents and others decide whether   theentertainment content (such as films, videos, DVDs, and   computer games) in your service or app is age-appropriate   for young players, build your app or service to align with   content rating systems:   o    Entertainment Software Ratings Board (ESRB)   o   Pan European Gaming Information (PEGI)   o      International App Rating Council (IARC), which is   developing a  consistent classification system   globally for all apps, particularly for games played   on social networks and mobile devices.
What type of content and corresponding parental controls  are available;    How to report abuse / misuse / inappropriate or illegal  content;    How the complaint report will be handled;    What services are age-restricted;    How to behave safely and responsibly when using built-in  interactive services 11.
Provide rules of use and teach adolescents to be vigilant,  well-mannered and responsible while they are navigating  the Internet.
Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:                                                     11 Please refer to the User Generated Content checklist for additional guidance        29   Promote digital  technology as a  mode to further  positive civic  engagement        Develop / offer a range and high quality of rich, compelling,  entertaining content that is age-appropriate and, particularly for  younger children, encourages / enables them to learn etc.
whilst  entertaining them and contribute to children’s physical, mental and  social development providing new opportunities to entertain and  educate.
Produce content that helps children in education, information,  stimulation of imagination and enable new possibilities, in addition to  being attractive and usable to them, reliable and safe, and if relevant,  make advertising or commercial communication clearly recognizable  as such.
30   User Generated content/  interactive/social media service  providers       If before the online world was dominated mainly by adults, now we are in a world of user-generated  content, which is no longer including only adult but also children and adolescents.
In addition, there is no doubt that the explosion of social networking sites has made the issue of controlling  user generated content more complex.
Social networks are web-wide and young users are potentially open  to identity theft, grooming and cyber bullying.
The ‘checklist’ below has been drafted according to the rules applied by one of the biggest social network  This could help other social networks and interactive services who want to develop their COP programme  however, it does not mean that all the previsions can be equally applied.
User Generated content / interactive / social media service providers  Child Online   Case studies   Protection Checklist   Develop  standard  processes for  handling child  sexual abuse  content   In collaboration with government and law enforcement, UG content / interactive / social  media service providers can play a key role in combating child sexual abuse content by the  following actions:   Collaborate with Law Enforcement (LE) / hotline agencies in order to  effectively handle issues related to illegal content / behaviours,  particularly those relating to child sexual abuse content12.
Work with the appropriate functions within your organisation (e.g.
customer care, fraud / security) to ensure that you are able to13:    ?
This is particularly  important where an issue is of public interest and requires  prompt attention.
Check whether your organisation’s ToS / T&C adequately  reflect the following:   o   Illegal content, including Child Sexual Abuse Content,  will not be tolerated                                                          12 Please refer to the Mobile Operators checklist for additional guidance  13 Please refer to the Finished Content Providers checklist for additional guidance        31   o  Your organisation will collaborate fully with law   enforcement investigations in the event that illegal  content is reported / discovered    Adopt appropriate policies regarding the ownership of user generated  content, including the option to remove user created content at the  user’s request.
o   Ideally, these teams should be grouped to handle  different types of incidents in order to ensure that  adequate response is provided and appropriate  actions are taken.
o  A user’s non-compliance with policies for acceptable   use may have consequences including removal of  content, suspension or closure of their account.
If the reported piece of content violates the  provider’s policies, your organization should  remove it and warn the person who posted it.
Have processes in place to swiftly remove or block access to illegal  content:     ?
Develop technical systems that either block the creation of       illegal content, including in private groups, or flag it for  immediate review by your safety team.
Create proactive  technical measures to analyse the objects and Meta data linked  to a profile to detect criminal behaviour or patterns and take  actions appropriately.
Such developments should be in  conformity with public policy on data protection and privacy of  the individual.
Develop Notice and Take Down processes14 .
14 Please refer to the Internet Service Providers checklist for additional guidance        32   Since the world of interactive and social media providers is a multi- stakeholder community, it is important that your organization  establishes relevant partnerships to ensure that you and your customers  have relevant information to act on illegal content.
Social networking sites should ban registered sex offenders  from setting up accounts on their sites using technology that  already exists today.
Develop a safer  and age  appropriate  service  environment   UG content / interactive / social media service providers can help to offer a safer, more  enjoyable digital environment through the following actions:   Communicate in a easy to understand, customer-friendly language  within your Terms of Service and user guidelines a clear set of “House  Rules” for services you offer, which define:      ?
Mechanisms for reporting inappropriate content, contact or behaviour  should be easily accessible to users at all times15.
15 Please refer to the Internet Service Providers checklist for additional guidance        33   Control access to user generated content.
Make meaningful efforts to  enforce minimum age requirements.
Sites should enforce their minimum age requirements and take  steps to identify and remove underage users who have  misrepresented their age to gain access.
If your organisation does not yet have in place community age  verification systems, you will need to set up appropriate sign- on processes to determine whether users are old enough to  access the service.
A number of measures may be used to protect online users against  inappropriate or illegal user generated content:   ?
This filter  includes swearing, sexual terms, and racist or homophobic  language.
In addition wherever possible and  appropriate companies should develop tools which allow them  actively to seek out and remove content which is in breach of  their Ts&Cs.
Tools can be develop to prevent the uploading of  known illegal content or to detect known illegal content that is  already present on the site.
Encourage future biometric and age verification systems through  research and development using known international standards and  support the development of such tools.
Social networking sites should implement default privacy  settings that prevent adults from contacting children under 16  who they do not already know in the physical world.
Photos and videos should be pre-checked in order to make sure  that children do not publish sensitive personal information  about themselves or others.
Review discussion groups to find harmful subject matter, hate speech,  and illegal behaviour, deleting such content when it is found.
Ensure privacy guidelines and how information is collected about  users16.
Be responsible for most of the (commercial) content available online  (e.g., online forums, social networks, online gaming)17.
Implement appropriate standards and rules to protect children from age  inappropriate advertising    ?
Establish clear “limits” for online advertising to children.18                  Empower and  educate  children,  parents, other  caregivers, and  teachers about  children’s  safety and  responsible  use of ICTs       UG content / interactive / social media service providers can complement technical  measures through education and empowerment activities through the following actions:   Create a section dedicated to safety tips.
Online users should receive the latest safety information, tips,   articles, features, and dialogues about digital citizenship, as  well as links to useful content from third-party experts.
what are social networking sites?
How is the Internet accessed via mobile?)
and where relevant, the  options available for parents to apply controls.
By encouraging people to seek help  from friends, your organization will find that many of these  situations can be resolved face to face.
Establish a more “trust and reputation” based system to harness good  behavior and enable peers to teach best practice to each other by  example.
Industry can encourage and empower children’s right to participation by:    Refer to General Guidelines      Promote digital  technology as a  mode to  further  positive civic  engagement                    36   Hardware Manufacturers   Children and young people today are accessing the Internet using a wide range of electronic devices from  laptops to tablets to cell phones and more.
The ‘checklist’ below will help those hardware manufacturers who want to develop their COP programme  to focus on key areas as a starting point.
associated with many of the items listed below – this can be accessed by following the relevant links.
Hardware Manufacturers Child Online Protection Checklist   Case studies   Develop standard  processes for  handling child sexual  abuse content   Develop a safer and  age appropriate  service environment   In collaboration with government and law enforcement, hardware manufacturers can play a  key role in combating child sexual abuse content by the following actions:   Share information with your customers/ users regarding the  applicable legal framework for the online protection of children,  under which your organization is operating.
[This framework  should also be reflected on your organization’s relevant policies.]
Offer easy-to-use parental control options, which allow parents  to restrict the services and content that children can access  when using the several electronic devices.
These restrictions can  include:       internet access;   ?
access to social media;   ?
When turning on Parental Controls a PIN is required to change  the allowed services, which prevents children or other parties  from changing your settings.
Empower and  educate children,  parents, other  caregivers, and      Hardware manufacturers can complement technical measures with education and  empowerment activities through the following actions:   ?
Support customers by making available useful  guidelines for family online safety, encouraging parents        37   teachers about  children’s safety and  responsible use of  ICTs        to: ensure a moderate use of electronic devices and  services by their children as part of an otherwise  healthy and balanced lifestyle;     Get familiarized with the services and products their  children are using;    Pay close attention to the behaviour of their children in  order to identify possible changes which could be  linked to online bullying or harassment;     Become aware of the physical risks imposed on  children by the excessive use of the respective  electronic devices.
Promote digital  technology as a mode  to further positive  civic engagement    Industry can encourage and facilitate children’s right to participation by:   Refer to General Guidelines                38                    CONSULTATION QUESTIONNAIRE    Kindly type your responses directly into the text boxes provided.
PARTICIPANT INFORMATION    1.
Input provided will not be publicly attributed to any organization or individual.
However, please indicate  if we may disclose the fact that you or your organization provided input in the process.
Private Sector / Business*     Civil Society  Academia        Non-Governmental Organization             Trade Union                         Government     United Nations    Other, please specify:  *For Private Sector/Business and ICT, can you please provide your sub-sector      5.
May we add your contact information to our “Interested persons” list to keep you informed about the  process related to the development of the Guidelines and/or in the event we need to contact you to clarify  your responses?
Please  comment on the content of the draft Guidelines, including any suggestions for redrafting of  particular provisions.
Please share one or more examples of a policy, practice or initiative your organization is involved in that  is relevant to the draft Guidelines and the topic of child online security and ICTs (links to existing material  are fine).
(The partner organizations may draw on this material for good practice examples of how to  implement the Guidelines).
How might the Guidelines be helpful to you and your organization?
What would be helpful to include in commentary and documentation that accompanies the final  version of the Guidelines?
(Select all that apply)     Case Studies / Good Practice Examples      The business case for the Guidelines  Assessment tools to measure progress    Facts & Figures            Glossary of Terms  Other, please specify:      C.    15.
(Select  all that apply):    Collect and share resources/guidance materials and tools that may help businesses/organizations with their  application of the Guidelines  Collect and share good practice examples illustrating action businesses/organizations can take to help with  their application of the Guidelines  Work with others to fill gaps in guidance on specific issues relating to ICTs and children (please specify any  needs below)  Create an initiative around the Guidelines and their implementation    Please elaborate or indicate any other recommendations here:    D.   ADDITIONAL COMMENTS AND/OR QUESTIONS   Please limit your input to 500 words.