               POLICY BRIEF ON CHILD ONLINE PROTECTION IN GHANA   Executive Summary   The internet is a vast and fast growing resource and, together with new technologies, it provides  new  opportunities  for  children  and  young  people  when  it  comes  to  education  and  skills  development, communication, social interaction and entertainment.
However, while the internet  is  acknowledged  to  be  a  powerful  and  invaluable  resource,  it  is  important  that  children  and  young  people  are  aware  of,  and  protected  from,  the  risks  they  may encounter online  such as  exposure to sexual and violent content, cyberbullying, cybercrime, among others.
In Ghana there is practically no legislation or policy which directly guarantees children’s safety  online.
Furthermore, the general public is largely unaware of the threats and risks the internet  possess  to  children  and  young  people.
Stakeholders  must  therefore  come  together  and  work  collaboratively  to  improve the safety of children and young people within cyberspace.
This  policy  brief  offers  a  contextual  analysis  of  the  current  Child  Online  Protection  (COP)  environment  in  Ghana  and  gives  important  recommendations on how to ensure that children  can utilise the opportunities the Internet offers without the potential adverse effects.
Introduction   The  development  of  the  internet  has  opened  up  unprecedented  opportunities  in  the areas of  communications,  commerce,  culture,  and  politics  and  in  the  exercise  of rights.
Access to the  internet  continues  to  increase  across  the  African  continent  with  enormous  possibilities  for  Africans of all ages both at home and in the Diasporas.
For children in particular, the internet  offers opportunities to learn, communicate and have fun.
In spite of these benefits, the use of  the internet comes with its own threats and risks especially for vulnerable populations such as  children.
Any of these roles  that  is  assumed  by  a  child  at  any  particular  point  in  his  or  her  online  experience,  exposes  him/her to a variety of appropriate and inappropriate content, which can range from commercial  information (unsolicited adverts, spam, etc.)
Potential value-laden content such  as prejudicial/stereotypical and misleading information which many young netizens may not be  discerning  enough  to  decipher,  and  other  unacceptable  activities such as  online grooming for  prostitution or terrorism, also endanger children in cyberspace.
However, for children to fully utilize  the  vast  opportunities  the  internet  offers  while  avoiding  the  negative  consequences,  it  is   1 | P a g e         important that they feel confident that they are safe online and know how to protect themselves  against potential threats.
This analytical piece highlights challenges affecting child online protection (COP) in Ghana in  terms  of  policies  and  practices.
Overview of Child Online Protection Issues in Ghana   In  Ghana,  as  in  other  countries  around  the  world, increasing numbers of children are gaining  access to the Internet.
They engage in chat rooms and share personal information when online.
The  International  Telecommunications  Union  (ITU)  has  also  developed  a  global set of Guidelines for children;  parents, guardians and educators; industry; and policy makers to be adopted and adapted to suit  national  and  local  realities.
In  Ghana  however,  there  are  no  known  policies  or  institutional  frameworks,  whether  developed  locally  or  adapted  from  the  ITU  Guidelines  or  other  best  practices,  intended  to  protect  and  safeguard  children  in  cyberspace.
Even  though  the  Information  &  Communications  Technology  for  Accelerated  Development  (ICT4AD)  Policy   exists, it does not make provisions for the protection of children online.
The sector regulator, the  National  Communications  Authority  (NCA),  has  also not developed any specific guideline or  policy to guide industry players and users on COP issues.
2 | P a g e         What is currently available is the Ministry of Communications’ National Cyber Security Policy &  Strategy  Final  Draft  document  (as  at  July  23,  2015)  which  makes  the  following  provision in  relation to COP:     Child Online Protection Policy measures will be implemented through multi-stakeholder  working  by  government,  industry, civil society, and relevant international child online  protection agencies.
Government will encourage dialogue at national and local levels to  engage  all  concerned  and  create  awareness  of  the  possibilities  and  dangers  of  the  Internet.
At  a  recent  Africa  Regional  Conference  on  COP,  the  Director  of  Research,  Statistics  and  Infrastructure  Management  at  the  Ministry  of  Communications  also  shared  a  roadmap  and  strategies  being  put  in  place  to  ensure  that  children  are  protected  online.
The  four-point  strategies make the following provision:   a)  Development  of  a  sound  research  base  on  COP  issues  and  establishment  of  a  stakeholder working group to serve as the leading expert group that advises government  on formulation and implementation of a national COP plan    b)  Capacity building and awareness creation among key stakeholders  c)  Development  of  legal  measures  to  review  the  existing  child  protection  act  to include   COP   d)  Establishment  of  an  online  COP  Portal  with  child  online  education  information  and  online  forms  for    reporting  COP  incidents,  as  well  as  a  call  centre  with special COP  support numbers for the public to call for assistance     When implemented, the proposed strategies will help improve the safety of the country’s young  netizens.
The  cooperation  of  all  relevant  stakeholders  will  make  the  implementation  less  cumbersome  and  faster.
Stakeholders,  especially  civil  society,  will  have  to  conscientiously  monitor  closely  the  implementation  of  the  roadmap  to  ensure  that  its  objective  is  achieved.
Practices   Compared  to  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  number  of  Ghanaian  children  with  access  to  the  internet  is  relatively low.
The few who go online, access the internet through school libraries,  internet  cafés,  parents’  computers  and  smart  devices,  and  in  some  cases,  the  children’s  own  devices.
Many  of  the  parents  whose  children  are  online  do  not  know  much  about  the  technologies and platforms they use nor the threats associated with their online activities.
This  makes it difficult for them (parents) to provide guidance on safety measures for their wards.
Unfortunately,  there  is  very  little  sensitisation  from  the  media,  civil  society  groups  and  educational  institutions  about  online  hazards  in  Ghana.
Media reports about the internet and  other  ICTs have often focused on the benefits of these technologies.
On the civil society front, there has not been lots of work on COP in the country.
Civil society  organisations  (CSOs)  working  on  children-related  issues  in  Ghana are mainly involved in the  protection  of  children’s  rights  and  wellbeing  offline.
The  Global  Resource  &  Information  Directory  (GRID),  an  encyclopaedia  of  information  maintained  by  the  Family  Online  Safety  Institute on worldwide Internet trends for children and youth, notes that there are practically no  organisations  actively  involved  in  the  provision  of  online  safety  information  for  Ghanaians.
According  to  GRID,  the  few  websites available focus more on improving access to ICTs and  somewhat digital literacy.
It has also worked  collaboratively with World Vision Ghana Office to outdoor the Keeping Children Safe Online  (KCSO) tool which is aimed at educating children, young people and parents in Ghana.
The government of Ghana, through the ICT for Accelerated Development (ICT4AD) policy , is  gradually extending ICTs and internet accessibility to a number of educational institutions from  basic  to  tertiary  levels  in  partnership  with  corporate  and  non-profit  organisations.
Sensitisation  about  the hazards associated with online  activities is often neglected; sometimes because some of the teachers themselves have limited  information on the reality of such risks.
Conclusion   The  internet  is  indeed  a great tool with which children are able to tap into a vast resource of  information  and  educational  materials.
In  spite  of  the  benefits  derived from internet use, the threats  associated with being online are real and children are often the most vulnerable because of their  inexperience  and  gullibility.
The  strategy/policy will have to  be developed  using  a  multistakeholder  approach  to  ensure  that  the  final  outcome  document  will  meet  the  demands  and  expectations  of  all  relevant stakeholders.
It will also need to  meet international  standards and practices, and actually give meaning to all the conventions, agreements and treaties  Ghana is signatory to regarding the protection of children.
Recommendations  With internet use rapidly increasing across the continent, it is important to shape internet-related  policies  to  meet  and  protect  the  interest  of  all  stakeholders, including children.
4 | P a g e               Government  Government  has  a  duty to protect  its citizens, including children, from harm both offline and  online.
The  roadmap  on  COP  in  Ghana  as  presented  by  the  Ministry  of  Communications is a positive step, but it has to be expanded to  include  implementation  schedule with timelines for action, periodic monitoring and reporting,  and roles and responsibilities for all stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels.
The  COP  stakeholder  working  group  will  need  an  advisory  board  made  up  of  experts  in  technology  and  child  development  to  provide  leadership  and  guidance  and  inform  policies   through a sustained research programme.
In addition, all relevant stakeholders must be roped in  to the roadmap and other COP policy initiatives to get the commitment of ISPs, enforcement  bodies,  regional/local  authorities,  the  private  sector,  civil  society  organisations,  schools  and  parents/guardians even before implementation.
Policy  measures  that  address  different  risks  and initiatives of various stakeholders co-exist at  different levels.
This includes the harmonisation of  all cross-ministerial initiatives on child online/offline protections for effective implementation.
Public-private  partnerships  have  proven  to  be  an  effective  way  to  encourage  self-  and  co-regulation  by  industry  players  who  are  also  very  critical  in  restricting  children’s access to potentially harmful and inappropriate content without compromising their  right to information and freedom of expression.
Educational Institutions  Internet use is recognised to be an important skill in its own right, in addition to its use as an  educational  information  resource.
Since a number of teachers, especially those in the  rural and remote areas often have little knowledge about ICTs and related risks, and many others  find  it  difficult  to  keep  adapting  teaching  materials  to  evolve  with  children’s  ages  and  new  technologies,  it  is  recommended  that  periodic  refresher  training  should  be  organised  to  keep  them up to speed with new technologies and associated risks.
Beyond  the  trainings,  lesson  plans  and  other  teaching  resources  need  to  be  developed  and  upgraded regularly to help teachers stay on top of COP and e-safety issues in order to educate  their  pupils/students  on  how  to  stay  safe  online.
Equipment  and  facilities  with  internet  connection  should  also  be  made  available  to all schools for practical demonstrations of COP  challenges that are often taught in theory.
Industry/Private Sector   5 | P a g e         Industry players are another group of critical stakeholders in protecting children online.
In most  cases,  they  set  up  the  standards  that  form  the  basis  for  e-safety.
Operators  in  the sector are  therefore  encouraged  to  put  in  place  measures  that  protect  the  privacy  and  personal  data  of  children especially while respecting their right to free speech online.
They are also encouraged to  make their safety measures known to the general public particularly parents and children in easy- to-understand  language.
They  must  also  provide  procedures  for  reporting  online  abuse  of  children,  including  the  setting  up  of  hotlines  just  for  COP  issues.
In  line  with  reporting  violations,  it  is  important  for  sector  operators to also liaise with law enforcement agencies in  dealing  with  cyber  grooming  of  children  for  prostitution  and  terrorism and other cybercrimes  such as scam and identity theft.
Industry players must also support research on COP issues to  inform  their  in-house  policies  on the protection of children online.
As much as possible, they  should give parents the ability to control their wards’ online activities while directly protecting  children from age-inappropriate advertising as indicated in the ITU’s Guidelines for Industry on  Child Online Protection.
Parents  Technology is constantly advancing and evolving.
As early adopters, young people are often fast  in  keeping  up-to-date  with  technologies  as  they  evolve.
Many  parents  however  find  staying  updated with technological advancements and what their children are doing online complex and  challenging.
But  to  provide  guidance  and  safety  tools  for  their  wards,  parents need to invest  more  in  order  to  appreciate  the  risks  associated  with  the  technologies  and  platforms  their  children are exposed to.
Education about child online safety should not stop in the classroom  with teachers, parents have to take it up to ensure that children have some safety measures when  navigating the online world.
Parents  must  therefore  get  themselves  informed  about  COP  issues  and  the  range  of  options  available to them – social and technical – to keep their young netizens safe online.
For instance,  parents will have to know and choose appropriate technologies for their wards, monitor usage,  discuss online security issues  with children and set controls until they are discerning enough to  make  their  own  decisions.
They  can  also  install  safety  tools  on the devices of their children.
Parents  are  also  advised  to  resort  to  available  guidelines  for parents, such as the ITU’s COP  Guidelines for Parents, Guardians and Educators and J Initiative’s Safety Information Guides for  Empowering  Parents  and  Families,  Teenagers  and  Educators i    for  more  guidance  on  how  to  safeguard  their  children  online.
Civil Society   It  is  highly  recommended  that civil society organisations (CSOs) working on child’s right and  other children-related issues also get involved in issue of COP and also include such issues in  their  programmes  and  activities.
CSOs  are  also  encouraged  to  engage  industry  players  regularly  to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  children  are protected.
In  addition, CSOs should monitor and evaluate the implementation of all interventions, including   6 | P a g e         the roadmap presented by the Ministry of Communication, to ensure all activities are carried out  creditably.
The academic community is also encouraged to inform COP policy with periodic evidence-based  research  and  findings.
They  could  also  complement  the  work  of  other  stakeholders  with  sensitisation activities in the classroom.
Children and the general public are encouraged to build their capacity around COP issues so they  can  adopt  the  right  safety  measures  when  in  cyberspace.
In  line with that there is a need for  sustained  information  sharing  and  public  education  by  all stakeholders especially educational  institutions and the media.
Internet Society – APAC Bureau  9 Temasek Boulevard  #09-01 Suntec Tower 2  Singapore 038989  Tel: +65 6407 1470  Fax: +65 6407 1501  Email: apac@isoc.org  www.internetsociety.org    Follow us on Twitter @ISOCapac  Follow us on Scoopt.it!
http://www.scoop.it/t/internet-in-asia-pacific     internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     2   Executive Summary   In today’s age, the Internet has become essential for developing and strengthening the capacities of  children.
But at the same time, use of the Internet can come with some risks for young Internet users.
However, quick-fix interventions that limit children’s online access tend to result in a loss of opportunity for  them to take advantage of the benefits of the Internet.
To frame the analysis, this study divides Asia-Pacific economies into three clusters by Internet penetration  level (high, moderate and low), which generally has a positive correlation with the income level of an  economy, i.e.
a high-income economy tends to have higher Internet penetration.
Eleven economies have  been selected based on the ease of obtaining data and information on child online safety.
Findings   The study found that all selected economies are working to protect children from online sexual abuse and  exploitation.
Regardless of their level of Internet penetration, all criminalise the production and distribution  of child pornography under domestic law.
Relevant laws in economies with high Internet  penetration tend to have a clear and consistent definition of “child” and “child pornography”, and include  offenses facilitated by all Internet-enabled platforms.
Economies with high Internet penetration have also enacted laws and developed interventions on other  aspects of child online safety, such as children’s exposure to harmful content, cyberbullying and Internet  addiction.
But there does not seem to be any targeted legislative response to the online privacy of children  and the protection of children from information security risks.
Moreover, comprehensive measures to equip  children with the knowledge, tools and skills necessary for them to manage these risks are still lacking,  particularly in developing countries in the region.
It must be emphasised that drafting and implementing legislation are only one among the many steps that  can be taken by governments.
The study found that countries have used a mix of measures to address  these concerns, including technical tools to filter content, end-user empowerment, and cooperation  between multiple stakeholders, including children.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     3   The number of measures, policies and programmes in place suggest that economies with high Internet  penetration are actively working to address child online safety issues.
Emerging economies included in this report, which tend to have moderate Internet penetration, typically  do not have as much resources at their disposal.
In these countries, the public sector has taken initiatives  to address child online safety issues, albeit less rigorously than those with high Internet penetration.
UNICEF has likewise been working in these countries  to address child online safety, mainly to support research that will guide policymaking and help raise  awareness on the issues.
Generally, there is limited English-language information on the child online safety initiatives of economies  with low Internet penetration.
Information on India was drawn largely from a recent UNICEF study.
India,  when compared with economies of moderate and high Internet penetration has weaker legislation, and  actors are less coordinated in tackling child online safety issues.
Policy Recommendations   Based on the study, the following policy recommendations are proposed:    •   In domestic laws, clearly define terms based on international legal standards and include offenses  facilitated by all Internet-enabled platforms.
Ensure that policies to protect children online are consistent with other important policy objectives,  such as the preservation of fundamental rights, including privacy and freedom of expression.
Collaborate among relevant ministries, agencies and institutions, adopt a multi-stakeholder approach,  and ensure international cooperation.
Digital skills, including safety  online, must be taught from the earliest stage possible.
In practice, for today’s environment, this  means from early primary (or elementary) school age.
Develop a coordinated strategy for awareness-raising and education on child online safety for  different actors.
This includes engaging with and empowering parents, guardians, teachers and other  authority figures with whom young people regularly interact.
Strengthen the child protection and technological capacity of law enforcement agencies.
Engage with children to develop robust research on child online safety and integrate findings in child  protection systems.
Develop consistent indicators to assess and monitor child online safety.
Policy Recommendations                                     internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     5     Introduction   Studies, largely on developed economies in Europe and the North America, show that an increasing  number of children1 are using the Internet.
They are starting at a younger age, using a variety of devices and  spending more time online.
Some markets are reaching saturation with nearly 100% Internet penetration among  children in northern Europe.2    As the Internet, particularly mobile broadband, becomes more accessible and affordable in Asia and the  Pacific, the abovementioned trend is also becoming evident in the region.
In India, it is estimated that 134  million children have mobile phones.3 In Indonesia, roughly 60% of children access the Internet through  mobile devices.4 In the Philippines, around half of the 44 million Internet users are children aged 17 years  old and below.5 In Thailand, 58% of children aged 6-14 years are using the Internet.6 Meanwhile a study  conducted by the China National Youth Palace Association in 2014 in 18 cities found that 72% of children  aged 10 or under in China owned a mobile phone, and 30% of children under 6 years have used a tablet.
It  also noted that age 10 was the turning point when children used the Internet not only for online gaming,  but also for entertainment, communication, learning and self-expression.
By age 13, children become not  only online content consumers, but also creators.7    The Internet brings opportunities for children’s education, self-expression and social development.
But its  use also carries threats and risks, such as access to inappropriate content, harmful interactions with other  children or with adults, and exposure to aggressive marketing practices.
In some  instances, children have lost their lives because of cyberbullying, and while the Internet has not created  crimes involving sexual abuse and exploitation of children, it has enhanced their scale and potential.
Social media has transformed how society creates and consumes news and information today, but it has  also allowed for new ways to facilitate people trafficking, distribution of child abuse materials and new  avenues for recruiting victims.
It is estimated that nearly one quarter of children reported missing in Indonesia  had been lured into trafficking by their captors through Facebook.8 The Indonesia National Center for                                                       1 The definition of “child” may be different in the economies in this report, UNICEF's definition is used, and "child" refers to a person  who is under 18 years old except for any country that legalised the concept of adulthood younger than the standard.
4 GSMA and NTT DOCOMO, "Children's use of mobile phones: An international comparison 2012,"  http://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/GSMA_ChildrensMobilePhones2012WEB.pdf.
8	MTV Exit cited in A. R. Mubarak, "Child Safety Issues in Cyberspace: A Critical Theory on Trends and Challenges in the ASEAN Region,"  International Journal of Computer Applications, Vol.
48-55,   internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     6   Children reports that 18,747 had been sexually exploited through the Internet from 2011-2015,9 while in  Singapore, a 2014 McAfee survey revealed that one in three children have had experience with  cyberbullying.10 Despite these incidents, a 2015 study by Stairway Foundation and the Department of  Education in the Philippines found that half of the children polled lacked awareness of the risks and  dangers that they face on the Internet.11    Connected products, services and technologies are developing at a rapid pace, bringing about evolving  opportunities, as well as threats and challenges.
For example, bitcoin is an innovative payment network that allows users to send and receive money and  protects against identity theft.
But because payments in bitcoin can be made and finalised without one's  personal information being tied to the transaction, it can be conveniently used to purchase child sexual  abuse materials.
Several other anonymised or difficult-to-trace forms of electronic payment can be used as  a means for crimes involving the exploitation of children, but the extent of the threat these present has  not been researched and is as yet unquantifiable.12    Addressing the risks that children face online without reducing their access to the opportunities and  benefits of the Internet is a complex global challenge.
As a starting point, policymakers should not get side-tracked into blaming the medium:  coordination and cooperation with different stakeholders is key to building a safer Internet, including the  active participation of children themselves in developing effective safety strategies.
As the report points  out:15    We have discovered that many children are comfortable navigating the Internet and are able to avoid risks.
9 Rizki Ameliah, "Indonesia's Perspective on Child Online Protection," presentation of Indonesia's Ministry of Communication and  Information Technology on 13 September 2016, http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Regional- Presence/AsiaPacific/Documents/Events/2016/Sept-COP/Presentation/MCIT%20Indonesia%2c%20ASEAN%20ITU- Manila%2c13%20September%202016-FINAL%20Rizky.pdf.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     7   should be allowed to express their views on how to mitigate risks, and they should be listened to and  empowered to safely exploit the benefits of the Internet.
Ultimately, the onus lies with adults to put in place a  framework that ensures children equal and equitable access to the Internet, along with a safer online  environment.
The other actors that need to be involved in addressing child online safety include  policymakers, law enforcement agencies, social workers, teachers, parents and the private sector.
Framework for Analysis      To frame the analysis, this study divides Asia-Pacific economies into three clusters by Internet penetration  level:    High = >70%  Moderate = 25%-70%  Low = <25%    In general, Internet penetration level has a positive correlation with the income level of an economy, i.e., a  high-income economy tends to have high Internet penetration.
The Internet Society’s 2015 Global Internet Report provides Internet penetration levels for 19 Asia-Pacific  countries, and two to five economies per cluster are selected out of these based on the ease of obtaining  data and information on child online safety (see Table 1).
Internet Penetration  14.40%   26%   39.32%  40.70%        52.72%   71.06%   82.10%   84.65%   88.22%  89.65%  91%   Bangladesh India Thailand Philippines Viet Nam Malaysia Singapore Australia New Zealand Republic of Korea Japan  Figure 1.
Internet penetration in selected Asia-Pacific economies16                                                           16 Source: ITU Facts and Figures 2016, http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx accessed on 18 May 2017.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     8   Economies	with	High	 Internet	penetration    Economies	with	Mid  Internet	penetration    Economies	with	Low  Internet	penetration     Japan   Republic	of	  Korea   Australia   New	Zealand   Singapore   Malaysia	  						Viet	Nam	  Thailand	  Philippines   India   Bangladesh      Table 1.
Selected economies for the different levels of Internet penetration      Methodology and Limitations   The methodology used to collect data and resources mainly secondary research online, using key search  terms related to online child safety (See Table 2).
Areas   Child-Related	Terms  Internet-Related	Terms  Safety-Related	Terms   Other	Key	Terms   Searched	Terms	  Child  Adolescent  Online  Safety  Policy  Implementation	   Young  Teenager  Cyber  Protection  Legal     Kid    Internet    Registration     Juvenile         Act       Table 2.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     9   Literature Review   The risks that children encounter on the Internet are diverse, but can be divided into three groups:17    Content – The types of content that children encounter online may be inappropriate, potentially  dangerous and illegal, such as websites that promote self-harm, hate speech and pornography.
Usage/Conduct – The way that children use the Internet may put them at risk.
This includes the types of  content that children create and share with others.
The risks range from cyberbullying, sexting,18 fraudulent  transactions, to privacy and security concerns.
Internet addiction is also a concern for many countries.
Interaction/Communication – Interacting with individuals especially on social media networks and  chatrooms, can expose children to risks such as online grooming,19 and arranging to meet with potentially  or actually abusive strangers.
A. R. Mubarak, "Child Safety Issues in Cyberspace: A Critical Theory on Trends and Challenges in the ASEAN  Region," International Journal of Computer Applications, Vol.
It covers  the ASEAN sub-region, including several economies from all three clusters in this study, as well as all three  groups of risks described above.
The study provides some information on legislation and policies that are in place to address child online  safety.
It focuses on the following themes:    Content –  •   Children’s access to sexual images and pornography that could lead to them engaging in risky sexual  acts   Using mobile phone cameras for inappropriate purposes  Online gaming and gambling, and Internet addiction     Usage/Conduct –  •  •                                                      17 London School of Economic and Political Science Media Policy Project Blog, "Children's safety on the Internet: A Guide to  Stakeholders," 31 March 2015, http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2015/03/31/childrens-safety-on-the-internet-a-guide-to- stakeholders/.
Research shows that 88% of self- generated sexually explicit content online was taken from its original location and uploaded to a different Internet site.
To do this they are exploiting the popularity with children of chat  rooms and social networking websites.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     10   Cyberbullying   Social networking sites and child grooming  Online prostitution and the production and distribution of child pornography   •    Interaction/Communication –  •  •    Due to the borderless nature of the Internet, the Mubarak study urges ASEAN member countries to  develop a region-wide, if not a uniform, policy on child protection issues.
It suggests that many countries  need to define the legal obligation of Internet service providers (ISPs) to protect children online.
The author notes that the sub-region’s economic,  social and cultural diversity may pose a short-term challenge to developing a coordinated strategy for child  online safety.
The report highlights the lack of adequate resources to support interventions and activities, and the  absence of monitoring mechanisms to assess implementation and impact of plans to tackle online child  abuse.
It also illustrates the lack of data and information on many aspects of child online sexual abuse and  exploitation.
UNICEF has published a number of reports related to child online safety issues over the past decade,  including a similar study, Child Safety Online: Global Challenges and Strategies in 2012,22 focusing on abuse  and exploitation online, but also touching upon cyberbullying and the impact of pornographic content on  children.
The report considers how children across the world use the Internet, and examines specific online activities  and experiences that have the potential to place them at risk.
It outlines relevant international law and key  challenges to governments and law enforcement agencies, and concludes by proposing a strategic  protection framework with four main objectives: (1) empowering children and promoting their resilience;  (2) removing impunity for abusers; (3) reducing availability of harmful material from the Internet; and (4)  promoting recovery and rehabilitation for children who have experienced harm.
But while 75% of surveyed states have policies promoting basic ICT literacy skills to  children—specifically those in secondary school—less attention is given to training beyond basic ICT  literacy, including skills to ‘enhance....interactive and critical use of media’, as well as constructive online  participation and content creation.
More than two-thirds of member states involve multiple sectors, such as law enforcement, health,  education and security, in developing cyber safety and privacy policies.
Indeed, the study underlines the lack of rigorously obtained data on children’s behaviours and  perceptions online among member states in the region, potentially leading to the development and  implementation of policy based on general and untested assumptions.
Many do not have assessment programmes in place to measure the efficacy of  their policies and procedures.
OECD, The Protection of Children Online (Paris, 2012)24    The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member countries include four of  the five selected economies with high Internet penetration level—Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea and  New Zealand.
This publication includes recommendations from the OECD Council on the protection of  children online, and a report on the risks faced by children and the policies to protect them.
It covers all the  all three groups of risks described above—content, usage/conduct and interaction/communication.
The report examines policy measures available to OECD member and non-member countries, compares  existing and planned policy approaches, and explores how international cooperation can enhance the  protection of children on the Internet.
To catch up with children’s  rapid Internet adoption, governments need to:     •  Manage policy complexity through enhanced coordination, consistency and coherence;  •  •   Adopt an evidence-based policymaking approach; and  Take advantage of international cooperation to improve the efficiency of national policy frameworks  and foster capacity building.
World Bank and the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children, Protecting Children from  Cybercrime: Legislative Responses in Asia to Fight Child Pornography, Online Grooming, and Cyberbullying  (Washington, D.C., 2015)25     Jointly conducted by the World Bank and the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children, this  study provides an overview of 17 Asian countries' legislative responses to online child abuse and  exploitation, with a focus on child pornography (or child abuse images), online grooming and cyberbullying.
It (1) analyses the extent to which existing legislative measures are in line with relevant international  practices; (2) presents examples of good practices; and (3) recommends measures to strengthen the  national legal framework to address child abuse and exploitation.
These include the following:    •  •   •   •  •  •   •   Provide a definition of child pornography  Enact new laws and/or amend existing laws to criminalise activities with specific regard to child  pornography, and ensure implementation  Criminalise an act that aids or abets the commission of child pornography offenses, as well as an  attempt to commit such offenses  Provide appropriate penalties for child pornography offenses  Take necessary measures to establish extraterritorial jurisdiction over child pornography offenses  Require ISPs to report child pornography to relevant authorities, and take steps to prevent further  transmission of the discovered child pornography  Criminalise the use of ICTs to commit illicit activities related to child pornography, including  downloading, viewing and accessing child pornography  Criminalise advertising child sex tourism through the Internet and associated technologies  Adopt legislation to criminalise online grooming  Introduce legislation regarding cyberbullying  Raise awareness around the issue of sexting, and develop legislation to combat and prevent sexting   •  •  •  •      UNICEF, Child Online Protection in India, (New Delhi, 2016)26     One of the country-specific reports published by UNICEF, this study assesses child online safety in India,  and covers children’s online usage/conduct and interaction/communication.
The report examines India’s response system to online sexual abuse and exploitation, and takes note of  prevention efforts through education, as well as the limitations of existing policies to protect children on  the Internet.
Lina Acca Methew, "Online Child Safety from Sexual Abuse in India," Journal of Information Law and  Technology, Vol.
1 (2009)27     Published in 2009, this academic paper focuses on online grooming, access to sexually explicit content, and  the production and reception of online child sexual abuse materials.
It argues that bullying is not a technological or legal problem,  but an educational and social one:    Remedies for bullying that target the medium in which bullying occurs or the legal framework will be  ineffective.
It cites institutional and technology tools that children can use to empower themselves to prevent or  mitigate bullying, as well as programmes offered by social networks to take down serious abuse.
Legislation and Policies   Child Pornography    All selected economies, regardless of their level of Internet penetration, criminalise the production and  distribution of child pornography in domestic law:      Economies with High                                  Internet Penetration  Economies with Moderate                         Internet Penetration  Economies with Low Internet Penetration  • China   -Article 366 of the Criminal Law  • Malaysia  -Child Act 2001 -Section 293 of the Penal Code -Sections 211 and 233 of the  Communications and Multimedia Act 1998  • Philippines  -Articles 201 and 355 of the Criminal Code -Anti-Child Pornography Act of 2009 -Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012  • Thailand  -Anti-Child Pornography Act of 2009 -Computer Crime Act 2007  • Viet Nam  -The Law on Information Techonology  • Bangladesh  -Articles 292 and 294 of the Criminal Code -Pornography Control Act 2012 -Article 57 of the ICT Act  • India  -Protection of Children from Sexual  Offenses Act 2012 -Sections 67, 67A and 67B of the  Information Technology (Amendment) Act  • Indonesia  -Article 295(1) of the Criminal Code -Law No.
44 of 2008 about                 Pornography -Law No.11 of 2008 concerning Electronics  Information and Transaction  • Sri Lanka  -Section 3 of the Penal Code (Amendment)  Act  • Australia -  -Divisions 273 and 474 of the Criminal  Code  • Japan - -Articles 174 and 175 of the Criminal  Code -Act on Punishment of Activities Relating  to Child Prostitution and Child  Pornography, and the Protection of  Children -Act on Development of an Environment  that Provides Safe and Secure Internet Use  for Young People 2008 -Online Dating Site Regulation Law   2003  • Republic of Korea - -Articles 243-245 of the Criminal Code -Act of the Protection of Children and  Juveniles from Sexual Abuse  • New Zealand - -Sections 124 and 131B of the Crimes   Act -Sections 3 and 127 of the Films, Video and  Publications Classficiation Act  • Singapore - -Sections 293 and 376E of the Criminal  Code -Section 32 of the Films Act -Sections 11 and 12 of the              Publications Act  Table 3.
List of national legislations related to child pornography in selected economies       internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     15   According to the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children (ICMEC)'s Global Review of Child  Pornography:29     The commercial trade of child pornography online has been significantly reduced due to a variety of  successful efforts to combat its growth.
There has, however, been an increase in the trade of illicit content  between individuals and groups via peer-to-peer networks.
Those in high Internet penetration economies  tend to have a clear and consistent definition of “child” and “child pornography”, and include offenses  facilitated by all Internet-enabled platforms.
Australia, the Philippines and Singapore have gone a step  further, introducing legal measures to deal with offenses related to online child grooming.30    Laws on child pornography in moderate and low Internet penetration economies are not as  comprehensive.
It is important to harmonise  national and international legal standards as inconsistent policies weaken prevention and prosecution  efforts, and allow child predators to target countries where they would be best able to exploit children.
The main international legal instrument that addresses child pornography is the Optional Protocol to the  Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography  (OPSC).
It requires countries to criminalise (1) child pornography, whether committed  domestically or transnationally, on an individual or organised basis, as well as (2) simple possession  regardless of intent to distribute.
The Convention on Cybercrime includes offenses related to child pornography.
Acts for Other Child Online Safety Issues    Economies with high Internet penetration are more likely to have enacted laws on other aspects of child  online safety, such as children’s exposure to harmful content, cyberbullying and Internet addiction.
They are  also more likely to have a broad strategy for empowering children to protect themselves online, with  government agencies, the private sector and not-for-profit groups working together to provide young  Internet users the skills and tools they need to take control of their well-being and strengthen their  resilience to risks on the Internet.
There however does not seem to be any targeted legislative response to  children’s online privacy and their protection from information security risks.
Harmful Content    In Japan, the Act on Development of an Environment that Provides Safe and Secure Internet Use for Young  People was passed in 2008 and amended a year later.32 It mandates 33 the:    •  •   Establishment of a national plan for measures to provide safe and secure Internet use for children;  Promotion of education and awareness-raising activities on appropriate Internet use at the national  and local levels; and  Provision of service to filter harmful content.
•    The Act compels businesses related to the Internet to filter content harmful to children.
These include  Internet service providers, mobile service providers, manufacturers of equipment with functions to access  the Internet, and software developers.
Content filtering and blocking, often involving blanket takedowns at the national level, is increasingly  being used as a risk reduction measure in the region.
However, these come with a corresponding danger of  restricting Internet users, including young people, from exploring and making full use of the digital space  for their personal, educational and social growth34.
Filtering technologies are prone to two simple inherent  flaws: under-blocking and over-blocking.
Under-blocking refers to the failure of filtering to block access to  all targeted content.
32	Japan Act on Development of an Environment that Provides Safe and Secure Internet Use for Young People (Act No.
34 Content blocking and censorship also runs into the risk of making intermediaries such as Internet access providers, social networks  and search engines liable for the content hosted on their servers and platforms.
It is thus equally important to integrate transparency  and accountability into measures that involve third-party filtering or takedowns.
For more information on intermediary liability, see  the Manila Principles at https://www.manilaprinciples.org/  35 For more information on the uses and limits of content blocking techniques, see Internet Society, Perspectives on Internet Content  Blocking (2017), https://www.internetsociety.org/doc/internet-content-blocking; and Internet Society, Children and the Internet  (2012), https://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/bp-childrenandtheinternet-20129017-en.pdf   internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     17   Cyberbullying    Recently, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines and Singapore, have passed laws to protect children  against cyberbullying.
New Zealand’s Harmful Digital Communications Act in 2015.37:    •  •   •  •   •   •   •   Establishes a set of guiding Communication Principles under which the Act operates;  Sets up a government-approved agency to help Internet users who believe themselves harmed by  digital communications;  Creates a new set of court orders that New Zealand's District Courts can serve against Internet hosts  or authors, on referral from the Approved Agency;  Constructs a new set of civil and criminal offenses for creating or propagating "harmful digital  communications"; and  Introduces a new 48-hour content takedown process, whereby individuals can demand online  hosting providers to remove content they believe is harmful.
The Philippine Anti-Bullying Act of 2013 requires schools to develop and implement anti-cyberbullying  policies, and the Department of Education to issue administrative sanctions for non-compliance.38    Singapore ‘s Protection from Harassment Act, passed in 2014 and revised the following year39 criminalises  cyber- and other forms of harassment offline, including stalking.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     18     Internet Addiction    Chapter 3 of the Republic of Korea Juvenile Protection Act, passed in 2014.41 deals with preventing juvenile  addiction to Internet games.
Chapter 3 consists of four articles on Internet addiction:    •  •   Article 24 requires a parental authority’s consent prior to a minor’s use of Internet games;   Article 25 requires Internet game providers to specify the game’s appropriateness for a particular age  group, and inform parents or legal guardians on any payments related to the product;  Article 26 “restricts the provision of Internet games to juveniles under the age of 16 between 12  midnight and 6am; and  Article 27 details the support given for juveniles afflicted with addiction to Internet games by the,  Ministry of Gender Equality and Family.
•   •     Other countries in the region, such as China, have begun to address Internet addiction through measures  like rehabilitation programmes and by limiting permissible hours for children in Internet cafes.
An important international legal instrument that addresses child safety and protection online is the  Convention on the Rights of the Child, which all selected economies have signed and ratified.
Specific  provisions, such as Article 19, requires countries to take appropriate legislative, administrative, social and  educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse,  neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child has affirmed that Article 19 applies to violence through  information communication technologies (ICTs), including sexual abuse for the production and  dissemination child abuse images; exposure to harmful material; bullying;  harassment; or being groomed  for sexual activities.42 In addition, Article 16 recognises children’s right to privacy, and Articles 13, 15 and 17  make governments responsible for ensuring children’s freedom of expression, freedom to seek information  and freedom of association, all which are relevant to the benefits that the Internet provide.
Online Consent    More recently in Vietnam, a new regulation to take effect this year requires Internet users to obtain  permission from children or their legal guardians prior to posting the information of anyone below 16 years  of age online.
This includes the child’s name, age, images, address, distinguishing features and health  conditions.
The policy also entitles children and their parents to demand authorities and online service  providers to remove private information about them on the Internet.43                                                       41	Republic of Korea Juvenile Protection Act 2014, http://elaw.klri.re.kr/eng_service/lawView.do?hseq=32537&lang=ENG.
43	“Vietnam steps up child protection with new Internet law”, Vietnam Breaking News, 16 May 2017,  https://www.vietnambreakingnews.com/2017/05/vietnam-steps-up-child-protection-with-new-internet-law/	  internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     19     Child Online Safety Implementation: Policies and Plans    It must be emphasised that drafting and implementing legislation are only among the many steps that can  be taken by governments: legal measures alone are insufficient to address child online safety issues.
Other  approaches that include education, awareness-raising and cooperation with stakeholders - including young  people and children themselves-  are key.
Economies with High                                 Internet Penetration  Economies with Moderate Internet   Penetration  Economies with Low                                 Internet Penetration  • Australia  -The National Safe Schools Framework  • Japan  -Responses to Online Bullying -Information Moral Education  • Malaysia  -National Child Protection Policy -Plan of Action on Child Online Protection  • Philippines   -Child Protection Against Online Sexual  Abuse and Exploitation Program  • Viet Nam  -Joint Circular on Management of Online  Games  • India  -National Policy on Information and  Communication Technology -National Advisory on Preventing and  Combating Cyber Crime against Children,   2012  Table 4.
In Japan, it is mandatory for  elementary school students to take an “Information Moral Education” course.
In Australia, the National Safe  Schools Framework provides Australian schools with a set of guiding principles to develop student safety.44    Malaysia’s National Child Protection Policy and Plan of Action on Child Online Protection is consistent with  the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the country’s Child Act 2001.
The policy does not explicitly  address the protection of children online, but it can be applied to both the offline and online  environment.45 Drafted in 2015, the Plan of Action on Child Online Protection has four focus areas: (1)  advocacy and awareness-raising; (2) prevention of online child abuse; (3) interventions in identified cases,  and (4) support for victims and their families.46 These will be carried out by the assigned lead agencies: the  Women, Family and Community Development Ministry; the Science, Technology and Innovation Ministry;  the Education Ministry; the Home Ministry, the Malaysian Communication and Multimedia Commission  (MCMC) and Malaysian Royal Police.
In the Philippines, the Department of Social Welfare and Development, the Department of Justice and the  Asia Foundation launched a three-year programme with support from the Australian Government and                                                      44 Australian Government Department of Education and Training, “The National Safe Schools Framework,”  http://education.gov.au/national-safe-schools-framework-0.
45 Ministry of Women and Family Development, “National Child Protection Policy,”  http://www.jkm.simple.my/content.php?pagename=dasar_perlindungan_kanak-kanak_negara&lang=en.
46 Ministry of Women and Family Development, “Child Online Protection in Malaysia,”  http://www.childhelplineinternational.org/media/154436/1-ministry-ptcop.pdf; and Open Gov, "Malaysia online child protection plan  ready for action, says Minister," 27 March 2015, http://www.opengovasia.com/articles/6357-malaysian-online-child-protection-plan- ready-for-action-says-minister.
The Philippines Child Protection Against Online Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Programme aims to  develop the capacity of the court system, police, social services and the education sector on issues related  to child online sexual abuse and exploitation.
Its components include:47    •  •  •   Drafting a Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act;  Advocating for child-friendly rules in family courts;  Establishing community-based, multi-sector and local task forces in selected pilot areas to serve as  Child Protection Quick Reaction Teams;  Legal audit of online child sexual abuse cases in courts; and  Public information and education campaigns on the rights of children against online sexual abuse and  exploitation, and multi-sector training of those involved in the justice system.
•  •     In 2015, the Viet Nam Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC) issued a circular to govern the  production, provision and use of online gaming services.
It includes the protection of children, and calls for measures to:49    •   Provide access to ICT tools for equitable, inclusive and affordable education for all children especially  in remote, tribal and hard to reach areas; and  Promote safe and enjoyable engagement of children with new technology in accordance with their  age and level of maturity, taking into consideration respect for their own culture and roots.
•     The Indian Government's National Advisory on Preventing and Combating Cyber Crime against Children,  prepared in 2012, provides a set of guidelines to help state agencies minimise cases of cybercrime against  young Internet users.
The government is also planning to establish a National Cyber Crime Coordination  Centre with a dedicated unit for cyber offenses against women and children.
Regional and International Policies, Plans and Initiatives    There is a growing number of agreements to help promote coordination and cooperation among APAC  economies in tackling child online safety issues.
Those with high Internet penetration and increasingly,  those with moderate Internet penetration, are joining global networks that can support their domestic  initiatives to tackle child online safety issues.
48 http://en.nhandan.com.vn/society/item/3057302-vietnam-introduces-measures-to-regulate-online-games.html  49 Government of India, Ministry of Women and Child Development, National Policy for Children, 2013,  http://www.childlineindia.org.in/pdf/The-National-Policy-for-Children-2013.pdf.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     21   against Children, approved in 2015, includes the development of preventive measures against online  violence as a priority action.50    The Asia-Pacific Financial Coalition Against Child Pornography (APAC-FCACP), an initiative of ICMEC, was  launched in 2009 to fight against the online sale and dissemination of child sexual exploitation materials.
APAC-FCACP members include banks, credit card companies, online third-party payment systems,  technology companies, social networking platforms, industry associations and law enforcement agencies.51    The Child Online Protection (COP) Initiative of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) has  emerged as an international platform for dialogue, engaging with multiple stakeholders52 to develop child  online protection guidelines for: (1) children; (2) parent, guardians and educations; (3) industry; and (4)  policymakers.
ITU has also come up with comparable indicators to measure various aspects of child online  safety.53    The Dynamic Coalition for Child Online Safety at the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) aims to create an  open avenue for the discussion of fundamental and practical issues related to child online safety among  representatives from children's organisations, government, industry, academia and other civil society  groups.54    The International Association of Internet Hotlines (INHOPE)55 collects reports of illegal online activities  using 51 hotlines in 45 countries.
Its members include Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea and New Zealand  INHOPE Foundation likewise supports hotlines in Cambodia and Thailand.
The network allows countries to  coordinate and exchange information among themselves, and with law enforcement and ISPs, particularly  in reporting and removing illegal content that is hosted abroad..     Insafe, a European network of awareness centres for child online protection, organises the annual Safer  Internet Day every February, and involves numerous countries outside Europe.56    The Virtual Global Taskforce for Combating Online Child Sexual Abuse57 is an international alliance of law  enforcement agencies, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and industry players.
Members include the  Australian Federal Police, Indonesian National Police, Korean National Police Agency Cyber Bureau,  Philippine National Police Anti Cybercrime Group and the New Zealand Police.
INTERPOL, the world’s largest international police organisation, counts all of the selected economies in this  report as its members.
INTERPOL’s International Child Sexual Exploitation database has identified more than  8,200 victims around the world, with an average of seven child victims found every day in 2015.
Its Baseline  project works with private entities to encourage industry and network administrators to recognise, report  and remove child abuse material from their networks.
The INTERPOL Specialists Group on Crimes Against Children brings  together experts to share best practices and information on the apprehension of child sex offenders and                                                      50	Ibid.
54 Internet Governance Forum, "Dynamic Coalition on Child Online Safety," http://igf.wgig.org/dynamic_coalitions.php?listy=13.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     22   their treatment and management within the community.
It involves  70 member countries, along with major international organisations, 20 global technology corporations  including Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Tencent, and 17 civil society organisations.
These countries commit to four  policy targets that aim to: (1) identify, support and protect victims; (2) identify and prosecute offenders; (3)  raise awareness; and (4) reduce the availability of child pornography online.59 Soon after the merger in June  2016, WeProtect Global Alliance launched the Global Partnership and Fund to End Violence Against  Children, in partnership with UNICEF and World Health Organization, and supported by a multi-donor  fund.60    ECPAT International is a global network of 90 civil society organisation in 82 countries, including most of  the economies in this study (Singapore is not a member).
Actor Analysis   Provide capacity building for law enforcement to identify and care for victims; and  Drive public information and awareness-raising to support behavioural change.
Develop and implement stronger legal frameworks;   Child online safety requires the involvement and cooperation of various stakeholders at local, national,  regional and international levels.
Economies with High Internet Penetration    Australia    Australia’s Enhancing Online Safety for Children Act in 2015 established the Office of the Children’s e-Safety  Commissioner.
Specifically, it runs the Budd:E Cybersecurity Education61 platform, an interactive tool for young people, and                                                      58	Virtual Global Taskforce for Combating Online Child Sexual Abuse, “Member Countries,” http://virtualglobaltaskforce.com/who-we- are/member-countries/.
61 https://budd-e.cybersmart.gov.au/   internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     23   a free mobile app, Cybersafety Help Button62, that provides Internet users, particularly children, with easy  access to online safety information and assistance.
The Department of Education works closely with the Department of Communications, which along with  the Australian Communications and Media Authority is primarily responsible for cybersafety matters,.63 It  makes available online safety education to children, parents, guardians and teachers, and operates the  “Safe Schools Hub”, a one-stop shop for relevant information and resources.
Another website for schools is  “Bullying No Way!” which has an online curriculum and other resources related to bullying online and  offline.64     Platforms such as Digital Licence,65 offer certification programmes on digital reputation, well-being and  safety for different age groups.
Global organisations, such as UK-based Think You Know, and Cyber Safe  Kids are also involved in empowering young people in Australia through guidance, workshops and training.
Japan    In Japan, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology trains teachers, and  encourages students to “acquire the basic attitude for behaving appropriately in the information society”  through its model curriculum for information morals education.67     Likewise, the National Information Security Center emphasises education on cyberethics.68 The Content  Evaluation and Monitoring Association, established upon the recommendation of the Ministry of Internal  Affairs and Communications, is a third-party organisation that certifies and tracks the operation of mobile  Internet service providers.
It is involved in the filtering of harmful content and in educational activities to  improve digital literacy.69                                                       62 https://www.esafety.gov.au/complaints-and-reporting/cybersafety-help-button  63	Other organisations or initiatives working on online child safety in Australia are: the Australian Cybercrime Online Reporting  Network (http://www.acorn.gov.au); Bully Zero Australia Foundation (http://bzaf.org.au); Daniel Morcombe Foundation  (http://www.danielmorcombe.com.au); Education Services Australia (http://www.esa.edu.au); Kids Helpline  (http://www.kidshelpline.com.au); Lawstuff (http://www.lawstuff.org.au); National Association for Prevention of Child Abuse and  Neglect (http://www.napcan.org.au); National Center Against Bullying (https://www.amf.org.au); Reachout.com  (http://www.au.reachout.com); Stay Smart Online (http://www.staysmartonline.gov.au); The Line (http://www.theline.org.au);  ThinkUKnow (http://www.thinkuknow.org.au)  64 Australian Government Department of Education and Training, "Cybersafety in schools," https://www.education.gov.au/cybersafety- schools.
66 http://www.creepquiz.eq.edu.au/index.html  67 Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, “Promotion of information morals education at school to acquire the  basic attitude for behaving appropriately in information society,”  http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/html/hpac200701/1283225_004.pdf.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     24     The not-for-profit Japan Internet Safety Promotion Association has  a multi-stakeholder approach to child  online safety—the Anti-Child Pornography Working Group deals with information on relevant international  responses as well as legal and technical measures in Japan; while the Social Game Working Group tackles  problems related to gaming among children and young people.70 Meanwhile, the Safer Internet  Association, whose members include Yahoo Japan and local ISP Sakura Internet, receives reports from the  public on potentially harmful online content, and also trains instructors to provide Internet safety courses  for both children and adults71      Republic of Korea    In the Republic of Korea, the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family screens harmful content on the  Internet by reporting it to the Korea Communications Standards Commission (KCSC), through its Illegal and  Harmful Information Report Center and the Game Rating and Administration Committee, which  subsequently send blocking requests to online portals.
The harmful content is listed with the Parents’ Union  on Net.72 KCSC also SafeNet, which has a website rating system and provides information on content filters.
The National Information Society Agency (NIA) works with various government agencies, including the  Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MISP) to raise awareness on cyber ethics and cyberbullying  issues among children, parents, guardians and educators.
New Zealand    In New Zealand, the Department of Internal Affairs provides information on censorship and Internet child  safety, including guidelines for parents and interactive sites for children.
Its website has an online safety  agreement template to help parents establish some rules for children’s Internet use.73    The Office of the Privacy Commissioner74, which administers the country’s Privacy Act, has partnered with  NetSafe and the New Zealand National Commission for UNESCO to launch OWLS75, a resource that  teachers can use to orient students on concepts like online privacy.
Its Youth Privacy Kit,76 co-developed by  young people, has guidance notes and ideas for presenters, and includes a variety of youth-oriented  activities.
Netsafe,77 a not-for-profit organisation funded by the Ministry of Education78, InternetNZ and other  partners, produces a range of materials on online safety for children of different age groups, as well as for                                                      70 Japan Internet Safety Promotion Association, “Outline of JISPA,” http://www.good-net.jp/english/.
73 New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs, "Child Safety Online," https://www.dia.govt.nz/Censorship-Child-Safety-Online.
It is a member of INHOPE, and partners with public, private and civil  society groups, including Microsoft and Google, to promote online safety issues.
It identifies child sexual offenders and child exploitation sites; works  with district-based child exploitation squads and the Department of Internal Affairs and Customs; and  coordinates international investigations.81    The website Connect Smart, a multi-stakeholder initiative led by the National Cyber Policy Office,82  provides resources on online safety for children, parents, schools and businesses.
Singapore    In Singapore, the government-backed Media Literacy Council83 develops public awareness and education  programmes on cyberwellness.
This includes cyberbullying, making virtual friends, sharing personal  information, cybersecurity, inappropriate content and Internet addiction.
It also takes charge of organising  the annual Safer Internet Day.
The Ministry of Communications and Information’s Cyber Security Agency (CSA) manages the website  “GOsafeonline” which contains tips on how to safely use social networks, as well as resources for parents.84  Recently, CSA has collaborated with the Singapore Personal Data Protection Commission to develop a  series of Student Activity Books to raise awareness on cybersecurity and personal data protection.85    The examples above indicate that economies with high Internet penetration are actively working to  address a variety of child online safety issues, both through top-down approaches to limit and respond to  children’s exposure to online harm, and increasingly, through initiatives to enable children, parents and  educators to take charge of minimising the dangers that young people face online.
85 GOsafeonline, "Cyber Security Activity Book," 15 November 2016, https://www.csa.gov.sg/gosafeonline/resources/activity-book.
86 In Taiwan, where some 84% of the population are online, a not-for-profit group, iWin, receives complaints about content that may   internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     26   As economies with high Internet penetration are generally high-income economies, the public sector tends  to be better resourced to lead and coordinate child online safety measures.
Economies with Moderate Internet Penetration    Malaysia    In Malaysia, the Ministry of Women, Family and Community Development’s Child Online Protection  Taskforce, comprised of relevant ministries and agencies, helps to mitigate online threats and crimes such  as cyberbullying, pornography, sexting and cybergrooming.
It also led the development of the Plan of  Action on Child Online Protection, in coordination with other government agencies.
MCMC has since 2012 been  collaborating with different stakeholders to carry out the Klik Dengan Bijak (Click Wisely Programme),87  which aims to raise online safety awareness among children and young people, as well as parents,  guardians and other caregivers.88    The Ministry of Education, along with Cybersecurity Malaysia--an agency of the Ministry of Science,  Technology and Innovation--and mobile service provider DiGi Telecommunications implements the  CyberSAFE Programme to raise awareness of online safety issues among children, parents and educators.
It  conducts the annual CyberSAFE in Schools National Survey to investigate the extent to which children are  exposed to online risks and harm,89 and more recently has partnered with UNICEF to organise a Digital  Citizen Camp for schoolchildren to help nurture peer-to-peer learning on positive conduct on the Internet.
Locally, Digi carries out Telenor’s global ‘Be a Cyberhero’ campaign, which aims to engage four million  children by 2020 in online safety practices.
Along with Digi, the Malaysia Digital Economy Corporation  (MDEC) is developing a digital citizenship module for schools, as well as for the #mydigitalmaker Mobile  Learning Unit that will make its way to rural areas across the country.
Philippines    The Inter-Agency Council Against Child Pornography (IACACP),90 comprised of 12 governmental and three  non-governmental organisations, was established in 2010 to coordinate, monitor and oversee the  implementation of the Anti-Child Pornography Act of 2009.
The Philippine Department of Social Welfare  and Development leads the #StopChildPornPH initiative, launched in 2016, to provide online safety                                                                                                                                                                 be inappropriate for children, as well as those that might violate a child’s online privacy.
It liaises with the sector’s regulatory body, the  National Communications Commission, as well as other government agencies to rectify or remove harmful content on the Internet.
88  Partners  include  the  Ministry  of  Communications  and  Multimedia;  Ministry  of  Education;  Ministry  of  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation; Ministry of Women, Family and Community Development; Ministry of Youth and Sports; Royal Malaysian Police; National  Service Training Department; Communications and Multimedia Content Forum; Scouts Association; Kidzania.
The government also works with UNICEF  and various NGOs on child online safety issues (see section on UNICEF below).
The regulator had previously issued a memorandum, back in 2014, for  Internet service providers to prohibit access to websites with child pornography content.
Thailand    In Thailand, the Department of Children and Youth of the Ministry of Social Development and Human  Security leads the development of a Strategy for Child and Youth Online Protection and Enhancement.92    Mobile operator DTAC, owned by Telenor, has launched a number of initiatives to drive online  empowerment among young people in the country.
Under its Safe Internet project, supported by the  National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) and the Ministry of ICT, it has  organised talk show pilots in several cities, anti-cyberbullying campaigns, summer camps, and has created  the Thai Digital Citizen Hub for children to share their concerns and coping strategies online.
Meanwhile, the not-for-profit Internet Foundation for Development of Thailand conducts training and  develops resources on online safety for children, parents and teachers93.
It also operates the Thai Hotline94  with support from INHOPE Foundation, and in partnership with the Ministry of ICT, law-enforcement  agencies, ISPs, web hosting services and child protection organisations.95 The hotline allows anyone to  report cases of online child sexual abuse and exploitation, privacy violations, and any content that is illegal  under Thai legislation, and works with partners to process legal actions.
The Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of ICT launched a Cyber Scout Programme in 2010, recruiting  students and young volunteers to monitor online content that deemed potentially offensive.96                                                            91 The Philippines’ Anti-Child Pornography Act has been criticised for having a mandatory filtering provision, to be implemented by  ISPs with instructions from the NTC, which in turn acts upon the recommendations of the IACACP.
The clause has likewise drawn flak  from civil society organisations as an ineffective measure in stemming both the local production of and the foreign consumption of  child porn originating from the country, one of the top sources of child pornography worldwide.
96 Cyber Scout, http://www.cyberscout.in.th/home.php.
It’s Chong Hack97 campaign encourages young people to secure their  accounts on social media.
More recently, it marked Safer Internet Day with a multi-stakeholder symposium  to promote digital literacy and online child protection in the country.
Overall, the public sector in economies with moderate Internet penetration has begun to address safety  issues for children in cyberspace, albeit less rigorously than those with high Internet penetration.
In the  former, other actors - from the private sector to NGOs and international organisations - are becoming more  and more involved in projects to promote online child protection.
UNICEF    UNICEF has been supporting research that will guide policymaking and help raise public and stakeholder  awareness with regards to online child protection    At the regional level, the UNICEF East Asia Pacific Regional Office and Child Rights Coalition Asia jointly  launched an awareness-raising programme that develops and distributes child-friendly materials with the  involvement of children.
The partnership aims to help further develop the Digital Thumbprint Programme, a  school-based workshop adopted by Globe from Optus of Australia.99 To better understand Filipino  children’s online behaviour, UNICEF has commissioned the University of the Philippines Manila – National  Institute of Health to localise and implement the EU Kids Online Survey, which should provide an overview  of children’s online access, use, risk, coping strategies and safety awareness in pilot areas.
The initiative  promotes children's responsible use of the Internet, and aims to curb cyberbullying and other forms of  abuse and exploitation.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     29   students and communities.101 More recently in Malaysia, it partnered with Digi Communications to launch a  parental guidebook to promote safe Internet experience for children on social media.
Economies with Low Internet Penetration    Bangladesh    In 2011, Ministry of Social Welfare' Department of Social Services, in partnership with a local NGO and with  support from UNICEF, piloted a Child Helpline which in 2015 was extended to other areas in the country.102     A recent survey by Telenor, a mobile service provider, found that almost half of the 1,896 urban students103 ,  polled experienced cyberbullying.104      India105    In India, child pornography is reported to the Police Cybercrime Cell, which seeks clearance from the  Department of Telecommunications, and from the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  (MeitY) to block sites containing illegal content.
Google has worked with MeitY and the Computer Emergency Response Team-India to organise Internet  safety campaigns, including its Web Rangers initiative to foster peer-to-peer learning on digital footprint  management among teenagers.
The Internet and Mobile Association of India has likewise partnered with  Opera Software for its ‘Safe Surfing’ initiative, and with Facebook to train young students, teachers and  parents on community awareness and Internet safety practices.
Local not-for-profit Aarambh collaborated with the UK-based Internet Watch Foundation to establish a  national hotline for reporting, removing and blocking CSAM.
NGOs like Aarambh, the Tulir Centre for the  Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse, and the Centre for Cyber Victim Counselling are among the  organisations providing recovery and care for victims of child online abuse and exploitation.
Standalone programmes exist, although many have limited reach: The Data Security Council of India, an  industry association, has conducted awareness raising campaigns for children and adults on cybersecurity  and cybercrimes.
Private sector organisations like Intel Security, Microsoft and Telenor target children  and/or parents in their online safety programmes, and tackle issues related to abuse, bullying and malware.
Information on the country was drawn largely from the UNICEF study.
India, when compared with those of  moderate and high Internet penetration has weaker legislation and actors are less coordinated in tackling  child online safety issues.
Safely” Launched To Help Create a Safer Internet Environment For Users In Viet Nam," 31 May 2011,  https://www.unicef.org/vietnam/media_16185.
102 UNICEF, "Child Help Line offers protection against cyber crime," http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/media_9966.htm.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     30   Emerging Priority Issues   This study finds that all selected economies with high Internet penetration have relatively stronger  legislation and policies to address a variety of child online safety issues.
These are also high-income  economies where the public sector is more likely to have greater capacity and is better resourced to lead  such measures.
Countries with moderate and low Internet penetration are starting to more actively support digital skills  training initiatives for children, but overall continue to focus on online sexual abuse and exploitation  through a range of measures—legal, policy, technical, social and educational.
However, regional and  international studies have reported that these are less effective and less well-coordinated.
Countries have highlighted difficulties in extraditing and prosecuting transborder crimes, due to  the "dual criminality"106 clause--extraterritorial legislation that requires an act to be a crime in both the  country where it took place and the country where the suspect resides.107    Online grooming, a relatively new phenomenon, has yet to be universally criminalised.
In the selected  economies in this study, only Australia, the Philippines and Singapore have introduced legal measures to  prohibit it.
The Republic of Korea is  addressing game addiction as well as smartphone and Internet addiction problems through its Smartmedia  Clean School Programme.109 Similarly, in China and India, there are camps or centres to rehabilitate and  counsel children suffering from Internet addiction.
Additionally, peer support initiatives, wherein older children mentor                                                       106	Dual criminality is a requirement in the extradition law of many countries.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety     31   younger ones on appropriate behaviour in cyberspace, can be useful in expanding an understanding of  online risks among young Internet users.
In Japan, for instance, the policy that mandates harmful content filtering also pushes for  education on appropriate Internet use for children.
Meanwhile, Malaysia’s National Child Protection Policy  includes the provision of basic knowledge to children to enable them to protect themselves from harm.
At  the global level the ITU’s Child Online Protection programme and the Internet Governance Forum’s  Dynamic Coalition for Child Online Safety both encourage the development of online protection tools and  guidelines for young people.
More broadly, all the economies covered by the study have carried out initiatives to promote digital  citizenship among young Internet users, albeit with varying degrees of impact.
Economies with high  Internet penetration in the region tend to have programmes managed by a wider range of stakeholders,  making them more sustainable, and specifically involve the education sector in promoting awareness on  responsible behaviour online among students.
Yet this study also finds a growing number of  resources—toolkits, modules, platforms and training materials—developed by different stakeholders in the  Asia-Pacific region, many of them targeting specific age groups, and focusing on social media use.
These  can be used as a take off point or as references in developing more scalable programmes and tools to  empower young Internet users.
Economies with Low                   Internet Penetration • Online sexual abuse and        exploitation  • Digital citizenship • Cyberbullying   Economies with High                  Internet Penetration • Online sexual abuse and        exploitation • Safe and secure Internet use • Cyberbullying • Cyberethics education • Digital citizenship • Addiction (game, Internet     and  smartphone) • Privacy  Economies with Moderate   Internet Penetration • Online sexual abuse and        exploitation • Cyberethics education •Digital citizenship • Cyberbullying • Addiction (online games) •Online consent   Table 5.
In domestic law, clearly define terms based on international legal standards and include offenses  facilitated by all Internet-enabled platforms    Terms such as “child”, “child pornography” and “online grooming” should be clearly defined where relevant  based on the OPSC and guidelines from ICMEC, ITU COP, UNICEF, #WePROTECT and other international  bodies.
It is also important to explicitly include offenses facilitated by all Internet-enabled platforms in  national law.
Ensure that policies to protect children online are consistent with other important policy objectives, such  as the preservation of fundamental rights     Measures that prevent and mitigate risks should not reduce the benefits of the Internet for children, and  should be consistent with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which were signed and ratified by  all countries in Asia-Pacific.
These fundamental values include the right of children to freedom of expression  and privacy.
Collaborate, adopt a multi-stakeholder approach, and ensure international cooperation    Partnerships are essential for addressing child online safety issues.
Relevant actors include (a) Government  and law enforcement agencies; (b) Social services organisations; (c) ISPs and mobile service providers; (d)  Teacher and parent associations; (e) Children and young people; (f) Child protection and welfare NGOs; (g)  Academic and research institutions; (h) Owners of public access points, e.g.
Internet cafés, telecentres,  online gaming centres; (i) Private sector; and (j) International alliances and networks    IV.
Make digital citizenship a priority in online child protection policies    Policymakers need to acknowledge children’s capacity to protect themselves, and to combat the risks that  they encounter on the Internet.
Legislation to minimise harm should be balanced with measures that make  available knowledge and tools, and that develop habits and attitudes to build children’s resilience, while  also enabling them to engage constructively online.
This includes exercising care in the content they create, the information they share  with others, and their interaction with other children and with adults, especially strangers in cyberspace.
That children as young as 10 years old can become active consumers and producers of online content  underlines the importance of empowering children to use the Internet safely and confidently at a younger  age.
Efforts to promote digital citizenship should be undertaken alongside measures to encourage parents,  guardians, caregivers and teachers to guide and assist young Internet users in safely navigating the open  Internet.
Parents and guardians should also be aware of what their children are doing online, and they  should be able to discuss any issues or concerns in a manner which encourages care and understanding  rather than being perceived as parental control.
internetsociety.org   @internetsociety    33      Child Online Safety in Asia-Pacific   V. Develop a coordinated strategy for awareness-raising and education on child online safety for different  actors    Many countries have implemented activities to raise awareness on child online safety issues among  children, parents, educators and even industry, but they are often ad hoc activities.
There are diverse groups of children of different ages, ethnicity, ability, socio-economic positions living in  urban or rural settings.
Public awareness and education materials on child online safety need to be tailored  to suit the different groups of children.
This could be implemented in schools along with digital literacy  programmes.
Strengthen the child protection and technological capacity of law enforcement agencies    Law enforcement agencies do not always view online sexual abuse and exploitation as a child protection  issue.
It is therefore important for law enforcement agencies  to be aware and sensitive to aspects of online child safety and have the will and capacity to work with  other stakeholders.
An understanding of the fast-changing Internet ecosystem is needed, as well as  expertise in areas such as digital forensics.
Engage with children to develop robust research on child online safety and integrate findings in child  protection systems    Children are a vital stakeholder in addressing issues of online safety.
Countries in the region are starting to  gather data on children’s online conduct and usage patterns, including their coping strategies and safety  awareness, but many are one-off studies.
Information from such initiatives need to be consolidated,  promoted and updated through further research to bring online child protection issues to the attention of  relevant stakeholders, and to better inform policymaking in the region.
Effective interventions require  developing a good understanding of children’s behaviour on the Internet, and the online risks they face.
Keeping current with evolving technology will enable stakeholders to develop and carry out more timely  interventions.
Develop consistent indicators to assess and monitor child online safety    There is limited statistical data on children’s use of the Internet and the risks that they face online.
International cooperation would benefit from consistent  indicators to measure child online safety.