The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is not responsible for the content of  external  sources including external websites referenced in this publication.
Neither ITU nor any person acting on its behalf  is responsible for the use that might be made of  the information contained in this publication.
Legal notice   Mention of  and references to specific countries, companies, products, initiatives or guidelines do not in any way imply that they are endorsed or  recommended by ITU, the authors, or any other organization that the authors are affiliated with, in preference to others of  a similar nature that  are not mentioned.
Requests to reproduce extracts of  this publication may be submitted to: jur@itu.int © International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Second Edition, 2016  Disclaimer   These Guidelines have been prepared by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and a team of  contributing authors from leading institutions active  in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child online safety issues.
ITU is grateful to all of  the following authors, who have contributed their valuable time and insights: (listed in alphabetical order of organisation)  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   John Carr (Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety)  •  •  Michael Moran (Interpol) •  Janice Richardson (Insafe) •  Cristina Bueti (ITU)  •  Dieter Carstensen, Cristiana de Paoli and Mari Laiho (Save the Children) •  Maria José Cantarino de Frías (Telefonica)  The authors wish to thank Kristin Kvigne (Interpol) for her detailed review and comments.
Additional information and materials relating to these Draft Guidelines can be found at: http://www.itu.int/cop/ and will be updated on a regular basis.
If  you have any comments, or if  you would like to provide any additional information, please contact cop@itu.int  Table of Contents  Foreword Getting started   1.
Children and young people’s use of technology  3.
Conclusions  Sources for further reading & inspiration  Appendix 1       “SMART rules” for children and young people  Guidelines for the age group 5-7 year old  Guidelines for the age group 8-12 year old  Guidelines for the age group 13 years and above   Parent Contract  Child’s Contract   1 5 11 29 33  47  49  55 73 75 76 76 77  Guidelines for Children and Young People  4  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young PeopleForeword  It is my pleasure to share with you the 2016 update of the Child Online  Protection Guidelines.
This version was updated at the request of  the  Member States within the framework of  the Regional Initiative on COP,  approved by the World Telecommunication Development Conference  (WTDC-2014).
In an era of  ‘always-on’ Internet, child online protection is a critical  issue which, with the borderless nature of the Internet, requires a global,  coordinated response.
By using computers and mobile devices to access the Internet, children  and young people can do a great deal to combat and guard against cyber  threats themselves, and I hope this guide will help them do so.
Mr Houlin Zhao  Secretary-General of  the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)  Guidelines for Children and Young Peoplewww.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People1  What are these Guide- lines about?
However, a young internet  user of  seven years of  age is very  unlikely to have the same needs or  interests as a 12 year old just start- ing at High School or a 17 year  old on the brink of  adulthood.
These Guidelines have been  prepared in the context of  the  Child Online Protection (COP)1  Initiative in order to establish  the foundations for a safe and  secure cyberworld not only for  today’s children but also for future  generations.
Working with younger children on  this issue should be approached  carefully.
It is important that the  explanations and the messages  you give to children about such  issues are appropriate to their  age and development.
The information society in which  today’s children and young people  are growing up, offers an instant  digital world through the click  of  a mouse.
An unprecedented  level of  services and information  is accessible through a computer  or a mobile device with Internet  access.
The barriers associated  with the cost of these devices and  access to the Internet are dimin- ishing rapidly.
All these technical  developments provide children  and young people with unparal- leled opportunities to explore  new frontiers and meet people  from faraway places.
However, children and young  people also need to be aware of   some of  the potentially negative  aspects of  the technologies.
Harmful activities can include  bullying and harassment, identity  theft and online abuse (such  as children seeing harmful and  illegal content, or being exposed  to grooming for sexual purposes,  or the production, distribution  and collection of  child abuse  material).
These are all threats to children  and young people’s well being  and a challenge that must be  addressed by all stakeholders,  including children themselves.
Whilst all providers of  online  services should do whatever they   can at a technical level to make  the Internet as safe as it can be  for children and young people,  the first and best form of  defence  in protecting YOU is making  you aware of  what can happen  online and make you understand  that there is always a solution to a  problem that you may encounter  online.
Moreover there is now a substan- tial body of  international com- mitments, law and international  instruments which underpin and  in many cases mandate action to  protect children both generally,  and also specifically in relation to  the Internet.
The United Nation’s Convention  of  the Rights of  the Child  (CRC)2 and specifically the  outcomes of  The World Summit   on the Information Society  (WSIS) (2003-2005)3, WSIS+10  High Level Event Outcome  Documents (2014)4 and the  outcomes of  the United Nations  General Assembly Overall  Review of the Implementation  of  the WSIS Outcomes (2015)5  recognize the needs of children  and young people to be protected  in cyberspace.
The Sustainable  Development Goals (SDGs)6  adopted by the United Nations in  2015 further obligates countries  to work towards ending all  forms of  abuse, exploitation  and violence affecting children  and young people by 2030.
This  includes any kind of  abuse and  exploitation faced by children and  young people online.
Through these Guidelines, the  COP Initiative calls upon all  stakeholders, including children  and young people, to promote  the adoption of  policies and  strategies that will protect children  in cyberspace and provide safer  access to all the extraordinary  opportunities and resources that  are available online.
It is hoped  that this will not only lead to  the building of  a more inclusive  information society, but also  enable countries to meet their  obligations towards protecting  and realizing the rights of   children as stated in the CRC, the  WSIS Outcomes Document and  now in the SDGs.
2  http://www.unicef.org/crc/ 3  http://www.itu.int/wsis/outcome/booklet.pdf 4  http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/implementation/2014/forum/inc/doc/outcome/362828V2E.pdf 5  http://unpan3.un.org/wsis10/ 6  http://www.wvi.org/united-nations-and-global-engagement/publication/child-friendly-version-proposed-     post-2015-goals  Guidelines for Children and Young People4  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People5  Background   Online technologies present many  possibilities to communicate,  learn new skills, be creative and  contribute to establishing a better  society for all, but often they  also bring new risks e.g.
This is a  global issue that requires a global  response from all segments of   society, including children and  young people themselves.
Recognising the grave dangers  that may face children and  young people in cyberspace, the  international community has  made a number of  agreements  and laws that protect children   and young people from any  kind of  harm online.
While  these international instruments  recognise that governments are  foremost responsible to take  action to keep children and  young people safe in relation to  the Internet, they also recognise  the important role children and  young people can play in keeping  themselves and other children  safe online.
The CRC recognises the  human rights of  all children in  all parts of  the world, including  children’s right to be protected  from any kind of  violence and  harm, including in cyberspace.
Further, the WSIS which was  held in two phases in Geneva  (from 10 to 12 December 2003)  and in Tunis (from 16 to 18  November 2005) concluded  with the approval of  the WSIS  Outcome Documents which  made a bold commitment “to  build a people-centred, inclusive  and development oriented  information society, where  everyone can create, access,  utilize and share information and  knowledge.”   At WSIS, ITU was entrusted  by leaders of  the international  community with Action Line  C5: “building confidence and  security in the use of ICTs”.
The  Tunis Commitment recognized  “the role of  ICTs in the  protection of  children and in  enhancing the development of   children” as well as the need to  “strengthen action to protect  children from abuse and defend  their rights in the context of  ICTs”.
To this  end, the WSIS+10 High-Level  Event (that took place in Geneva  in 2014) was organized as an  extended version of  the WSIS  Forum.
The High Level Event  addressed the progress made  in the implementation of  the  WSIS outcomes (2003 and 2005)  especially related to the Action  Lines, and developed proposals  on a new vision beyond 2015.   www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People7  inequality and injustice and tackle  climate change by 2030.
These  goals build upon the Millennium  Development Goals (MDGs),  which will expire at the end of   2015.
This includes any  kind of  abuse and exploitation  faced by children and young  people online.
The States are now  further obligated to work towards  making cyberspace safe for  children and young people.
In this  regard, governments and other  stakeholders should work together  to help all enjoy the benefits  of  ICTs in a safe and secure  environment.” The document  further highlights priority  areas to be addressed in the  implementation of  WSIS beyond  2015.
With regard to children’s  online security it emphasises,  “Promoting a culture of  online  security and safety, empowering  users, and encouraging national,  regional and international  cybersecurity strategies to protect  users, including children”.
It strongly criminalises  of  all kinds of  sexual offences  against children including child  pornography.
The global community of   children and young people further  stated in the Outcome Document  of  the World Congress III against  Sexual Exploitation of  Children  and Adolescents held in Brazil  in 20088 the following: “We ask  for strong cyber safety rules  which are well propagated on   both the websites and within the  communities.
To this end we call  for the increased development of   children’s, teachers’, parents’ and  family manuals which address the  threats of  the Internet in addition  to providing supplemental  information about Sexual  Exploitation of  Children.”  The African Union has also  adopted the Africa Cyber Security  Convention in 2014, which  highlights ways to address child  pornography in the region.
The latest international agreement  that secures children’s rights is  the commitment made by world  leaders to achieve the Sustainable  Development Goals (SDGs).
There were 3,500 participants including 300 adolescents – 150 of which were from foreign countries.
We are at this moment calling  for governmental actions to  effectuate laws and policies that  redound to the benefit, protection  and well-being of  children both  on the local and international level.
We also call for the adoption of  an  International Day where children will  lead the effort in awareness raising  campaigns, rallies and marches.
To  further enlarge the scope of this day,  we request the organization of  an  International Art, Essay and Speech  competition which will culminate on  this day.
We now turn our attention to the  media particularly the Internet which  poses one of  the greatest threats to   millions of  children throughout the  world.
We the children must make  known our plight for governments to  pursue strict and punitive legislation  with regards to the Internet,  especially child pornography- simply  another form of  abuse.
We similarly ask for strong  cyber safety rules which are well  propagated on both the websites and  within the communities.
To this end  we call for the increased development  of  children’s, teachers, parent’s and  family manuals which address the   threats of  the internet in addition to  providing supplemental information  about sexual exploitation of  children.
9  Source: http://www.iyac.net/iyac_charter.pdf  The full “Adolescent Declaration to End Sexual Exploitation” can be found at: http://www.unicef.org/brazil/pt/br_IIIWC_En.pdf    Guidelines for Children and Young People10  “Children and young  aware of the opportunities”  people online should be   www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People11  Children and young  people’s use of  technology  Information and Communication  Technologies (ICTs) are changing  the way children interact with  their peers, the way they access  information, express their  views, post and share creative  content.
Children and young  people specifically like the  highly interactive nature of   many Internet related services.
In general, for children, the  Internet is something they feel  secure about, something they like,   and something interesting, fun,  relaxing, useful, and friendly.
Access: A study in the United  States10 finds that the age of   accessing the Internet has reduced  a lot.
About 80% of  children  under the age of  five years use  the Internet weekly.
Moreover as  children get older, their use of   the Internet also increases.
In the  United States about 42% and 36%  of  8-11 year old boys and girls,   10  http://content.usatoday.com/communities/technologylive/post/2011/03/study-80-percent-of-children-     under-5-use-internet-weekly/1#.VkDrLOvNz8E (Accessed 9 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People2.
12  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People13  respectively, use the Internet many  times a day and around one-fifth  do so daily.11 More than 90% of   teens report going online daily —  including about 25% who say they  go online “almost constantly”.12  Across the world in South Korea,  which is considered the world’s  most wired country, government  data says about one in ten South  Korean children between the ages  of  10 and 19 are addicted to the  Internet.13  Children under nine years old  enjoy a variety of  online activities,  including watching videos, playing  games, searching for information,   doing their homework and  socialising within children’s virtual  worlds.
The range of  activities  increases with age.14 Listening to  music, watching video clips and  social networking top the list of   activities done on a daily basis by  9-16 year olds as revealed in study  of  European children and young  people.
Other social activities  that rate fairly high include using  Skype and WhatsApp.
Other  activities such as searching for  information to satisfy a curiosity,  schoolwork, playing games (alone  or in multiplayer games) are part  of  the daily media diets of around  one in three children.15  The widely available fixed broad- band Internet access in the  developed countries is still the  preferred way of  getting online,  in comparison to developing  countries where such infrastruc- tures are less developed.
In many  countries Internet cafés and other  communal resources are also  important providers of  access for  children and young people.
In recent years however mobile  Internet access has increased tre- mendously.
In the Asia Pacific re- gion, the fastest growing region in   relation to mobile subscriptions,  China and India have become  leaders in the technology with  about 980 million mobile phone  subscribers in India alone16.
The  world’s mobile connections now  number seven billion17 – more  than 230 million of  which include  Mobile Broadband18.
In Latin  America, mobile broadband is  now more widespread in the  region than fixed broadband, due  to the affordability of  mobile  devices and the growing coverage  of  mobile networks.19 Australian  statistics show that in 2015 35%  of  children aged 8 to 11 years  own a mobile phone, which is   (Accessed 2 November 2015)  11  http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Most-US-Children-Use-Internet-Least-Daily/1010789#sthash.bZFoyZxz.dpuf  (Accessed 25 November 2015) 12  Pew Research Center, Teens, Social Media & Technology Overview 2015, Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/09/teens-social-media-technology-2015/ (Accessed 9 November 2015) 13  http://www.businessinsider.com/south-korea-online-gaming-addiction-rehab-centers-2015-3 (Accessed 10 November 2015) 14  Holloway,D., Green, L. and Livingstone, S. Zero to eight.
Young children and their Internet use.
pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015) 16  Press Release, Telecom Regulatory Authority of  India, 2015, Available at: http://www.trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/WhatsNew/Documents/PR-No=47.pdf (Accessed 2 November 2015) 17  http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2015/17.aspx#.VjgW7OvNz8E (Accessed 2 November 2015) 18  https://mobiforge.com/research-analysis/global-mobile-statistics-2014-part-a-mobile-subscribers-handset-market-share-mobile-operators (Accessed 2 November 2015) 19  Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), The new digital revolution: from the consumer Internet to the industrial Internet, 2015.
Available at http://repositorio.cepal.org/     bitstream/handle/11362/38767/S1500587_en.pdf?sequence=1 (Accessed 26 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People14  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People15  twice as many as in 2007.20 It is  clear children and young people  are now increasingly using mobile  devices to go online, including  smartphones and tablets.
Digital devices: There are  number of digital devices through  which children and young people  now go online such as desktop  computers, laptop computers,  mobile phones, smartphones,  tablets, other handheld devices  such as iPod Touch, e-book  readers and games consoles.
A 2014 study in the UK shows  that more than a third of 12-15  year olds access the Internet  through a smartphone.
Moreover  the tablet is the one media device  that has grown most in popularity   amongst 5-7 year olds over the last  year, with 54% using it in 2014 as  compared to 39% in 2013.
At the  same time, access to a PC or lap- top in the home for children aged  5-15 years has been declining.21  This has also resulted in high use  of social media applications (such  as Facebook, Twitter, Whatsapp)  especially through mobile apps.
Similarly in Brazil, in 2013 a little  over half of the children (53%)  use the mobile phone to access the  Internet.
Internet access through  tablets went from 2%, in 2012, to  16% in 2013.22  However children and young peo- ple experience slightly increased  risk of harm when accessing the  Internet via a smartphone or   tablet, as they are less likely to be  monitored by parents or caregivers.
Children with smartphones also  access the Internet more often,  engage in a greater range of activi- ties, and have a higher number of   online skills.23  The increased used of Internet  through smartphones also pro- vide several benefits.
Information: The access to  information is crucial for children  and adolescents when doing their  homework.
A study on children’s  Internet usage in the UK24  indicates that 75% of children  aged 8-11 years and 84% of   adolescents aged 12-15 years use  the Internet to help them with  their homework.
Similarly in Brazil,  87% of children and young people  aged 9-17 years use the Internet  for schoolwork.25 The library has  moved online and the ability to  seek and find relevant and reliable  information in any language is a  great advantage which has been  embraced by the young generation  throughout the world.
(accessed 26 November 2015)  20  https://kids.ownfone.com.au/children-and-cell-phones-statistics#.VldJvITtkhY (Accessed 26 November 2015) 21  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf     22  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (accessed 10 November 2015) 23  Stald, G., Green, L., Barbovski, M., Haddon, L., Mascheroni, G., Sa ́gva ́ri, B., Scifo, B. and Tsaliki, L. Online on the mobile: Internet use on smartphones and associated risks among youth in Europe.
24  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf (accessed 25 November 2015) 25  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (Accessed 25 November 2015)  Available at: http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/research/EUKidsOnline/EU%20Kids%20III/Reports/MobileReport.pdf  (accessed 13 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People16  One of  the most used resources  online is Wikipedia26.
Social networks: The birth of   online social networks has been  a remarkable success.
The variety  of  social networks caters to all  ages, cultures and languages.
Having a profile on a social  network has become an important   part of  many children and young  people’s online lives.
Social  networks can often represent  a one-stop gateway to games,  friends, news, music, and ways  of  self-expression.
Social networking tends to top  the activities taken up by children  on a daily basis, and children  who also use a smartphone and  a tablet to go online are more   likely to engage in activities on a  social networking site every day.
Overall, about 70% of  children  and young people have at least  one profile on a social networking  site in Europe27.
On the same  lines, about 80% of  Internet  users between the ages of  9 and  17 years have social networking  profiles in Brazil, reveals the ICT  Kids Online Brazil 2013 survey.28  Among these studies, Facebook  emerges as the most commonly  used social networking site among  children and young people.
In the UK one in four children  use Twitter the most to socially  network in the online world.
Most children   and young people in Europe also  have a profile on a media-sharing  platform such as YouTube, Insta- gram or Flickr.29   An example of  young people  creatively using media sharing  platforms could be that of   a young band that creates a  new song, posts the video on  YouTube30, and informs their  friends and fans about it.
With simple techniques  and little financial investment, this  band can now gain a greater fan  base and potentially be heard by   shared_repository_Content_Net%20Children%20Go%20Mobile%20Project_Reports_Net%20children%20go%20mobile%20risks%20and%20opportunities%20%282nd%20ed.%29.pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015)    26  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page 27  Mascheroni, G. and O ́lafsson, K. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities.
Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/56986/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRARY_Secondary_libfile_     28  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (Accessed 10 November 2015) 29  Mascheroni, G. and O ́lafsson, K. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities.
Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/56986/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRARY_Secondary_libfile_     30  https://www.youtube.com  shared_repository_Content_Net%20Children%20Go%20Mobile%20Project_Reports_Net%20children%20go%20mobile%20risks%20and%20opportunities%20%282nd%20ed.%29.pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015)  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People17  a record company that wishes to  sign them to their label.
These sites have  around 355 million registered us- ers under the age of  10 and over  800 million aged 10 to 15 years.32  Webkinz, Neopets and Club  Penguin are some of  the vir- tual worlds that are particularly  popular with children aged eight  and under, while children over  ten years tend to prefer the virtual  worlds of  Poptropica, Moshi  Monsters and Moviestar Planet.33   31  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/young-children’s-play-in-online-virtual-worlds/ (Accessed 3 November 2015) 32  Burke.
A., Children’s Construction of  Identity in Virtual Play Worlds – A Classroom Perspective, 2013,     Memorial University, Available at: http://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/langandlit/article/view    33  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/category/universe-graph/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)  File/19779/15290 (Accessed 3 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People18  The positive benefits from  social networks for  children  with learning difficulties can  be summarised as follows:22 Practicing social skills: you  get a chance to meet all kinds  of  people online.
Because  socializing via technology  isn’t as immediate as face-to- face interactions or telephone  conversations, you have a little  more time to think about a  situation before you respond.
As evident there are virtual worlds  catering to each specific age  group and gender.34   Virtual worlds, like Club  Penguin, that target primary  and elementary school children,  allow users to create a profile and  take on the identities of penguin  avatars35 to play game and  activities.
34  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/category/kidstween-worlds/ (Accessed 3 November 2015) 35  Avatars in video games are essentially the player’s physical representation in the game world,    36  Habbo’s Second Global Youth Survey 2008    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avatar_(computing)  What’s your online profile?
Many social networks facilitate  the creation of  sub groups based  on themes such as democracy,  pets, games, school work music   and so forth.
org/2013/05/21/teens-social-media-and-privacy/(Accessed 9 November 2015) 38  http://www.greatschools.net/cgi-bin/showarticle/3120 (Accessed 26 November 2015)  Case Study: The Bright Side of  Social Networks for Children with  Learning Difficulties  The  positive  benefits  from  social  networks  for  children  with  learning  difficulties can be summarised as follows38: Practicing social skills: you get a chance to meet all kinds of people on- line.
Because socializing via technology isn’t as immediate as face-to-face  interactions or telephone conversations, you have a little more time to think  about a situation before you respond.
Some examples of focused  interaction online include buddy/friend lists, moderated themed chat rooms  or message boards and, for younger children, the opportunity for parents  to help a child by typing or reading along some of the time.
Such a child can also find a peer group online  that appreciates this aspect of him or her.” Frequent use of  existing and emerging/changing technologies: Technology is evolving faster than ever before.
As you learn to adapt to new  technologies (or new applications of existing technologies), you will be bet- ter equipped to adapt to future technology.
This will help you quickly assess  the risks of communicating through these new and adapt your behaviour to  maintain control over your own safety.
As with social  networks, online games can con- nect you with other players from  around the world.
More than 70%  of  gamers play with a friend and  millions of  people worldwide par- ticipate in massive virtual worlds.39  A recent research in UK shows  majority of  children in each age  group who play games online play  on their own/against the com- puter or games player, accounting  for over four in five 5-7 year olds,  close to seven in ten 8-11 year  olds and seven in ten 12-15 year  olds40.
A 2014 Cox Internet Safe- ty Survey reveals nearly three in  four online gamers interact with  other gamers online through web  chat, voice chat and web cam.41  It is indeed a social activity that  captures youth universally and can  be played now on the smallest of  handheld devices42.
Group  interaction is as strong a cultural  tradition in that country as study- ing and shopping.
Commu-  nity within games is really popu- lar, as well as the ability to form  groups, or guilds.
A survey by Get Safe  Online45 reveals about 25% of   children and young people have  disclosed personal information  while online gaming.
39  http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2013/11/video-games.aspx (Accessed 10 November 2015) 40  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf (accessed 25 November 2015) 41  Cox 2014 Teen Internet Safety Survey, Available at http://www.cox.com/wcm/en/aboutus/datasheet/takecharge/tween-internet-safety-survey.pdf  (Accessed on 26 November 2015) 42  The Integration Centre.
43  Adapted http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17175353/ (accessed 10 November 2015) 44  http://treeofsaviorgame.com/general/313/understand-game-addiction-law-in-south-korea-in-5-minutes/ (accessed 10 November 2015) 45  https://www.getsafeonline.org/safeguarding-children/gaming/ (Accessed 10 November 2015)  aspx (Accessed 3 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People24  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People25  Digital Citizenship:  The introduction of  new  technologies always carries the  need to understand how to use  it appropriately.
We, including  children and young people, can  demand that the producers and  providers build in as many safety  features as possible, enabling  us to make informed choices  on matters, like for instance,  revealing private information.
A  2015 global survey on privacy on  the Internet reveals that two out  of  three websites and apps collect  and process personal data of   children, and half  of  the sites and  apps share personal information  about children with other  organizations.
In more than 70%  per cent of  these sites and apps,   it was not easy to delete personal  information from an account.46  Given this scenario, it is up to  children and young people to  carry the main responsibility  of  acting appropriately and  respectfully online.
It’s  about building safe spaces and  communities, understanding how  to manage personal information,  and about being Internet savvy  - using your online presence to  grow and shape your world in a  safe, creative way, and inspiring  others to do the same47.
Safer Internet celebrations:  The positive and safer use of   the Internet is celebrated around  the world every year.
This might  involve children, the local school,  industry and relevant players who  all collaborate in creating greater  awareness of  the opportunities to  get a positive online experience.
To get the most updated  information on these events it is  suggested you do a search online  for terms like “internet safety  celebration” + “country name”.
46  https://www.getsafeonline.org/safeguarding-children/gaming/ (Accessed 10 November 2015) 47  http://www.insidemarketing.it/privacy-e-minori-il-50-di-siti-web-e-app-condivide-i-dati-di-bambini-con-terze-parti_8103/ (Accessed 25 November 2015) http://www.digizen.org/  Guidelines for Children and Young People26  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People27  Here is a list of issues you should consider when discussing “Digital Citizenship.”48  Digital Etiquette:  electronic standards of   conduct or procedure.
Digital Communication:  electronic exchange of   information.
•  Anyone should be afforded   the opportunity to access  information anywhere and  anytime.
Digital Literacy: process of   teaching and learning about  technology and the use of  technology.
•  As new technologies emerge,  we need to learn how to use  that technology quickly and  appropriately.
Digital Access: full  electronic participation in  society.
Elec- tronic access should not be  determined by race, physical  or mental challenges.
To become produc- tive citizens, we need to be  committed to equal digital  access.
48  http://www.digitalcitizenship.net/Nine_Elements.html (Accessed 26 November 2015)  Digital Law: electronic respon- sibility for actions and deeds.
•  Digital law deals with the   ethics of  technology.
These laws apply to anyone  who works or plays online.
Users,  including children and young  people, must help define  how the technology is to  be used in an appropriate  manner.
In a digital society  these two areas must work  together for everyone to be  productive.
Digital Security (self-protec- tion): electronic precautions to  guarantee safety.
We need to have virus  protection, backups of  data,  and surge control of  our  equipment.
As responsible  citizens, we must protect our  information from outside  forces that might cause dis- ruption or harm.
Guidelines for Children and Young People28 “All children and young people around the world  have the right to a safe experience online ”  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People29  What you need to know  to stay safe online  INTERNET SAFETY  GUIDELINES: Internet safety messages need to  be timely, age specific, culturally  sensitive and match the values and  laws of  the society in which the  child or young person lives.
The COP Initiative has  identified three principal age  groupings of  young Internet  users.
These groupings broadly  correspond with the key stages  of  development on a child’s  journey to adulthood.
However, we  cannot emphasise too strongly  that every child is different who   requires and deserves individual  attention.
The first age group 5-7 year  old: This group experience their  first contacts with technology.
Filtering software or  other technical measures may also  have a particularly useful role to  play in supporting the use of the  Internet by a child of  this age.
It  would be wise to consider limiting  such a young child’s potential  access e.g.
30  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People31  The COP guidelines recognize  the difficulty in creating messages  that will cover the needs of all  ages within the defined groups.
The aim is to provide  this age group with the basics  in Internet safety, etiquette  and understanding.
This age  group will probably not be able  to decode more sophisticated  messages.
Parents or adults with  responsibility for children should  consult the COP guidelines for  parents, guardians and educators  to see how they might best assist  the youngest age group to stay  safe online.
The second age group: 8-12  year old: This age span is a challenging  transition for the child.
It  is an age group where awareness  of  what is available online exists.
Filtering software or other  technical measures may have a  particularly useful role to play in  supporting the use of the Internet  by a young person of  this age.
An important aspect of this age  group is the sometimes uncritical  approach to content and contact,  which can put the age group in a  particularly vulnerable situation  for predators and commercial  entities wishing to engage with  them.
The last age group: 13 year old  and above: This group is the one covering  the longest span, is the group  consisting of  young people  who are, namely, teenagers.
This  group is growing up rapidly,  transitioning from being young  people to becoming young adults.
They are both developing and  exploring their own identities,   their own tastes.
They will very  often be able to use technology  with a high level of  proficiency,  without any adult supervision or  interaction.
Linked to their own hormonal  development and a growing sense  of  physical maturity, teenagers  can go through phases when they  feel a very strong need to find  their own way, to escape close  parental or adult supervision and  seek out their peers.
A natural  curiosity about sexual matters  can lead some people in this age  group into potentially worrying  situations and this makes it all the  more important for them to un- derstand how to stay safe online.
Guidelines for Children and Young People32  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People33  “SMART rules”  for children and young people S = Set your limits  M = Meeting online friends offline  A = Accepting invitations/friendships  R = React  T = Tell someone about your concerns Using the Internet is fun.
You can do a lot of great things on the Internet.
You can play games,  you can chat with your friends, meet new friends and find a lot of  useful information.
But you also have to be aware that you can find some unpleasant  things on the Internet, such as images and stories that may confuse  or even frighten you.
Unfortunately the Internet is  also used by people who are not so nice or who might even want to  harm, harass or bully you or other people.
While using the Internet  you need to be aware of certain basic rules to be able to safeguard  yourself and others.
You have the right to use the Internet safely and to set your own  limits.
Whether using a social networking site or  any other online service take care of your privacy and that of your  family and friends.
You might have the feeling of being anonymous  online but collecting information from various sources can reveal too  much private information about yourself or others you are close to,  including your family.
If you join a social networking site use the privacy settings to protect  your online profile so that only your friends can see it.
Once you post information, photographs or any other  material on the Internet, you may never be able to remove it or  prevent other people from using it.
Always  double check the information from other reliable sources.
Sometimes online contacts develop into friendships.
Very often that can be fun but at the same time if  you do not actually know someone yourself, are you really prepared  to count them as a “friend” and share with them exactly the same  information that you share with your oldest and best friends?
You may get requests by strangers who want to be  included in your contact list and see your profile, but it is not wise to  accept them.
Getting more and more contacts is after all not the point of  social networking.
Do not  knowingly access or share links to such sites.
You can report illegal content to an Internet Hotline or to the   police.
In addition to taking good care of yourself, you should also take  care of your computer or mobile device.
Like the SMART rules,  there are some easy tips to remember in order to keep your  computer and mobile device safe.
If  parental controls are   installed then talk with your  parents and agree on the level  that matches your age and  needs.
Get a feeling for your machine   and how it works so that you  can act if  you spot something  unusual.
You  will be able to find different  versions of  a Family Internet  Safety Contract online.
Your online rights •  You have the right to make  use of  technologies to devel- op your personality and help  increase your capabilities;  •  You have the right to protect   your identity;  •  You have the right to  participate, have fun  and access information  appropriate to your age and  personality;  •  You have the right to   express yourself  freely, and  be treated with respect while  always respecting others; •  You have the right to be   critical and discuss anything  you read or come across  when online;  •  You have the right to say   NO if  someone makes you  feel uncomfortable with his/  her requests when online.
Guidelines for Children and Young People46  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People47  consult the COP guidelines for  parents, guardians and educators  to see how they might best assist  the youngest age group to stay  safe online.
In addition, several  useful and interesting links to  online resources for this age  group have been listed in the  section ‘Sources for Further  Reading and Inspiration’.
Guidelines for the age  group 5-7 year old Many young people in this age  group will not be able to read  or understand Guidelines of   this kind.
Filtering software or other  technical measures may also have  a particularly useful role to play in  supporting the use of the Internet  by a child of  this age.
It would be  wise to consider limiting such a  young child’s potential access to  the Internet e.g.
The aim is to  provide this age group with the  basics in Internet safety, etiquette  and understanding.
This age  group will probably not be able  to decode more sophisticated  messages.
Parent or adults with  responsibility for children should   Guidelines for Children and Young People48  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People49  Guidelines for the age  group 8-12 year old There are lots of  different things  you can do online.
Chatting to friends using IM,  in chat rooms and on social  networking sites can be great ways  to keep up to date.
Ask your  parents before giving anyone  on the Internet your name,  address, phone number or any  other personal details.
It  is important that if  you chat with  other gamers you protect your  privacy and don’t share personal  or private information.
Ask your parents to install   internet filter software to block  bad sites.
Ask your parents before  giving anyone on the Internet  your name, address, phone  number or any other personal  details.
Remember that private images  and videos you send to friends  or pose of  a social networking  sire may be passed on to other  and uploaded to public areas.
Know how to ‘escape’ from a  website if an Internet search  takes you to an unpleasant or  nasty website.
Guidelines for Children and Young People54  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People55  Guidelines for the age  group 13 years and above Huge number of  young people in  this age group use social network  sites, online games and Instant  Messenger applications.
It’s how they stay in  touch with and communicate with  their friends, how they organize  large parts of  their social lives and  school work.
Here you will find  information on how to be safe  using these online platforms as  well as insight into what you can  do to help create a safe and posi- tive online space for you and your  friends.
Harmful and illegal  content Curiosity, interests, and a desire  to learn new things and explore  new facets of knowledge: the  Internet is a great tool to satisfy  such needs.
But the Internet is an  open world in which everyone is  free to circulate news or almost  anything else.
It contains an  infinite amount of  information,  so vast in scope that it is easy to  get lost or run into untruths and  material not appropriate to your  needs or age.
This can occur in a purely  accidental way, as in the case of  searches on completely different  subjects, through e-mailing, P2P  programmes, forums, chat rooms  and, more generally, through the   many channels involved in social  networking.
Put your critical sense to work  and try to determine whether  the site is trustworthy: When  you access the site do other  pages begin to automatically  open?
Are there dates included that  can indicate whether the site  has been updated?
that are found on the  web relating to sex can often  be of  a pornographic nature  and convey sexual material in  a typically adult manner with  sentiments that are not appro- priate to your age group.
The Internet and mobile phones  can potentially be used by abusive  adults to make contact with boys  and girls.
This happens particu- larly through SMS and MMS mes- saging, chat rooms, Instant Mes- saging programmes, newsgroups,  forums, online games, and, more  generally, through all the social  networking spaces, where it is  possible to obtain information on  users’ ages, sex and more, through  the profiles they’ve compiled.
Sexual predators use the Internet  to contact children and young  people for sexual purposes, often  using a technique known as  “grooming”.
They may  also be hesitant to tell adults  about their encounters for fear  of  embarrassment or of  losing  access to the Internet.
Even if  a nice  virtual friendship has been  formed, that might seem  like it could lead to some- thing more, it is important  to remember that you don’t  always know who is really at  the other end of  the com- puter;  •  In order to enter a chat  room, forum, or more  generally, a social network,  you often have to compile  a personal profile, inserting  information that can be  detailed to varying degrees.
Such details  can become accessible to  anyone, and it is therefore  advisable to create an  identity for yourself, using  nicknames or aliases and  fictional images or avatars,  and not provide any detailed  personal information;  •  When you are curious about  your sexuality or your more  intimate feelings, remember  that the Internet can some- times be a source of really  good advice and information  but very often it is better to  try to find a way to discuss   these things with people  who you already know and  trust in real life.
•  If  attempts at allurement or  awkward situations should  occur, it is important to  find someone to speak to,  an adult or friend; Internet  service providers will also  often allow users to report  incidents by clicking on  “report” or “notify”, in  order to report the abuse.
These images are mostly  self generated and shared through  mobile phone MMS, Skype and so- cial networking sites where images  can be posted and shared (such as  Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Flickr,  YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat  etc.
Available at https://esafety.gov.au/~/media/cesc/documents/sygno-english-brochure-pdf-so-you-got-naked-online.pdf   (Accessed 3 November 2015) 51  https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/aap-press-room/news-features-and-safety-tips/pages/Talking-to-Kids-and-Teens-About-Social-Media-and-Sexting.
aspx#sthash.TcXDRfUF.dpuf (Accessed 3 November 2015) 52  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/keeping-children-safe/sexting/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People60  Sexting may be considered harm- less but there are several risks.
It’s easy to  send a photo or message but the  sender has no control about how  it’s passed on.
Facebook calls their rules  ‘Community Standards’, You- Tube’s rules are called ‘Commu- nity Guidelines’ and other sites   53  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/keeping-children-safe/sexting/ (Accessed 3 November 2015) 54  https://www.iwf.org.uk/resources/iwfresearch (Accessed 10 November 2015) 55  Adapted from https://esafety.gov.au/esafety-information/esafety-issues/sexting (Accessed 10 November 2015)  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People61  like Tumblr, Twitter and Instagram  have their own sets of rules and  ways to report.
Although  most of these services and the  ways they are used are positive, in  some cases these same tools can  be used to offend, deride, defame  and annoy Internet users; and  furthermore, violent or offensive  off-line behaviour becomes magni- fied when filmed with mobile  phones and exchanged or posted  on the Net.
For this reason it is important that  you know that this phenomenon  exists and that you are aware of   the different forms it can take and  what can be done to avoid becom- ing a victim:  56  http://www.thinkuknow.co.uk/14_plus/help/Contact-social-sites/ (Accessed 3 November 2015) 57  Cox 2014 Teen Internet Safety Survey, Available at http://www.cox.com/wcm/en/aboutus/datasheet/takecharge/tween-internet-safety-survey.pdf (Accessed on 26 November 2015) 58  INSAFE and INHOPE helpline data, available at http://helplines.betterinternetforkids.eu/# (Accessed 26 November 2015) 59  European Schoolnet, Bullying in Schools, A summary of  research and anti-bullying initiatives, 2015 Available at http://files.eun.org/enable/assets/downloads/Review%20of%20bullying%20and%20cyber%20bullying%20 summary%20report.pdf  (Accessed 16 November 2015)  Guidelines for Children and Young People62  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People63  •  Do not circulate your per- sonal data thoughtlessly, as  this could make you easily  identifiable and more prone  to acts of  bullying and  intimidation by others your  own age;  •  Once information is posted  online it is out of  your con- trol and available to anyone  and open to any sort of  use.
In the more serious cases,   such as cases involv- ing physical threats, it is  advis- able that the police  also be informed;  ?
It is possible to trace   the e-mail account from  which the offensive  message was sent, but  practically impossible to  prove who actually used   it to send the message.
In many countries there  are national or local organizations  that you can turn to for help.
In  order to join a chat room, forum  or more generally, a social net- work, you must first put together a   personal profile that includes more  or less detailed types of informa- tion.
Before you enter any infor- mation about yourself into a site’s  database or membership records,  check how the information might  be used, whether or not some or  all of it will be published, and if so  where.
If you feel uncomfortable  with the amount of information  being asked of you, if you do not  really know or trust the site, don’t  provide it.
Look for another or  similar service which asks for less  information or promises to treat  your information more carefully.
What goes online can quickly  go beyond your control and be at  anyone’s disposal for any possible  use:  •  Whenever you need to   divulge your personal data  make sure that whoever  is requesting information  about you is authentic and  serious and also remem- ber that before giving data  regarding your friends you  need to first inform them  and have their permission  because they may not be  happy about having their  e-mail addresses or other  information about them  passed on to others;  •  You may not be obliged to  provide all of  the informa- tion requested of you and  you should insert only the  types of  data that are strictly  required.
Keep in mind that  it is practically impossible to  determine where an online  image can end up; before  filming or photographing  someone you should always  ask for their permission.
•  When you need to register  for a particular service, try  to employ a few simple  devices: for example, use   Guidelines for Children and Young People66  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People67  a password that would be  hard to figure out so that  no one else can guess it  and get into your account;  use a complex e-mail  address, possibly with both  numbers and letters (e.g.
com) so  it be- comes more difficult  to guess by spammers  or unknown people who  might want to send you  unwanted mail; make sure  your anti-spam service (for  incoming e-mails) and anti- virus controls (for e-mail  attachments) are activated  and continuously updated;  use two e-mail addresses,  one which is strictly personal  and for correspondence with  only your real life contacts  (friends, relatives, and such),  and another to be inserted in  all those online registration  forms that ask for personal  data (user profiles,  competition announcements,  online games, etc.)
that   you already know could be  accessed by strangers.
), E- Grabber  (capable of  gaining access  to all the e-mail addresses  stored on the victim’s PC),  or Info Grabber (capable of   extracting information such  as the various Registration  Keys of  a PC’s most  important programmes).
Without your knowledge  these programmes can  send over the Internet  all the information these  programmes pick up to  unknown persons.
Respect copyright What’s great about the Web is the  infinite possibilities of finding and  accessing all kinds of materials  through search engines and they  can be downloaded either free  of  charge or paid for through  your PC or mobile phone, and  then used offline.
•  Peer to Peer (P2P) software   enables one to share  and exchange one’s files  directly with other Internet  users, without any extra  connection costs.
Some  countries are considering  banning people from using  the Internet if  they are  caught persistently using  it to obtain unauthorised  access to copyrighted  material.
In addition, when  using other people’s work,  like articles or dissertations,  remember to quote the  sources appropriately.
Always make sure to read  the guide relating to the  programme you are using to  avoid making the errors that  are listed below;   •  Copyright protected material   is generally indicated by  standard wording, such as  “all rights reserved” or other  similar phrasings; in cases  where this is not evident, it  is nonetheless best not to  take any risks;   •  The Peer to Peer (P2P) pro- grammes you use to share  and download files also carry  certain risks.
One must have  a very thorough understand- ing of  them to be able to use  them without running any  security risks:  ?
They will ask you to enter a lot  of personal information e.g.
All that many  companies do is ask the person to  check a box to confirm they meet  the minimum age requirement.
Some companies in a number of   countries are beginning to deploy  age verification systems linked to  their purchasing procedures, but  this is still a very new and limited  technology, however it is a grow- ing, practice.
Gather as much information  as you can about the site  in question, such as name,  address, telephone number  and head office of the   company, description of the  contract’s general conditions  and, in particular, how to  withdraw from the purchase;  also find out about the  protection and management  of personal data and payment  security; and compare prices,  looking for the same item on  other sites;  •  Prepaid credit cards, or ones  that can be topped up, come  with spending limits and  can help avoid unpleasant  surprises.
•  Before you buy anything   online, make sure the  site uses a secure system  for transactions so as to  prevent, for example,  “sniffing”, which is a means  of capturing data during  transmission.
74  www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People75  Sources for Further Reading & Inspiration United Nation’s Convention of   the Rights of  the Child  http://www.unicef.org/crc/  The Internet Big Picture - World  Internet Users and Population  Stats http://www.internetworld- stats.com/stats.htm  The Children and Young Person’s  Global Online Charter http:// www.iyac.net/children/index.htm  A number of  Childnet’s resources  for young people  http://www.childnet-int.org/ young-people/  Internet safety information  (access to sites in different  languages)  http://www.saferinternet.org/ ww/en/pub/insafe/index.htm  http://www.getnetwise.org/  WSIS Outcomes  http://www.itu.int/wsis  WSIS+10 High Level Event  Outcome Documents  http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/ implementation/2014/forum/ inc/doc/outcome/362828V2E.
pdf  ITU’s activities on cybersecurity  http://www.itu.int/cybersecurity  Child Online Protection (COP)  Initiative  http://www.itu.int/cop  Child-friendly version of  ‘A World  Fit for Children’  http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/ child_friendly_ssoc_outcome.pdf  Opinion polls: What young  people think  http://www.unicef.org/polls  Connect Safely is for parents,  teens, educators, advocates  - everyone engaged in and  interested in the impact of the  social Web  http://www.connectsafely.org/  Imagine Your Future – a  prediction of  how the future will  be http://www.elon.edu/e-web/ predictions/kidzone/yourfuture.
xhtml#kids%27%20 predictions  Children and Adolescents  Statement at World Congress III  Against Sexual Exploitation  http://www.unicef.org/brazil/pt/ br_IIIWC_En.pdf  Guidelines for Children and Young People76  Appendix 1  Parent Contract I know that the Internet can be a  wonderful place for my kids to visit.
I will not overreact if  my child   tells me about something  “bad” he or she finds or does  on the Internet.
I will try to provide close sup-   port and supervision of  my  younger children’s use of  the  Internet, for example by trying  to keep their computer in a  family area.
I will frequently check to see  where my kids have visited on  the Internet.
I will seek options for filtering   and blocking inappropriate  Internet material from my  children.
Parent signature(s)  Date   I understand that my parents have  agreed to live by these rules and I  agree to help my parents explore  the Internet with me.
Child signature  Date   www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People77  Child’s Contract I know that the Internet can be a won- derful place to visit.
Wherever possible I will choose  a safe and sensible screen name  for myself that will not broad- cast any personal information  about my family or me.
I will discuss with my parents   all of the different programmes  and applications I use on my  computer and on the Internet,  and talk to them about the sites  I visit.
When considering signing up  to a new online service I will  avoid those which demand too  much personal information  and try to opt for those which  ask for less.
I will always take steps to find  out what personal information  about me will be published  by the service by default in  my profile and will always opt  for the maximum degree of   privacy.
I will not share my personal  information, or that of  my  parents or any other family  member, in any way, shape or  form, online or with someone  I meet online.
This includes,  but is not limited to name,  address, telephone number,  age or school name.
I will use good manners when   I’m online, including good  language and respect.
If  I  get something in the post from  someone I’ve met online, I’ll  tell my parents immediately  (because that means they have  my private information).
I will teach my parents more  about the Internet so we can have  fun together and learn cool new  things.
If  my  child encounters unsafe situations  and tells me, I will handle each  situation with maturity and good  sense, without blaming anyone,  and will calmly work through it  with my child to ensure their safer  Internet experiences in the future.
Parent signature(s)  Date  Child signature  Date   www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young PeoplePhoto credits: www.shutterstock.com, Ahone Ayeh Njume-Ebong/ITU   Guidelines for Children and Young PeopleInternational Telecommunication Union Place des Nations CH-1211 Geneva 20 Switzerland www.itu.int/cop  Printed in Switzerland Geneva, 2016  With the support of: