Cyber Security Standards 
Karen Scarfone, Dan Benigni and Tim Grance 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, Maryland 
 
Abstract: The goal of cyber security standards is to improve the security of information technology (IT) systems, 
networks, and critical infrastructures. A cyber security standard defines both functional and assurance requirements 
within a product, system, process, or technology environment. Well-developed cyber security standards enable 
consistency among product developers and serve as a reliable metric for purchasing security products. 
Cyber security standards cover a broad range of granularity, from the mathematical definition of a cryptographic 
algorithm to the specification of security features in a web browser, and are typically implementation independent. 
A standard must address user needs, but must also be practical since cost and technological limitations must be 
considered in building products to meet the standard. Additionally, a standard’s requirements must be verifiable; 
otherwise, users cannot assess security even when products are tested against the standard. 
 
Keywords: cyber security; information technology; standards; standardization 
 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines a standard as “a document, established by 
consensus and approved by a recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines, or 
characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given 
context” [1]. Numerous standards have been developed for cyber security to help organizations better manage 
security risk, implement security controls that meet legal and regulatory requirements, and achieve performance and 
cost benefits. This article provides an overview of cyber security standards in general and highlights some of the 
major ongoing international, regional, national, industry, and government standards efforts. It also discusses the 
advantages of having standards and explains how organizations can participate in standards research and 
development. 
 
1 Cyber Security Standards Overview 
Cyber security standards are proliferating. Governments and businesses increasingly mandate their implementation. 
More manufacturers and vendors are building and selling standards-compliant products and services. In addition, a 
growing number of organizations are becoming involved in standards development. Cyber security standards are 
being embraced because they are useful. They provide tangible benefits that justify the time and financial resources 
required to produce and apply them.  
 
Security technology has not kept pace with the rapid development of IT, leaving systems, data, and users vulnerable 
to both conventional and innovative security threats. Politically motivated adversaries, financially motivated 
criminals, mischievous attackers, and malicious or careless authorized users are among the threats to systems and 
technology that have the potential to jeopardize cyber security, US economic security, consumer identities and 
privacy, and US public health and safety. While it is impossible to eliminate all threats, improvements in cyber 
security can help manage security risks by making it harder for attacks to succeed and by reducing the effect of 
attacks that do occur. 
 
Cyber security standards enhance security and contribute to risk management in several important ways. Standards 
help establish common security requirements and the capabilities needed for secure solutions. For example, Federal 
Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, establishes 
standard requirements for all cryptographic-based security systems used by federal organizations to protect sensitive 
or valuable data [2]. Conformance testing can then be performed against the standard to provide assurance to users 
that cryptographic modules are built to requirements. 
 
Security standards facilitate sharing of knowledge and best practices by helping to ensure common understanding of 
concepts, terms, and definitions, which prevents errors. For example, the Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT) Security Standards Roadmap [3] includes references to several security glossaries, including the 
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC27 IT Security Terminology publication [4]. Other helpful resources include the Internet Security 
Glossary from the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Request for Comments (RFC) 4949 [5] and a 
compendium of the International Telecommunications Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) 

approved security definitions [6]. Using common definitions for security terminology saves time in the development 
of new standards and supports the interoperability of standards. 
 
Cyber security standards also provide other benefits. Because standards generally incorporate best practices and 
conformance requirements, their use typically results in improvements in quality. Standards reduce the number of 
technical variations and allow consumers easy access to interchangeable technology. Standards compliance 
programs offer a way to measure products and services against objective criteria and provide a basis for comparing 
products, such as confirming that they offer certain sets of security features. Consumers often benefit from cost 
savings that result from the development, manufacture, sales, and delivery of standards-based, interoperable 
products and services. Another benefit of cyber security standards is that the standards development process, with its 
typical practices of involving a wide range of subject-matter experts, prototyping, and incorporating conformity 
assessment criteria and methodologies, helps ensure that standards are implementable and reflect recommended 
practices. Products or services that have been demonstrated to conform to IT security standards can then be expected 
to offer more assurance than nonstandard products. 
 
When security standards are not available for a technology, several problems often occur. Organizations that adopt 
the technology may not be aware of its inherent security weaknesses and the implications of implementing the 
technology for the organization’s security posture. Organizations also may not have reliable information on how to 
take advantage of the technology’s security capabilities or on what additional security controls may be needed to 
compensate for weaknesses in those capabilities. This tends to lead to insecure implementations and insufficient 
security maintenance, making systems more likely to be exploited and the organization more vulnerable to harm. 
 
1.1 Cyber Security Standards Characteristics 
Standards can be defined as widely used rules or specifications for activities or their results. Nevertheless, there are 
often significant differences in how individual standards are developed and applied. These differences can help 
determine how quickly and easily a new standard is embraced and thereby influence the continued use or demise of 
alternatives. As a result, standards are often described by the specific characteristics of their development and 
intended application, including the development process used to produce the standard, the way in which the standard 
is regulated, the applicability of the standard to different audiences, the availability of the standard to the public, and 
the measurability of the standard. 
 
Standards come into being in different ways. Proprietary or company standards are developed by companies with 
little or no participation by external parties. De facto standards are created through the informal adoption of 
prevailing practices or norms. The majority are voluntary standards developed through some form of voluntary 
consensus process, in which stakeholders participate and agree. Some voluntary standards development efforts are 
open to all interested parties, while others are restricted to specific groups or individuals, such as members of a 
particular alliance or consortium. 
 
Standards differ in the ways that they are regulated. Compliance with standards may be optional, or a governing or 
regulatory organization may make compliance a requirement. Voluntary standards are generally called voluntary, 
not only because they are created through volunteers’ efforts but also because they are intended for optional use, 
although a regulating agency could adopt or mandate their use. Mandatory standards are standards whose use is 
prescribed by a regulatory agency or implementing organization. Mandatory standards typically implement laws and 
regulations. 
 
The audience to whom a standard applies depends upon the entity that develops or adopts it. An international 
standard is one that is adopted by an international standards development organization (SDO) and made available to 
the public, such as ISO International Standards. A regional standard is a standard adopted by several nations in a 
particular geographic region, for example, European Committee for Standardization (CEN) standards. A national 
standard is a standard developed for use in a particular country either by a government entity or a national SDO. A 
national standard can also be an international standard that is adopted for use by an individual country. Examples 
include FIPS and American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards in the United States and British Standards 
Institution (BSI) Standards in the United Kingdom. An industry standard is one that has been adopted by a 
particular industry for common use, for example, Security Industry Association (SIA) standards. Finally, a company 
standard, also known as a proprietary standard, is a standard developed and owned by a commercial entity that 
specifies practices or conventions unique to that entity. 

Standards may or may not be freely accessible by everyone. By definition, open standards are publicly available, 
but their developer may charge for copies. Examples of open standards that are available to the public for a fee are 
ISO standards and standards developed by ANSI-accredited organizations. A vendor who develops and owns a 
proprietary standard may choose to make it available to promote interoperability and broaden the market, or choose 
not to share it. 
 
A growing number of standards require a demonstration of conformance. A performance standard states 
requirements in terms of required results with criteria for verifying conformance, but without stating the methods for 
achieving required results. Examples of performance standards are the Federal Information Security Management 
Act (FISMA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). A prescriptive standard 
specifies design requirements, how a requirement is to be achieved, or how an item is to be constructed, but without 
criteria for measuring the conformity of the results with specified requirements. An example of a prescriptive 
standard is ISO/IEC 7810 on identification card physical construction. The development and use of performance 
standards are encouraged since they are less likely than prescriptive specifications to stand in the way of innovation. 
Still, prescriptive standards are sometimes more appropriate, particularly for describing test methods or procedures 
or for defining standards to achieve interoperability. 
 
1.2 Cyber Security Standards Interaction 
A standard is rarely applied in isolation. When technologies, processes, and management practices are combined to 
solve a business problem, multiple standards normally come into play. When components are integrated, each may 
entail one or more technical or management standards. For example, a given business solution is likely to involve a 
variety of IT security configuration standards, such as networking, communications, and security management 
standards. Each standard imposes requirements that may or may not conflict with the requirements of other 
standards. 
 
Standards can interact in several ways. Some standards are complementary, which means that one standard supports 
or reinforces the requirements of another. For example, ISO frequently publishes multipart standards that can be 
considered complementary, where each part is a separately developed volume covering a different aspect of a central 
issue. Some standards may conflict with each other, which means that there are inconsistencies or contradictions 
between standards, resulting in issues such as technological incompatibility or legal noncompliance. Other standards 
are discrete, which means that they have no direct effect on one another. There are also standards gaps, where there 
is no formal standard developed for a particular area of security, although a guideline may exist. Standards gaps 
typically occur when a technology is evolving so rapidly that standards development cannot keep pace. In other 
cases, a gap exists because consensus has not been reached on either the technology or the standard. 
 
1.3 Standards and Guidelines 
Standards can be contrasted with another category of documents, generally referred to as guidelines. Both standards 
and guidelines provide guidance aimed at enhancing cyber security, but guidelines usually lack the level of 
consensus and formality associated with standards. Some standards, such as ANSI Standards and FIPS Publications, 
are easily recognized because they include the term standard in their titles. Others are harder to recognize. For 
example, standards issued by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), an international standards 
developer, are designated as Recommendations. A standard issued by the IETF starts out as an RFC and retains that 
designation even after being adopted as a standard. In other cases, documents that are not standards in the strict 
sense of the word may be treated as such by an organization if it suits the organization’s needs. For example, many 
US and international organizations and businesses have adopted National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) Special Publications as standards, even though those documents are published as guidelines for use by US 
Federal agencies. 
 
Some organizations develop both standards and guidelines. For example, in addition to international standards, 
ISO/IEC issues several types of guidelines, including technical specifications, publicly available specifications 
(PAS), and technical reports, according to the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1, Section 3 [7]. A technical specification 
may be published when the immediate release of an international standard is not feasible, such as when the subject 
in question is still under development. A PAS may be an intermediate specification published prior to the 
development of a full international standard, or in International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) it may be a 
“dual logo” publication published in collaboration with an external organization. A PAS does not fulfill the 

requirements for a standard. A technical report is an informative document generally intended to educate the reader, 
not to specify an international standard. 
 
2 Cyber Security Standards Developers 
International, regional, national, industry, and government groups are involved in the development of cyber security 
standards. An SDO is an organization whose primary mission is the development of voluntary consensus standards 
on an international, regional, or on a national basis. Most SDOs cover a wide variety of technical areas, not just 
cyber security. Consortia, industry alliances, and associations are all groups of organizations or individuals with 
similar interests that promote standards development. A consortium is typically formed for a limited time to achieve 
a specific goal, such as the development of standards. Industry alliances and associations tend to be more loosely 
formed to foster common interests. Consortia and industry alliances comprise companies, and associations are made 
up of individuals. Finally, the US government and other national governments develop standards specifically 
intended for government audiences. Examples of organizations in each of these categories are provided below, along 
with brief discussions of some of the organizations’ cyber security standards work. 
 
2.1 International Standards Development Organizations 
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association (IEEE-SA) develops standards in many 
areas, including information technology, telecommunications, and power generation. An example of IEEE-SA’s 
security work is its 802 Local Area Network (LAN)/Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) Standards Committee. 
Various working groups within the committee develop widely used standards for many types of networking 
technologies, such as Ethernet, wireless LANs, Bluetooth, and Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX). These standards include the security features built into the wireless networking protocols. 
 
The IETF is concerned with the evolution of the Internet architecture and the operation of the Internet. The IETF has 
dozens of working groups that each focus on a different element of the Internet, including several groups working on 
Internet security. Topics addressed by these working groups include Domain Name System (DNS) security, 
authentication protocols, routing protocol security, Internet Protocol (IP) version 6, public key infrastructure, e-mail 
security, event logging, and network traffic encryption. 
 
ISO, whose membership consists of the national standards institutes of more than 150 countries, addresses all 
standards except those for electrical and electronic engineering, which are the responsibility of the IEC. ISO and 
IEC formed the Joint Technical Committee 1 (JTC1) for IT standards development, including standards for the 
security of systems and information. JTC1 has a number of subcommittees (SC) and working groups that address 
specific technologies. For example, the SC17 group addresses identification cards and personal identification, the 
SC27 group focuses on IT security techniques, the SC31 group works on automatic identification and data capture 
(AIDC) techniques, and the SC37 group develops biometric standards. 
 
The ITU-T produces standards, called Recommendations, for telecommunication networks. ITU-T’s standards are 
developed by study groups (SG) such as SG17, which covers security, languages, and telecommunications software. 
SG17 led the development of the ICT Security Standards Roadmap, which provides information on previous and 
current security standards work from several major standards developers, including ISO, IEC, IETF, Organization 
for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE), and telecommunications-specific organizations. It also lists current security standards gaps and provides 
pointers to security glossaries. SG17 developed the ICT Security Standards Roadmap in collaboration with the 
European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) and the Network and Information Security Steering 
Group (NISSG). 
 
2.2 Regional Standards Development Organizations 
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) produces telecommunications standards within 
Europe. ETSI’s cyber security standards activities include work on electronic signatures, smart cards, lawful 
interception, and 3GPP. 
 
The CEN, whose members are the national standards organizations of 30 European countries, develops cyber 
security standards on its own and in conjunction with other international, national, and government standards 
developers. 
 

2.3 National Standards Development Organizations 
In the narrowest sense of the term, ANSI is not an SDO, since it does not develop standards; rather, it administers 
and coordinates the activities of the US private sector voluntary standardization system. ANSI sponsors cyber 
security-related working groups, such as a Homeland Security Standards Panel and a Healthcare Information 
Technology Standards Panel. 
 
The InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS) is an ANSI-accredited organization, 
which develops US standards for information and communications technologies. INCITS comprise technical 
committees (TCs) that create standards for different technology areas. Examples of cyber security-focused TCs are 
B10 (identification cards and related devices), CS1 (cyber security), M1 (biometrics), and T6 (radio frequency 
identification (RFID) technology). 
 
2.4 Consortia, Industry Alliances, and Associations 
The Association for Automatic Identification and Mobility (AIM) is a trade association for entities that are 
interested in AIDC technologies. AIM performs the development of cyber security standards in areas such as 
barcodes, card technologies, electronic article surveillance, RFID, real-time locating systems (RTLS), and other 
AIDC-related technologies. 
 
The British Security Industry Association (BSIA) is the professional trade association for the security industry in the 
United Kingdom. The BSIA develops codes of practice and technical documents and submits some of them for 
consideration as British Standards. Security areas addressed by the BSIA include access control, information 
destruction, physical security equipment, and security systems. 
 
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) is an organization for information assurance, 
governance, security, and audit professionals. It is best known for its information system auditing and control 
standards and related initiatives. For example, ISACA has developed Control Objectives for Information and related 
Technology (COBIT), which is a control framework that encompasses several aspects of IT governance, including 
risk assessment. COBIT is based on various international standards and can be used to identify appropriate standards 
references during audits. 
 
The Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society (ISA) is a professional association that develops standards 
for automation technologies. For example, its SP99 working group develops security standards for manufacturing 
and control systems, such as supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems and distributed control 
systems (DCS). Some of ISA’s reports on this topic have become ANSI standards. 
 
The OASIS develops standards for security and e-business, and is well known for its web services standards work. 
OASIS has several working groups focused on security topics such as biometrics, digital signature services, 
enterprise key management infrastructures, public key infrastructure adoption, and web services security. 
 
The SIA is an ANSI-accredited SDO that develops systems integration and equipment performance standards. 
Several SIA working groups develop physical security standards on topics such as biometrics, mobile security 
devices, credential readers, security communications, and security control panels. 
 
2.5 US Government Standards Developers 
NIST develops security standards for US Federal information systems. NIST’s FIPS have been made mandatory for 
federal use. Examples of FIPS include FIPS 200, which specifies minimum security requirements for federal 
information systems; FIPS 199, which provides standards for security categorization of federal systems; and FIPS 
197, which defines the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). NIST also hosts the National Center for Standards 
and Certification Information (NCSCI), which provides information on US standards and technical regulations, as 
well as other national, regional, and international standards. 
 
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) assists the President of the United States in the development of 
budget, management, and regulatory policies. OMB’s products include OMB Circulars and OMB Memoranda, 
which are instructions or information issued to federal agencies. Some of these documents mandate the use of 
particular security standards or require federal agencies to meet other security requirements. For example, 

OMB Circular A-130 pertains to the management of federal information resources, and OMB Memorandum M-07-
16 mandates security controls to protect the confidentiality of personally identifiable information. 
 
3 Getting Involved in Standards Development 
In addition to those mentioned above, there are many other cyber security standards developers already working on 
creating new standards. The ICT Security Standards Roadmap provides information on a number of ongoing 
standards activities. Organizations interested in cyber security standards development can join existing standards 
efforts so that they can ensure that standards are developed in a way that is favorable to, or at least compatible with, 
their critical interests. 
 
In addition to influencing the direction that a standard takes, actively participating in the standards development 
process offers other advantages. An organization gains a better understanding of the standards under development, 
their underlying designs, the trade-offs and compromises made during their development, and the operating 
conditions and environments they are intended to serve. Organizations make contacts and build relationships with 
technical experts involved in the development effort, as well as improving their own technical knowledge. 
Participation in standards development also benefits the security community by sharing the effort across many 
organizations. 
 
Most organizations do not participate in standards development activities. They may feel that it is not important, that 
it is impossible to influence the outcome, or that involvement is too expensive. Nevertheless, participation can be 
critical to realizing the benefits of standards. Also, organizations that choose not to get involved can find themselves 
faced with new standards with which they are not prepared to comply. 
 
There are a number of ways to participate in the standards development process, each with its own level of resource 
commitment. Organizations can choose how fully to participate, depending upon the importance of the standard to 
the organization and the resources they have available to commit to the effort. Trackers follow the development of a 
standard at a high level, for example, by reading summaries and implementation timelines on the developer’s public 
website. Tracking the progress of a new standard gives organizations the ability to anticipate its effects, even if they 
choose not to become more actively involved in its development. Public reviewers review drafts of the standard and 
submit comments, which can influence the content and impact of a standard under development. For particularly 
important standards, organizations should consider becoming members of the entity developing the standards. 
 
The role of driver may be appropriate when the organization’s stake in a new standard is critical. It may be that 
producing the standard is part of the organization’s charter or mission; driving the development of a standard may 
require significant resources. 
 
In addition to contributing to the development of new standards, organizations should also consider participating in 
the maintenance of existing standards. Most standards undergo periodic review and revision. SDOs typically have 
established formal maintenance programs to help ensure that their standards do not become dated due to 
technological evolution, changes to related standards, or other causes. 
 
References 
1. International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission (2004). ISO/IEC Directives Part 
2:2004 (Rules for the Structure and Drafting of international Standards), 5th ed., 
http://publicaa.ansi.org/sites/apdl/Documents/Standards%20Activities/International%20Standardization/ISO/ISOIECDirectivesP
art2pdfformat.pdf.  
 
2. National Institute for Standards and Technology (2001). FIPS PUB 140-2: Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, 
May. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips140-2/fips1402.pdf. 
 
3. ITU-T, European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), Network and Information Security Steering Group 
(NISSG) (2007). ICT Security Standards Roadmap, version 2.2, September 2007. http://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/studygroups/com17/ict/index.html.  
 
4. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC27 (2008). Standing Document 6 (SD6): Glossary of IT Security Terminology, 2008-03-19. 
http://www.jtc1sc27.din.de/sce/SD6. 
 

5. Internet Engineering Task Force (2007). Internet Security Glossary, August 2007. http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4949.txt.  
 
6. ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (2008). Security Compendium, Part 2—Approved ITU-T Security Definitions, 
http://www.itu.int/dmspub/itu-t/oth/0A/0D/T0A0D00000A0001MSWE.doc.    
7. ISO/IEC (2008). ISO/IEC Directives Part 1:2008 (Procedures for the Technical Work), 6th ed., 
http://isotc.iso.org/livelink/livelink/fetch/2000/2122/3146825/4229629/4230450/4230455/ISO IEC Directives Part 1 Procedures 
for the technical work—2008 6th ed.—PDF format?nodeid=4230504&vernum=0. 
 
Further Reading 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) (2008). ANSI Standards Activities, 
http://www.ansi.org/standardsactivities/overview/overview.aspx?menuid=3.  
 
Association for Automatic Identification and Mobility (AIM) AIM Global Standards, http://www.aimglobal.org/standards/.  
 
British Security Industry Association (BSIA) http://www.bsia.co.uk/index.php.  
 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) http://www.dhs.gov/index.shtm.  
 
European Committee for Standardization (CEN) http://www.cen.eu/cenorm/homepage.htm.  
 
European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) http://www.enisa.europa.eu/index.htm.  
 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) ETSI Standards, 
http://www.etsi.org/WebSite/Standards/Standard.aspx.  
 
IEEE, IEEE Standards Association (IEEE SA) http://standards.ieee.org/.  
 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) http://www.isaca.org/Template.  
 
ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 001 “Information Technology”. http://www.jtc1.org/.  
 
InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS) http://www.ncits.org/.  
 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) http://www.iec.ch/.  
 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) http://www.ietf.org/.  
 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) http://www.iso.org/iso/home.htm.  
 
International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/.  
 
Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society (ISA), ISA Standards 
http://www.isa.org/Template.cfm?Section=Standards2&Template=/customsource/isa/Standards/AutomationStandards.cfm.  
 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) http://csrc.nist.gov/. 
 
NIST National Center for Standards and Certification Information (NCSI) http://ts.nist.gov/Standards/Information/index.cfm.  
 
Information & Communications Technologies (ICT) Standards Board Network and Information Security Steering Group 
(NISSG). http://www.ictsb.org/Working Groups/NISSG/index.htm.   
 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/.  
 
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) http://www.oasis-open.org/.  
 
Process Control Systems Forum (PCSF) https://www.pcsforum.org/.  
 
Security Industry Association (SIA), SIA Standards. https://www.siaonline.org/standards/index.html.  
 
United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), Control Systems Security Program (CSSP) http://www.us-
cert.gov/control systems/index.html.   
 

Cross-References 
Regulations and Standards 
Authentication, Authorization, Access Control, and Privilege Management 
Cryptography 
Protocol Security 
Wireless Security 

