 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: 

A Regulatory Digest∗

 

 

 

October 2017 

This Digest is intended to be a “live”, periodically updated compilation of recent cybersecurity 
laws, regulations, guidelines and other significant documents on cybersecurity for the financial 
sector, therefore is organized in reverse chronological order with the most recent document first.  
The Digest is not meant to be comprehensive of everything published by all jurisdictions and 
international bodies.  The explanatory summaries are composed of text extracted from the 
documents and includes links to the original documents or websites that contained them at time 
of addition to the Digest. It has been compiled and it is being maintained by Aquiles A. Almansi 
(Lead Financial Sector Specialist, GFM03), Yejin Carol Lee (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, 
GFM01a), and Johanna Lincoln (FinSAC Consultant). 

 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

CONTENTS 

TABLES .............................................................................................................................. 4 

TABLE 1.  List of Included Documents Applicable to Single Jurisdictions ............................ 4 

TABLE 2.  List of Included Documents Applicable to the European Union ........................... 6 

TABLE 3.  List of Included Documents Applicable to Multi-Jurisdictions ............................. 6 
 

DIGEST DOCUMENTS (in reverse chronological order) ............................................ 7 

56.  ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017) .................................................. 7 

55.  AU - Banking Exec Accountability & Related Measures Bill (Sep 2017) ...................... 7 

54.  US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (Aug 2017) .............................................. 7 

53.  US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk Alert (Aug 2017) ............................ 7 

52.  FSI  Insights: Regulatory approaches to  enhance  banks’ cyber-security frameworks 

(Aug 2017) .......................................................................................................................................... 8 

51.  IMF WP- Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability (Aug 2017) .................. 8 

50.  SWIFT Customer Security Program (Jul/ May /April 2017) ............................................... 9 

49.  UK FCA Consultation - Individual Accountability Regime (Jul 2017) ......................... 10 

48.  Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control objectives and procedures for 

outsourced service providers (Jun 2017) ................................................................................. 10 

47.  People Republic of China Cyber-Security Law (Jun 2017)............................................... 10 

46.  G7 - fundamental elements for effective cybersecurity assessment (May 2017) ........ 11 

45.  EU Report on influence of tech on future of financial sector (May 2017) .................... 11 

44.  FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (May 2017) ........................................................... 12 

43.  ESAs Report on main risks for the EU Financial System (Apr 2017) ........................... 13 

42.  AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity (Apr 2017) ........................................................................... 13 

41.  NY cyber-security requirements for financial services companies (Mar 2017) .......... 14 

40.  EU Commission Consultation on the impact of FinTech (Mar 2017) ............................ 14 

39.  BaFin Consultation on bank regulatory reqs for IT systems (Mar 2017) ...................... 15 

38.  UK Open Banking Initiative (Mar 2017) ................................................................................ 15 

37.  CPMI report - DLT in payment clearing/settlement (Feb 2017) ...................................... 16 

36.  US NIST draft updated Cybersecurity Framework (Jan 2017) ........................................ 16 

35.  UK Gov Cyber-Security Regulation and Incentives Review (Dec 2016) ..................... 17 

34.  HK SFC Circular on augmenting accountability of senior mgmt (Dec 2016) ............. 17 

33.  HKMA circular on Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative (Dec 2016) ........................... 17 

32.  G7 Fundamental Elements of Cybersecurity for Financial Sector (Oct 2016) ............ 19 

2 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

31.  US FinCEN Advisory on FIs obligations on cyber-related events (Oct 2016) ............ 20 

30.  US FBAs ANPR for enhanced cybersecurity standards (Oct 2016) ............................... 20 

29.  HK SFC Review of cybersec. of online & mobile trading systems (Oct 2016) .......... 21 

28.  MY SC Guidelines to Enhance Cyber resilience of Capital Mkt (Oct 2016) ............... 22 

27.  UK CBEST Intelligence-Led Vulnerability Testing 2.0 (2016)....................................... 23 

26.  IE CB Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks (Sept 2016) .............. 24 

25.  India Non-Banking Financial Company - Account Aggregators (Sep 2016) ............... 24 

24.  ENISA Strategies for Incident Response & Cyber Crisis Coop. (Aug 2016) .............. 24 

23.  MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing (Jul 2016) .......................................................................... 25 

22.  EU Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (Jul 2016) ................ 26 

21.  EBA ICT risk guidelines (Jun 2016; May 2017 finalized) ................................................ 27 

20.  CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cybersecurity (Jun 2016) ........................................................ 28 

19.  Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts (Apr 2016) ................................. 28 

18.  EU General Data Protection Regulation (Apr 2016) ........................................................... 29 

17.  ISO/IEC - IT, Security Techniques, InfoSec Management Systems (Feb 2016) ........ 29 

16.  EU Payment Services Directive 2 (Jan 2016) ........................................................................ 31 

15.  MAS Circular - Tech Risk and Cybersec Training for Board (Oct 2015) ..................... 31 

14.  MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions (Aug 2015) ............................... 31 

13.  UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (Jul 2015) .......................... 32 

12.  Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-Defense Management (Mar 2015) ........... 32 

11.  ASIC’s Report on Cyber Resilience (Mar 2015) .................................................................. 33 

10.  EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments (Dec 2014) ....................................... 33 

9.  MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management (Mar 2014) ............................................ 33 

8.  World Bank - General Principles for Credit Reporting (Sep 2011) ................................ 34 

7.  BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk (Jun 2011) ........... 34 

6.  FFIEC - Authentication in Internet Banking Environment, suppl. (Jun 2011) ............ 35 

5.  AICPA suite of SOC & Implementation Guidance (Apr 2010) ....................................... 35 

4.  ENISA National Exercises Good Practice Guide (Dec 2009) .......................................... 35 

3.  ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting (Dec 2009) .................................... 36 

2.  KR Electronic Financial Transactions Act and Enforcement Decree (Jan 2007) ....... 36 

1.  KR Reg. on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions (Jan 2007) ................... 36 

APPENDIX:  INDEX by CONCEPTS ........................................................................... 38 

 

3 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

TABLES 

TABLE 1.  List of Included Documents Applicable to Single Jurisdictions 

(Alphabetical Order of Country followed by Date) 

INSTITUTION 

DATE  

NAME 

Australia 
Treasury 
Australian 
Securities & 
Investment 
Commission  
 
China 

Sep 2017 

Mar 2015 

Draft Treasury Laws Amendment (Banking Executive 
Accountability and Related Measures) Bill 2017 
ASIC Report on Cyber Resilience 

 
Jun 2017 

 
People Republic of China Cyber-Security Law 

 

 

 

Germany BaFin 

Mar 2017 

 

HK SFC 

HKMA 

HK SFC 

 
Reserve Bank of 
India 
 
Bank of Ireland 

 
Bank of Israel 

 
Korea 

Korean 
FSC/FSS 
 

SC Malaysia 

 
Association of 
Banks in 
Singapore 
MA Singapore 

 

Dec 2016 

Dec 2016 

Oct 2016 

 
Sep 2016 

 
Sep 2016 

 
Mar 2015 

 
Jan 2007 

Jan 2007 

 
Oct 2016 

 
June 2017 

July 2016 

BaFin consultation on Circular on bank regulatory 
requirements for IT systems 
 

HK SFC Circular on augmenting accountability of 
senior management  
HKMA Circular on the Cyber-security Fortification 
Initiative 
HK SFC Review of cyber-security of online and mobile 
trading systems 
 
India Non-Banking Financial Company - Account 
Aggregators 
 
Central Bank of Ireland Cross Industry Guidance on IT 
and Cyber-security Risks 
 
Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-defense 
Management 
 
Korea Electronic Financial Transactions Act and 
Enforcement Decree 
Korea Regulation on Supervision of Electronic 
Financial Transactions 
 
Malaysia Securities Commission Guidelines to enhance 
cyber-resilience of the Capital Market 
 
Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control 
objectives and procedures for outsourced service 
providers 
MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing 

MA Singapore 

Oct 2015 

MAS Circular on Technology risk and cyber-security 
training for Board 

4 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

INSTITUTION 

DATE  

NAME 

MA Singapore 

Aug 2015 

MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions 

MA Singapore 

Mar 2014 

MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management 

 
UK FCA 

 
Jul 2017 

UK CMA 

Mar 2017 

UK Government 

Dec 2016 

Bank of England 

2016 

UK FCA & PRA 

Jul 2015 

 
US NIST 

US SEC 

 
Aug 2017 

Aug 2017 

US FFIEC 

May 2017 

NYDFS 

Mar 2017 

US NIST 

Jan 2017 

US FinCEN 

Oct 2016 

Oct 2016 

Jun 2011 

US Federal 
Banking 
Agencies 
US FFIEC 

 
 

 
UK FCA Consultation on extending Individual 
Accountability regime (SMCR) 
UK Open Banking Initiative 

UK Government Cyber-security Regulation and 
Incentives Review 
UK CBEST Intelligence-led cyber security assessment 
2.0 
UK FCA Senior Managers and Certification Regime 
(final rules) 
 
US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework 
 
US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk 
Alert 
FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool 

New York cyber-security requirements for financial 
services companies 
US NIST draft updated Framework for Improving 
Critical Infrastructure Cyber-security 
US FinCEN Advisory on FIs obligations on cyber-
related events and crimes 
US Federal Banking Agencies ANPR for enhanced 
cyber-security standards 

FFIEC - Supplement to Authentication in an Internet 
Banking Environment 

5 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

TABLE 2.  List of Included Documents Applicable to the European Union  

INSTITUTION 

DATE  

NAME 

ECB 

2017 

ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017) 

EU Parliament 

May 2017 

ESAs (EBA, 
EIOPA, ESMA) 
EC 

ENISA 

EC 

EBA 

EC 

EC 

EBA 

ENISA 

ENISA 

 

Apr 2017 

Mar 2017 

Aug 2016 

Jul 2016 

Jun 2016 

Apr 2016 

Jan 2016 

Dec 2014 

Dec 2009 

Dec 2009 

EU Parliament Report on influence of technology on future 
of financial sector 
ESAs Report on main risks for the EU Financial System 

EU Commission Consultation on the impact of FinTech 

ENISA Strategies for Incident Response and Cyber Crisis 
Cooperation 
EU Directive on Security of Network and Information 
Systems 
EBA ICT risk guidelines 

EU General Data Protection Regulation 

EU Payment Services Directive 2 

EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments 

ENISA National Exercise Good Practice Guide 

ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting 

TABLE 3.  List of Included Documents Applicable to Multi-Jurisdictions 

INSTITUTION 

DATE  

NAME 

Financial Stability 
Institute 
IMF 

Aug 2017 

Aug 2017 

FSI Insights on policy implementation No 2: Regulatory 
approaches to enhance banks’ cyber-security frameworks 
IMF Working Paper - Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and 
Financial Stability 

July/May/Apr 2017  SWIFT Customer Security Program 

May 2017 

Apr 2017 

Feb 2017 

Oct 2016 

G7 CEG developing fundamental elements for effective 
assessment of cyber-security 
AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity 

CPMI Report on distributed ledger technology in payment 
clearing and settlement 
G7 fundamental elements of cyber-security in the financial 
sector 
CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cyber-security 

SWIFT 

G7 

AICPA 

CPMI 

G7 

CPMI-IOSCO 

Jun 2016 

IOSCO 

ISO/IEC 

World Bank 
Group 
BCBS 

AICPA 

 

Apr 2016 

Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts 

Feb 2016 

Sep 2011 

Jun 2011 

Apr 2010 

ISO/IEC Standards on IT, Security Techniques, Information 
Security Management Systems 
World Bank Financial Infrastructure Series - General 
Principles for Credit Reporting 
BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational 
Risk 
AICPA SOC suite of Service Organization Standards and 
Implementation Guidance 

6 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

DIGEST DOCUMENTS (in reverse chronological order) 

 

 

56. ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017)  

ECB is finalizing a reporting framework for significant cyber incidents which was piloted 
in 2016, with plans to be rolled out to all significant institutions from the 19 euro area 
countries  in    third  quarter  of  2017.    “The  reporting  framework  for  significant  cyber 
incidents is designed to collect and store information on cybercrime incidents that have 
an impact on significant institutions. This will require incidents to be reported as soon as 
the  banks  detect  them.  The  information  will  be  used  to  identify  and  monitor  trends  in 
cyber incidents affecting significant institutions and will facilitate a fast reaction by the 
ECB in the event that a major incident affects one or more significant banks…”   The pilot 
exercise has  resulted in  improvements to  the framework including incident  definitions, 
the reporting template, and the reporting instructions. 

55. AU - Banking Exec Accountability & Related Measures Bill (Sep 2017) 

Australian Treasury released a Banking Executive Accountability and Related Measures 
amendment bill for consultation. The Banking Executive Accountability Regime (BEAR) 
was introduced earlier in the 2017-18 Budget announcement of the Treasury. 

“This Bill amends the Banking Act 1959 to establish the Banking Executive Accountability 
Regime (BEAR). The BEAR is a strengthened responsibility and accountability framework 
for  the  most  senior  and  influential  directors  and  executives  in  authorized  deposit-taking 
institutions (ADI) groups It requires them to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity 
and  to  ensure  the  business  activities  for  which  they  are  responsible  are  carried  out 
effectively.” The BEAR provisions are due to apply from 1 July 2018. Consultation period 
ended September 29. 

54. US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (Aug 2017) 

The US National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)’s  National  Initiative for 
Cybersecurity  Education  (NICE)  Cybersecurity  Workforce  Framework  aims  to  provide 
organizations  with  a  common  vocabulary  when  describing  the  role,  area  of  specialty, 
category  of  work,  and  the  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  (KSA)  of  cybersecurity 
professionals. 

53. US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk Alert (Aug 2017) 

The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)’s Office of Compliance Inspections 
and  Examinations  (OCIE)  published  its  Risk  Alert  on  its  findings  from  Cybersecurity 
Examinations  (Cybersecurity  2  Initiative),  as  part  of  its  Cybersecurity  Examination 
Initiative  announced  in  2014  after  its  Cybersecurity  Roundtable.  This  second  round 
covered examinations conducted between September 2015 and June 2016 of 75 regulated 
entities (registered broker-dealers, investment advisers, and investment companies). 

7 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

The newly published Risk Alert reported mixed progress of the regulated entities. It noted: 
The  examinations  focused  on  the  firms’  written  policies  and  procedures  regarding 
cybersecurity,  including  validating  and  testing  that  such  policies  and  procedures  were 
implemented  and  followed.  In  addition,  the  staff  sought  to  better  understand  how  firms 
managed  their  cybersecurity  preparedness  by  focusing  on  the  following  areas:  (1) 
governance and risk assessment; (2) access rights and controls; (3) data loss prevention; 
(4) vendor management; (5) training; and (6) incident response. 

The Risk Alert announcing the OCIE Cybersecurity Initiative noted that the initiative is 
designed  to  assess  cybersecurity  preparedness  in  the  securities  industry  and  to  obtain 
information about the industry’s recent experiences with certain types of cyber threats. As 
part of this initiative, OCIE will conduct examinations of more than 50 registered broker-
dealers  and  registered  investment  advisers  focused  on  the  following:  the  entity’s 
cybersecurity governance, identification and assessment of cybersecurity risks, protection 
of  networks  and  information,  risks  associated  with  remote  customer  access  and  funds 
transfer  requests,  risks  associated  with  vendors  and  other  third  parties,  detection  of 
unauthorized activity, and experiences with certain cybersecurity threats. 

52. FSI  Insights:  Regulatory  approaches  to  enhance  banks’  cyber-security 

frameworks (Aug 2017) 

 “FSI Insights are written by members of the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for 
International Settlements, often in collaboration with staff from supervisory agencies and 
central  banks.  The  papers  aim  to  contribute  to  international  discussions  on  a  range  of 
policy  issues  and  implementation  challenges  faced  by  financial  sector  authorities.  The 
views expressed in the FSI Insights are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of their respective institutions.”  

In this FSI Insights on policy implementation No 2:  after a discussion on the question of 
“developing  specific  regulations  for  cyber-risk”,  the  authors  introduce  “existing  key 
regulatory requirements relating to cyber-risk” and “supervisory frameworks and tools”, 
to then make their “observations about the implementation of cyber-risk regulations by 
the banking industry”, finally closing with “some policy considerations”. 

 

51. IMF WP- Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability (Aug 2017) 

“Working Paper - Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability Abstract: Cyber-
attacks  on  financial  institutions  and  financial  market  infrastructures  are  becoming  more 
common  and  more  sophisticated.  Risk  awareness  has  been  increasing,  firms  actively 
manage cyber risk and invest in cybersecurity, and to some extent transfer and pool their 
risks through cyber liability insurance policies. This paper considers the properties of cyber 
risk,  discusses  why  the  private  market  can  fail  to  provide  the  socially  optimal  level  of 
cybersecurity, and explore how systemic cyber risk interacts with other financial stability 
risks. Furthermore, this study examines the current regulatory frameworks and supervisory 
approaches, and identifies information asymmetries and other inefficiencies that hamper 
the  detection  and  management  of  systemic  cyber  risk.  The  paper  concludes  discussing 

8 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

policy measures that can increase the resilience of the financial system to systemic cyber 
risk.” 

50. SWIFT Customer Security Program (Jul/ May /April 2017) 

As  part  of  its  roll  out  of  the  SWIFT  Customer  Security  Programme  (CSP)  requirement 
announced in September 2016, SWIFT launched the  KYC Registry Security  Attestation 
Application  (KYC-SA)  –  “a  central  application  for  users  to  self-attest  their  level  of 
compliance  with  SWIFT’s  Customer  Security  Controls  Framework.  The  KYC-SA 
application also enables users to securely exchange their security status information with 
selected counterparties, supporting cyber risk management, transparency and business due 
diligence.” 

In  April  and  May,  SWIFT  issued  its  new  mandatory  Customer  Security  Controls 
Framework and published further details  of the related attestation  policy  and process  as 
announced in September 2016 in the SWIFT Customer Security Controls Policy document. 

SWIFT’s Customer Security Controls Framework is presented via three objectives (Secure 
your  Environment,  Know  and  Limit  Access,  and  Detect  and  Respond),  eight  principles 
within those objectives, and 27 (16 mandatory and 11 advisory) controls organized under 
those  principles.  These  controls  are  intended  to  help  customers  to  safeguard  their  local 
environments and reinforce the security of the global financial community. 

Customers  will  be  required  to  provide  an  annual  self-attestation  against  the  mandatory 
controls from Q2 2017, by December 31 2017. From January 2018, SWIFT will flag those 
users that have not submitted a self-attestation on time to their regulators. As from January 
2019 onwards, SWIFT’s reporting right will also cover users that have failed to self-attest 
full compliance with  all mandatory security  controls  in  a timely manner or that connect 
through  a  non-compliant  service  provider.  Thereafter,  SWIFT  will  provide  ongoing 
updates to local supervisory bodies. 

Also  in  May,  it  launched  the  SWIFT  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centre,  SWIFT 
ISAC, global portal, a key part of its Customer Security Program to facilitate information 
sharing among its community. “...existing intelligence bulletins will now be stored in the 
SWIFT ISAC portal, in a readily readable and searchable format, aligned with standardised 
templates... This information includes malware details such as file hashes and YARA rules, 
Indicators of Compromise, as well as details on the Modus Operandi used by the cyber-
criminals. The information, which is particularly relevant to SWIFT customers, can also 
be downloaded as PDF reports or as machine-readable files in OpenIOC format, an XML-
based file format that is commonly used by the cyber-security industry.” 

There  had  been  multiple  incidents  involving  fraudulent  transfers  through  the  SWIFT 
messaging  system,  although  incidents  stemmed  from  breaches  within  locally  managed 
infrastructure at the customer level and not that of SWIFT’s own network or software. 

Documents are available through customer login at www.swift.com. 

 

9 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

49. UK FCA Consultation - Individual Accountability Regime (Jul 2017) 

The  FCA  commenced  a  consultation  period  for  CP17/25:  Individual  accountability  - 
extending the Senior Managers and Certification Regime to all FCA firms. Consultation 
period will close in  November 2017, and a Policy Statement  is  expected by Summer of 
2018. 

“The  Senior  Managers  and  Certification  Regime  (SM&CR)  currently  applies  to  deposit 
takers and, following the Bank of England and Financial Services Act 2016, is now being 
extended to FCA solo-regulated firms. It replaces the current Approved Persons Regime, 
changing how individuals working in financial services are regulated... This consultation 
paper  sets  out  our  proposed  approach  to  the  extension  of  the  SM&CR  as  well  as  some 
minor proposals relating to the existing banking regime.” 

(See UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (final rules) (Jul 2015) 

48. Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control objectives and procedures 

for outsourced service providers (Jun 2017) 

The Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) published the version 1.1 of its “Guidelines 
on control objectives and procedures for outsourced service providers” based on the MAS 
Guidelines on Outsourcing (issued on 27 July 2016) and industry feedback.  In July 2015, 
it had first issued the earlier version 1.0 of the  Issuance of initial Guidelines on control 
objectives and procedures for outsourced service providers” 

“…the Association of Banks in Singapore (“ABS”) has established these Guidelines on 
Control Objectives and Procedures for the FIs’ Outsourced Service Providers (“OSPs”) 
operating in Singapore. These Guidelines form the minimum/baseline controls that OSPs 
which  wish  to  service  the  FIs  should  have  in  place.  However,  FIs  with  specific  needs 
should  continue  to  liaise  with  their  OSPs  on  a  bilateral  basis  to  impose  any  additional 
specific requirements... 

By complying with the Guidelines, OSPs can assure the FIs that their controls are designed 
and operating effectively to meet the control objectives that are relevant in the provision 
of the outsourced services.  

SCOPE:  These  Guidelines  should  be  adopted  by  all  OSPs  in  Singapore  that  undertake 
material outsourcing arrangements for FIs in Singapore.” 

(See “MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing (Jul 2016)” below) 

 

47. People Republic of China Cyber-Security Law (Jun 2017) 

The Cyber-security Law of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) took effect on 1 June 
2017. (Official Chinese version.). The law applies to everyone who operates networks in 
the  PRC  and  will  affect  multinational  corporations.  The  Cyberspace  Administration  of 
China (CAC) has issued a series of regulations implementing the law. The public has been 

10 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

asked for comments on other proposed implementing rules, including measures affecting 
the transfer of personal data outside the PRC. 

46. G7 - fundamental elements for effective cybersecurity assessment (May 2017) 

The  G7  Communique  reflected  the  discussions  on  cyber-security  at  the  G7  Meeting  of 
Finance Ministers and Central Banks’ Governors in Bari, Italy May 12-13, 2017. 

On top of highlighting the importance of developing “common and shared practices to help 
timely detection of vulnerabilities in the financial system” they raised the need for current 
assessment approaches to be “enhanced and be complemented by practices that are tailored 
to  bolster  cyber  resilience,  including  regular  cyber  exercises  and  simulations  as  well  as 
consideration of how to most effectively leverage penetration tests” in response to rapidly 
evolving nature of cyber risks. 

Most importantly, the G7 Cyber Expert Group (G7 CEG) was mandated to develop a set 
of  high  level  and  non-binding  fundamental  elements  for  effective  assessment  of 
cybersecurity by October 2017. 

They also specified the following areas for future further work: 

“...task the G7 CEG to  advance work on the third-party  risks and the coordination with 
other critical sectors.... 

...encourage international coordination and knowledge sharing. 

...explore other issues of interest related with cybersecurity as directed and prioritised by 
G7 Finance Ministers and Central Banks Governors. 

...call on the International Organizations and governmental institutions in partnership with 
the private sector to enhance sharing of cybersecurity information. Definitions, collection 
methodologies and data sharing, when appropriate, should be coordinated and consistent 
across countries and sectors, so that results are comparable. Sharing national experiences 
and best practices among all stakeholders on optimal cybersecurity legislation or relevant 
regulatory initiatives would be highly beneficial.” 

The  communique  also  informed  that  the  G7  is  following  the  development  of  a  cyber 
insurance  market  and  the  ongoing  work  by  OECD,  notably  its  report  Supporting  an 
Effective Cyber Insurance Market. 

45. EU Report on influence of tech on future of financial sector (May 2017) 

The EU Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON) published a 
Report on the influence of technology on the future of the financial sector. The report calls 
on  the  EU  Commission  to  develop  an  action  plan  to  enable  new  and  innovative 
technologies to develop in the framework of the Capital Markets Union and Digital Single 
Market. 

The report outlines key priorities such as: 

11 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

•  cyber-security and data protection; 

• 

interoperability and passporting of fintech services within the EU; 

•  providing a level playing field for traditional companies and start-ups; and 

•  controlled experimentation with new technologies and fostering financial education 

and IT skills. 

44. FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (May 2017) 

The US Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) members published 
an updated Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (CAT), originally released in 2015 (see 2015 
FAQs).  The  CAT  remains  “a  voluntary  tool  that  institution  management  may  use  to 
determine the institution’s inherent risk and cybersecurity preparedness.” 

From its Overview: “The content of the Assessment is consistent with the principles of the 
FFIEC Information Technology Examination Handbook (IT Handbook) and the National 
Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  Cybersecurity  Framework,  as  well  as 
industry  accepted  cybersecurity  practices.  The  Assessment  provides  institutions  with  a 
repeatable and measurable process to inform management of their institution’s risks and 
cybersecurity preparedness.” 

The Assessment consists of two parts: Inherent Risk Profile and Cybersecurity Maturity. 
The  Inherent  Risk  Profile  identifies  the  institution’s  inherent  risk  before  implementing 
controls. The Cybersecurity Maturity includes domains, assessment factors, components, 
and  individual  declarative  statements  across  five  maturity  levels  to  identify  specific 
controls and practices that are in place. While management can determine the institution’s 
maturity  level  in  each  domain,  the  Assessment  is  not  designed  to  identify  an  overall 
cybersecurity maturity level. 

To  complete  the  Assessment,  management  first  assesses  the  institution’s  inherent  risk 
profile based on five categories: 

•  Technologies and Connection Types 

•  Delivery Channels 

•  Online/Mobile Products and Technology Services 

•  Organizational Characteristics 

•  External Threats 

Management then evaluates the institution’s Cybersecurity Maturity level for each of five 
domains: 

•  Cyber Risk Management and Oversight 

•  Threat Intelligence and Collaboration 

•  Cybersecurity Controls 

•  External Dependency Management 

•  Cyber Incident Management and Resilience 

12 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

The  Council  consists  of the  principals  of  the  following:  The  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal  Reserve System, Federal  Deposit  Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union 
Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau, and State Liaison Committee. 

43. ESAs Report on main risks for the EU Financial System (Apr 2017) 

The Joint Committee of the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs: EBA, EIOPA, and 
ESMA)  published  its  spring  2017  Report  on  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  European 
Union’s financial system. 

The Report highlights among others the rising operational risks related to information and 
communication technologies that are increasingly requiring supervisory attention. 

Fast technological change is expected to have a significant impact on the existing business 
models of financial institutions over time. Many financial intermediaries have to deal with 
ageing  core  IT  systems,  hence  the  need  for  extensive  IT  investments,  which  further 
aggravate  profitability.  In  addition,  cyber-risk  threatens  data  integrity  and  business 
continuity in an interconnected financial system. 

Against this background, the demand for cyber-insurance is expected to grow while cyber-
coverage  products  are  still  relatively  new  in  the  market,  with  limited  underwriting 
experiences. Unlike other types of insurance, there is a severe lack of historical data that 
can be used for pricing purposes. 

The ESAs are responding to cyber-and IT-related risks by, e.g., drafting Guidelines on ICT 
risk  assessment  for  supervisors,  assessing  cyber-security  capabilities  of  central 
counterparties (CCPs) and assessing the potential accumulation of risk at insurers deriving 
from newly developed cyber-security coverages. 

The report focuses on continued challenges highlighted in the August 2016 report, but also 
highlights 
information  and 
communication technologies (ICT), including cyber-risks. 

increasing  challenges  posed  by  rapid  advances 

in 

42. AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity (Apr 2017) 

The American  Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) finalized the  guidance 
for Systems and Organization Controls (SOC) for Cybersecurity. 

“In  recognition  of  the  needs  of  management  and  boards  of  directors  of  diverse 
organizations, and for the benefit of the public interest,  the American  Institute of CPAs 
(AICPA) has developed a cybersecurity risk management reporting framework. Using it, 
organizations can communicate pertinent  information regarding their cybersecurity risk-
management  efforts and  educate stakeholders  about  the systems,  processes and  controls 
they have in  place to  detect,  prevent  and respond to  breaches. The reporting framework 
also  enables  a  CPA  to  examine  and  report  on  the  management-prepared  cybersecurity 
information,  thereby  increasing  the  confidence  that  stakeholders  may  place  on  an 
organization’s initiatives. other words, this provides clear guidance for CPAs to provide 
assurance on cybersecurity.” 

13 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

“The AICPA determined that the entity reporting framework should be developed first.... 
The AICPA is in the process of revising the SOC 2 R guide for service organizations. Once 
that project has been completed, the AICPA will develop a new supply-chain/vendor-risk 
management guide to address the supply-chain level.” 

41. NY cyber-security requirements for financial services companies (Mar 2017) 

The  new  Requirements  on  cyber-security  from  the  New  York  Department  of  Financial 
Services (NY DFS) took effect on 1 March 2017. 

The  regulation  requires  banks,  insurance  companies,  and  other  financial  services 
institutions regulated by the NYDFS to establish and maintain a  cyber-security program 
designed to protect customer information as well as the information technology systems of 
these  regulated  entities.  The  proposed  requirements  for  regulated  financial  institutions 
include, among others: 

•  Establishment of a cyber-security program; 

•  Adoption of a written cyber-security policy; 

•  Designation of a Chief Information Security Officer responsible for implementing, 

overseeing and enforcing the new program and its policy; 

•  Annual penetration testing and bi-annual vulnerability  assessments of an entity’s 

information system; 

•  Maintenance of audit trails to detect and respond to Cyber-security events; 

•  Limitation and regular review of user access privileges; 

•  Encryption of Non-public information; 

•  Establishment of an incident response plan; 

•  Establishment of security policy for third party service provider. 

This  regulation  requires  each  company  to  assess  its  specific  risk  profile  and  design  a 
program that addresses its risks in a robust fashion. Senior management must take this issue 
seriously  and  be  responsible  for  the  organization’s  cybersecurity  program  and  file  an 
annual  certification  confirming  compliance  with  these  regulations.  A  regulated  entity’s 
cybersecurity program must ensure the safety and soundness of the institution and protect 
its customers. 

The first certification will be due in February 2018. 

40. EU Commission Consultation on the impact of FinTech (Mar 2017) 

The EU Commission (EC) launched a  Consultation on technology and its impact on the 
European financial services sector as part of its consumer financial services action plan. 
The consultation is structured along four policy objectives: 

•  Fostering access to financial services for consumers and businesses; 

•  Bringing down operational costs and increasing efficiency for the industry; 

14 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

•  Making the single market more competitive by lowering barriers to entry; and 

•  Balancing greater data sharing and transparency with data security and protection 

needs. 

The last of the four areas notes: “... important questions about personal data processing, 
data management policies, data standardization, data sharing, security and ability to access 
and  supervise  data  from  (licensed)  providers  of  financial  services  should  move  to  the 
forefront of the policy agenda for FinTech. Mismanagement in these important areas can 
cause loss of trust and disruption in the market that would require policy intervention.” 

The consultation aims to gather information on the impact of innovative technology on the 
financial sector to aid the EC in developing its policy approach and to help assess whether 
the regulatory and supervisory framework promotes technological innovation. 

Comments were accepted until 15 June 2017. 

39. BaFin Consultation on bank regulatory reqs for IT systems (Mar 2017) 

The  German  Federal  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (BaFin)  published  (in  German 
language) a Draft Circular “Banking Supervision Requirements for IT” (BAIT). 

The  draft  specifies  BaFin’s  minimum  requirements  for  risk  management  (MaRisk)  with 
respect to the security of information technology. It highlights the IT security requirements 
imposed by BaFin and the Bundesbank on institutions. 

Furthermore, the circular helps increase institutions’ awareness of IT risks, including the 
risks from third-party providers. 

Comments were due by 5 May 2017. 

38. UK Open Banking Initiative (Mar 2017) 

The  UK  Competition  and  Markets  Authority  (CMA)  announced  on-schedule  release  of 
standardised data about UK banking products, branches and ATMs by the end of March, 
by the nine banking institutions mandated by the CMA. The CMA will require the biggest 
UK retail banks, to open access to transaction data by January 13, 2018, coinciding with 
the EU Payment Systems Directive 2. 

In early 2016, the Open Banking Working Group (OBWG) established by the UK Treasury, 
published a manual, the Open Banking Standard, setting out a detailed framework of how 
Open Banking Standard could be designed and delivered, with a time table for achieving 
this. The Open Banking Initiative website explains that its “delivery is split between March 
2017 and January 2018, with March 2017 being focused on Open Data, making available 
information on ATMs, Branches, Personal Current Accounts, Business Current Accounts 
(for SMEs) & SME Unsecured  Lending and Commercial Credit Cards. January 2018 is 
aligned  to  the  upcoming  European  Regulation  (Payment  Services  Directive  2),  where 
authorized third parties can be given consent by the account holder to access their Bank 
accounts to extract statement information and to initiate payments, without having to use 

15 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

the Banks Online services. It is envisaged that this capability will then lead to far reaching 
innovative services being created by new entrants and technology companies.” 

The  OBWG  includes  nine  Banks  mandated  by  the  CMA  (Allied  Irish  Bank,  Bank  of 
Ireland,  Barclays,  Danske,  HSBC,  Lloyds  Banking  Group,  Nationwide,  RBS  Group, 
Santander), as well as Challenger Banks, Fintechs, Third Parties, Consumer Groups and 
other parties to define and develop the required Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs), 
security and messaging standards that underpin Open Banking. 

37. CPMI report - DLT in payment clearing/settlement (Feb 2017) 

The BIS Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) published a Report 
on distributed ledger technology (DLT) in payment clearing and settlement. 

Distributed  ledgers,  also  known  as  blockchains,  are  ledgers  of  electronic  transactions 
maintained by a shared network of participants and not by a centralised entity. 

The  report  provides  an  analytical  framework  for  central  banks  and  other  authorities  to 
review and analyse the use of this technology for payment, clearing, and settlement. The 
objective of the framework is to help understand the uses of DLT and, in doing so, identify 
both the opportunities and challenges associated with this technology. 

The framework presents the technology’s potential to provide operational efficiencies and 
to make financial markets more robust and resilient. Enhanced operational resilience and 
reliability  are  of  particular  interest  to  the  authorities  given  the  importance  of  protecting 
against cyberthreats. It also contains a set of questions that should be useful when looking 
at DLT arrangements. 

It  highlights  that  work  is  still  needed  to  ensure  that  the  legal  underpinnings  of  DLT 
arrangements  are  sound,  governance  structures  are  robust,  technology  solutions  meet 
industry  needs,  and  that  appropriate  data  controls  are  in  place  and  satisfy  regulatory 
requirements. 

36. US NIST draft updated Cybersecurity Framework (Jan 2017) 

The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) issued in January 2017 a 
draft update to the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity—also 
known as the Cybersecurity Framework. Providing new details on managing cyber-supply 
chain risks, clarifying key terms, and introducing measurement methods for cyber-security. 
The  updated  framework  aims  to  further  develop  NIST’s  voluntary  guidance  to 
organizations on reducing cybersecurity risks. 

The Cyber-Security Framework was published in February 2014 following a collaborative 
process  involving  industry,  academia  and  government  agencies,  as  directed  by  a 
presidential executive order. The original goal was to develop a voluntary framework to 
help organizations manage cybersecurity risk in the nation’s critical infrastructure, such as 
bridges and the electric power grid, but the framework has been widely adopted by many 
types of organizations across the country and around the world. 

16 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

The 2017 draft, Version 1.1 incorporates feedback since the release of framework version 
1.0, and integrates comments from the December 2015 Request for Information as well as 
comments  from  attendees  at  the  Cyber-security  Framework  Workshop  2016  held  at  the 
NIST campus in Gaithersburg, Maryland. 

35. UK Gov Cyber-Security Regulation and Incentives Review (Dec 2016) 

In  December  2016,  the  UK  Government  published  the  Cyber-Security  Regulation  and 
Incentives Review. 

During 2016, as part of the Government’s 1.9 billion pounds strategy to protect the UK in 
cyber-space,  the  Department  for  Digital,  Culture,  Media  &  Sport  (DCMS)  conducted  a 
review to consider whether there is a need for additional regulation or incentives to boost 
cyber-risk  management  across  the  wider  economy.  The  review  was  conducted  in  close 
consultation  with  a  wide  range  of  businesses,  industry  partners  and  stakeholders,  and 
gathered evidence from a broad range of sources. 

“The review shows that there is a strong justification for regulation to secure personal data, 
as  there  is  a  clear  public  interest  in  protecting  citizens  from  crime  and  other  harm... 
Government will therefore seek to improve cyber-risk management in the wider economy 
through  its  implementation  of  the  forthcoming  General  Data  Protection  Regulation 
(GDPR). The breach reporting requirements and fines that can be issued under GDPR will 
represent a significant call to action. These will be supplemented by a number of measures 
to more clearly link data protection with cyber-security, including through closer working 
between  the  Information  Commissioner’s  Office  and  the  new  National  Cyber-Security 
Centre.” 

34. HK SFC Circular on augmenting accountability of senior mgmt (Dec 2016) 

HK  Securities  and  Futures  Commission  (SFC)  issued  a  Circular  on  enhancing  the 
accountability regime for senior management of licensed companies. The circular specifies 
definition  of  senior  management  and  their  regulatory  obligations  and  potential  legal 
liabilities. It specifies eight core functions of a licensed company for which it must appoint 
at least one fit and proper person to be the manager-incharge (MIC), and provides guidance 
on selection of the MIC(s). It also brings in the roles and responsibilities of the Board of 
Directors. 

33. HKMA circular on Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative (Dec 2016) 

The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  issued  in  December  2016  a  circular  to 
authorized institutions to inform them of the implementation details of the Cybersecurity 
Fortification Initiative (CFI). The CFI consists of three pillars: 

• Pillar 1: Cyber-Resilience Assessment Framework (C-RAF): 

The C-RAF is a tool to help authorized institutions evaluate their cyber resilience. 
The assessment comprises three stages: 

17 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

–  Inherent Risk Assessment – This facilitates an AI to assess its level of inherent 
cyber-security  risk  and  categorize  it  into  “low”,  “medium”  or  “high”  in 
accordance with the outcome of the assessment; 

–  Maturity  Assessment  –  This  assists  an  AI  in  determining  whether  the  actual 
level  of  its  cyber-resilience  is  commensurate  with  that  of  its  inherent  risk. 
Where material gaps are identified, the AI is expected to formulate a plan to 
enhance its maturity level; and 

–  Intelligence-led Cyber-Attack Simulation Testing (iCAST) – This is a test of 
the AI’s cyber-resilience by simulating real-life cyber-attacks from adversaries, 
making  use  of  relevant  cyber-intelligence.  AIs  with  an  inherent  risk  level 
assessed to be “medium” or “high” are expected to conduct the iCAST within 
a reasonable time. 

The HKMA will adopt a phased approach to the implementation of the C-RAF as 
follows: 

–  the first phase will cover around 30 authorized institutions including all major 
retail banks, selected global banks and a few smaller authorized institutions – 
the HKMA will inform these authorized institutions individually; 

–  the  expected  timeline  for  completing  the  C-RAF  assessment  under  the  first 
phase  is  end-September  2017  for  inherent  risk  assessment  and  maturity 
assessment, and end-June 2018 for iCAST (if applicable); and 

–  depending  on  industry  feedback  and  the  experience  gathered  from  the  first 
phase,  the  second  phase  will  cover  all  the  remaining  authorized  institutions. 
They will be expected to complete the inherent risk assessment and the maturity 
assessment by the end of 2018. The HKMA will consider the assessment results 
of the second phase in determining a timeframe for the remaining authorized 
institutions to complete the iCAST. Although authorized institutions covered 
in  the  second  phase  are  given  a  longer  timeframe  for  implementation,  they 
should familiarize themselves with the C-RAF and take steps to strengthen their 
cyber-resilience at an early stage where necessary. 

•  Pillar 2: Professional Development Programme (PDP): 

The PDP, rolled out in December 2016, seeks to provide a local certification scheme 
and training program for cybersecurity professionals. At the request of the industry, 
the  HKMA  has  adopted  a  list  of  professional  qualifications,  recommended  by  an 
expert panel,  which are  equivalent  to  the certification provided under the PDP.  A 
person holding a PDP certification or an equivalent professional qualification may 
perform the assessments and tests in relation to the different roles defined under the 
C-RAF as set out in the Annex of the circular. 

•  Pillar 3: Cyber-Intelligence Sharing Platform (CISP): 

18 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

The HKMA noted that all banks are expected to join the Cyber Intelligence Sharing 
Platform. Banks were advised to start to make the necessary preparations including 
system changes at an early stage. 

The CISP is ready for access by banks with effect from December 2016. 

32. G7 Fundamental Elements of Cybersecurity for Financial Sector (Oct 2016) 

The  G7  published  its  fundamental  elements  of  cybersecurity  for  the  financial  sector  to 
“serve  as  the  building  blocks  upon  which  an  entity  can  design  and  implement  its 
cybersecurity  strategy  and  operating  framework,  informed  by  its  approach  to  risk 
management and culture. The elements also provide steps in a dynamic process through 
which the entity can systematically re-evaluate its cyber-security strategy and framework 
as  the  operational  and  threat  environment  evolves.  Public  authorities  within  and  across 
jurisdictions  can  use  the  elements  as  well  to  guide  their  public  policy,  regulatory,  and 
supervisory efforts.” 

The eight elements noted are: 

1.  Cybersecurity  Strategy  and  Framework:  Establish  and  maintain  a  cybersecurity 
strategy and framework tailored to specific cyber risks and appropriately informed 
by international, national, and industry standards and guidelines.; 

2.  Governance:  Define  and  facilitate  performance  of  roles  and  responsibilities  for 
personnel  implementing,  managing,  and  overseeing  the  effectiveness  of  the 
cybersecurity  strategy  and  framework  to  ensure  accountability;  and  provide 
adequate resources, appropriate authority, and access to the governing authority; 

3.  Risk  and  Control  Assessment:  Identify  functions,  activities,  products,  and 
services—including  interconnections,  dependencies,  and  third  parties—prioritize 
their  relative  importance,  and  assess  their  respective  cyber  risks.  Identify  and 
implement  controls—including  systems,  policies,  procedures,  and  training—to 
protect against and manage those risks within the tolerance set by the governing 
authority; 

4.  Monitoring:  Establish  systematic  monitoring  processes  to  rapidly  detect  cyber 
incidents  and  periodically  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  identified  controls, 
including through network monitoring, testing, audits, and exercises; 

5.  Response: Timely (a) assess the nature, scope, and impact of a cyber incident; (b) 
contain  the  incident  and  mitigate  its  impact;  (c)  notify  internal  and  external 
stakeholders (such as law enforcement, regulators, and other public authorities, as 
well as shareholders, third-party service providers, and customers as appropriate); 
and (d) coordinate joint response activities as needed; 

6.  Recovery:  Resume  operations  responsibly,  while  allowing  for  continued 
remediation,  including  by  (a)  eliminating  harmful  remnants  of  the  incident;  (b) 
restoring systems and data to normal and confirming normal state; (c) identifying 
and  mitigating  all  vulnerabilities 
remediating 

that  were  exploited; 

(d) 

19 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

vulnerabilities to  prevent similar incidents; and (e) communicating  appropriately 
internally and externally; 

7.  Information  Sharing:  Engage  in  the  timely  sharing  of  reliable,  actionable 
cybersecurity  information  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders  (including 
entities and public authorities within and outside the financial sector) on threats, 
vulnerabilities,  incidents,  and  responses  to  enhance  defenses,  limit  damage, 
increase situational awareness, and broaden learning; 

8.  Continuous Learning: Review the cybersecurity strategy and framework regularly 
and when events warrant—including its governance, risk and control assessment, 
monitoring, response, recovery, and information sharing components—to address 
changes  in  cyber  risks,  allocate  resources,  identify  and  remediate  gaps,  and 
incorporate lessons learned. 

31. US FinCEN Advisory on FIs obligations on cyber-related events (Oct 2016) 

On 25 October 2016, the US Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (Fin-CEN) 
issued an Advisory to assist financial institutions in understanding their Bank Secrecy Act 
(BSA)  obligations  regarding  cyber-events  and  cyber-enabled  crime.  This  advisory  also 
highlights  how  BSA  reporting  helps  U.S.  authorities  combat  cyber  events  and  cyber-
enabled crime. 

Through this advisory FinCEN advises financial institutions on: 

•  Reporting  cyber-enabled  crime  and  cyber-events  through  Suspicious  Activity 

Reports (SARs); 

• 

Including relevant and available cyber-related information (e.g., Internet Protocol 
(IP)  addresses  with  timestamps,  virtual-wallet  information,  device  identifiers)  in 
SARs; 

•  Collaborating  between  BSA/Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  units  and  inhouse 

cyber-security units to identify suspicious activity; and 

•  Sharing  information,  including  cyber-related  information,  among  financial 
institutions to guard against and report money laundering, terrorism financing, and 
cyber-enabled crime. 

30. US FBAs ANPR for enhanced cybersecurity standards (Oct 2016) 

On 19 October 2016, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (the 
Federal  Banking  Agencies)  issued  an  Advanced  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking  to 
establish enhanced cyber-security standards. 

The proposed rules would apply to large institutions subject to the agencies’ jurisdiction, 
including: 

20 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

•  US  bank  holding  companies  with  total  consolidated  assets  of  USD  50  billion  or 

more; 

•  banks with total consolidated assets of USD 50 billion or more; 

• 

the US operations of foreign banking organizations with total US assets of USD 50 
billion or more, and 

•  nonbank financial companies supervised by the Federal Reserve per the DoddFrank 

Act. (section 165). 

While the ANPR is based on some existing regulatory guidance, it also adds some new and 
more stringent requirements to covered entities. For example, it requires a very short two-
hour timeframe to recover critical systems from cyber-events. Improvements are proposed 
in the following areas: 

Incident responses and cyber-resilience; 

• 
•  Cyber-risk governance; 
•  Cyber-risk management; 
• 

Internal and external dependency management. 
 

Comments received are accessible here. 

29. HK SFC Review of cybersec. of online & mobile trading systems (Oct 2016) 

The Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) launched a Review of cyber-
security,  compliance  and  resilience  of  brokers’  internet/mobile  trading  systems.  This 
initiative  follows  several  reports  from  securities  brokers  that  the  security  of  some 
customers’ online and mobile trading accounts has been compromised and unauthorized 
securities trading transactions have been conducted through these accounts. 

Cybersecurity management is a priority for the SFC’s supervision of licensed corporations. 
Licensed corporations should critically review and enhance their controls to combat cyber-
attacks. This would involve: 

•  Strengthening  threat,  intelligence  and  vulnerability  management  to  pro-actively 

identify and remediate cyber-security vulnerabilities; 

• 

Implementing  reliable  preventive,  detective  and  monitoring  measures  to  protect 
sensitive information and trading systems; 

•  Being vigilant in monitoring unusual or questionable logins/transactions in client 

accounts; 

• 

Implementing  effective  user authentication and  access  controls  to  deter  potential 
hacking attempts; and 

•  Establishing an effective contingency plan which covers, among others, possible 

cyber-attack scenarios where trade and position data are impacted. 

21 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

Examples of good practices observed in the market place include (i) implementing client 
data encryption; (ii) putting in place controls to detect internet protocol (IP) ranges used by 
clients and abnormal buy/sell transactions; (iii) implementing two factor authentications in 
conjunction with strong password requirements for client’s logon; and (iv) sending timely 
trade confirmation to clients via SMS. A combination of these measures enables brokers 
spot suspicious activities and mitigate against hacking risks. Where the security of accounts 
is  compromised,  early  detection  enables  brokers  to  send  alert  to  clients  to  stop  further 
unauthorized trading. 

The SFC review has three components: 

• 

surveying a mix of small to medium sized brokers to assess relevant cybersecurity 
features of brokers’ internet and mobile trading systems; 

•  onsite inspections of selected brokers for an in-depth review of their information 
technology  and  other  related  management  controls  and  an  assessment  of  their 
design and effectiveness in preventing and detecting cyber-attacks; and 

•  benchmarking  the  SFC’s  regulatory  requirements  and  market  practice  in  Hong 
Kong against other major financial services regulators and other relevant  market 
practices  overseas  and  locally.  The  findings  of  the  cyber-security  review  are 
designed to assist the SFC’s policy formulation to improve overall resilience of the 
markets. 

28. MY SC Guidelines to Enhance Cyber resilience of Capital Mkt (Oct 2016) 

Malaysia’s  Securities  Commission  (SC)  published  on  October  2016  new  Guidelines  on 
Management of Cyber-risk to enhance cyber-resilience of the capital market by requiring 
capital market entities to establish and implement effective governance measures to counter 
cyber-risk and protect investors. 

The Guidelines, among other requirements, clearly stipulate the roles and responsibilities 
of the board and senior management in building cyber-resilience of a capital market entity. 
The entity is required to identify a responsible person to be accountable for the effective 
management  of  cyber-risk.  The  involvement  of  the  board  and  senior  management  is 
deemed important to ensure that the capital market entity puts adequate focus on cyber-risk 
issues, determines risk tolerance and priorities, and allocates sufficient resources to cyber-
risk. 

The Guidelines require regulated entities to have in place a risk management framework to 
minimize cyber-threats, implement adequate measures to identify potential vulnerabilities 
in their operating environment and ensure timely response and recovery in the event of a 
cyber-breach. 

Regulated  entities  are  also  required  to  report  cyber-incidents  to  the  SC  to  enhance 
industry’s awareness on, and preparedness in dealing with, cyber-risk. The reporting is to 
provide a platform for SC to collaborate with market entities and stakeholders to enhance 
cyber-resilience on an ongoing basis. 

22 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

These Guidelines are to be implemented in phases for entities based on, among others, size, 
nature of activities, and market share. 

27. UK CBEST Intelligence-Led Vulnerability Testing 2.0 (2016) 

The  Bank  of  England’s  Sector  Cyber-Team  (SCT)  published  version  2.0  of  its  CBEST 
“framework for intelligence-led penetration testing of systemically critical organizations” 
for the CBEST engagement participants and service providers. 

The  CBEST  framework  was  first  launched  in  June  2014  by  UK  Financial  Authorities, 
headed by the Bank of England at the recommendation of the Financial Policy Committee 
(FPC), which is “charged with taking action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view 
to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK financial system.” 

CBEST  is  a  voluntary  cyber  vulnerability  assessment  program  made  available  to  core 
firms/FMIs of the UK financial system. The assessment operates within a framework and 
includes  a  set  of  Key  Performance  Indicators  (KPIs)  for  1)  threat  intelligence  and  2) 
intrusion detection and incident response. Each include a section used by the BoE’s Sector 
Cyber Team assessing “the provider’s ability to deliver CBEST services in accordance with 
the framework agreement”, as well as a section conducted by the approved provider which 
is  an  assessment  of  “the  client  firm’s  capability  surrounding  use  of  either  cyber  threat 
intelligence, intrusion detection, or incident response.” 

The completed KPIs, kept by the SCT, help inform the cybersecurity assessment for the 
tested firm and an industry understanding of the financial sector cybersecurity capability 
for the regulators as well as the UK Financial Policy Committee (FPC). 

CBEST is deemed unique in that the tests are “built around the key potential attackers for 
a particular firm and the attack types they would deploy,” making use of up-to-date threat 
intelligence direct from UK Government agencies and accredited commercial providers. 

CBEST program has also brought forth new accreditation standards for threat intelligence 
providers  and  penetration  testing  providers,  working  with  the  Council  for  Registered 
Ethical Security Testers (CREST). 

Its resource components include the following: 

1. 

Implementation Guide, which explains the key phases, activities, deliverables and 
interactions involved in a CBEST assessment; 

2.  Services Assessment Guide, which provides background information, in the form 
of  a  set  of  assessment  criteria,  that  CBEST  participants  can  use  as  they  assess 
prospective threat intelligence and penetration testing service providers approved 
by the Council for Registered Ethical Security Testers (CREST); and 

3.  Understanding Cyber Threat  Intelligence Operations, which defines best practice 
standards for the production and consumption of threat intelligence... intended to 
provide  the  CBEST  programme  with  a  foundation  for  defining  and  executing 
intelligence-led  cyber  threat  vulnerability  tests  in  conjunction  with  accredited 

23 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

providers  of  threat  intelligence  products  and  services.  After  establishing  some 
important  terminology,  this  document  presents  an  overview  of  the  process 
underpinning  a  best  practice  threat  intelligence  capability  and  the  organisation, 
roles and skills required for running it. It then discusses maturity models relating to 
the production and consumption of threat intelligence. 

26. IE CB Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks (Sept 2016) 

The Central Bank of Ireland issued in September 2016 a Guidance on IT and cybersecurity 
governance and risk management for financial services firms. 

The document sets out the Central Bank’s observations from supervisory work in this area 
and outlines guidance reflecting “the current thinking as to good practices that regulated 
firms should use to inform the development of effective IT and cybersecurity governance 
and risk management frameworks.” 

A major message is that the Boards and Senior Management of regulated firms are expected 
to fully recognize their responsibilities for these issues and to put them among their top 
priorities. The guidance lists Central Bank expectations on key issues such as alignment of 
IT and business strategy, outsourcing risk, change management, cyber-security, incident 
response, disaster recovery and business continuity. 

25. India Non-Banking Financial Company - Account Aggregators (Sep 2016) 

The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  produced  final  Directions  providing  a  framework  for  the 
registration and operation of “Account Aggregator” in India, requiring these operators to 
register  and  be  regulated  by  the  RBI.  It  defines  “Account  Aggregators”  as  non-banking 
financial  companies  that  will  collect  and  provide  information  on  a  customer’s  financial 
assets, in a consolidated, organized and retrievable manner to the customer or any other 
person  as  per  the  instructions  of  the  customer.  The  Directions  prohibit  Account 
Aggregators  from  conducting  any  other  business  than  that  of  aggregator,  handling 
transactions  for  customers,  for  example.  It  clearly  sets  out  Data  Security  requirements, 
including prohibiting request or storing of customer credentials. 

24. ENISA Strategies for Incident Response & Cyber Crisis Coop. (Aug 2016) 

This European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) document 
is an input for the Network and Information Security (NIS) Platform for the discussion on 
incident  response  and  cyber  crisis  coordination  (by  “WG2”  –  see  below).  It  briefly 
introduces what incident response is, who the main actors are, what baseline capabilities 
these  entities  should  possess  in  order  to  effectively  combat  cyberattacks,  and  what 
challenges  there  may  be  that  impede  efficiency  in  incident  response.  The  notion  of 
Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs) as key players in incident response 
is introduced. Descriptions of incident response mechanisms will be elaborated, taking into 
account national-level cybersecurity strategies, cyber crisis coordination and management 
covering both escalation and communication between CSIRTs and government bodies. 

As part of the implementation of the cybersecurity Strategy of the EU, the NIS Platform 
was created in 2013 to help European stakeholders carry out appropriate risk management, 

24 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

establish  good  cybersecurity  policies  and  processes  and  further  adopt  standards  and 
solutions that will improve the ability to create safer market conditions for the EU. 

The expert work of the components of the NIS Platform was divided into Working Groups 
(WGs), all dealing with their special field of expertise in cybersecurity: 

•  WG1  on  risk  management,  including  information  assurance,  risks  metrics  and 

awareness raising; 

•  WG2  on  information  exchange  and  incident  coordination,  including  incident 

reporting and risks metrics for the purpose of information exchange; 

•  WG3 on secure ICT research and innovation. 

Ongoing work by the WGs is a series of chapters to be adopted by the NIS Platform. The 
chapters foreseen by the three WGs are: 

Incident response; 

1.  Organizational structures and requirements; 
2.  Verification and auditing of requirements; 
3.  Voluntary information sharing; 
4. 
5.  Mandatory incident notification; 
6.  Data protection; 
7. 
8. 

(Optional) Incentives for the uptake of good cybersecurity practices; 
(Optional) Recommendations on research challenges and opportunities. 
 

23. MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing (Jul 2016) 

“These  Guidelines  provide  guidance  on  sound  practices  on  risk  management  of 
outsourcing  arrangements...  An  institution  should  ensure  that  outsourced  services 
(whether provided by a service provider or its sub-contractor) continue to be managed as 
if the services were still managed by the institution.” 

After  describing  an  institution’s  expected  engagement  with  MAS  on  outsourcing 
including notification to MAS of adverse developments, the Guideline goes through the 
following areas of risk management practices which institutions are obliged to implement: 
Responsibility of the Board and Senior Management; Evaluation of Risks; Assessment of 
Service  Providers;  Outsourcing  Agreement;  Confidentiality  and  Security;  Business 
Continuity Management; Monitoring and Control of Outsourcing  Arrangements; Audit 
and  Inspection;  Outsourcing  Outside  Singapore;  Outsourcing  with  a  Group;  and 
Outsourcing of Internal Audit to External Auditors.   

The Guideline ends with a separate section on Cloud Computing/Service (CS), that “MAS 
considers CS operated by service providers as a form of outsourcing… The types of risks 
in CS that confront institutions are not distinct from that of other forms of outsourcing 
arrangements. Institutions should perform the necessary due diligence and apply sound 
governance  and  risk  management  practices  articulated  in  this  set  of  guidelines  when 
subscribing to CS….”   

25 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

Its  Annexes  include  a  list  of  non-exhaustive  examples  of  outsourcing  arrangements  to 
which  the  guidelines  apply  and  don’t  apply  are  shared,  a  guidance  in  assessing  the 
materiality  of  an  outsourcing  arrangement,  and  a  template  for  a  register  of  outsource 
entities of an institution to be maintained for submission to MAS, at least annually or upon 
request. 

The Guideline’s audit and inspection section specifies that “An institution’s outsourcing 
arrangements should not interfere with the ability of the institution to effectively manage 
its  business  activities  or  impede  MAS  in  carrying  out  its  supervisory  functions  and 
objectives.”  This specifically includes, not only that the outsourcing agreements should 
include clauses that  “allow the institution to conduct audits on the service provider and 
its subcontractors, whether by its internal or external auditors, or by agents appointed by 
the institution; and to obtain copies of any report and finding made on the service provider 
and  its  sub-contractors,”,  but  that  which  also  “allow  MAS,  or  any  agent  appointed  by 
MAS, where necessary or expedient, to exercise the contractual rights of the institution 
to: (i) access and inspect the service provider and its sub-contractors, and obtain records 
and documents, of transactions, and information of the institution given to, stored at or 
processed by the service provider and its sub-contractors; and (ii) access any report and 
finding made on the service provider and its sub-contractors, whether produced by the 
service  provider’s  and  its  sub-contractors’  internal  or  external  auditors,  or  by  agents 
appointed by the service provider and its sub-contractors, in relation to the outsourcing 
arrangement.” 

 

22. EU Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (Jul 2016) 

This  EU  Directive  on  security  of  network  and  information  systems  sets  out  security 
obligations for operators of essential services, including those in the banking and financial 
sectors, and for digital service providers, such as online marketplaces, search engines and 
cloud services. 

Member States will be required to designate a national authority for dealing with cyber-
threats and to develop a national cyber-strategy among others. 

General  Provisions:  “...  describes  the  goals  of  the  Directive,  and  its  legislative 

I. 
environment. It also gives formal definitions to terms that appear in the text.” 

II. 
National Frameworks on the security of Network and Information Systems: “... lists 
the different entities and legislative frameworks that each Member State will have to set 
up in order to comply with the Directive. Each MS needs to adopt a national NIS strategy; 
designate one or more national competent authorities, as well as a single point of contact 
for cross-border cooperation; and set up at least one Computer Security Incident Response 
Team (CSIRT). These teams need to cover certain sectors and services.” 

III. 
Cooperation:  “...  defines  two  groups  meant  to  improve  NIS-related  cooperation 
between MS. The first is the Cooperation Network, composed of representatives of MS, 
the Commission, and ENISA. This group is meant to focus on strategic issues. The second 

26 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

group is the CSIRT Network, composed of representatives of MS’ CSIRT and CERT-EU, 
with the Commission as observer and ENISA as Secretary and active support.” 

IV. 
Security  of  the  Network  and  Information  Systems  of  Operators  of  Essential  Ser-
vices: “... defines security requirements for and duties of operators of essential services. 
These services are described in Annex 2 of the Directive.” 

V. 
Security of the Network and Information Systems of Digital Service Providers: “... 
defines security requirements for and duties of digital service providers. These providers 
are described in Annex 3 of the Directive” 

Standardization  and  Voluntary  Notification:  “...encourages  the  use  of  EU  or 

VI. 
international standards” and discusses handling of voluntary notifications. 

Final  Provisions:  “...  covers  all  other  aspects,  like  the  details  the  timeline  for 

VII. 
transposition of the Directive, or penalties” 

The Directive entered into force on 8 August 2016 and needs to be transposed by 9 May 
2018. 

21. EBA ICT risk guidelines (Jun 2016; May 2017 finalized) 

The EBA finalized its Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review 
and Evaluation process (SREP) 
 
The EBA launched a consultation on its draft Guidelines on the assessment of information 
and  communication  technology  (ICT)  risk  in  the  context  of  the  supervisory  review  and 
evaluation process (SREP). These draft Guidelines are addressed to competent authorities 
and aim at promoting common procedures and methodologies for the assessment of ICT 
risk. 

The requirements to assess ICT risks consist of: 

• 

• 

• 

ICT governance (risks at senior management level and management body level); 

ICT strategy and its alignment with an institution’s business strategy; and 

ICT risk exposures and controls. 

These  Guidelines  build  on  existing  references  to  ICT  risk  in  the  EBA  SREP  guidelines 
providing the scope and methodology for the assessment of ICT risk within an institution 
and are structured around three main parts: 

• 

setting the context and scope of the ensuing assessment; 

•  addressing what competent authorities should expect to see about management of 
ICT risks at senior management level and management body level, as well as the 
assessment  of  an  institution’s  ICT  strategy  and  its  alignment  with  the  business 
strategy; and 

27 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

•  covering  the  assessment  of  the  institution’s  ICT  risk  exposures  and  the 

effectiveness of controls. 

The assessment contained in these guidelines feeds into the EBA SREP methodology more 
generally,  therefore,  they  should  be  read  along  with  the  EBA  SREP  Guidelines,  which 
continue to remain applicable as appropriate. The appendix lists and provides examples of 
the different type of ICT risks.  

20. CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cybersecurity (Jun 2016) 

The  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  and  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have published a  Guidance on cyber-
security which highlights the following points: 

•  Sound cyber-governance is key. Board and senior management attention is critical 

to a successful cyber-resilience strategy; 

•  The ability to resume operations quickly and safely after a successful cyberattack 

is paramount; 

•  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (FMI)  should  make  use  of  good-quality  threat 

intelligence and rigorous testing; 

•  FMIs  should  aim  to  instill  a  culture  of  cyber-risk  awareness  and  demonstrate 
ongoing  re-evaluation  and  improvement  of  their  cyber-resilience  at  every  level 
within the organization; 

•  Cyber-resilience cannot be achieved by an FMI alone; it is a collective endeavor of 

the whole ecosystem. 

19. Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts (Apr 2016) 

This report, covers the main regulatory issues and challenges related to cyber security for 
relevant  segments  of  securities  markets.  For  IOSCO  member  organizations,  the  report 
provides  an  overview  of  some  of  the  different  regulatory  approaches  related  to 
cybersecurity that  IOSCO members have implemented thus  far, to  serve as reference of 
potential tools available to regulators as they consider appropriate policy  responses. For 
market participants, the report outlines various plans and measures participants have put in 
place to enhance cyber security in terms of identification, protection, detection, response 
and recovery. 

The report results from a board-level coordination effort led by the Quebec AMF (Autorit´e 
des march´e s financiers) with assistance of the China Securities Regulatory Commission 
and the Monetary Authority of Singapore, bringing together the contribution of relevant 
IOSCO Policy committees and related stakeholders. 

28 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

18. EU General Data Protection Regulation (Apr 2016) 

The EU General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR, was set into place in April 2016 and 
will  come  into  force  in  May  2018.  The  new  EU  Regulation  repeals  the  Data  Protection 
Directive of 1995 and replaces local laws for data protection, bringing a single standard 
among all EU member states. 

Some  important  highlights  of  the  regulation  include  the  following  issues  of  scope:  1) 
responsibility  of  data  protection,  including  demonstration  of  compliance  (accountability 
principle), now extends to data processor and not just the data controller (i.e. a supervisor 
can supervise processors directly as well); 2) scope of the law follows the data – GDPR is 
applicable to entities outside the EU if they are servicing EU member states; 3) includes 
not  just  direct  personal  data  but  any  derived  data  that  can  be  either  by  itself  or  in 
combination with other data be identified back to an individual. 

Other important matters are: 

•  Data portability and “Right to be Forgotten” – individual’s right to their own data 

and to have it be transported or deleted if certain conditions are met. 

•  Elevation of importance of data protection through imposing principles of 

“data protection by design” and “data protection by default.” 

•  Required maintenance of a record of all processing activities 

•  Data breach notification to the supervisory authority within 72 hours (and to the 
individuals  in  cases  of  high  risk)  unless  it  can  “demonstrate  that  the  breach  is 
unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons.” 

•  Security measures, such as encryption and pseudonymisation, to be taken based on 

risks for the individuals’ data compromise. 

•  Responsibility of carrying out Data Protection Impact Assessments to “evaluate, in 
particular, the origin, nature, particularity and severity” of risk of data compromise, 
to then take commensurate steps to mitigate, or report to the supervisory authority 
prior to processing. 

•  Explicit details on administrative fines (except in Denmark and Estonia where legal 

system prohibits) setting maximum figures based on categories. 

17. ISO/IEC - IT, Security Techniques, InfoSec Management Systems (Feb 2016) 

The  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  and 
the  International 
Electrotechnical  Commission  (IEC)  maintain  an  expert  committee  dedicated  to  the 
development  of  international  management  systems  standards  for  information  security, 
otherwise  known  as  the  Information  Security  Management  System  (ISMS)  family  of 
standards. Using the ISMS family of standards, organizations can develop and implement 
a  framework  for  managing  the  security  of  their  information  assets  including  financial 

29 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

information, intellectual property, and employee details, or information entrusted to them 
by  customers  or  third  parties.  These  standards  can  also  be  used  to  prepare  for  an 
independent assessment of their ISMS applied to the protection of information. The ISMS 
family consists of the following International Standards: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

ISO/IEC  27000,  Information  security  management  systems  -  Overview  and 
vocabulary 

ISO/IEC 27001, Information security management systems - Requirements 

ISO/IEC 27002, Code of practice for information security controls 

ISO/IEC  27003,  Information  security  management  system  implementation 
guidance 

ISO/IEC 27004, Information security management - Measurement 

ISO/IEC 27005, Information security risk management 

ISO/IEC  27006,  Requirements  for  bodies  providing  audit  and  certification  of 
information security management systems 

ISO/IEC 27007, Guidelines for information security management systems auditing 

ISO/IEC TR 27008, Guidelines for auditors on information security controls 

ISO/IEC 27009, Sector-specific application of ISO/IEC 27001 -Requirements 

ISO/IEC  27010, 
interorganizational communications 

Information  security  management 

for 

inter-sector  and 

ISO/IEC 
telecommunications organizations based on ISO/IEC 27002 

security  management 

27011, 

Information 

guidelines 

for 

ISO/IEC 27013, Guidance on the integrated implementation of ISO/IEC 27001 and 
ISO/IEC 20000-1 

ISO/IEC 27014, Governance of information security 

ISO/IEC  TR  27015,  Information  security  management  guidelines  for  financial 
services 

ISO/IEC TR 27016, Information security management - Organizational economics 

ISO/IEC  27017,  Code  of  practice  for  information  security  controls  based  on 
ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services 

ISO/IEC  27018,  Code  of  practice  for  protection  of  personally  identifiable 
information (PII) in public clouds acting as PII processors 

30 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

• 

ISO/IEC  27019,  Information  security  management  guidelines  based  on  ISO/IEC 
27002 for process control systems specific to the energy utility industry 

16. EU Payment Services Directive 2 (Jan 2016) 

The  Directive  (PSD2)  revises  the  PSD,  adopted  in  2007,  “provides  legal  foundation  for 
further development of a better integrated internal market for electronic payments within 
the EU”. It takes into account new market entrants offering services, specifically “account 
information services” (which allow a payment service user to have an overview of their 
financial situation at any time) and “payment initiation services” (which allow consumers 
to pay via credit transfer from accounts without intermediaries). This is made possible as 
banks  will  be  required  to  open  up  customer  data  via  a  standard  set  of  Application 
Programming  Interfaces  (APIs).  It  enhances  consumer  rights,  including  removal  of 
surcharges for use of credit or debit card, reduced liability for non-authorized payments, 
and  unconditional  refund  right  for  euro  direct  debits.  It  enhances  to  role  of  the  EBA  to 
develop  a  public  central  register  of  authorized  payment  institutions  undated  by  national 
authorities,  to  resolve  disputes  from  national  authorities,  develop  regulatory  technical 
standards  on  strong  customer  authentication  and  secure  communication  channels  for  all 
payment service providers, and to develop cooperation and information exchange between 
the supervisory authorities. 

Countries are to incorporate it into national laws by Jan 13, 2018. 

15. MAS Circular - Tech Risk and Cybersec Training for Board (Oct 2015) 

The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Circular  No.  SRD  TR  03/2015  on  Technology 
Risk and Cyber Security Training for Board establishes that the board of directors and the 
senior management of a financial institution are responsible for the oversight of technology 
risks and cyber security. The Board needs to endorse the organization’s IT strategy and risk 
tolerance, and ensure that management focus, expertise and resources are brought to bear. 
The board also needs to ensure an appropriate accountability structure and organizational 
risk  culture  is  in  place  to  support  effective  implementation  of  the  organization’s  cyber 
resilience program. MAS expects the Board to be regularly apprised on salient technology 
and cyber  risk developments,  and the financial institution  should have a  comprehensive 
technology risk and cybersecurity training program for the Board. 

14. MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions (Aug 2015) 

The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Circular  No.  SRD  TR  01/2015  requires  that 
financial institutions not only secure their perimeters from a potential breach, but also have 
robust capabilities to promptly detect any cyber intrusions so as to enable swift containment 
and  recovery.  It  considers  important  that  financial  institutions  maintain  a  keen  sense  of 
situational  awareness  by  continuously  enhancing  their  technical  and  internal  control 
processes  to  monitor  and  detect  intrusions  in  their  networks,  systems,  servers,  network 
devices and endpoints. 

31 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

13. UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (Jul 2015) 

The UK FCA published final rules for a new regulatory framework “Senior Managers and 
Certification Regime (SMR)”, which replaced the Approved Persons Regime (APR) for 
banks,  building  societies,  credit  unions  and  dual-regulated  (FCA  and  PRA  regulated) 
investment firms, effective March 2016: 

“While  the  Senior  Managers  Regime  will  ensure  that  senior  managers  can  be  held 
accountable  for  any  misconduct  that  falls  within  their  areas  of  responsibilities,  the  new 
Certification Regime and Conduct Rules aim to hold individuals working at all levels in 
banking to appropriate standards of conduct ... 

•  The  Senior  Managers  Regime  focuses  on  individuals  who  hold  key  roles  and 
responsibilities  in  relevant  firms.  Preparations  for  the  new  regime  will  involve 
allocating  and  mapping  out  responsibilities  and  preparing  Statements  of 
Responsibilities  for  individuals  carrying  out  Senior  Management  Functions 
(SMFs).  While  individuals  who  fall  under  this  regime  will  continue  to  be 
preapproved by regulators, firms will also be legally required to ensure that they 
have procedures in place to assess their fitness and propriety before applying for 
approval and at least annually afterwards. 

•  The Certification Regime applies to other staff who could pose a risk of significant 
harm to the firm or any of its customers (for example, staff who give investment 
advice or submit to benchmarks). These staff will not be preapproved by regulators 
and  firms’  preparations  will  need  to  include  putting  in  place  procedures  for 
assessing for themselves the fitness and propriety of staff, for which they will be 
accountable to the regulators. These preparations will be important not only when 
recruiting for roles that come under the Certification Regime but when reassessing 
each year the fitness and propriety of staff who are subject to the regime. 

•  The Conduct Rules set out a basic standard for behavior that all those covered by 
the new regimes will be expected meet. Firms’ preparations will need to include 
ensuring that staff who will be subject to the new rules are aware of the conduct 
rules  and  how  they  apply  to  them.  Individuals  subject  to  either  the  SMR  or  the 
Certification Regime will be subject to Conduct Rules from the commencement of 
the  new  regime  on  7th  March  2016,  while  firms  will  have  a  year  after 
commencement to prepare for the wider application of the Conduct Rules to other 
staff.” 

12. Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-Defense Management (Mar 2015) 

In 2015, The Central  Bank of  Israel issued a  Directive on Cyber-Defense Management. 
This  Directive  contains  regulatory  provisions  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Department’s 
requirements and expectations regarding the management of cyberdefense. The Directive 
prescribes a structured but flexible framework for cyber-risk management, while allowing 
the  banking  corporation  to  exercise  discretion  in  its  implementation.  This  form  of 
regulatory  approach  is  intended  to  enable  the  banking  corporation  to  adapt  its  defense 
system  in  a  dynamic  manner  to  the  changing  cyber-threat  landscape.  Therefore,  the 

32 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

Directive  defines  principles  for  cyber-defense,  rather  than  specifying  a  strict  “list  of 
controls”. The expectation is that the banking corporation shall adopt these principles while 
establishing  a  cyber-defense  array  in  accordance  with  the  scope  and  the  nature  of  its 
business activity, and its risk profile 

11. ASIC’s Report on Cyber Resilience (Mar 2015) 

This report by the Australian Securities & Investment Commission (ASIC) is intended to 
help  regulated  entities  improve  their  cyber  resilience  by  increasing  awareness  of  cyber 
risks,  encouraging  collaboration  between  industry  and  government,  and  identifying 
opportunities to improve cyber resilience. It also aims to identify how cyber risks should 
be  addressed  as  part  of  current  legal  and  compliance  obligations  relevant  to  ASIC’s 
jurisdiction. 

10. EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments (Dec 2014) 

EBA’s Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments was published, with an implementation 
date of 1 August 2015, with the substance as consulted, i.e. a conversion of the original 
SecuRe  Pay  recommendations.  The  implementation  of  any  potentially  more  stringent 
requirements necessary under the Payment Systems Directive 2 was intended to occur at a 
later stage, by the date set in the PSD 2. 

The Guidelines encompass the following: 

1.  General control and security environment: Governance; Risk Assessment; Incident 

Monitoring and Reporting; Risk Control and Mitigation; and Traceability. 

2.  Specific  control  and  security  measures  for  internet  payments:  Initial  customer 
identification,  information;  Strong  customer  authentication;  Enrolment  for,  and 
provision of, authentication tools and/or software delivered to the customer; Log-
in  attempts,  session  time  out,  validity  of  authentication;  Transaction  monitoring; 
and Protection of sensitive payment data. 

3.  Customer  awareness,  education,  and  communication  including  Notifications, 
setting  of  limits;  and  Customer  access  to  information  on  the  status  of  payment 
initiation and execution. 

9.  MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management (Mar 2014) 

Notice  CMG-N02  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  requires  regulated 
financial  institutions  to:  a)  make  all  reasonable  effort  to  maintain  high  availability  for 
critical systems; b) establish a recovery time objective of not more than 4 hours for each 
critical system; c) notify the Authority as soon as possible, but not later than 1 hour, upon 
the  discovery  of  a  relevant  incident;  d)  submit  within  14  days  a  root  cause  and  impact 
analysis  report  to  the  Authority;  and  e)  implement  IT  controls  to  protect  customer 
information from unauthorized access or disclosure. 

This  Notice  applies  to  all:  (a)  approved  exchanges;  (b)  licensed  trade  repositories;  (c) 
approved  clearing  houses;  (c)  recognized  clearing  houses  which  are  incorporated  in 

33 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

Singapore;  (d)  holders  of  a  capital  markets  services  license;  (e)  recognized  market 
operators which are incorporated in  Singapore; and (f) persons who are approved under 
section  289  of  the  Act  to  act  as  a  trustee  of  a  collective  investment  scheme  which  is 
authorized under section 286 of the Securities and Futures Act and constituted as a unit 
trust. 

8.  World Bank - General Principles for Credit Reporting (Sep 2011) 

World  Bank  Financial  Infrastructure  Series  -  General  Principles  for  Credit  Reporting 
Abstract: “This report describes the nature of credit reporting elements which are crucial 
for understanding credit reporting and to ensuring that credit reporting systems are safe, 
efficient and reliable. It intends to provide an international agreed framework in the form 
of international standards for credit reporting systems’ policy and oversight. The Principles 
for credit reporting are deliberately expressed in a general way to ensure that they can be 
useful in all countries and that they will be durable. These principles are not intended for 
use as a blueprint for the design or operation of any specific system, but rather suggest the 
key characteristics that should be satisfied by different systems and the infrastructure used 
to  support  them  to  achieve  a  stated  common  purpose,  namely  expanded  access  and 
coverage, fair conditions, and safe and efficient service for borrowers and lenders. Section 
two  provides  a  brief  overview  of  the  market  for  credit  information  sharing  and  credit 
reporting  activities  and  then  analyzes  in  some  detail  the  key  considerations  underlying 
credit reporting. Section three outlines the general principles and related roles. Section four 
proposes a framework for the effective oversight of credit reporting systems.” 

7.  BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk (Jun 2011) 

These  Principles  for  the  Sound  Management  of  Operational  Risk  and  the  Role  of 
Supervision updates and replaces the 2003 Sound Practices for the Management and 

Supervision  of  Operational  Risk.  This  document  incorporates  the  evolution  of  sound 
practice and details eleven principles of sound operational risk management covering (1) 
governance, (2) risk management environment and (3) the role of disclosure. 

It  covers  fundamental  principles  of  operational  risk  management:  first,  for  the  Board  of 
Directors  to  establish  a  strong  risk  management  culture,  maintaining  a  framework  for 
operational  risk  management  fully  integrated  into  the  bank’s  overall  risk  management 
processes.  Under  Governance,  it  details  the  role  of  Board  of  Directors  and  Senior 
Management.  Risk  Management  Environment  section  includes  risk  Identification  and 
Assessment, regular Monitoring and Reporting, strong Control and Mitigation practices. 
The principles also speak to Business Resiliency and Continuity plans, as well as public 
disclosures to allow stakeholders’ assessment of operational risk management. 

Of relevance to cyber issues is Technology Risk and Outsourcing, specifically that Senior 
management  needs  to  ensure,  that  staff  responsible  for  managing  operational  risk 
coordinate  and  communicate  effectively  with  those  responsible  for  outsourcing 
arrangements.  The  Control  and  Mitigation  section  includes  the  requirement  to  have  an 
integrated approach to identifying, measuring, monitoring and managing technology risks. 
Further, it details that “the board and senior management are responsible for understanding 

34 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

the operational risks associated with outsourcing arrangements and ensuring that effective 
risk  management  policies  and  practices  are  in  place  to  manage  the  risk  in  outsourcing 
activities” and delineates activities that outsourcing policies and risk management should 
encompass. 

6.  FFIEC - Authentication in Internet Banking Environment, suppl. (Jun 2011) 

The  US  FFIEC  released  a  Supplementary  update  to  the  Authentication  in  an  Internet 
Banking Environment  Guidance of 2005. “The Supplement  reiterates and reinforces the 
expectations  described  in  the  2005  Guidance  that  financial  institutions  should  perform 
periodic  risk  assessments  considering  new  and  evolving  threats  to  online  accounts  and 
adjust their customer authentication, layered security, and other controls as appropriate in 
response to identified risks. It establishes minimum control expectations for certain online 
banking activities and identifies controls that are less effective in the current environment. 
It also identifies certain specific minimum elements that should be part of an institution’s 
customer  awareness  and  education  program.”  “Financial  institutions  should  use  this 
guidance when evaluating and implementing authentication systems and practices whether 
they are provided internally or by a service provider. Although this guidance is focused on 
the risks and risk management techniques associated with the Internet delivery channel, the 
principles are applicable to all forms of electronic banking activities.” 

New  guidance  took  effect  January  2012,  for  examiners  to  formally  assess  institutions 
against these enhanced expectations. 

5.  AICPA suite of SOC & Implementation Guidance (Apr 2010) 

System and Organization Controls (SOC) is a suite of service offerings (independent audit 
reports) Certified Public Accountants may provide in connection with system level controls 
of  a  service  organization  or  entity-level  controls  of  other  organizations.  They  are 
independent  attestations  of  an  organization’s  operating  environment,  similar  to  the  ISO 
certifications,  but  well-recognized  audit  regime  that  covers  both  financial  and  security 
aspects. 

The SOC report series include: 

•  SOC 1: Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization; 

•  SOC  2:  Reporting  on  Controls  at  a  Service  Organization  Relevant  to  Security, 

Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy; 

•  SOC  3:  Trust  Services  Principles,  Criteria,  and  Illustrations  for  Security, 

Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy 

4.  ENISA National Exercises Good Practice Guide (Dec 2009) 

The European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) guide was 
prepared “to assist authorities in Member States to better understand the complexities of 
exercises  and  help  them  prepare  local  and  national  ones.  This  guide  was  prepared  by 

35 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

interviewing experts on exercises throughout the EU and beyond with the aim to identify 
good practices that were already applied and proved to be effective.” 

“The  guide  examines  these  practices  by  first  giving  an  introduction  to  the  subject  of 
exercises, then reviewing the life-cycle of an exercise (identifying, planning, conducting, 
and evaluating) systematically. Also, the roles of the involved stakeholders are presented. 
Throughout the guide, good practices are highlighted for easy identification.” 

3.  ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting (Dec 2009) 

Given strong commitment by the EU institutions and the Member States to the resilience 
of  public  communications  networks,  ENISA  was  asked  to  help  Member  States  and  EU 
institutions  to  identify  good  practices  in  incident  reporting  schemes.  This  document 
addresses  many  of  the  issues  that  Member  States  will  face  as  they  debate,  take  stock, 
establish, launch, develop and harmonize their incident reporting systems at national level. 
The  report  discusses  schemes  for  reporting  incidents  that  may  harm  or  threaten  the 
resilience  and  security  of  public  eCommunication  networks.  It  examines  the  whole 
lifecycle  of  a  reporting  scheme,  from  the  first  steps  in  designing  the  scheme,  through 
engaging  the  constituency’s  cooperation,  setting  the  reporting  procedures,  and  then 
management and improvement of the scheme. 

2.  KR Electronic Financial Transactions Act and Enforcement Decree (Jan 2007) 

South Korea’s Electronic Financial Transactions Act was enacted and enforced in January 
2007. The Act (last amended May 2013) and Enforcement Decree (last amended March 
2014) was for “ensuring the security and reliability of electronic financial transactions by 
clarifying  their  legal  relations  and  to  promoting  financial  conveniences  for  people  and 
developing the national economy by creating a foundation for the sound development of 
electronic  financial  industry.”  It  provides  the  legal  grounds  for  the  financial  sector 
regulators to conduct supervision and examination of financial institutions and electronic 
financial business operators. According to the Act and other related regulations, Financial 
Institutions (FIs) should adopt comprehensive measures to better cope with cyber threats 
and manage related risks. 

1.  KR Reg. on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions (Jan 2007) 

South Korea’s Regulation on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions, frequently 
amended latest being June 30, 2016, prescribes to the Financial Services Commission, as 
the  body  delegated  in  the  Electronic  Financial  Transactions  Act,  the  matters  under  its 
authority that are “required for securing the safety of the information technology sector of 
an institution subject to examination by the Financial Supervisory Service under other Acts 
and  subordinate  statutes.”  It  addresses  “Rights  and  Obligations  of  Parties  to  Electronic 
Financial  Transactions”;  “Securing  the  Safety  of  Electronic  Financial  Transactions  and 
Protecting Users”; “Licensing, Registration and Operation of Electronic Financial Affairs”; 
and  “Supervision  of  Electronic  Financial  Affairs”.  It  includes  explanatory  Tables  on 
“Standards  for  Computing  the  Number  of  IT  Personnel  and  Information  Protection 
Personnel”;  “Standards  for  IT  Sector  and  Information  Protection  Budgets”;  “Specific 
Limits  on  Use  of  Means  of  Electronic  Payment”;  “Prerequisites  for  Major  Investors”; 

36 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

“Financial Companies Subject to Evaluation of IT Sector Operation”; and “Types of Assets 
with Low Investment Risk”. 

 

 

37 

Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

APPENDIX:  INDEX by CONCEPTS 
Following table lists the documents (by numbers as referenced in the Table of Contents) in which the listed concepts appear. 

 

 

38 

 

Conceptauthorised person1113184934781011171819202223242627.127.33032353636384042454649515254business area131721263840493478101112131617192021222324252627.127.32830353639414344484951525354busines operations12711121517192123242627.328344142485254central bank7810111619202226373840434546505152communications network2341116182224265154competent authority410161819212223243840434549conduct authority13192027.13849control function13212327.3344449critical infrastructure34111719202224262830353644515254cross border7811131617181920212224384043454649515234101114192021242627.127.32830313335373840444546515254cyber defense1227.3445154cyber event192030314144515254cyber incident12192024283031324446515354cyber resilience111214151920242627.32830334344465152111215192021242627.3282930323335364142434445465051525354Digest document numbers (as listed in Table of Contents) in which the concept appears*best practicescyber riskcyber attackbusiness continuityFinancial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

 

39 

 

Conceptcyber security111924355152611121920212427.127.227.3282930313235363740434445464850515254cybersecurity framework111920303642445154data protection381013161718192021222427.227.33537384045495254digital services22353845financial business12172649financial companies1225304351financial conduct13192027.1384967891011141516171920212327.227.32830313738404344454648495152financial market781113161819202122232627.130374345495152financial sector781112192022252627.127.33032373840434445464951521267811131617192021232527.127.227.32829373840414344454648495152financial stability781119202627.13032404345465152financial system78101113161920212326303132374041434546495152financial transactions1211172030313738404151general principles81318192122343538495255good practices3410111624262935384654governing bodies81317192224384146495254incident report341012162224283138454852543411121819202122242627.127.328303235363741444850515253541234681112161718192022242627.127.227.3282930313335363738394142434445474850515253543481011121719202224252627.3313236373840414445464750515254Digest document numbers (as listed in Table of Contents) in which the concept appears*cyber threatfinancial servicesfinancial institutioninformation securityincident responseinformation sharingFinancial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

 

 

40 

 

Concept3478111217181920222324252627.227.328303335364041444548541234789101112131516171819202123252627.32829303233343639414244484951525455internal audit7121317212327.3283035394244495055international standard481017223845465154internet payment10162638management function71012132127.3304449515435710111213161719202123242627.134363839434448495154management response27131720263644474952management system371112131719212627.33639444547484951525354managing cyber1112192024283035364244515254market infrastructure811171920222627.130374043455152market participants81011192130374043454951money laundering8101113161827.33134374045464955network security34111719233941474854operational risk7811121619202122232627.328303637394043515254outsourcing arrangement711131623252628294849payment initiation101617384045payment institution101638payment instrument2101638payment services101113162127.33840444549payment transactions21016213738penetration test121920212627.127.227.3283035383941444648525354person data8101113161819212235384045practice guidance34242638regulated activity13192334384349Digest document numbers (as listed in Table of Contents) in which the concept appears*information technologyinformation systemmanagement processFinancial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest 
 

 

*Some Digest items have multiple pieces, which are as follows: 

 

41 

 

 

Conceptreporting service8214249reporting system378121721475154response function31327.349544678101112131416171920212223242627.127.227.3293033363839414243444547485152535456789101112131617192021222324252627.127.227.3283031323435363739424344454849505152535455risk profile7111213161920212326283032373840414449515254security incident34910111216171718192122242627.127.33839444748515254security management411171921242627.229333638394247485254security risk10161718192126353637384445474851525447101112131516192021232627.23034354142444849515253542347810111213161718192021222324252627.127.227.32830323536373839404142444547484950515253supervisory authority7810161820212226304043455152third countries131618224345492347810111213161718192021222324252627.227.3283032353637383941424344454648495051525354threat intelligence111920242627.127.227.329303644505152trade venu1113192249senior managementthird partiesrisk managementDigest document numbers (as listed in Table of Contents) in which the concept appears*risk assessmentservice providerDIGEST TOC ref#TOC TITLE27.1UK CBEST Intelligence-Led Vulnerability Testing 2.0 (2016) - Implementation Guide27.2Procuring Penetration Testing Services27.3Threat Intelligence Framework