New York’s Cybersecurity 
Regulations for Financial 
Institutions & Health Care

New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for 
Financial Institutions
A New Age of Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and 
Demanding Leadership Accountability
Authors:

Craig A. Newman
Alejandro Cruz
Kade Olsen
Simone Silva-Arrindell
Leigh Barnwell
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP

About the Publication:

This mini-treatise, New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions, A New Age of 
Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Leadership Accountability, authored by 
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, and published by and available on Bloomberg Law provides 
a general overview of the sweeping new cybersecurity regulation issued by the New York State 
Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator, focusing on its 
core rules and requirements. This publication also provides practical guidance regarding issues that 
affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the requirements of the regulation.

About Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice:

The Patterson Belknap Privacy and Data Security practice provides public and private organizations—
including financial services firms, asset managers and funds, retailers, hospitality, media and 
technology companies, manufacturers, insurance companies, tax-exempt organizations, and law 
firms—with comprehensive services in this vital area. The firm’s attorneys combine decades of 
experience spanning from the public and private sectors, including experienced litigators, corporate 
advisors and former federal prosecutors with deep experience in all aspects of privacy and data 
security. The group advises on a broad range of issues including prevention and compliance, 
risk mitigation, data breach response, special board and committee representation, internal 
investigations, and litigation. Patterson Belknap also draws on valuable resources, including highly 
experienced forensic consultants, security professionals, and crisis communications teams, who add 
insight and value on key aspects of cybersecurity matters.

1

About the Firm:

Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP is a New York City based law firm with over 200 lawyers. The 
firm is on The American Lawyer’s 2016 “A-List” of the 20 leading law firms in the United States. 
Patterson Belknap delivers a full range of services across approximately 20 practice groups in both 
litigation and commercial law. For more information, please visit www.pbwt.com.

About Craig Newman:

Craig A. Newman is a recognized leader in both complex financial litigation and global 
cybersecurity. With more than twenty years as a litigation partner and General Counsel at both 
a multi-billion dollar international private equity firm and F500-owned media consortium, Craig 
represents Fortune 500 companies, their boards and leadership teams. In his cybersecurity work, 
Craig represents clients in litigation, regulatory and governance matters, and the management 
of risks associated with data security practices and policies including data breach preparedness 
and response. He chairs Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice and is a founding 
contributor to the firm’s blog, www.DataSecurityLaw.com. Craig also sits on the Bloomberg Law 
Innovation Advisory Board. A former journalist, Craig appears regularly on national television 
including CNBC, CNN and Bloomberg, discussing issues at the intersection of business, law, 
cybersecurity and data privacy, and has written for The New York Times, The Washington Post, The 
Wall Street Journal and Financial Times. He was named as one of the National Law Journal’s 2015 
“Cybersecurity & Data Privacy Trailblazers.”

About Bloomberg Law:
Bloomberg Law helps legal professionals provide world-class counsel with access to actionable 
legal intelligence in a business context. Bloomberg Law delivers a unique combination of practical 
guidance, comprehensive primary and secondary source material, trusted content from Bloomberg 
BNA, news, time-saving practice tools, market data and business intelligence. For more information, 
visit www.bna.com/bloomberglaw. 

Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security brings you streamlined access to the expertise of 
Bloomberg BNA’s privacy and data security editorial team, contributing practitioners, and in-country 
experts together with unmatched practice tools to help you quickly respond with confidence to 
client inquiries.

In Practice tools include exemplar policies and provisions, checklists, and forms to facilitate your 
drafting needs for privacy and data security tasks such as:
 
 
 
 

•  New York Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions Managing a Data Breach
• Managing Privacy and Data Security Risk in Mergers
• Designing a Privacy Policy
• Cross-Border Data Transfer

2

Introduction

Cybersecurity is one of the most critical challenges facing our nation and our economy. 

 
U.S. regulators on both the state and federal level are working to keep pace with the 
challenges and risks posed by cybercrime.

On March 1, 2017, a sweeping new cybersecurity regulation was issued by the New 

 
York State Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator. 
The regulation affects more than 3,000 institutions that operate in the state as well as many of 
their key third-party vendors. The regulation – in some respects – is unprecedented in its detail 
and focus on leadership accountability.

Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP is pleased to release “A New Age of Cybersecurity 

 
Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Accountability.” Our publication provides a 
general overview of this new regulation, focusing on its core rules and requirements. We 
also raise issues that affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the 
requirements of the regulation.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Craig A. Newman  
Partner & Chair, Data Security & Privacy 
Practice Patterson Belknap Webb & 
Tyler LLP 
New York, New York

3

4

A new age of cybersecurity regulation: 
Raising the bar and demanding accountabiltiy
By Craig A. Newman, Alejandro Cruz, Kade Olsen, Simone Silva-Arrindell, and  
Leigh Barnwell Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, New York*

I. Regulatory Overview

A. Introduction

On March 1, 2017, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a 
new cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions, their information 
technology systems, and their customers from cybercrime1. This “first-in-the-nation regulation” 
requires many of the more than 3,000 financial institutions, insurance companies, health 
plans, charitable institutions, and other organizations regulated by DFS to take a fresh and 
comprehensive look at their cybersecurity preparedness, governance, internal controls, and 
defenses. It applies directly to any entity operating with a “license … or similar authorization 
under [New York’s] Banking Law, the Insurance Law or the Financial Services Law”2, —including 
many foreign and out-of-state branches of DFS-regulated entities.

The regulation provides a basic framework within which organizations are required to develop 
a comprehensive cybersecurity program best suited to address their specific risk profile. 
Although the new regulation includes a degree of flexibility and bears some similarities to 
guidelines and regulations issued by other regulatory bodies, it has 23 different sections and 
is far more detailed and accountability oriented than most other comparable data security 
regimes. Significantly, in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory standards, 
the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership accountable by requiring an 
annual compliance certificate signed by a senior officer or board member.

Given the DFS’s broad authority and history as an aggressive regulator, the risks of 
noncompliance with the new regulation are substantial. And prompt implementation is 

________________________________________________________________________
* Craig A. Newman, a partner in the New York office of Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice. He may be 
reached at cnewman@pbwt.com. Alejandro Cruz, Kade Olsen, Simone Silva-Arrindell, and Leigh Barnwell are all associates at the firm. 

The information presented here is for general informational purposes only and should not be construed as specific legal advice. The information is also 
summary in nature. Please refer to the New York Department of Financial Services “Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies” for a full 
statement of the regulation and applicable requirements.

1 Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies, 
2 23 NYCRR 500.01(c).

5

required. As the regulation states, “[i]t is critical for all regulated institutions … to move 
swiftly and urgently to adopt a cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00. Notwithstanding 
the mandate to act quickly, the complexity of the new regulation means that affected 
organizations will need to proceed methodically to ensure compliance with the regulation, 
and should consider appropriately documenting their decision-making process at key 
junctures. 

II. Accountability

A. Corporate Governance

The DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at the top of an organization. 
According to the regulation, senior management “must take [cybersecurity issues] seriously 
and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00.

That responsibility starts with the organization’s “Cybersecurity Policy.” According to the new 
regulation, each covered entity must implement and maintain a written policy laying out 
its policies and procedures for the protection of its information systems and any nonpublic 
information3 stored on those systems. 23 NYCRR 500.03. The policy must address, at a 
minimum, data governance, access controls, disaster recovery planning, performance 
planning, network security, consumer data privacy, third-party management, and incident 
response. We discuss each of these topics below.

Critically, the policy must be approved by the organization’s board or a senior officer. The 
regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee thereof,” or a 
“Senior Officer” approve the policy. 23 NYCRR 500.03. An organization must also certify in 
writing annually to the DFS that its cybersecurity program complies with the regulation. 23 
NYCRR 500.17.

________________________________________________________________________
3 The regulation expressly defines nonpublic information. 23 NYCRR 500.01(g). First, such information includes any business-related information that, if 
tampered with or disclosed, would cause a material adverse impact to the business. Second, it includes any information that can be used to identify an 
individual, “in combination with any one or more of the following elements”: (i) social security number; (ii) driver’s license or similar number; (iii) account or 
credit card number; (iv) security code or password that would permit access to an individual’s financial account; or (v) biometric records. Finally, it includes 
any information (except for age or gender) created or derived by a health care provider related to: (i) any mental condition; (ii) the provision of any health 
care; and (iii) the payment for health care. 

6

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 No prior state or federal regulations have come close to requiring this level of 
accountability from an organization’s directors or senior management. Accountability 
of this nature also raises the prospect of potential liability at the top of an organization. 
Covered entities will need to promptly develop procedures for educating and 
updating senior management and/or board members regarding their responsibilities 
under the new regulation. 
 
Covered entities should also consider reviewing relevant insurance policies, including 
directors and officers (D&O) coverage, to account for the new layer of potential liability 
imposed by the DFS regulation.

B. Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Designation

Covered entities must designate a “qualified individual” to serve as a Chief Information 
Security Officer (CISO). 23 NYCRR 500.04. The CISO is responsible for overseeing, 
implementing, and enforcing the covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy. Covered 
entities may employ a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but each covered 
entity electing to do so must: 
 
 

•  retain responsibility for compliance with the CISO requirements;
•  designate a senior member of its personnel to oversee the third-party service 

provider; and 

 

•  require the third-party service provider to maintain a cybersecurity program that 

meets the DFS’s regulations.

The CISO’s responsibilities are substantial and require communication with senior 
management and the board of directors (or a subcommittee of the board). Highlighting, once 
again, the regulation’s focus on senior-level involvement, the CISO must deliver a report at 
least annually to the board of directors or equivalent governing body. 23 NYCRR 500.04(b). 
The board report, “to the extent applicable,” must include the following:

•  an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the covered entity’s 

information systems;

• exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures;
• identification of cyber risks;
• an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness;
• proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and
• a summary of material cybersecurity events.

7

In addition to reporting internally, the CISO must report to the DFS Superintendent upon 
request. 23 NYCRR 500.02(d). 

Given the CISO’s significant and overall responsibilities for cybersecurity, some smaller covered 
entities—depending on the circumstances—may wish to consider retaining an experienced and 
qualified third-party service provider to serve as the CISO.

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

  Given the scope of the CISO’s responsibilities under the regulation, covered entities 
should consider a comprehensive policy governing the CISO’s role within an 
organization. Such a policy should be reviewed and updated as needed, based on DFS 
commentary, enforcement expectations, and other pertinent developments.

 Organizations have latitude in designating a CISO from within or outside of the 
organization, as covered entities may use the services of a third party to fill this role. Both 
options may present potential challenges, and a careful assessment of the risks and 
benefits of each option should be done before deciding the course of action best suited 
to the organization’s resources and risk profile.

 
III. Implementation

A. Risk Assessment, Cybersecurity Program, and Cybersecurity Policy

Three overarching requirements of the regulation will drive its implementation: the Risk 
Assessment, the Cybersecurity Program, and the Cybersecurity Policy.

The regulation requires covered entities to develop a Cybersecurity Program (23 NYCRR 
500.02) and Cybersecurity Policy (23 NYCRR 500.03) that comply with DFS requirements. 
According to the regulation, the central factor in developing both the Cybersecurity Program 
and Cybersecurity Policy is the Risk Assessment (23 NYCRR 500.09). The Risk Assessment 
must consider the “particular risks” to a company’s business “sufficient to inform the design 
of the cybersecurity program required.” 23 NYCRR 500.09(a). Risk Assessments must be 
performed periodically and “updated as reasonably necessary … to respond to technological 
developments and evolving threats.” Id. From a compliance standpoint, the outcome of these 
periodic Risk Assessments may serve to refine some covered entities’ obligations under the 
regulation (especially as firms become more cyber-mature), as many requirements apply only to 
“the extent applicable” based on the Risk Assessment. See, e.g., 23 NYCRR 500.06(a), 500.11(a).

8

Risk Assessments, which must be carried out “in accordance with written policies and 
procedures,” 23 NYCRR 500.09(b), shall be documented and must include the following: (1) 
criteria for the evaluation and categorization of identified cybersecurity risks or threats facing 
the organization; (2) criteria for the assessment of “confidentiality, integrity, security and 
availability” of the organization’s information systems and nonpublic information (as defined 
in the regulation), including existing controls in the context of identified risks; (3) requirements 
describing how identified risks are either mitigated or accepted and how the organization’s 
Cybersecurity Program will address those risks. Id.

Every covered entity must then develop a Cybersecurity Program that addresses each of the 
applicable DFS requirements. The Cybersecurity Program “shall be based on the Covered 
Entity’s Risk Assessment” and must be “designed to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability” of its information systems. 23 NYCRR 500.02. Notably, the Cybersecurity Program 
is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document. Rather, it consists of the underlying 
system, process, and procedures by which a covered entity ensures its compliance with the 
DFS regulation. At a minimum, the Cybersecurity Program must do six things: (1) identify 
internal and external cyber risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of 
policies and procedures to protect information systems and nonpublic information; (3) detect 
cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect, and mitigate the effects of cybersecurity events; 
(5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory reporting requirements. 23 
NYCRR 500.02(b).

Finally, as discussed above, a covered entity must create a Cybersecurity Policy. 23 NYCRR 
500.03. The Cybersecurity Policy must also be based on the organization’s Risk Assessment 
and should address the following fourteen specific areas (some of which overlap with the 
regulation’s stand-alone requirements) to “the extent applicable”: 

• information security;
• data governance and classification;
• asset inventory and device management;
• access controls and identity management;
• business continuity and disaster recovery planning and resources;
• systems operations and availability concerns;
• systems and network security;
• systems and network monitoring;
• systems and application development and quality assurance;

9

• physical security and environmental controls;
• customer data privacy;
• vendor and third party service provider;
• risk assessment; and
• incident response.

B. Day-To-Day Requirements

The regulation also contains a series of detailed day-to-day requirements—ranging from 
access controls to employee training—that covered institutions must integrate into their overall 
Cybersecurity Policy, “to the extent applicable” to their operations.

1. Data Governance and Classification

Generally speaking, data classification and data mapping are considered initial steps in 
developing a Cybersecurity Policy. Organizations must identify how they collect, store, and 
transmit sensitive data and nonpublic information. While this can be a resource-intensive 
process, it will likely pay dividends over time. The Cybersecurity Policy should therefore 
articulate a process for identifying and categorizing different types of sensitive information 
within an organization. 
While covered entities may identify additional categories of sensitive information to be 
protected, the DFS regulation identifies three categories of nonpublic information that must 
be protected (23 NYCRR 500.01(g)):

•  business-related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized disclosure of 

which would cause a material adverse impact to the business; 

•  information about an individual that—because of name, number, personal mark, or 

other identifier—can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or 
more of the following data elements: social security number; driver’s license number 
or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security code, access code or 
password that would permit access to a financial account; or biometric records; and
•   information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or the 

individual’s family or household.

In addition to data classification, covered entities are required to establish a data governance 
policy. 23 NYCRR 500.03(b). The regulation, however, does not provide guidance as to the 
specific requirements of such a policy.

10

 

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 Covered entities may want to consider in appropriate instances utilizing “data 
stewards” who have expertise on specific categories of sensitive data. 

 When sensitive information is collected, shared, and accessed across different business 
units of a covered entity, the Cybersecurity Policy should coordinate security activities 
and controls between and among the relevant departments.
  Covered entities are required to protect sensitive information at all stages of its life 
within the organization: its creation or collection, its day-to-day use and storage, 
its transmission inside and outside the organization, and ultimately its deletion, 
destruction, and disposal.

2. Access Controls and Identity Management 

Access controls and identity management go hand in hand with data governance and 
information security. As part of their Cybersecurity Policy, covered entities should create 
a framework for managing the electronic identities of those who have access to the 
organization’s information systems and their corresponding access privileges for various 
categories of data. The regulation specifically requires companies to “limit user access 
privileges” to systems that “provide access to Nonpublic Information,” and those privileges 
must be reviewed and modified on a regular basis. 23 NYCRR 500.07. 

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 Developing access controls is ancillary to other DFS requirements—including 
requirements governing network and physical security, vendor data security, and multi-
factor authentication.

 Each covered entity must “periodically review” the access privileges of its employees. 
At a minimum, companies should consider reviewing an employee’s access privileges 
when he or she changes positions, but covered entities should consider going further 
depending on the circumstances. For example, periodic reviews and reconciliations 
could provide opportunities to clean-up and refine access privileges based on routine 
changes in personnel and company structure.

11

3. Systems and Network Security 

As part of the Cybersecurity Program, covered entities should create policies regarding the 
security of their internal networks. 23 NYCRR 500.03(g). In particular, companies should 
consider how their electronic systems connect with third parties or other external entities and 
develop policies for managing the security of those external network connections. This will be 
especially important for covered entities with network connections to third-party vendors and 
contractors, which we discuss below.

The Cybersecurity Policy should also incorporate procedures for regular internal systems and 
network monitoring, as appropriate, to assess the capacity and performance of the systems 
and network, as well as compliance with security protocols. 23 NYCRR 500.03(h).

4. Physical Security and Environmental Controls

The Cybersecurity Policy must address physical security for the information systems 
infrastructure. Covered entities must also specify environmental controls that will ensure the 
integrity and continued availability of the data in the event of man-made or natural disasters 
or other potential disruptions. 23 NYCRR 500.03(j).

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 Organizations should consider developing a comprehensive protocol for controlling 
access to their most critical information systems considering, among other factors, the 
firm’s overall risk profile, its physical storage of (and use of safeguards for) sensitive 
information, and its access limitations for relevant personnel.

 This is another area where an organization might benefit from a periodic and 
documented review to ensure that access controls remain current.

5. Systems Operations and Availability 

The Cybersecurity Policy must also address the availability of information systems. Covered 
entities should ensure that necessary systems are available as needed to employees and 
customers by adopting policies regarding hardware maintenance and repairs, operating 
system functionality, software upgrades, and adequate bandwidth, among other topics. 23 
NYCRR 500.03(f).

12

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 Network capacity, performance, and availability constraints are clearly of concern to 
DFS. Covered institutions would be well advised to engage in a periodic review of 
these issues to ensure compliance with the regulation.

 
6. Systems and Application Development and Quality Assurance 

Entities must ensure that their information systems, applications, and security programs work 
as designed and developed to address vulnerabilities. 23 NYCRR 500.03(i). To that end, 
covered entities must prepare “written procedures, guidelines and standards” to ensure 
“secure development practices” for in-house applications and systems and “procedures for 
evaluating, assessing or testing” externally developed applications and systems. 23 NYCRR 
500.08(a).

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 The procedures, guidelines, and standards for system and application security must 
be assessed and updated by the CISO “as necessary.” 23 NYCRR 500.08(b). Given the 
“as necessary” language, organizations should consider reviewing the security of their 
applications and systems on a routine basis, subject to their particular risk profile and 
other relevant circumstances. 

7. Data Retention, Destruction, and Audit Trails

The regulation sets forth specific guidelines for the retention and destruction of data. At a 
minimum, a covered entity must implement, “to the extent applicable and based on its Risk 
Assessment,” an audit trail system that tracks and maintains data “to reconstruct material 
financial transactions sufficient to support normal operations and obligations,” as well as to 
detect and respond to cybersecurity events. 23 NYCRR 500.06. Audit trail records must be 
retained for at least five years. Id.

There are, however, limits on the data retention required by the regulation. Covered entities 
must implement policies and procedures for the timely destruction of nonpublic data that is 
“no longer necessary for business operations or for other legitimate business purposes of the 
Covered Entity.” 23 NYCRR 500.13. Covered entities may retain data or information when it is 
otherwise required by law or regulation “or where targeted disposal is not reasonably feasible 
due to the manner in which the information is maintained.” Id.

13

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 The audit-trail requirement is significant. Organizations must maintain audit trails 
that allow for the reconstruction of financial transactions sufficient to support normal 
operations, and designed to detect and respond to cybersecurity events. 

 Covered entities and their counsel may wish to consider, as necessary, obligations 
to discard data in light of existing document retention policies as well as retention 
obligations that might be in place for ongoing litigation or other business or regulatory 
reasons.

8. Limiting Access to Nonpublic Information 

A significant portion of the new regulation is dedicated to protecting and limiting access to 
nonpublic information. As an initial matter, covered entities must “limit user access privileges 
to Information Systems” that provide access to nonpublic information. 23 NYCRR 500.07. This 
requirement dovetails with the regulation’s access-control requirements discussed above.

In addition to limiting access, covered entities must also implement heightened 
authentication requirements for access to nonpublic information as well as to other 
sensitive data, systems, and interfaces. “Based on its Risk Assessment,” a covered entity 
must use “effective controls, which may include Multi-Factor Authentication or Risk-Based 
Authentication,” to protect against unauthorized access to nonpublic information. 23 NYCRR 
500.12. For access to internal systems through an external network, covered entities are 
required to use multi-factor authentication unless “the Covered Entity’s CISO has approved in 
writing the use of reasonably equivalent or more secure access controls.” Id. This requirement 
represents a level of regulatory granularity uncommon in the cybersecurity context.

Multi-Factor Authentication: The DFS defines multi-factor authentication (23 NYCRR 500.01(f)) 
as authentication through at least two of the following types of factors: 

• knowledge factors, such as passwords; or
• possession factors, such as a physical token or a text message; or
• inherence factors, including biometric characteristics.

Risk-Based Authentication: The DFS defines risk-based authentication as a system of 
authentication that detects anomalies or changes in the normal use patterns of a person 
and requires additional verification of the person’s identity when deviations are detected. 23 

14

NYCRR 500.01(l). For example, a risk-based authentication system would detect when a user 
attempts to enter his account from a new computer for the first time and would then require 
the user to answer additional security questions before gaining access. 

Encryption: Covered entities must also develop “controls” to protect nonpublic information 
in transit and at rest. 23 NYCRR 500.15. The “default” measure to protect such information 
is encryption. If encrypting nonpublic information is not feasible, covered entities may use 
“alternative compensating controls” to secure the information with the review and approval 
of the CISO. 23 NYCRR 500.15(a)(1). If an entity chooses to use “alternative compensating 
controls” rather than encryption, “the feasibility of encryption and effectiveness of the 
compensating controls shall be reviewed by the CISO at least annually.” 23 NYCRR 500.15(b).

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 These requirements are substantial and highly detailed. The requirement to encrypt or 
otherwise secure nonpublic information both at rest and while in transit may be overly 
burdensome or difficult to satisfy from a business or operational perspective. 

 In such cases, “alternative compensating controls” are permitted, but the regulation 
does not provide further detail or definition of “alternative compensating controls.” 
Given that, covered entities considering alternatives to encryption may be well-advised 
to consider the level of protection required for nonpublic information as part of their 
Risk Assessment.

9. Training and Personnel 

Human resources departments and professionals may also feel the weight of the new DFS 
regulation. Each covered entity must employ sufficient dedicated cybersecurity personnel to 
manage its cybersecurity risks and “to perform or oversee the performance” of the covered 
entity’s “core cybersecurity functions.” 23 NYCRR 500.10(a). Those personnel must also receive 
sufficient training to “address relevant cybersecurity risks” and “maintain current knowledge of 
changing cybersecurity threats and countermeasures.” Id.

The regulation’s training requirements are not limited to cybersecurity personnel. A covered 
entity must “provide for regular cybersecurity awareness training” for “all personnel,” and 
that training must be “updated to reflect risks” identified in the Risk Assessment. 23 NYCRR 
500.14(b) (emphasis added).

15

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 The regulation provides that “all” personnel must receive cybersecurity training. 23 
NYCRR 500.14(b). The DFS, however, does not specify the type of training that is 
appropriate or sufficient. Covered entities may in certain circumstances tailor the 
training employees receive based on their positions and functions or, in the alternative, 
consider more generalized training for all employees.

 
C. Periodic Cyber Risk Assessments

The DFS regulation also requires covered entities to assess and periodically reassess their 
cybersecurity systems. In addition to the Risk Assessment, the new regulation calls for three 
different types of regular assessments:

•  Penetration and Vulnerability Testing: A covered entity must establish programs for 

“monitoring and testing, developed in accordance” with its Risk Assessment, to assess 
the “effectiveness” of its Cybersecurity Program. 23 NYCRR 500.05. A covered entity has 
two “options” for doing so: 

 

a.  Continuous Monitoring: A company may deploy “effective continuous monitoring” 

(23 NYCRR 500.05), which is not defined in the regulation, and may need to be 
gleaned from industry standards and practices, as well as the company’s own Risk 
Assessment.

b.  Periodic Assessments: Instead of continuous monitoring, a covered entity may 

instead choose to conduct “periodic penetration testing and vulnerability 
assessments.” 23 NYCRR 500.05. If an organization follows this approach, it must 
conduct penetration testing annually and vulnerability testing biannually.

 

 

i.  Penetration testing is defined as “a test methodology in which assessors 

attempt to circumvent or defeat the security features of an Information 
System.” 23 NYCRR 500.01(h). 

ii.  “Vulnerability assessment” is not defined by the DFS and will likely need to be 

defined with reference to industry standards and practices.

•  Third-Party Assessments: Periodically, a covered entity must assess the cybersecurity 

practices of any third parties that have access to the organization’s network or 
nonpublic information. 23 NYCRR 500.11(a)(4). The regulation does not define the 
scope of this assessment, but as a practical matter, this mandate may, depending on 
the circumstances, apply to payroll and human resource vendors, IT and data-hosting 
consultants, cloud service providers, and other vendors, consultants, and law firms. 

 

 

 

16

•  Application Security Assessments: Periodically, the CISO must review, assess, and 
update procedures and guidelines concerning the security of information system 
applications. 23 NYCRR 500.08(b). Under the regulation, each organization’s 
Cybersecurity Program must include written procedures, guidelines, and standards to 
ensure the secure use of internally developed applications. Organizations must also 
assess and test the security of any externally developed applications that they utilize. 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 Because the DFS has not defined “vulnerability assessments” or “third-party 
assessments,” covered entities may in appropriate cases consider the practices of other 
peer organizations and relevant industry standards as well as their own risk profile 
when developing such tests.

D. Incident Response Plan 

As mentioned above, as part of its Cybersecurity Policy and Program, each covered entity 
must develop an “incident response plan.” 23 NYCRR 500.16. The purpose of the plan, 
according to the DFS, is to ensure that the organization is prepared to “promptly respond to, 
and recover from, any Cybersecurity Event affecting the confidentiality, integrity or availability 
of the Covered Entity’s Information Systems or the continuing functionality of any aspect of 
the Covered Entity’s business.” Id. The regulation identifies a number of areas that the incident 
response plan must address:

• the internal processes for responding to a cybersecurity event;
• the goals of the incident response plan;
• the definition of clear roles, responsibilities, and levels of decision-making authority;
• external and internal communications and information sharing;
•  remediation of any identified weaknesses in the company’s information systems and 

associate controls;

• documentation and reporting of cybersecurity events; and
•  the evaluation and revision of the organization’s response plan following a  

cybersecurity event.

17

 

 

 
 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 The DFS regulation itself does not prescribe particular language or details that must be 
included in an incident response plan. Other governmental agencies have provided 
guidance that could be informative. For example, the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) framework suggests that organizations predetermine their 
communication guidelines with “outside parties, such as incident response teams, 
law enforcement, the media, vendors, and victim organizations.4” NIST also strongly 
encourages organizations to develop written procedures for prioritizing the handling 
of individual incidents, including functional and informational factors and detailing 
recoverability from an incident5. Commentators also encourage organizations to “train, 
practice, and run simulated breaches to develop response ‘muscle memory.’”6 

 Written policies and procedures for responding to a breach may also provide 
contemporaneous documentation of readiness, which may be useful for purposes of 
DFS reviews and in potential litigation or inquiries arising from a breach.

E. Third-Party Information Security Policy 

The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but 
also requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s IT network 
or nonpublic information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards. 23 NYCRR 500.11. 
Specifically, the regulation sets out detailed data security rules and protocols that regulated 
institutions must impose on all of their vendors and business partners.

Since New York–based banks and insurers are not the only entities covered by the regulation—
many out-of-state and foreign institutions that operate in New York under DFS supervision 
are generally subject to the new regulation as well—the number of third parties affected 
will be substantial. The DFS’s focus on third parties connected to covered entities is likely a 
response to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years—
in addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving cyber 
vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks.

________________________________________________________________________
4 National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide (2012), page 2, available at  
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-61r2.pdf. 
5 Id., page 3.
6 Tucker Bailey & Josh Brandley, Ten Steps to Planning an Effective Cyber-Incident Response, Harvard Business Review (July 1, 2013), available at  
https://hbr.org/2013/07/ten-steps-to-planning-an-effect. 

18

Under the regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement written policies 
and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or nonpublic information that can be 
accessed by their vendors. At a minimum, these policies must identify the risks arising from 
third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on third-party vendors, and create a due-
diligence process for evaluating vendors. 23 NYCRR 500.11(a).

Moreover, organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or 
contractual protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” 23 NYCRR 500.11(b). To “the 
extent applicable,” those guidelines must address:

•  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or nonpublic 

information (§500.11(b)(1)); 

•  use of encryption of all nonpublic information—both “in transit and at rest” (§500.11(b)

(2)); 

•  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a breach or 

potential cyber-related event (§500.11(b)(3)); and

•  representations and warranties from third-party provider addressing cybersecurity 

and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s information systems and 
nonpublic information (§500.11(b)(4)).

In practice, compliance with this aspect of the regulation will require far more than simply 
“checking the boxes.” Business partners for all covered entities may be required to reconsider 
their own cybersecurity policies and practices and retool them to comply with the regulation.
 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 

 For most organizations, this requirement will be substantial. An April 2015 report by 
the DFS found that only 46% of surveyed institutions conduct “pre-contract on-site 
assessments of at least high-risk third-party vendors.” And 44% of those organizations 
do not require third-party vendors to guarantee that their data and products are free of 
viruses. Similarly, only half of the surveyed institutions require indemnification clauses 
for information security failures in their agreements with third-party vendors.

_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

7  New York State Dep’t of Fin. Servs., “Update on Cyber Security in the Banking Sector: Third Party Service Providers” (April 2015), page 3, available at http://
www.dfs.ny.gov/reportpub/dfs_rpt_tpvendor_042015.pdf. 
8 Id., page 5.
9 Id., page 6.

19

 

 As an initial step, covered entities should begin by determining which of their third-
party vendors are covered by the regulation and assessing their current contractual 
arrangements with those vendors. At the same time, a broader third-party vendor 
program should be contemplated, including, when appropriate, vendor diligence 
procedures, standard terms and conditions, and provisions requiring prompt notice in 
the event a vendor suffers a data security incident that might affect the covered entity’s 
nonpublic information or network.

IV. Additional Requirements

A. Regulatory Reporting

Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS regulation imposes 
a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity event, as defined by the 
regulation. 23 NYCRR 500.17(a). Within 72 hours “from a determination” that a cybersecurity 
event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the event. Id. A cybersecurity event is 
“material” if it fits within the following categories:

•  a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self-

regulatory agency (§500.17(a)(1)); or

•  a cybersecurity event that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any 

material part of the normal operation(s)” of the covered entity (§500.17(a)(2)). 

In addition to reporting cybersecurity events, organizations must certify compliance with 
the DFS regulation on an annual basis. 23 NYCRR 500.17(b). And every covered entity must 
maintain “all records, schedules and data supporting this certificate for a period of five years.” 
Id.

20

 

 

 

Patterson Belknap Commentary

 The DFS’s reporting requirements are, without question, regulatory “firsts” that go 
beyond regulatory reporting requirements under federal or state laws.

 When a cybersecurity event or other triggering circumstance occurs, covered entities 
now must not only determine whether reporting is required by a federal or state 
regulator, but must also evaluate whether the event has a “reasonable likelihood of 
materially harming” the organization’s operations. 23 NYCRR 500.17(a)(2).

B. Exemptions

Not every DFS-regulated institution will be subject to all aspects of the regulation. The 
following types of entities can expect some relief from the regulation’s strict requirements.

•  Companies with less than $5 million in gross revenue in New York (in each of the 

preceding three years), less than $10 million in year-end total assets from all operations, 
or fewer than ten employees in New York (including independent contractors) are 
exempt from a number of the regulation’s provisions. 23 NYCRR 500.19(a).

•  Companies that do not have information systems and access to nonpublic information 
are exempt from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements. 23 
NYCRR 500.19(c).

•  Captive insurance companies—both pure and group captive insurers—are also exempt 

from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements. 23 NYCRR 
500.19(d).

•  Finally, charitable annuity societies, risk retention groups not charted in New York, and 

Rule 125 certified and accredited reinsurers are exempt from the regulation in its entirety. 
23 NYCRR 500.19(f).

The first three exempt groups must “file a Notice of Exemption” within thirty days of the 
“determination that the Covered Entity is exempt.” 23 NYCRR 500.19(e). In the event that 
any Covered Entity, “as of its most recent fiscal year end, ceases to qualify for an exemption, 
such Covered Entity shall have 180 days from such fiscal year” to comply with “all applicable 
requirements” of the regulation. 23 NYCRR 500.19(g).

21

V. Conclusion

A. Transition Period Timeline

Although the regulation is phased in over a two-year period, most of the requirements 
must be in place within 180 days. This will require many of the covered institutions to re-
examine their overall approach to cybersecurity and determine whether it aligns with the new 
regulation. We will monitor pertinent developments as institutions roll out their compliance 
programs and issue regular updates to this publication.

Reproduced with permission from Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security,  
http://www.bna.com/bloomberg-law-privacy-data-security/.

Copyright © 2017 by The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1801 S. Bell 
Street, Arlington, VA 22202 (800-372-1033) http://www.bna.com. 

22

Privacy Law Watch™ 
March 21, 2017
Insurance

Dueling Cybersecurity Regulations for Health Care:  
HHS Meets New York State

NY Cybersecurity Reg

New York’s new cybersecurity regulation will regulate the data security practices of health-
care insurers with a set of rules that are the most comprehensive in the U.S. These rules 
will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their 
cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines, the author 
writes. 
 
By Craig A. Newman

Craig A. Newman is a partner at Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP in New York and 
chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice. 

Data security regulation for health-care insurers that operate in New York just got more 
complicated. For years, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for 
Civil Rights—the industry’s primary data security regulator—has zealously policed the 
health care field. In fact, so far in 2017, the agency has already brought four data security 
enforcement actions. The most recent was the February 2017 $5.5 million settlement with 
Memorial Healthcare System—matching the largest civil monetary fine ever imposed 
against a single organization—because of weak internal controls that permitted employees 
to improperly access more than 100,000 patient records. 

And now New York has gotten into the act with a completely different set of rules that 
are the most comprehensive of any U.S. state. Earlier this month, New York’s top banking 
and insurance regulator threw down the proverbial gauntlet—or, perhaps more of a 
sledgehammer— with its new cybersecurity regulation which has broad implications 
for health-care insurers that operate in New York. The regulation will force health-care 
insurers to navigate a minefield of new and far more exacting technical, legal and 
governance requirements than the industry specific regulations already in place including 
those under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the 
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 (HITECH). 
The New York rules just took effect on March 1 and will phase in over two years but many 

23

detailed requirements must be put in place within the first 180 days. 
This will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their 
cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines. The regulation 
also places additional demands on an insurer’s third-party vendors—now indirectly 
covered by the new rules—including health care providers and outside consulting, 
accounting and law firms, among others. 

Background: The New York Regulation

On March 1, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a “first 
in the nation” cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions and 
insurance companies, their information technology systems, and their customers from 
cybercrime. The regulation applies to any entity operating with a “license” or “similar 
authorization” under New York’s “Banking Law, the Insurance Law or the Financial Services 
Law”—including foreign and out-of-state affiliates of DFS-regulated entities. It directly 
covers health-care insurers that operate in the state. 

Health-care insurers are accustomed to regulation. The HIPAA Security Rule already 
requires that they maintain data security programs that are reasonable in view of their 
scale, complexity and resources but does not dictate particular measures that must be 
undertaken. The New York regulation takes a starkly different approach with its matrix 
of specific risk-based governance, process and technical requirements. Although the 
new regulation includes a degree of flexibility to fit each institution’s risk profile, it has 
23 different sections and is far more detailed and accountability-oriented than other 
data security regimes. And in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory 
norms, the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership responsible for 
compliance by requiring the filing of an annual compliance certificate attesting to an 
institution’s adherence to the regulation. 

The New York regulation requires, in general, that DFS-regulated health-care insurers 
have state-approved plans in place to protect their businesses, information systems 
and the personal information of their customers. The rules require that each health-care 
insurer start by conducting a “risk assessment” to drive the scope of the organization’s 
overall cybersecurity program. The cybersecurity program must be “designed to ensure 
the confidentiality, integrity and availability” of its information systems. Notably, the 
cybersecurity program is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document but rather 
the underlying system, process and procedures by which a covered entity ensures its 
compliance with the DFS regulation. 
At a minimum, the cybersecurity program must do six things: (1) identify internal and 
external cybersecurity risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of 

24

policies and procedures to protect information systems and non-public information; 
(3) detect cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect and mitigate the effects of 
cybersecurity events; (5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory 
reporting requirements. 

Beyond the cybersecurity program, there is a laundry list of additional requirements 
ranging from the development and implementation of a 14-point cybersecurity policy 
to employee training, board and senior leadership engagement to highly technical 
requirements like encryption, access controls and different types of internal monitoring or 
vulnerability assessments. 

In a clear departure from existing data security regulatory norms, the new regulation holds 
an institution’s senior leadership responsible for compliance for DFS-regulated health-
care insurers, the new rules present a regulatory scheme—and regulatory expectations—
that impose new obligations and new approaches to data security. Here is a brief look at 
several of these important new requirements: 

Accountability: Cyber Czar and Corporate Leadership 
Unlike existing health-care data security regulation, the New York rules are based on 
a foundation of corporate accountability. In the first instance, the New York regulation 
requires the designation of a “qualified individual” to serve as a chief information security 
officer (CISO). The CISO is responsible for overseeing, implementing and enforcing the 
covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy. Covered entities have the option of 
engaging a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but retain responsibility for 
compliance with the CISO requirements and must appoint a senior employee to oversee 
the third-party service provider. 
Not surprisingly, the CISO’s responsibilities are substantial including delivering a bi-
annual report to the board or equivalent governing body that covers, “to the extent 
applicable,” the following: 
 

•   an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the covered 

entity’s information systems; 

 
 
 
 
 

• exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures; 
• identification of cybersecurity risks; 
• an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness; 
• proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and 
• a summary of material cybersecurity events.

Beyond the CISO’s role, the DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at 
the top of an organization. According to the regulation, senior management “must take” 

25

cybersecurity issues “seriously and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity 
program.” That responsibility starts with review of the organization’s cybersecurity 
policy. The regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee 
of the board of directors, or a “senior officer” approve the policy. The chairperson of the 
board of directors or a senior officer must also certify in writing to DFS annually that the 
organization’s cybersecurity program complies with the regulation. 

New York Regulation Far Broader Than HIPAA

And, the New York regulation covers far more sensitive information than under HIPAA. The 
HIPAA Privacy Rule covers individually identifiable health information—called protected 
health information (PHI), and is subject to certain general data security safeguards. The 
HIPAA Security Rule protects a subset of that information—individually identifiable health 
information a covered entity creates, receives, maintains or transmits in electronic form 
(called e-PHI). By contrast, the New York regulation protects three different categories of 
sensitive information—only the last category of which directly overlaps with PHI or e-PHI: 
 

•  business related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized 

disclosure of which would cause a material adverse impact to the business; 

•  information about an individual which because of name, number, personal mark 

or other identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with 
any one or more of the following data elements: social security number; drivers’ 
license number or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security 
code, access code or password that would permit access to a financial account; 
or biometric records; and 

•  information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or 

 

 

the individual’s family or household. 

The New York rules also apply to the security of “information systems” generally. This 
means that DFS-regulated health-care insurers will need to broaden their approach to 
cybersecurity protection to include these new elements not already covered by existing 
federal health-care regulation. 

Substantial Obligations on Third-Party Vendors

The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but also 
requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s information 
technology network or non-public information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards. 
Under HIPAA, covered health-care entities must bind third parties that will receive 
protected health-care information to comply with HIPAA’s requirements in a “Business 
Associate Agreement.” Such agreements may identify specific data security protocols that 

26

must be followed, but technical requirements are not mandated. 

By contrast, the New York regulation sets out data security rules and protocols that 
regulated institutions must impose on their vendors and business partners. The 
regulation’s focus on third-parties connected to covered entities is likely DFS’s response 
to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years—in 
addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks. 

The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than under 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. 

Under the New York regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement 
written policies and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or non-public 
information that can be accessed by their vendors. At a minimum, these policies must 
identify the risks arising from third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on the 
third-party vendors, and create a due-diligence process for evaluating vendors. Moreover, 
organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or contractual 
protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” To “the extent applicable,” those 
guidelines must address: 

•  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or

non-public information;

• use of encryption of all non-public information—both “in transit and at rest”;
•  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a

breach or potential cybersecurity-related event; and

• representations and warranties from the third-party provider addressing its 
cybersecurity and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s 
information systems and non-public information.

Regulatory Notice Provisions Far Different

The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than 
under HIPAA. Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS 
regulation imposes a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity 
event, as defined by the regulation. Within 72 hours “from a determination” that 
such a cybersecurity event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the 
event. A cybersecurity event is “material” if it falls in the following categories: 

27

• a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self-
regulatory agency; or 
• a cybersecurity even that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any material 
part of the normal operation(s)” of the Covered Entity. 

Under HIPAA’s Breach Notification Rule, institutions must report the breach of unsecured 
health information to the HHS without reasonable delay but in no event later than 60-days 
after discovery of the breach, or, if affecting fewer than 500 individuals, within 60 days of 
the end of the calendar year in which the breach occurred. 

Conclusion

The New York regulation isn’t likely to be the last word on data security for the industry. 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners is considering a model law that 
each state could adopt—outlining how insurers must safeguard consumer information and 
respond in the event of a data security incident. The model law was unveiled last year but 
has undergone revisions in response to criticisms raised by the industry and consumer 
groups. 

For health-care insurers already subject to extensive federal data security regulation, the 
New York cyber regulation imposes additional—and sweeping—burdens and requirements. 
No other data security regulation has demanded this combination of accountability, 
senior leadership engagement and across-the-board detail. And there’s no doubt that 
DFS will hold those institutions accountable for ball drops. 

© 2017 The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.  All Rights Reserved

28

29

Discover the 
difference.

Costs shouldn’t be hidden.  
Neither should answers.

•  Practical guidance, tools, news and analytics

•  Legal and business insights

•  The only legal resource for trusted BNA content & Bloomberg News

•  Unlimited research at an all-inclusive price

Learn more about Bloomberg Law  
at bna.com/bloomberglaw

 
©2017 The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.

0317-JO23379

