 
 

 
 

C YBER AND F INANCIAL SERVICE INDUSTRIES 
Public  regulation  and  business  cyber  compliance  to  improve  resilience 
towards blockchains disruptor risks 
 
Camille Madec – Msc in Management 
June 2016 
 

 

 
Introduction	  
How Blockchain redefines cyber security: a brief overview	  

Examples	  of	  blockchain	  business	  opportunities	  
Blockchain	  and	  cyber	  security	  risks	  

Blockchain regulatory framework and legal challenges	  

Cyber	  security	  and	  New	  Technology	  European	  legal	  framework	  
Blockchain	  governance	  and	  regulation	  challenges	  

2	  
4	  
4	  
5	  
6	  
6	  
7	  
9	  
9	  
9	  

How financial industry can step forward on the issue: compliance to 
strengthen cyber resilience	  

Cyber	  resilience	  as	  a	  competitive	  advantage	  
Cyber	  compliance	  road	  map	  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 	  
 	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

	  

Introduction 

In  order  to  stay  competitive,  financial  industry  must  seize  the  opportunities  of 
the on-going technological disruption, and particularly with the recent so-called 
blockchain  innovation  when  some  argue  that  this  new  technology  has  the 
potential to replace banks as financial intermediaries for transfer and exchanges 
of  money.  In  this  transitional  context,  financial  sector  could  face  new  cyber-
security  risks,  with  sophisticated  attacks,  which  eventually  call  for  a  renewed 
regulation  framework.  Here  the  financial  sector  means  banks,  insurers,  asset 
managers, and advisory firms.  
 
Blockchain can be defined as “a peer-to-peer operated public digital ledger that 
records  all  transactions  executed  for  a  particular  asset  (…)  “The  Blockchain 
maintains this record across a network of computers, and anyone on the network 
can  access  the  ledger.  Blockchain  is  ‘decentralised’  meaning  people  on  the 
network  maintain  the  ledger,  requiring  no  central  or  third  party  intermediary 
involvement.”  “Users  known  as  ‘miners’  use  specialised  software  to  look  for 
these time stamped ‘blocks’, verify their accuracy using a special algorithm, and 
add the block to the chain. The chain maintains chronological order for all blocks 
added because of these time-stamps.” 1 
 
Hence, Blockchain, well known through the so-called bit coin, could open much 
more  perspective  and  should  guaranty  security  and  the  validation  of  all  the 
exchange of data.  
 
In  addition  to  open  room  for  new  business  opportunities,  this  new  technology 
could  disrupt  the  legal  conception  of  privacy,  intellectual  property  right,  and 
presents some issues regarding financial institution accountability given the new 
associated risks.  
 
As a consequence while financial institutions have been under strengths by the 
new  regulatory  requirements  in  the  aftermath  of  the  2008  financial  crisis,  they 
might  see  their  accountability  rises  again  to  address  cybersecurity  risks  and 
associated prejudices related to blockchain innovation.  
 
Cyber  security  is  a  burning  issue  in  the  international  agenda.  The  G7  made 
cyber-security a priority and have established the “G7 Principles and Actions on 
Cyber”2. This issue is also considered in Asia, for instance, a new Cyber-security 
Act will be tabled in the Singapore Parliament next year that will also “empower 
the Singapore Cyber Security Agency to manage cyber incidents and raise the 
standard of cybersecurity providers in Singapore.”3  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

1 Piper Alderman, « Blockchain –emerging legal issues », Lexology, Global, october 12 2015, 
http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95 
2 http://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000160279.pdf 
3 http://globalcompliancenews.com/new-cybersecurity-laws-in-the-works-
20160601/?utm_source=wysija&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weeklynewsletter 

2	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

international 

regulators  are  particularly  vigilant  as 

 
More  over, 
regard 
technological  innovations.  On  the  one  hand,  regulators  watch  the  use  of 
consumer  data  made  by  financial  institutions,  as  an  example,  EBA  is  currently 
consulting on that issue 4 in order to “identifies risks and benefits for consumers 
and financial institutions, as well as for financial integrity in general”. Regulators 
such  as  the  SFC 5 in  Hong  Kong,  AMF  in  France  and  FCA  in  the  UK,  have 
established  new  Fin-tech  contact  points  in  order  to  work  with  financial 
institutions  to  address  those  issues.  On  the  other  hand,  they  started  to  fine 
financial  institutions  for  misrepresentation  of  data  security  practices.  For 
instance,  the  SEC  has  fined  $1M  Morgan  Stanley6 in  order  to  “settle  charges 
related to its failures to protect customer information, some of which was hacked 
and offered for sale online”.  
 
As  a  consequence,  given  the  current  development  we  cannot  exclude  the  risk 
that  financial  institutions  could  eventually  be  fined  in  the  future  for  eventual 
impact on customers given cyber security attacks related to blockchain.  
 
This  paper  explains  how  business  compliance  to  new  cyber  regulatory 
framework  is  a  strategic  issue  for  financial  institutions.  It  presents  the  financial 
institutions  specific  data  profile  and  linked  eventual  collateral  damages.  It 
highlights  blockchain  innovation  opportunities  and  associated  new  cybercrime 
challenges.  It  describes  the  current  European  regulatory  framework  and  legal 
accountability  scenarios.  It  then  finally  supports  the  hypothesis  of  cyber 
compliance as a corporate competitive advantage and maps out some elements 
of potential recommendations to strengthen cybersecurity resilience.  
 
This  paper  comes  from  my  participation  of  the  management  course  “Applied 
Cybersecurity  Strategy  for  Managers”.  The  course  aimed  to  provide  an 
understanding of information security challenges and overview of strategic best 
practices regarding governance and crisis management. Particularly, I have been 
able  to  understand  the  innovativeness  of  cybercriminals.  I  thank  for  the 
information and knowledge shared that particularly have inspired this work.  
 
This paper has also grown out of my current experience as a compliance officer 
for BNP Paribas Global in the area of Clients Interest Protection that has stressed 
the strategic dimension of compliance for corporate world.  
 
 
 
 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

4 http://www.eba.europa.eu/-/eba-seeks-views-on-the-use-of-consumer-data-by-financial-institutions 
5 http://www.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/news-and-announcements/news/doc?refNo=16PR19 
6 http://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2016-112.html 

3	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

How Blockchain redefines cyber security: a brief overview 

	  

Examples	  of	  blockchain	  business	  opportunities	  	  
 
Blockchain  is  the  technology  many  believe  will  be  the  key  to  the  future  of 
banking. The digitalisation of financial service opens room for new opportunity 
such as to propose new kind of consumer’s experience as well as the use of new 
technologies  and  improve  business  data  analysis. 7  The  ACPR,  the  French 
banking  and 
insurance  regulatory  authority,  has  recently  classified  the 
opportunities and risks linked to the Fintech8 such as the new services for uses, 
better resilience versus the difficulty to establish effective supervision, the risks 
of  regulation  dumping  and  regarding  clients  interest  protection  such  as  data 
misuse and security. The French Central Bank is currently studying blockchain in 
cooperation with two start-ups, the “Labo Blockchain” and “Blockchain France”.  
 
In  that  context,  blockchain  is  a  true  financial  service  disruption,  according  to 
Piper  Alderman  “Blockchain  can  perform  the  intermediating  function  in  a 
cheaper and more secure way, and disrupt the role of Banks.”9 According to the 
lawyer Alain Bensoussan10, blockchain allows decentralization, anonymity as well 
as security, traceability and reduces costs. In a nutshell, Blockchain allows faster 
and more effective transaction, as well as it reduces transaction costs.  
 
Hence, leading bank wants to seize that financial service opportunity. They are 
currently  working  on  blockchain  project  with  financial  innovation  firm,  R3  CEV. 
The  objective  is  that  the  project  delivers  a  “more  efficient  and  cost-effective 
international  settlement  network  and  possibly  eliminate  the  need  to  rely  on 
central  bank”11.    R3  CEV  has  announced  that  40  peer  banks,  including  HSBC, 
Citigroup, and BNP Paribas, started an initiative to test new kind of transaction 
through blockchain. This consortium is the most important ever organized to test 
this new technology.  
 
Another example of blockchain’s smart output is the so-called “smart contract” 
this innovation would allow automatic execution for standardized contracts such 
as loans or corporate issuance of bonds, without central compensation. Notably, 
blockchain is opening a new wave of innovation for Legaltech. Other major areas 
for  applying  blockchain  technology 
include:  smart  assets,  clearing  and 
settlement, payments, digital identity.  

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

7 Frédéric Visnovsky, Secrétaire général adjoint ACPR, « Les banques face à trois défits », Mai 2016 (p.13).  
8 Idem  
9 Piper Alderman, « Blockchain –emerging legal issues », Lexology, Global, october 12 2015, 
http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95 
10  Olivier  Hielle,  La  technologie  Blockchain  :  une  révolution  aux  nombreux  problèmes  juridiques,  Dalloz 
actualité (31 mai 2016). 
11 11 Piper Alderman, « Blockchain –emerging legal issues », Lexology, Global, october 12 2015, 

http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95	  
	  

4	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

Another  example  is  the  new  cryptographic  decentralized  money,  Elthereum,  is 
the second cryptographic money after Bitcoin. It is evaluated at 688 millions of 
dollars today.  
 
According  to  FTI  consulting 12  recent  study  “UK  banking  and  investment 
institutions  are  most  knowledgeable  about  bitcoin  technology  blochain”,  the 
study,  which  targeted  772  respondents  in  the  banking  and  investment  sector 
from the UK, Germany, South Africa, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and the 
US,  found  almost  two-thirds  of  respondents  were  aware  of  blockchain 
technology and a quarter is knowledgeable about it.  
 

Blockchain	  and	  cyber	  security	  risks	  	  
 
There  is  no  consensus  about  whether  blockchain  could  increase  cyber  security 
risks. The degree of security of the network could possibly determine the  “the 
speed  and  extent  of  acceptance  of  blockchain  technology  within  the  global 
financial services community.“13  
 
In  March  2015,  Interpol  conducted  a  research14 to  identify  new  cyber  threats 
unleashed by blockchain. According to the experts “the design of the blockchain 
means there is the possibility of malware being injected and permanently hosted 
with  no  methods  currently  available  to  wipe  this  data.  This  could  affect  ‘cyber 
hygiene’  as  well  as  the  sharing  of  child  sexual  abuse  images  where  the 
blockchain  could  become  a  safe  haven  for  hosting  such  data.”  Further, 
according  to  the  research,  “it  could  also  enable  crime  scenarios  in  the  future 
such as the deployment of modular malware, a reshaping of the distribution of 
zero-day  attacks,  as  well  as  the  creation  of  illegal  underground  marketplaces 
dealing in private keys which would allow access to this data.” Has a conclusion, 
INTERPOL  communicated  about  its  challenge  to  “spread  awareness  amongst 

the public and law enforcement”.	    

 
The  issue  of  cyber-security  for  financial  institutions  is  very  strategic.  Firstly,  as 
these institutions rely on customer confidence they are particularly vulnerable to 
data loss and fraud. Secondly, banks represent a key sector for national security. 
Thirdly  they  are  exposed  to  credit  crisis  given  their  role  to  finance  economy. 
Lastly,  data  protection  is  a  key  challenge  given  financial  security  legal 
requirements.  

 Hunton 

& 

12 City Am – Article 07/03/2016  
13

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  

Williams 

“Blockchain, 

cybersecurity 

and 

global 

finance” 

https://www.hunton.com/files/News/289469d8-826a-4f2b-ae48-
df04b4c0acae/Presentation/NewsAttachment/3abe4d02-0d61-4276-9831-ea3ce3f225f9/blockchain-
cybersecurity-and-global-finance.pdf 
14 « INTERPOL cybe research identifies malware threat to virtual currencies » 26 march 2015 
http://www.interpol.int/News-and-media/News/2015/N2015-033 

5	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

Fraud  is  the  majority  of  cyber  incident  in  Financial  sector  today  (extortion, 
identity  theft  and  other  kind  of  crimes  targeting  individual  customers  or 
employees15.  However,  firms  are  exposed  to  larger  risks  such  as  data  theft, 
system disruption and damage.  
 
System  failure  is  an  incident  affecting  lot  of  financial  institutions  aiming  at 
unleashing  a  failure  of  the  payments  system  or  a  failure  of  the  national 
infrastructure upon which rely the financial sector. This can of scenario would be 
very  costly,  for  instance,  the  IFM  has  estimated  the  planned  shutdown  of  the 
Greek economy to represents 7% of Greek GDP16 
 
Further more, the risks are very high given that cyber crime motivation varies a 
lot (spying, terrorism, hacktivism, enrichment). In case or cyber attacks, financial 
institutions face specific risks such as: operational, reputation, criminal litigation, 
fines from regulators, eventual client losses and financial losses.  
 
Therefore, financial institutions Corporate Security Department have to foresee 
new cyber risk that could threaten their firms in case of blockchain development. 
This  is  even  more  essential  as  the  regulatory  and  legal  framework  addressing 
blockchain  is  under  development  and  not  established  so  far.  Hence,  financial 
institutions  cannot  anticipate  what  would  exactly  be 
their  degree  of 
accountability in case of cyber attacks related to blockchain.  

Blockchain regulatory framework and legal challenges 
 

Cyber	  security	  and	  New	  Technology	  European	  legal	  framework	  	  
 
In  Europe,  there  is  already  a  legal  framework  aimed  to  address  cyber-security 
risks.    The  European  directive  for  network  and  information  security  has 
implemented  a  cyber-security  strategy  for  member  states  with  the  legal 
obligation to adopt a security strategy and create a national authority in charge 
of  those  issues  with  sufficient  resources.  Particularly,  this  authority  should  be 
notified for every security incident.  
 
Further,  as  cyber-security  attacks  are  a  threat  for  personal  data,  we  can  also 
mention  existing  European  regulation  on  personal  data.  The  protection  of 
personal  data  and  the  respect  of  private  life,  are  fundamental  rights  under 
European law under article 7 and 8 of the European Union Fundamental Rights 
Charter  (articles  7  and  8).  There  is  a  specific  European  regulatory  authority  for 
personal  data  protection,  and  every  Member  States  has  established  a  national 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

15  « Cyber and the City, Making the UK financial and professional services sector more resilient to cyber 
attack » May 2016.  TheCityUK, Marsh. 
16 Idem  

6	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

regulator  in  charge  of  those  issues.  These  legal  requirements  were  also 
supposed to increase consumers’ trust in online services.  
 
Fintech, that integrated the market through online payment service, have been 
regulated  with  the  directive  related  to  payment  service  (DSP  2)  defining  new 
rules to protect consumers while implementing a biding legal framework.   
 
The  general  trend  is  that  those  legal  obligations  tend  to  increase  legal 
requirement and strengthen sanctions. What is more, personal accountability for 
managers tends to be increased.  
 
As  cryptographic  signatures 
in  electronic  documents  made  necessary  a 
worldwide wave of legal reform, blockchain challenges current legal framework. 
It  is  possible  that  existing  legal  frameworks  are  insufficient,  and  that  new 
regulations would need to be developed.  

Blockchain	  governance	  and	  regulation	  challenges	  	  
 
While Fintech had integrated the payment market through online payment with 
a specific European legislation, the is now legal recognition of virtual money and 
no specific reglementation dedicated to blockchain given the few application of 
this technology today. As we focus on cyber security attacks we will not pursue a 
deep  dive  in  legal  issues  regarding  smart  contracts,  intellectual  property  right 
but rather privacy and decentralized organization accountability 17. 
 
On the one hand, blockchain innovation presents legal issues that will need to 
be  addressed  in  order  to  establish  who  is  responsible  in  case  of  cyber  risks 
hypothesis particularly because “management” is conducted automatically with 
blockchain.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Blockchain  is  not  yet  a  mainstream 
technology, the regulation needs to be balanced in order to foster innovation.  
 
According  to  Pascal  Bouvier,  “the  legal  framework  is  incompatible  with  a 
technology  where  unknown  actors  would  settle  transactions,  where  the 
transaction settled would represent a security exogenous to the technology and 
where the technology could not deliver 100% of ownership”18.  

The recognition of this new technology is very new. For instance, in France, the 
new article L. 223-22 of the financial and monetary code seems to legalize in a 
specific  area  the  use  of  “dispositif  d’enregistrement  électronique  partagé”  a 
direct  reference  to  Blockchain  according  to  Alain  Besoussan.  The  French 
Parliament had also organized a conference about the subject last spring, which 
stresses that the subject made its entrance in the political agenda.  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
reader-card	  
	  

17  Piper  Alderman,  « Blockchain  –emerging 
http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95 
18 Pascal  Bouvier,  “Distributed  Ledgers  Part  II:  Clearing,  Settlements  &  Legal  frameworks”  10  août  2015  : 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/distributed-ledgers-part-ii-clearing-settlements-pascal-bouvier-cfa?trk=mp-

issues »,  Lexology,  Global,  october  12  2015, 

legal 

7	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

 
Existing  regulatory  frameworks  will  also  need  to  evolve  to  address  issues  of 
taxation,  national  security,  and  money 
laundering  since  Blockchain  can 
seamlessly  facilitate  cross-border  transfers.  Hence,  another  difficulty  will  be 
related  to  the  international  dimension  of  blockchain  that  makes  hard  to 
implement  a  national  regulation.  As  an  example,  after  the  signature  of  the 
Judicial Redress Act by Obama Administration, the signature of the agreement 
between the European Union and the United States has been a result of a very 
long negotiation process in order to address the issue of data sovereignty.  
 
As  regard  cyber  security  risks,  on  of  the  core  legal  challenge  will  be  the 
accountability  issue.  As  Blockchain  is  grounded  on  anonymity  the  question  is 
who would be accountable for the actions pursued? Should it be the users, the 
Blockchain owner, or software engineer?  
Regulation will address the issue of blockchain governance. According to Hubert 
de Vauplane19, “the more the Blockchain is open and public, less the Blockchain 
is governed”, “while in a private Blockchain, the governance is managed by the 
institution” as regard“ access conditions, working, secyrity and legal approval of 
transactions”.  Where  as  in  the  public  Blockchain,  there  is  no  other  rules  that 
Blockchain, or in other words “Code is Law” to quote US legal expert Lawrence 
Lessing.  First  issue:  who  is  the  block  chain  user?  Two  situations  must  be 
addressed  depending  if  the  Blockchain  is  private  or  public.  Unlike  public 
blockchain,  the  private  blockchain  -  even  though  grounded  in  a  public  source 
code - is protected by intellectual property rights in favour of the organism that 
manages it, but still exposed to cyber security risks.  

Moreover,  a  new  contractual  documentation  provided  by  financial  institutions 
and  disclosure  duty  could  be  necessary  when  consumers  may  simply  not 
understand  the  information  on  how  their  data  may  be  used  through  this  new 
technology.  

Lastly, even though government claims to give priority to the offensive against 
cyber criminals, with for example in the UK the recent creation of the National 
Cyber  Security  Centre;  regulators  will  probably  face  difficulties  to  implement 
those  sanctions.  Indeed,  it  is  very  hard  to  identify  the  author  of  such  intrusion 
and  to  establish  enough  proof.  Further  more,  it  will  be  hard  to  quantify  the 
prejudice  and  to  make  an  exact  assessment  of  reputational  damages  and 
information losses.  Therefore, financial institution will probably be accountable 
towards customers as regard eventual cyber security failures.  

However, in addition to regulation fining power, financial institutions must take 
into  account  that  in  common  law  country,  and  specifically  in  the  US  the  class 
action  represents  a  high  risk  to  take  into  consideration.  Indeed, Cyber  security 
issues could be a new area of claim in the future years.  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19	  	  Hubert	  de	  Vauplane,	  la	  Blockchain	  et	  la	  loi,	  Alternatives	  économiques	  (14	  février	  2016)	  http://alternatives-­‐
economiques.fr/blogs/vauplane/	  	  
	  
8	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

 

financial 

How 
compliance to strengthen cyber resilience  

industry  can  step 

forward  on 

the 

issue: 

Cyber	  resilience	  as	  a	  competitive	  advantage	  	  

	  
	  

	  

The  introduction  of  Blockchain  innovations  in  Financial  institutions  business 
model  makes  necessary  to  redefine  the  problem  of  cyber  security  in  those 
groups,  as  the  threats  could  be  different  or  new.  Indeed,  with  blockchain  new 
information technology systems failures could appear.  
 
Even  though  blockchain  legal  framework  is  not  yet  established  neither  at  the 
international or European level, financial institutions could anticipate compliance 
challenges in order to strengthen blockchain cyber resilience. A dedicated cyber 
security  road  map  could  be  a  competitive  advantage  for  firms  that  aim  to 
integrate blockchain innovations in their business models by creating high entry 
barriers with high security standards.  
 
During  10  May  2016  City  Week  Conference,  Will  Brandon  Chief  Information 
Security  Officer  of  the  Bank  of  England  had  stressed  some  of  key  priorities 
regarding  cyber  security  plan  such  as  “culture  training”,    “leadership  from  the 
top (and not just from the IT department)”, to conclude “that will mean, among 
other things, clear policies and standards, good management information, and a 
sensible approach to compliance”.  
 

Cyber	  compliance	  road	  map	  	  

Freshfields Partner Klaus Beucher, who advises multinationals on cyber security 
issues,  says  there  is  a  set  of  steps  that  companies  must  take  to  protect 
themselves with:  
 

•  Risk assessment: map the data, look at technical infrastructure, to look at 
everything  from  IP  protection  to  the  obligation  under  data  privacy  and 
employment law 

•  Ensure you have effective data governance policies in place 
•  Draw up a crisis plan and practise it 
•  Finally,  all  should  be  done  in  partnership  with  the  board  in  order  to 

determine who is accountable for data security 

 

	  

9	  

CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	  

In  My  2016,  TheCityUK  made  a  study  “Cyber  and 
the  City”  with 
recommendation to improve financial sector cyber attack resilience20. According 
to  John  McFarlane,  Barclays  Chairman,  a  “systemic  risk”  is  upon  financial 
institutions as cyber crime is a real danger.Among the key recommendations of 
the “board cyber check-list” were :  
 

•  “The main cyber thrats he firm have been identified and sized 
•  “There  is  an  action  plan  to  improve  defence  and  response  to  these 

threats” 

•  “Data assets are mapped and actions to secure them are clear” 
•  “Supplier,  customer,  employee  and  infrastructure  cyber  risks  are  being 

managed” 

•  “The plan includes independent testing against a recognised framework” 
•  “The  risk  appetite  statement  provides  control  of  cyber  concentration 

risk” 

•  “Insurance has been tested for its cyber coverage and counter-party risk” 
•  “Preparations have been made to respond to a successful attack” 
•  “Cyber insights are being shared and gained from peers” 
•  “Regular  Board  review  material  is  provided  to  confirm  status  on  the 

above” 

 
 
 
 
 
Hence, the methodolgy to strengthen compliance and cyber resilience seems to 
be  well  established  and  consensual.  However,  even  if  firms  are  aware  of  the 
cyber  threat,  actions  against  it  are  still  in  progress.  Hence  the  so  colled 
blockchain business revolution for Financial Institution will need to be developed 
through  compliance  framework  in  order  to  broaden  and  redefine  actions  to 
avoid new cyber security risks.  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20	  « Cyber and the City, Making the UK financial and professional services sector more resilient to cyber 
attack » May 2016.  TheCityUK, Marsh.	  	  
	  

10	  

