Austrian  
Cyber Security  
Strategy

Austrian  
Cyber Security  
Strategy

Vienna, 2013

Publishing information:
Media owner, publisher, editor: 

Federal Chancellery of the Republic of Austria 

Department IV - Coordination 

Division IV/6 – Security Policy Affairs 

Ballhausplatz 2, 1014 Vienna

Graphic design: Federal Chancellery | ARGE Grafik  

Printing: BM.I Digitalprintcenter

Vienna, March 2013

2

Table of Contents

1  Introduction 

2  Opportunities and risks in cyber space 

3  Principles 

4  Strategic goals 

5  Fields of action and measures 

Field of action 1 – structures and processes 

Field of action 2 - governance 

Field of action 3 - cooperation between the government, economy and society 

Field of action 4 – protection of critical infrastructures 

Field of action 5 – awareness raising and training 

Field of action 6 – research and development 

Field of action 7 – international cooperation 

6  Implementation 

Annex 1 

Annex 2 

List of Abbreviations 

Annex 3 

Cyber Security Glossary 

4

6

7

9

10

10

12

12

14

14

15

16

17

18

19

19

20

20

3

1  Introduction

The digital revolution has been gaining ground in all spheres of life of the modern world. 
And more than ever, post-industrial societies and highly developed countries are taking 
advantage of cyber space for their technological, economic, social, cultural, scientific and 
political development. Digital infrastructures are becoming the backbone of a successful 
economy, a vibrant research community, a transparent state as well as a free society. The 
development  of  modern  information  and  communication  technologies  –  above  all  the 
Internet – has transformed our social and economic life radically. In Austria about three 
quarters of the population use the Internet regularly, and half of this group does so on a 
daily basis. 

The economy depends increasingly on effective digital infrastructures with regard to its 
technological further development and the efficiency of internal procedures. The public 
administration does no longer rely exclusively on traditional channels of service delivery 
but considers the Internet indispensable for reaching out to the general public. 

The citizens must have confidence that their data will be received by the addressees fast 
and  reliably.  An  open  and  free  Internet,  the  protection  of  personal  data  as  well  as  the 
integrity of interconnected networks are the basis for global prosperity, security and the 
promotion of human rights.

Effective digital infrastructures are a prerequisite for providing services of general inter-
est  such  as  energy,  water  and  transport  to  the  population.  To  allow  citizens  to  realise 
the benefits promised by our globalised and digitised world, digital infrastructures must 
function reliably and securely. 

Attacks from cyber space1 pose a direct threat to our safety and the proper functioning 
of the state, economy, science and society. They may have a profound negative impact on 
our daily lives. Non-state actors (e.g. criminals, organised crime or terrorists) as well as 
state actors (e.g. secret services and the military) may misuse cyber space for their own 
purposes and interfere with its proper functioning. Both the threats in cyber space and the 
productive use of cyber space are practically infinite. It is therefore a top priority of Austria 
to help make cyber space sufficiently safe and secure at national and international level. 
The term “cyber security” stands for the security of infrastructures in cyber space, of the 
data exchanged in cyber space and above all of the people using cyber space.

It is a paramount common concern of the state, the economy and society to ensure cyber 
security  in  national  and  international  contexts.  The  Austrian  Cyber  Security  Strategy / 
ACSS (Österreichische Strategie für Cyber Sicherheit / ÖSCS) is a comprehensive and pro-
active concept for protecting cyber space and the people in virtual space while guarantee-
ing human rights. It will enhance the security and resilience of Austrian infrastructures and 
services in cyber space. Most importantly, it will, however, build awareness and confidence 
in the Austrian society. 

1 

 The terms “cyber space” and “virtual space” are used synonymously.

4

Austria’s Cyber Space Security Strategy has been developed on the basis of the Security 
Strategy2 and is guided by the principles of the Austrian Programme for Critical Infra-
structure Protection3.

2 
3 

 Decision of the Council of Ministers of 1 March 2011
 Decision of the Council of Ministers of 2 April 2008

5

2  Opportunities and risks in cyber space

2.1  Opportunities
Cyber space has developed into a vital area of activity for the state, the economy, science and 
society. It is important for all of them as a(n):

Information  and  communication  space:  Cyber  space  makes  it  possible  to  disseminate  and 
transmit different sets of data and information resources. It is growing at a rapid pace: world-
wide every minute about 204 million e-mails are sent, more than two million Google searches 
are conducted, Facebook is logged in six million times and more than 70 new domains are 
registered4.

Space for social interaction: Cyber space is a space of general social interaction which is used 
by people for socialising. Today there are more than two billion Internet users globally.

Economic and trade space: Cyber space has developed into a market place of strategic impor-
tance in a relatively short period of time. Based on estimates, the global e-commerce volume 
could almost double between 2012 (US $ 572 billion) and 2014.

Space for political participation: Cyber space has an impact on the relationship between the 
government and society. The state reaches the citizens through e-government, offering facili-
tated access to government services. Digital forms of interaction open up new opportunities 
for political participation and political expression. The prerequisite for achieving this goal is 
to guarantee all human rights – both in virtual space and offline.

Control space: The role of cyber space as a control space is closely connected to its function as 
an information space. By using this control space, it is practically possible to monitor, operate 
and maintain all infrastructures of the transport, economic, industrial, health and educational 
sectors. Based on estimates, up to 50 billion devices will be able to communicate with one 
another (“Internet of Things“) by 2020. It will therefore be all the more important to ensure 
the security of this communication.

2.2  Risks and threats
Cyber space as well as the security and safety of people in cyber space are exposed to a number 
of risks and threats as cyber space is also a space of criminal misuse. These risks and threats 
range from operating errors to massive attacks by state and non-state actors using cyber space 
as a venue for their activities, which is not limited by national borders; military operations 
may also be behind these attacks. The spectrum of these risks and threats is presented in the 
Cyber Risk Matrix in Annex 1. Cyber crime, identity fraud, cyber attacks or misuse of the 
Internet for extremist purposes are serious new challenges facing all the stakeholders affected, 
requiring broad cooperation of governmental and non-governmental bodies at national and 
international level.

4 

  Sources of all the data contained in this chapter: Intel and KSÖ White Paper – Cybersicherheit  intelligent 

regulieren; warum, wie und durch wen?“

6

3  Principles

State-of-the-art cyber security policy is a cross-cutting issue which has to be taken into ac-
count in many spheres of life and policy. It must be modelled based on a comprehensive and 
integrated approach, allow for active participation and must be implemented in the spirit of 
solidarity.

A comprehensive cyber security policy means that external and internal security as well as 
civilian and military security aspects are closely interlinked. Cyber security goes beyond the 
purview of traditional security authorities and comprises instruments of numerous other policy 
areas. 

An integrated cyber security policy must place emphasis on task-sharing between the state, the 
economy, academia and the civil society. It comprises measures in the following areas: political-
strategic management, education and training, risk assessment, prevention and preparedness, 
recognition and response, limitation of effects and restoration as well as the development of 
governmental and non-governmental capabilities and capacities. An integrated cyber security 
policy has to be based on a cooperative approach both at national and international level.

A proactive cyber security policy means to work towards preventing threats to cyber space and 
the people in cyber space or mitigating their impact (configuring security). 

A cyber security policy based on solidarity takes account of the fact that – due to the global 
nature of cyber space – today the cyber security of Austria, the EU and the entire community 
of nations is interconnected very closely. Intensive cooperation based on solidarity at European 
and international level is therefore required to ensure cyber security.

The universal Principles of ICT Security for a Digital Austria are fully applicable to cyber 
security: confidentiality, integrity, mandatory application, authenticity, availability as well as 
privacy and data protection5.

The following fundamental principles are in any case applicable to the area of cyber security:

The rule of law: Governance in the area of cyber security has to meet the high standards of 
the rule of law of the Austrian administration and guarantee compliance with human rights, 
in particular privacy and data protection as well as the freedom of expression and the right 
to information.

Subsidiarity: Cyber security is a legal asset. Therefore the state pledges it strong commitment to 
the protection of this legal asset. However, it cannot and should not assume sole responsibility 
for protecting cyber space. The owners and operators of information and communication tech-
nology (ICT) are primarily responsible for protecting their systems. The following principle 
shall apply: “Self-commitment if possible, regulation if necessary“.

Self-regulation: Efforts should in general be made to increase the level of protection through 
the actors’ own initiatives on the basis of code of conducts, standardisation and certification. 

5  See:http://www.digitales.oesterreich.gv.at/site/5743/default.aspx#a2

7

However, it remains the task of the state to create the regulatory framework for protecting 
the ICT of enterprises and private persons and to support self-regulation in the private sphere.

Proportionality: Measures to increase the level of protection and the respective costs have to 
be proportionate to the respective risk and to the possibilities of limiting these threats. 

Based on these principles, a comprehensive and coherent cyber security policy is developed, 
which comprises all measures at national, European and international level

 •

 •

 •

to help shape cyber space in a positive way in the interest of the citizens, academia and 
the state,
to prevent threats to cyber space and the people in cyber space from emerging or becom-
ing effective (“prevention”) as well as 
to protect the legal asset “cyber security” against threats as well as to cope with them.

8

4  Strategic goals

As Austria continues to develop into a digital society, it is vital to ensure compatibility with 
the fundamental values of an open society. A dynamic virtual space facilitates social prosperity 
and economic benefits in the framework of e-government and e-commerce. Moreover, it serves 
as a basis for information exchange as well as social and political participation. 

In the framework of its Cyber Security Strategy, Austria pursues the following strategic goals:

 •

 •

 •

 •
 •

 •

 •

 •

 •

Availability, reliability and confidentiality of data exchange as well as the integrity of 
data themselves are guaranteed only in a secure, resilient and reliable cyber space. There-
fore the virtual space must be capable of resisting risks, absorbing shocks and adjusting 
to a changed environment. The design of crucial ICT systems should be as redundant as 
possible.
Based on the national approach of the competent federal ministries, Austria will ensure 
that its ICT infrastructures are secure and resilient to threats. The governmental bodies 
will cooperate closely and as partners with the private sector.
The legal asset “cyber security” is protected by the Austrian authorities – in cooperation 
with non-governmental partners – by taking effective and proportionate measures in the 
field of political-strategic control, recognition and response as well as limitation of effects 
and restoration.
By taking a number of awareness measures, Austria is building a “culture of cyber security”.
In  the  framework  of  a  national  dialogue  on  cyber  security,  existing  cooperation  is 
strengthened and new initiatives are supported and interlinked by building knowledge, 
capabilities and capacities. Thanks to this approach, Austria is acting as a pioneer in im-
plementing measures to secure the digital society. Offering high levels of availability, in-
tegrity and confidentiality of required ICT infrastructures, Austria’s attractiveness as a 
business location is also enhanced. 
Austria will play an active role in international cooperation at European and global level, 
particularly by exchanging information, formulating international strategies, developing 
voluntary schemes and legally binding regulations, prosecuting criminal cases, holding 
transnational exercises and conducting cooperation projects.
The  Austrian  administration’s  e-government  is  secure  and  continuously  further  devel-
oped; the security measures of the Federal Republic of Austria, the federal provinces, cit-
ies and municipalities will be strengthened.
All Austrian enterprises will protect the integrity of their own applications as well as the 
identity and privacy of their customers. The close and systematic cooperation among en-
terprises plays a crucial role in this process.
The Austrian population should be aware of the individual’s personal responsibility in 
cyber space. All citizens should ensure adequate protection of their online activities and 
have the necessary capabilities for electronic authentication and signature.

9

5  Fields of action and measures

Field of action 1 – structures and processes

Objective:
Within cyber space there are numerous structures and stakeholders which are working individ-
ually to ensure cyber security. Several organisations specialised in cyber security (e.g. CERTs6) 
are already playing an important role in cyber crisis management. Overarching cyber security 
procedures have not yet been defined formally. It is therefore necessary to define processes 
and structures which will ensure overall coordination both at the political-strategic level and 
the operational level by involving all relevant stakeholders of the public and private sectors.

Measures:
1) Establishing a Cyber Security Steering Group
 •

The Cyber Security Steering Group was set up based on a decision of the Council of Min-
isters of 11 May 2012. Under the leadership of the Federal Chancellery, it is responsible 
for coordinating measures relating to cyber security at a political-strategic level, monitor-
ing and supporting the implementation of the ACSS, preparing an annual Cyber Security 
Report and advising the federal government in all matters relating to cyber security. The 
Steering Group is composed of liaison officers for the National Security Council7 and cy-
ber security experts of the ministries represented in the National Security Council. The 
Chief Information Officer of the Federal Republic of Austria is also a member of this 
body. Representatives of other ministries (particularly those competent for organisations 
and enterprises which are subject to or affected by control measures) and of the Austrian 
federal provinces will join the Steering Group as required to address specific issues. Rep-
resentatives of relevant enterprises will be involved in an appropriate manner.

2) Creating a structure for coordination at operational level
 •

Building on and taking advantage of existing operational structures, a structure for co-
ordination at operational level will be created. It will serve as a platform for preparing a 
periodic and incident-related Cyber Security Picture and for deliberations on measures to 
be taken at operational level. Furthermore, it will provide an overview of the status quo 
in cyber space by collecting, compiling, evaluating and passing on relevant information. 
The economic sector should also be involved appropriately and on an equal footing. The 
survey of the situation in cyber space will be prepared in a joint and ongoing process and 
will serve as a basis for the planning, preventive and response measures to be taken. The 
operators of critical infrastructures will be supported at operational level and particularly 
in the event of failures of information and communication structures. In addition, they 
will be provided with information on the dangers of the Internet. The Operational Coor-
dination Structure must be designed in such a way that it can be used as an operational 
executive body of the overall cyber crisis management.

6 
7 

 Computer Emergency Response Team
 Federal Act on the Establishment of a National Security Council, Section 5(1)

10

 •

 •

The tasks performed in the framework of the Operational Coordination Structure are 
coordinated by the Federal Ministry of the Interior (PPP model) by involving the minis-
tries and the operational structures of the business and research sectors. In carrying out 
its coordination tasks, it is supported at operational level by the Federal Ministry of De-
fence and Sports, to which coordination tasks will be transferred if a cyber defence in-
cident occurs. All operational organisation- / sector- / or target-group-specific structures 
will remain within the purview of the respective organisation. Institutions dealing with 
security issues of computer systems and the Internet as well as the protection of criti-
cal  infrastructures  will  cooperate  in  the  framework  of  the  Operational  Coordination 
Structure. At state level, these organisations are in particular: GovCERT (Government 
Computer Emergency Response Team), MilCERT (Military Cyber Emergency Readiness 
Team) and the Cyber Crime Competence Center (C 4). Other governmental institutions 
are involved by forming a second circle. An additional circle comprises private CERTs 
(CERT.at, BRZ-CERT, banks, …) as well as the economic and research sectors.
The Cyber Security Steering Group will set up a working group. It will be in charge of pre-
paring proposals for processes and structures for permanent coordination at operational 
level. Representatives of relevant enterprises will be involved in the appropriate manner.

3) Establishing a Cyber Crisis Management
 •

Austria’s Cyber Crisis Management consists of representatives of the state and of operators 
of critical infrastructures. As far as its composition and work procedures are concerned, 
it is modelled on the Governmental Crisis and Civil Protection Management (Krisen- und 
Katastrophenmanagement / SKKM). As its responsibility goes beyond ICT and to ensure in-
ternal security, the Federal Ministry of the Interior will be responsible for coordinating it in 
respect of overarching threats. As far as external security is concerned, the Federal Ministry 
of Defence and Sports will play the leading role in coordinating measures to protect sover-
eignty in the framework of military national defence (cyber defence).
Crisis management and continuity plans are prepared and updated regularly on the ba-
sis of risk analyses for sector-specific and cross-sectoral cyber threats in cooperation with 
public institutions and the operators of critical infrastructures.
Regular cyber exercises will be held to test the Cyber Crisis Management as well as crisis 
and continuity plans.

 •

 •

 •

 •

4) Strengthening existing cyber structures
 •

The role of GovCERT (operated by the Federal Chancellery as the government’s CERT) 
will be enhanced and strengthened. To this end, it will be necessary to lay down in detail 
its responsibilities, powers and spheres of action, its institutional embedding within the 
public administration, its role in the event of crisis as well as its interaction with the Op-
erational Coordination Structure. In addition, new requirements will have to be defined.
To avoid and prevent cyber crime as well as to facilitate operational international coop-
eration in this area, the role of the Cyber Crime Competence Center (C 4) of the Federal 
Ministry of the Interior will be enhanced. The Center is Austria’s central body in charge 
of exercising security and criminal police duties in the area of cyber security.
As a basis of operational capabilities for the prevention of cyber attacks, MilCERT (set up 
within the Federal Ministry of Defence and Sports) will be strengthened to protect its own 
networks and to further develop the Cyber Security Survey. By taking advantage of these 
capabilities, capacities for providing assistance in the ICT area will inter alia have to be 
established. 

11

 •

The Austrian CERT Association will be expanded and CERT.at will be strengthened to 
facilitate national cooperation among Austrian CERTs. This will help to promote the es-
tablishment of CERTs in all sectors on the one hand and to intensify the exchange of in-
formation and experience on CERT-specific issues on the other hand.

Field of action 2 - governance

Objective:
The aim is to define the role, responsibilities and powers of state and non-state actors in cyber 
space and to create adequate framework conditions for cooperation among all players.

Measures:
5) Establishing a modern regulatory framework
 •

Under the auspices of the Cyber Security Steering Group, a comprehensive report ana-
lysing the need to establish an additional legal basis, regulatory measures and voluntary 
self-commitment (Code of Conduct) for guaranteeing cyber security in Austria will be 
prepared and submitted to the federal government. This report will inter alia cover the 
following issues: the establishment of necessary organisational structures, the tasks and 
powers  of  authorities,  the  information  exchange  between  authorities  and  private  per-
sons, reporting duties, the duty of adopting protection measures as well as supply chain 
security. 
A balance between incentives and sanctions must be ensured in defining the duties of 
non-state actors. 

 •

6) Defining minimum standards
 •

Based on the interaction of all relevant stakeholders, minimum security standards must 
be defined to ensure effective prevention and to achieve a common understanding of cur-
rent  requirements.  These  requirements  will  be  applied  to  all  components  and  services 
used in all security-relevant ICT areas. The applicable norms, standards, codes of con-
ducts, best practises and the like will be compiled in the Austrian Information Security 
Management Handbook, which will be updated regularly.

7) Preparing an annual report on cyber security
 •

The Cyber Security Steering Group will prepare the annual report “Cyber Security in Austria”.

Field of action 3 - cooperation between the government, economy 
and society

Objective:
Many tasks and responsibilities of public administrations, the economy and population are 
based on information and communication technologies. The responsibility of using digital 
technology  in  a  prudent  way  rests  with  each  individual  organisational  unit.  But  it  is  only 
broad cooperation between all sectors and a permanent mutual exchange of information that 
will make the use of ICT transparent and safe. It is therefore important to strengthen existing 
capacities and processes in the administration and economy as well as among citizens through 
cooperation and to create new opportunities.

12

Measures:
8) Establishing a Cyber Security Platform
 •

The Austrian Cyber Security Platform shall bee established as a public private partner-
ship  to  facilitate  ongoing  communication  with  all  stakeholders  of  the  administration, 
economy and academia. In parallel, existing initiatives (e.g. Austrian Trust Circle, Cy-
ber Security Austria, Kuratorium sicheres Österreich, A-SIT8, …) will be carried on and 
taken advantage of. The Austrian Cyber Security Platform will provide the institutional 
framework for a permanent exchange of information within the public administration 
as well as between the public administration and representatives of the economy, science 
and research. All stakeholders will participate on an equal footing. The Cyber Security 
Platform advises and supports the Cyber Security Steering Group. 
Cooperation with private operators of critical infrastructures and other economic sec-
tors is of crucial importance for Austria’s cyber security. The respective details will be 
discussed in further talks between the Cyber Security Steering Group and the economic 
sector.
Extensive  cooperation  will  be  initiated  between  the  partners  participating  in  the  Cy-
ber Security Platform on issues such awareness-raising, training as well as research and 
development.
To promote the mutual understanding of challenges and opportunities for action of all 
partners involved in cyber security issues, exchanges of experts should be intensified be-
tween  the  participating  governmental,  private  and  academic  organisations.  Under  the 
leadership of the Cyber Security Steering Group and with the support of the Austrian Cy-
ber Security Platform, a programme will be developed for this purpose. 

 •

 •

 •

9)  Strengthening support for SMEs
 •

Priority programmes on cyber security will be launched to raise the awareness of SMEs 
and to prepare them for hazardous situations. Interest representations are to be encour-
aged to publish online information tailored to the needs of SMEs on the new Internet 
portal ICT Security9 and to initiate cyber security campaigns for SMEs. With the support 
of governmental bodies, sector-specific information platforms such as the Austrian Trust 
Circles should develop sector-specific cyber risk management plans; regulatory authori-
ties and interest representations will be involved in this dialogue. These risk management 
plans will be coordinated with governmental crisis and continuity management plans. 
Cross-sectoral cyber exercises for SMEs will be organised and held at periodic intervals. 
Specific sectors of SMEs should be allowed to participate in governmental cross-sectoral 
cyber exercises upon request.

10) Preparing a Cyber Security Communication Strategy
 • With a view to optimising communication between stakeholders in the administration, 
economy, academia and society, all websites set up or planned by governmental bodies 
have to be coordinated in the framework of a Cyber Security Communication Strategy. 
This Cyber Communication Strategy is prepared by the Cyber Security Steering Group 
by involving all relevant stakeholders. 

8 
9 

 Secure Information Technology Centre Austria
 Compare: Measure 12

13

Field of action 4 – protection of critical infrastructures

Objective:
Today almost all infrastructures increasingly depend on specialised ICT systems, which are 
expected to guarantee operations that are as smooth, reliable and continuous as possible. It is 
therefore a top priority to improve the resilience of these information systems against threats. 
Under the Austrian Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (Programm zum Schutz 
kritischer Infrastrukturen / APCIP), enterprises operating critical infrastructures are encour-
aged to implement comprehensive security architectures. The aim of the ACSS is to supple-
ment and intensify these measures in the field of cyber security. Cooperation with operators 
of critical information infrastructures should be given priority.

Measures:
11) Improving the resilience of critical infrastructures
 •

The operators of critical infrastructures should be involved in all processes of national cy-
ber crisis management. These strategic enterprises should set up a comprehensive security 
architecture (risk and crisis management), update it according to the threats arising and 
appoint a security officer. Crisis communication should be further developed and intensi-
fied. Moreover, cyber security standards should be defined for these enterprises based on 
a partnership approach.
The operators of critical infrastructures should have a duty to report severe cyber inci-
dents. The appropriate legal basis has to be established after comprehensive consulta-
tions with the relevant stakeholders.
 Existing arrangements for the protection of critical infrastructures (APCIP) and the Gov-
ernmental Crisis and Civil Protection Management should be reviewed on an ongoing 
basis to ensure that they continue to meet new cyber challenges and to modify them if 
required.

 •

 •

Field of action 5 – awareness raising and training

Objective:
By sensitising all target groups, the necessary awareness of, personal interest in and atten-
tion paid to cyber security will be increased. These awareness-raising measures will help to 
create understanding for the need to ensure cyber security. By taking concrete and target-
group-specific measures, the necessary knowledge about security-conscious behaviour and 
a responsible approach to using information and ICT as a whole will be imparted and pro-
moted. A meaningful and adequate ICT competence level should be ensured by intensifying 
training in the field of cyber security and media competence in schools and other educational 
facilities as well as by developing national cyber security competence in the apprenticeship 
training system.

Measures:
12) Strengthening a cyber security culture10
 •

Awareness-raising initiatives are developed, coordinated and implemented on the basis 
of a common approach by taking into account existing programmes. In this context it 
is important to examine cyber security from different perspectives, to highlight relevant 

10 

 See: National ICT Security Strategy, chapter “Awareness”

14

dangers, to draw attention to possible effects and damages as well as to make recommen-
dations for security measures.
To give different target groups access to more in-depth customised advice, the existing 
consulting programmes should be further strengthened and expanded.
An ICT Security Internet Portal will be set up in the form of a web platform. It will serve 
as an information and communication hub for awareness-raising measures. The Ministry 
of Finance, the Federal Chancellery and A-SIT will be in charge of coordinating the ICT 
Security Internet Portal. The strategic approach of the Portal will be guided by the prin-
ciples and objectives of the ACSS. 
Cyber crime prevention programmes will be further developed.

 •

 •

 •

13) Incorporating cyber security and media competence into all levels of education and training11
 •
Stronger integration of ICT, cyber security and media competence into the school cur-
riculum. ICT and new media literacy has become part of the curriculum of all types of 
schools. Moreover, ICT security issues and cyber security should become an integral part 
of a model for “digital competence” – adjusted to the curriculum of the respective type 
of school – so as to create awareness for security issues and to help children learn a re-
sponsible use of ICT and new media. The aim is to ensure an adequate ICT competence 
level across all types of schools. 
ICT (security) competence should be taken into account in the training programmes of 
pedagogical universities and other pedagogical institutions at tertiary level as a prerequi-
site for teaching these skills at school as well as in adult education centres.
The training of experts in the public sector responsible for improving cyber security will 
be intensified in cooperation with national and international training facilities.
The ICT system administrators of the operators of critical infrastructures should receive 
cyber security training to enable them to recognise cyber incidents, to detect anomalies in 
their ICT systems and to report them to their security officers (Human Sensor Programme). 

 •

 •

 •

Field of action 6 – research and development

Objective:
To ensure cyber security, technical expertise is necessary, which must be based on state-of-
the-art research and development results. To this end, cyber security issues must increasingly 
be taken into account in applied cyber research as well as in security research programmes 
such as KIRAS. Efforts should be made to achieve active thematic leadership in EU security 
research programmes.

Measures:
14) To strengthen Austria’s research in the area of cyber security12
 •

In the framework of national and EU security research programmes, cyber security must 
be among the key research priorities. In joint projects, the relevant stakeholders in ad-
ministration, economy and research will develop the conceptual framework and techno-
logical instruments to enhance Austria’s cyber security standards. Special emphasis will 
be placed on measures helping to turn research and development findings speedily into 
marketable products. Existing research projects, such as those under A-SIT, will be fur-
ther developed.

11 
12 

 See: National ICT Security Strategy, chapter “Education and Research”
 For more details see: National ICT Security Strategy, chapter “Education and Research”

15

 •

Austria  should  strive  for  an  active  thematic  leadership  in  EU  security  research  pro-
grammes. Austria should contribute themes which it considers important to international 
research programmes.

Field of action 7 – international cooperation

Objective:
Global networking and international cooperation are key factors of the ACSS. Security in 
cyber space may be achieved only through a coordinated policy mix at national and inter-
national level. Austria will therefore engage in an active “cyber foreign policy” and pursue 
its interests in the framework of the EU, UN, OSCE, Council of Europe, OECD and NATO 
partnerships based on a coordinated and targeted approach. Furthermore, the international 
aspects of Austria’s cyber policy will be coordinated consistently in other policy areas.

Measures:
15) Effective collaboration on cyber security in Europe and worldwide
 •

Austria will make a substantial contribution to the development and implementation of 
an EU Cyber Security Strategy. It will fully participate in the strategic and operational 
work of the EU13. 
The competent ministries will take the necessary measures to implement and to take full 
advantage of the Convention on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe.
Austria advocates a free Internet at international level. The free exercise of all human 
rights must be guaranteed in virtual space, and particularly the right to freedom of ex-
pression and information must not be restricted unduly in the Internet. This is the posi-
tion Austria will adopt in international forums. Hence, Austria will participate actively 
in developing and establishing a transnational code for governance in cyber space, which 
will include measures to build confidence and security.
Austria will continue its bilateral cooperation which has been initiated in the framework 
of the NATO Partnership for Peace and actively support the preparation of a list of con-
crete confidence- and security-building measures in the OSCE.
Austria participates actively in planning and implementing transnational cyber exercises. 
The experience gained will be used as a direct input for planning and further developing 
operational cooperation.
Foreign policy measures relevant for cyber security are coordinated by the Federal Min-
istry for European and International Affairs. Where appropriate, the conclusion of bilat-
eral or international agreements will be taken into consideration.

 •

 •

 •

 •

 •

13 

 On 7 February 2013 the European Commission presented drafts of the Cyber Security Strategy as well as of the 
Directive on Network and Information Security.

16

6  Implementation

The Steering Group develops an Implementation Plan to carry out the horizontal measures 
laid down in the Austrian Cyber Security Strategy within three months after adoption of the 
ACSS  by  the  federal  government.  The  competent  bodies  are  responsible  for  implementing 
these measures within their respective mandate. The implementation of measures of the ACSS 
will be coordinated by the Cyber Security Steering Group. Based on the ACSS, the competent 
ministries will develop sub-strategies for their sphere of responsibilities. The ministries rep-
resented in the Cyber Security Steering Group will submit an Implementation Report to the 
federal government every two years. The preparation of the Implementation Report will go 
hand in hand with a review of the Austrian Cyber Security Strategy, which will be revised and 
updated if necessary. The strategic foundations will be further developed in cooperation with 
non-state partners.

17

s
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
s
n
o
c

s
u
o
r
t
s
a
s
i
d

y
v
a
e
h

l

e
b
a
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

l

i

a
m
n
m

i

Annex 1

Broken digital

signature schemes

Identitytheft and 
Identitytheft and 
manipulation of
citizens id-data

Manipulation of 
water supply
systems IT

Manipulation of
energy generation
and supply IT-systems

Cyber Risk Matrix 2011 

Unsecure industrial
control systems
(z.B. SCADA)

Cyber espionage 
against the state

Unknown
IT-anomalies

Distributed denial of 

service attacks

Negligent behaviour of 
users in strategically 
important infrastructure 

providers
Manipulation of
Manipulation of
communication and 
satellite connections

Control over 

ownership of critical 

infrastructure

Manipulation of cloud 

service systems

Manipulation of 
ﬁ nancial transaction 

systems

Manipulation of trans-
portation IT systems 
(air, train, road)

Missing or obsolete 
legal foundation

Missing strategic 

networkinfrastructure 

strategy

Malicious software

Flawed and incompatible 

codes/software

Missing focus on 
Missing focus on 
regulations for 

IT-security

Incomplete Cyber 
Incomplete Cyber 

Governance

Industrial Cyber 
Industrial Cyber 

espionage

Lack of
experts

No systematic 
technology impact 

assessment

Unclear responsibility 
Unclear responsibility 
across governmental 
across governmental 

institutions

Inadequate

understanding of

the cyber attack status
the cyber attack status
the cyber attack status
the cyber attack status

Not enough incentives 
for security investments

Lack of security 
awareness and 

standards

Social networks and 
Social networks and 
their manipulation
their manipulation

Cyberterrorism 

Cyberwar

Vulnerability of IT-
infrastructure against
natural disasters

Cybercrime

Missing or incomplete 
business continuity 

management

Manipulation

of GPS-time signal

Manipuliated of 
unsecure hardware

Systematic theft of 
digital identities

No security seal
of quality/audits
of quality/audits

Social Engineering

very low

low
Occurrence probability

high

very high

18

Annex 2

List of Abbreviations

ACI 

Austrian Critical Infrastructure / Österreichische kritische Infrastruktur

ACSS  
 

APCIP 
 

A-SIT 
 

ASS  

Austrian Cyber Security Strategy / Österreichische Strategie für Cyber Sicherheit  
(ÖSCS)

Austrian  Programme  for  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection / Österreichisches  
Programm zum Schutz kritischer Infrastruktur

Secure  Information  Technology  Centre  -  Austria / Zentrum  für  sichere  
Informationstechnologie – Austria

Austrian Security Strategy / Österreichischen Sicherheitsstrategie (ÖSS)

CERT 

Computer Emergency Response Team

CERT.at 

Computer Emergency Response Team - Austria

CII 

Critical Information Infrastructures / Kritische Informationsinfrastrukturen

GovCERT  Governmental  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team / Staatliches  
 

Computer Emergency Response Team

ICT 

Information and communication technology

MilCERT  Military  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team / Militärisches  Computer  
 

Emergency Response Team

SCM 

SMEs 

PPP 

Submission to the Council of Ministers / Ministerratsvortrag (MRV)

Small and medium-sized enterprises

Public Private Partnership

19

Annex 3

Cyber Security Glossary

Awareness
refers to the security awareness of all persons sharing responsibility for information security. 
Understanding and motivation are necessary to ensure that security rules are observed and 
implemented on a continuous basis. To remind employees regularly of the importance of their 
activities for information security, they must be supported through targeted awareness-raising 
measures.

CERT – Computer Emergency Response Team
refers to an emergency team which will prevent threats and restore ICT systems if security 
incidents occur. 

Basically a CERT / CSIRT provides three types of services:
Emergency response services: making available emergency teams to prevent threats and restore 
ICT  systems  if  security  incidents  occur  (also  referred  to  as  CSIRT,  i.e.  Computer  Security 
Incident Response Team).
Preventive services: the preventive tasks of a CERT are to observe developments of ICT secu-
rity, to warn about weaknesses and recognised attack patterns, to provide support in assessing 
damage and to raise awareness within their sphere of responsibility, especially through training 
and consulting.
Security quality management: providing a pool of expert know-how, auditing capabilities and 
a lessons-learned cycle for their respective sphere of responsibility.

Critical infrastructure (CI), critical information infrastructure (CII)
Critical infrastructures are those infrastructures or parts thereof which are of crucial impor-
tance for ensuring important social functions. Their failure or destruction has severe effects on 
the health, security or the economic and social wellbeing of the population or the functioning 
of governmental institutions14. Critical infrastructure is often abbreviated as CI (Critical In-
frastructure) even in the German-language area. CIP has become the abbreviation commonly 
used at international and national level, referring to Critical Infrastructure Protection, while 
CIIP stands for Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.

Cyber attack, cyber espionage, cyber sabotage 
The term “cyber attack” refers to an attack through IT in cyber space, which is directed against 
one or several IT system(s). Its aim is to undermine the objectives of ICT security protection 
(confidentiality, integrity and availability) partly or totally.  Cyber attacks directed against the 
confidentiality of an IT system are referred to as “cyber espionage”, i.e. digital spying. Cyber 
attacks directed against the integrity and availability of an IT system are referred to as cyber 
sabotage15.

14 
15 

 Source of text: Austrian Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (APCIP)
 Source of text: definition AG “Cyber” based on: Federal Ministry of the Interior, “Cybersicherheitsstrategie für 
Deutschland”, Berlin, 2010 + KSÖ: Cyber Risik Matrix – Glossary (partly)

20

Cyber crime 
Cyber crime comprises illegal attacks from cyber space on or through ICT systems, which 
are defined in penal or administrative laws. The term therefore covers all criminal offences 
committed with the aid of information technologies and communications networks and also 
encompasses Internet crime16.

Cyber defence
The term “cyber defence” refers to all measures to defend cyber space with military and ap-
propriate means for achieving military-strategic goals. Cyber defence is an integrated system, 
comprising the implementation of all measures relating to ICT and information security, the 
capabilities of milCERT and CNO (Computer Network Operations) as well as the support of 
the physical capabilities of the army.

Cyber security
Cyber  security  describes  the  protection  of  a  key  legal  asset  through  constitutional  means 
against actor-related, technical, organisational and natural dangers posing a risk to the security 
of cyber space (including infrastructure and data security) as well as the security of the users 
in cyber space. Cyber security helps to identify, assess and follow up on threats as well as to 
strengthen the ability to cope with interferences in or from cyber space, to minimise the effects 
as well as to restore the capacity to act and functional capabilities of the respective stakehold-
ers, infrastructures and services. 

Cyber space / virtual space
Cyber space is the virtual space of all IT systems interconnected at data level on a global scale. 
The basis for cyber space is the Internet as a universal and publicly accessible connection and 
transport network, which may be supplemented and expanded through other data networks17. 
In common parlance, cyber space also refers to the global network of different independent IC 
infrastructures, telecommunication networks and computer systems. In the social sphere the 
use of this global network allows individuals to interact, exchange ideas, disseminate infor-
mation, give social support, engage in business, control action, create art and media works, 
play games, participate in political discussions and a lot more. Cyber space has become an 
umbrella term for all things related to the Internet and for different Internet cultures. Many 
countries regard networked ICT and independent networks operating through this medium 
as components of their “national critical infrastructures“.

Cyber terrorism / misuse of the Internet for extremist purposes
Cyber terrorism is defined as a politically motivated crime of state and / or non-state actors 
against  computers,  networks  and  the  information  stored  therein.  Its  aim  is  to  provoke  a 
severe or long-term disruption of public life or to cause serious damage to economic activity 
with the intention of severely intimidating the population, of forcing public authorities or an 
international organisation to carry out, tolerate or omit an act or of profoundly unsettling 
or destroying the political, constitutional, economic or social foundations of a state or an 
international organisation. These acts constitute organised cyber sabotage (attacks) caused 
by political-fundamentalist groups or individual perpetrators; they are directed against states, 
organisations or enterprises18.

16 
17 

18 

 Source of text: AG “Cyber” + KSÖ: Cyber Risk Matrix - Glossary
 Source of text: definition AG “Cyber“ based on: Federal Ministry of the Interior, “Cybersicherheitsstrategie für 
Deutschland” (Cyber Security Strategy for Germany), Berlin, 2010
 Source of text: AG “Cyber” + KSÖ: Cyber Risik Matrix – Glossary

21

Cyber war
Cyber war refers to acts of war in and around virtual space with means which are predomi-
nantly associated with information technology. In a broader sense, this implies the support 
of military campaigns in traditional operational spaces – i.e. ground, sea, air and outer space 
– through measures taken in the virtual space. In general, the term also refers to high-tech 
warfare in the information age based on the extensive computerisation, electronisation and 
networking of almost all military sectors and issues19.

Data protection 
Every individual has a right to secrecy of his / her personal data, especially in terms of respect for 
his / her private and family life, provided that they represent interests worthy of protection. Data 
protection interests are excluded if the respective data are not subject to confidential treatment 
due to their general availability or lack of traceability to the individual affected20.

DDOS (Distributed Denial of Services)
Distributed Denial of Services: attacks for which a large number of computers are used to 
block a specific computer through numerous external communication requests. 

Governmental Crisis and Civil Protection Management
The  Governmental  Crisis  and  Civil  Protection  Management  is  responsible  for  civil  protection 
management in Austria. It covers all measures taken to prevent and combat threats and damages 
caused by disasters. Its aim is to protect public life or to restore it as fast as possible, particularly 
public order and security as well as the supply of necessities. It covers activities of authorities and 
institutions organised under a public mandate and those of all private disaster relief organisations21.

ICT
ICT is an umbrella term for all computer- (IT) and network- (CT) based technologies as well as 
related economic sectors. Information and communication technology is also used as a blanket 
term  for  all  communication  instruments  or  communication  applications,  including  radio, 
television, mobile telephones, hardware and software for computers and networks, satellite 
systems, etc. as well as different services and applications related to these items22.

ICT security
ICT  security  is  the  protected  state  of  information  and  communication  technology  and  the 
information used therein which is appropriate to the type and level of sensitiveness as well as 
the type and intensity of a possible threat23.

ICT system
An ICT system is a combination of forces, means and procedures for processing, transmitting 
and / or conveying information to fulfil a specific task. The products (ICT services) of an ICT 
system may be made available through interfaces or, if appropriate, through services outside 
the limits of the system. 

 Source of text: ETH Zurich: “CSS No. 71/2010“, Zurich, 2010 + KSÖ: Cyber Risik Matrix – Glossary + AG 
“Cyber“
 Data Protection Act DSG 2000, Art. 1, constitutional provision, fundamental right to data protection, 
Section 1(1)
 Guideline / Crisis and Civil Protection Management 
 Source of text: Definition AG “Cyber” based on: Federal Ministry of the Interior “Cybersicherheitsstrategie für 
Deutschland” (Cyber Security Strategy for Germany), Berlin, 2010
 Internal definition AG “Cyber“ (Federal Ministry of Defence and Sports / Federal Ministry of the Interior)

19 

20 

21 
22 

23 

22

Information security / network security
Information security or network security are umbrella terms for ICT security, referring to the 
entire relevant information of an organisation or an enterprise, including information that 
has not been processed electronically. Hence, it describes the entirety of characteristics of an 
organisation ensuring the confidentiality, availability and integrity of information. Informa-
tion may be available as spoken text, paper documents or other directly readable media or as 
electronically processed data in ICT systems.

Internet
The Internet is a worldwide system of interconnected computers which applies the same pro-
tocol standard (TCP / IP – Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) and is used by 
billions of people. It is a network of networks consisting of millions and millions of private, 
public, academic, business and administrative networks, which are interconnected through a 
tightly woven system of electronic, radio and optical network technologies both at local and 
global level. The Internet does not have any central instances, neither in terms of technical 
implementation nor with regard to the conditions of access and use. It applies only a general 
definition of the two principal name spaces, the Internet Protocol address spaces and the Do-
main Name System, which are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN). The Internet works across platforms and operational systems. Typical 
services on the Internet are the worldwide web (www) and e-mail.

Malware
Malware refers to computer programmes executing processes that are not desired by the owner 
of the ICT system and often cause damages. As a catch-all term, malware describes all types 
of malicious software such as viruses, worms, spyware, backdoors and the like.

Sensitive data
In accordance with the Austrian Data Protection Act, sensitive data are defined as the data of 
natural persons about their racial and ethnic origin, political opinion, trade union affiliation, 
religious or philosophical beliefs, health or sexuality24.

Social engineering
In the context of IT security, this term is used for strategies of online fraudsters. It describes 
direct communication processes used by the attacker to obtain confidential information from 
the victim through manipulation or to draw benefits illegally. By approaching their victims 
individually, the attackers increase their success rates: phished data such as the user’s brows-
ing habits or names from the victim’s personal environment are used, e.g. in phishing e-mails 
written in a personal style to inspire confidence in the recipient25.

Worldwide web (www)
Name for the entirety of documents linked through hyperlinks on the Internet; often used as 
a synonym for the latter26.

24 
25 
26 

 www.sicherheitskultur.at, Information Security Glossary
 Source of text (partly): KSÖ: Cyber Risk Matrix - Glossary
 www.sicherheitskultur.at, Information Security Glossary

23

