 

†iwR÷vW© bs wW G-1 

 evsjv‡`k 

†M‡RU 

 

 

AwZwi³ msL¨v 

KZ…©cÿ KZ…©K cÖKvwkZ 

 

g½jevi, gvP© 11, 2014 

MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKvi 

WvK, †Uwj‡hvMv‡hvM I Z_¨cÖhyw³ gš¿Yvjq 

Z_¨ I †hvMv‡hvM cÖhyw³ wefvM 

(AvBwmwU-1 kvLv) 

cÖÁvcb 

ZvwiL, 03 gvP© 2014 wLªt 

bs  56.00.0000.028.22.006.14-34miKvi  mvBevi  Sz

uwK  wbim‡b  ÒmvBevi 

wmwKDwiwU ÷ªv‡UwRÓ Aby‡gv`b K‡i‡Q| Bnv me©mvavi‡Yi ÁvZv‡_© cÖKvk Kiv n‡jv| 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 ivóªcwZi Av‡`kµ‡g 

Avi. GBP. Gg. AvjvIj Kwei 

mnKvix mwPe| 

( 9701 ) 

g~j¨ t UvKv 16.00 

9702 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

NATIONAL 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Bangladesh 

requires 

reliable  physical  and 

information  communication 

technologies  (ICTs).  The  two  types  of  infrastructure  jointly  support  essential 

services  in  sectors  such  as  communications,  emergency  services,  energy, 

finance, food, government, health, transport and water. Therefore, to achieve our 

economic  security  and  democratic  objectives,  we  require  reliable  physical  and 

digital  infrastructure.  Physical  assets  increasingly  depend  upon  the  reliable 

functioning of the digital infrastructure or critical information infrastructure (CII) to 

deliver services and to conduct business. Consequently, significant disruption to 

CII could have an immediate and debilitating impact that reaches far beyond the 

ICT sector and affects the ability of a nation to perform its essential missions in 

multiple  sectors.  Therefore,  critical information  infrastructure  protection  (CIIP) is 

everyone’s responsibility. 

This document is “The National Cybersecurity Strategy of Bangladesh”. It is one 

of the long-term measures for protecting our cyber world against security threats, 

risks  and  challenges  to  national  security.  The  Strategy  addresses  the  country’s 

national security strategy. The purpose of this document is to create a coherent 

vision  for  2021  keeping  Bangladesh  secure  and  prosperous  by  coordinating 

government, private sector, citizens and international cyberspace defense efforts. 

This  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  outlines  a  framework  for  organizing  and 

prioritizing  efforts  to  manage  risks  to  our  cyberspace  or  critical  information 

infrastructure.  To  achieve  the  aforesaid  goals  above,  this  Strategy  significantly 

raises the profile of cybersecurity within our governments and defines clear roles 

and responsibilities. Cognizant of the shared nature of cyber vulnerabilities, this 

Strategy also requires a public-private partnership to fix the potential vulnerability 

of  private  sector-owned  critical 

infrastructures 

in  banking,  utilities  and 

telecommunications sectors against cyber attacks. 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9703 

 

In  addition,  we  recognize  that  cybersecurity is  a  global  challenge  that  demands 

truly  international  solutions.  Therefore,  we  commit  ourselves  to  joining  regional 

and international partnerships creating solutions for addressing the cybersecurity 

challenge  regardless  of  threat.  We,  therefore,  present  this  Strategy  in  terms  of 

the  Pillars  of  the  International  Telecommunication  Union’s  Global  Cybersecurity 

Agenda  (GCA).  The  GCA  contains  five  strategic  pillars  and  seven  goals  for 

building collaboration between relevant parties in the fight against cyber threats. 

We  aim  to  help  the  GCA  become  the  key  framework  for  creating  a  secure  and 

safe information society. 

STRATEGIC CONTEXT 

Bangladesh needs to build confidence and security in the use of ICTs because of 

the growing sophistication, frequency and gravity of cyber threats. Cyber threats 

are  a  concern  because  the  disruption  or  destruction  of  critical  information 

infrastructure  could  potentially  have  severe  economic,  social  and  national 

security impacts. 

Our  cyberspace  faces  a  range  of  threats.  Cyber  threats  range  from  espionage 

directed towards obtaining political intelligence to phishing to facilitate credit card 

fraud.  In  addition  to  Government  information,  espionage  now  targets  the 

intellectual  property  of  commercial  enterprises  in  areas  such  as  communication 

technologies,  optics,  electronics  and  genetics.  The  design  of  the  Internet 

infrastructure  facilitates  some  of  the  cyber  threats  due  to  its  borderless, 

anonymous and cross-border nature. Yet, the same insecure Internet serves as a 

basis for critical government and private sector services in Bangladesh. 

We  attach  great  value  to  the  protection  of  all  types  of  cyber  threats.  Indeed, 

cyberspace  is  swiftly  becoming  critical  to  the  control  of  cyber  threat  devices 

linked  to  the  energy  and  transportation  sectors  such  as  electronic  transformers 

and  pipeline  pumps.  New  smart  grid  technologies  deliver  intelligent  monitoring, 

control,  communication  and  self-healing  technologies.  However,  smart  meters 

are  susceptible  to  unauthorized  modification,  distributed  denial  of  service  and 

disruption  during  patching. We  are  also  concerned  about  an  increasing  number 

of  cyber  attacks.  For  example,  a  growing  number  of  cyber  attacks  aim  to  steal 

official government documents detailing negotiating positions. Disclosure of such 

details would seriously harm our national security and interests. 

9704 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

Worryingly,  cyber  espionage  and  other  cybercrimes  are very low  cost  activities. 

Attack  tools  and  methodologies  for  activities  such  as  phishing  or  malware 

distribution  are  freely  available  on  the  Internet  even  to  amateurs.  Besides, 

perpetrators  face  little  risk  of  conviction  due  to  incompatible  legal  frameworks 

and the lack of organizational structures to aid international cooperation, dialogue 

and coordination in dealing with cyber threats. Silent surveillance enables hostile 

nations  to  map  the  structure  and  defenses  around  key  government  and  private 

sector infrastructures, plant backdoors, create and test attacks. 

GOAL 

Working  collaboratively  home  and  abroad,  to  manage  all major  cyber  risks  that 

affect  us  directly  irrespective  of  their  origin  and  type,  thereby  creating  a  safe, 

secure  and  resilient  critical  national  information  infrastructure  for  our  economy 

and society. 

PURPOSE OF STRATEGY 

This Strategy recognizes the impact of cyber threats, risks and challenges to our 

national  values  and  interests.  The  Strategy  underlines  the  need  for  concerted 

effort  to  counter  these  fast  evolving  threats.  This  fully  integrated  approach 

leverages  the  resources  of  the  Government,  organizations  across  all  sectors, 

individual  private  citizens  and  international  partners  in  mitigating  threats  to  our 

cyberspace.  The  Strategy  defines  the  organizational  structures  required  to 

address this embryonic risk to our prosperity and national security. 

WAYS – PRIORITIES 

The  Strategy  is  the  basis  for  a  coordinated  national  and  globally  compatible 

approach to protecting our critical infrastructure against cyber threats. In line with 

the Global Cyber security Agenda (GCA) of ITU, our strategic Areas are: 

•  The  development  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  national  cybercrime  legislation 

that is regionally and globally applicable and harmonized 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9705 

 

•  The implementation of measures to reduce vulnerabilities in software products 

through the deployment of accreditation schemes, protocols and standards; 

•  The  definition  of  strategies  for  capacity  building  mechanisms  to  raise 

awareness, transfer know-how and boost cyber security on the national policy 

agenda; and 

•  The  development  of  a  unified  national  multi-stakeholder  strategy 

for 

international  cooperation,  dialogue  and  coordination  in  dealing  with  cyber 

threats. 

Cyber Security Priorities 

National Cyber security Strategy should have three national priorities: 

•  Legal Measures; 

•  Technical and Procedural Measures; and  

•  Organizational Structures  

The  first  priority  focuses  on  strategies  for  the  development  of  cybercrime 

legislation  that is  harmonized  and  applicable  globally. The  second  priority  deals 

with  organizational  structures  and  policies  on  cybercrime,  watch,  warning  and 

incident  response  as  well  as  the  creation  of  a  generic  and  universal  digital 

identity  system.  Priority  three  focuses  on  a  national  framework  of  security 

protocols, standards and software accreditation schemes. 

Priority 1: Legal Measures 

This Priority deals with the enactment of laws to deter and prosecute cybercrime. 

Inevitably,  the  actions  will  depend  on  national  conditions  and  local  needs.  The 

establishment  and  modernization  of  laws,  procedures,  and  policy  to  prevent, 

deter,  respond  to,  and  prosecute  cybercrime  is  an  integral  component  of  the 

National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  of  Bangladesh.  Since  cybersecurity  is  a  global 

challenge,  the  lack  of  harmonized  national  and  regional  cybercrime  legislation 

weakens  Bangladesh’s  internal  and  worldwide  ability  to  detect,  prosecute  and 

deter  cybercrime.  The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  identifies  the  actions 

below as necessary for creating suitable cybercrime legal measures: 

9706 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

Action 1: Cybercrime Legislation 

This  Action  involves  creation  of  laws  that  are  interoperable  and  applicable 

globally. 

Our  cybercrime  legislation  shall  be  harmonized  with  global  conventions. 

Therefore,  we  shall  align  our  cybercrime  legislation  with  the  ITU  Toolkit  for 

Cybercrime Legislation. The alignment of our cybercrime legislation with the ITU 

Toolkit 

for  Cybercrime  helps 

international  cooperation  and  addresses 

jurisdictional and evidentiary issues. 

Additionally, internationally  harmonized  legislation  strengthens  cybersecurity,  as 

it  helps  our  country  build  capacity  for  preventing,  deterring  and  prosecuting 

cybercrime. 

The  cybercrime  law  should  be  evaluated  by  all  ministries  and  legislative 

committees that might have an interest in it, even if they have nothing to do with 

criminal justice, so that no useful idea is missed. 

The cybercrime law should  similarly be evaluated by the local private sector, by 

any  local  affiliate  of  the  international  private  sector,  by  local  non-governmental 

organizations, by academics, by unaffiliated interested citizens, by willing foreign 

governments, and anyone else with a recognized interest. 

It is recommended that the text of National Cybercrime law be drafted to comply 

with the provisions of the Convention on Cybercrime (2001) 

Action 2: Government Legal Authority 

This  Action  aims  to  ensure  that  governments  have  sufficient  legal  authority  to 

secure cyberspace in public interest. 

•  To  create  cybersecurity  organization  structures 

including 

the  National 

Cybersecurity Council; 

•  Defines  the  legal  basis  for  creating  a  national  CIRT,  For  example,  the  Act 

defines  the  powers  to  shutdown  a  critical  infrastructure  if  at  risk  of  a  cyber 

attack; 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9707 

 

•  Provides the basis for promoting cybersecurity skills, training and awareness; 

•  Defines the legal and operational basis for an integrated and fully coordinated 

public private sector partnership on cybersecurity; 

•  Fosters innovation in cybersecurity to help develop long-term solutions; and 

•  Grants  the  government  authority  to  participate  in  international  cooperation, 

dialogue  and  coordination  activities focuses  on  cybersecurity  such  as  mutual 

assistance. 

Priority 2: Technical and Procedural Measures 

This  Priority  addresses  the  need  to  create  organizational  structures  at  national 

and  regional  levels  to  facilitate  communication,  information  exchange  and  the 

recognition  of  digital  credentials  across  jurisdictions.  The  structures  would  help 

create  a  generic  and  universal  digital  identity  system  and  the  necessary 

organizational  structures  to  recognize  digital  credentials  across  jurisdictions 

through the following actions:- 

Action 1: National Cybersecurity Framework 

This  Action  aims  to  create  a  Framework  that  defines  mandatory  security 

standards and offers guidance on issues such as risk  management, compliance 

and assurance. 

The  Bangladesh  National  Security  Framework  outlines  minimum-security 

measures  that  stakeholders  must  abide  by  to  claim  compliance  with  national 

cybersecurity  requirements.  The  Framework  contains  core  security  values  and 

minimum  standards  that  apply  to  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders.  Stakeholders 

select  the  applicable  standards  based  on  their  risk  profile  and  information 

protection needs. The stakeholders may use an internal audit or external auditor 

to  demonstrate  compliance  with  the  minimum-security  standards  to  a  central 

organization.  However,  the  Framework  does  not  provide  detailed  technical 

instructions on specific ICT systems. 

The National Cybersecurity Strategy identifies the following Policy Goals as vital 

components of the National Cybersecurity Framework: 

•  Governance and Risk Management 

9708 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

•  Information Security and Assurance  

•  Protective Marking and Asset Management  

•  Staff Vetting and Clearance  

•  Physical and Environmental Security  

Action 2: Secure Government Infrastructure 

This  Action  deals  with  spreading  awareness  of  relevant  risks,  preventive 

measures and effective responses to government Departments and Agencies. 

The  Government  of  Bangladesh  owns  and  operates  only  a  minority  of  critical 

information 

infrastructure.  However,  Bangladesh  attributes  considerable 

importance  to  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructure.  Therefore,  the 

Government  will  lead  the  cyberspace  security.  For  example,  the  Government’s 

procurement  process  will  mandate  the  inclusion  of  security  clauses  in  service 

contracts  to  encourage  development  of  secure  cyberspace  technologies.  The 

National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  identifies  the  following  actions  as  vital  for 

securing cyberspace: 

•  Create and enforce a staff vetting and clearance scheme; 

•  Create  and  enforce  a  formal  information  or  data  classification  for  sensitive 

data;   

•  Create  and  enforce  a  cybersecurity  risk  management  process  across 

government ministries and agencies; 

•  Define and enforce a robust government Authentication Framework; 

•  Improve security in government outsourcing and procurement through vetting 

of suppliers,  incorporation and enforcement of security clauses in contracts; 

•  Create a vulnerability management process for all government cyber systems;  

•  Secure government local area networks;  

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9709 

 

Action 3: Critical Information Infrastructure Protection 

This  Action focuses  on  defining  a  process  for  tracking  and  fixing vulnerabilities; 

improving attack attribution and prevention capabilities. 

Vulnerabilities are  weaknesses that allow a threat or  attack to break a  system’s 

confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  defenses.  Most  of  cyber  attacks  result 

from  poor 

technical  designs  or 

the  exploitation  of  known  but  unfixed 

vulnerabilities.  The  impact  of  the  exploitation  of  vulnerability  depends  on  the 

value  and  criticality  of  information.  Critical  information  infrastructures  inevitably 

store valuable information. 

The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  identifies  the  following  major  actions  and 

initiatives to reduce threats and related vulnerabilities in Bangladesh: 

•  Create a process for national vulnerability assessments to help understand the 

potential consequences of threats and vulnerabilities; 

•  Designate important systems as critical information infrastructure and enforce 

an accreditation regime around them. For example, no system will connect to 

critical infrastructure without a penetration test and other assurance activities; 

•  Enhance  law  enforcement  capabilities  in  the  investigation,  prevention  and 

prosecution of cybercrimes; 

•  Require the use of evaluated software products; 

•  Prioritize national cybersecurity research and development activities; 

•  Assess and secure emerging systems; and   

•  Participate in international efforts to improve the security of Internet protocols 

and routing  technologies. 

Priority 3: Organisational Structures 

This Priority Area requires the building of organizational structures and strategies 

to help prevent, detect and respond to attacks against critical infrastructure. The 

National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  identifies  the  actions  below  as  essential  for 

creating  appropriate  national  and  regional  organizational  structures  and  policies 

on cybercrime: 

9710 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

Action 1: Government’s Cybersecurity Role 

Cybersecurity  is  everyone’s  responsibility  because  countermeasures  only  work 

well  if  all  relevant  stakeholders  play  their  part.  The  stakeholders  include 

government,  business,  infrastructure  owners  and  users.  Collaboration  is  vital 

because neither government nor the private sector can independently control and 

protect information infrastructure. 

The  Government  of  Bangladesh  has  overall  responsibility  for  securing  the 

infrastructure in public interest. To improve cybersecurity in Bangladesh, it is vital 

that  the  Government  puts  in  place  appropriate  national  structures  to  protect  its 

own  infrastructure  and  all  assets  required  to  deliver  essential  services  to  the 

public.  The  national,  regional  and  globally  compatible  organizational  structures 

aim  to  protect  classified  data  and  networks  against  cyber  attacks.  The 

Government  is  also  responsible  for  communicating  national  priorities  to  the 

private  sector  to  help  ensure  that  critical  infrastructure  under  private  sector  in 

areas  such  as  banking,  transport  and  telecommunications  receives  sufficient 

protection. 

To  address  the  cybersecurity  challenge,  the  Government  of  Bangladesh  may 

appoint a senior aide as the National Cybersecurity Coordinator. 

The official has the responsibility to establish a cross-government programme to 

address  the  priority  areas  of  this  Strategy.  The  official  provides  strategic 

leadership  and  ensures  the  coherence  of  cybersecurity  activities  across 

government. The role cuts across government agencies and the official reports to 

the  National  Cybersecurity  Council,  as  and  when  formed.  The  Coordinator  has 

direct access to the Head of Government as well as sufficient staff and financial 

resources to coordinate inter-gvernment activities at a strategic level. 

Action 2: National Cybersecurity Council 

The  National  Cybersecurity  Council  is  the  focal  point  for  coordinating  efforts  to 

protect our cyberspace. This multi-Council body unites operational cybersecurity 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9711 

 

efforts  of  government  institutions  and  leads  collaboration  with  industry.  Public-

private  partnership  coordination  is  critical  to  protecting  our  critical  infrastructure 

because  it  enhances  information  sharing  and  cooperation  on  cyber  threat 

identification,  incident  response  and  recovery.  The  Cybersecurity  Strategy 

mandates the Council to perform the roles below: 

•  Developing  a  comprehensive  national  plan 

for  securing  critical 

infrastructure and services whether in government or private sector; 

•  Providing  national  major  incident  response  capacity  in  an  event  of 

significant attacks on critical infrastructure; 

•  Providing  government  and  private  sector  organizations  strategic  advice 

and processes for managing cybersecurity Programmes; 

•  Providing  integrated  security  advice  (combining  information,  personnel 

and  physical)  to  the  government  agencies  and  businesses  owning  or 

operating  critical  information  infrastructure  to  reduce  its  vulnerability  to 

cyber and other threats; 

•  Acting as the National Technical Authority for Information Assurance for 

private  sector  organizations  and  government  agencies  in  all  aspects  of 

cybersecurity; 

•  Working with other government agencies including intelligence agencies 

to review threat and vulnerability information and distribute advice on the 

countermeasures  to  regional  and  local  governmental  organizations, 

private sector, academia and the general public; 

•  Engage  in  international  schemes  such  as  the  International  Multilateral 

Partnership  Against  Cyber  Threats  (IMPACT)  for  alerts,  early  warning 

and cooperation; 

•  Perform  and  fund  research  and  development  with  other  agencies  to 

create a new generation of secure cyber technologies. An annual review 

assesses the effectiveness of the Council’s cybersecurity activities. 

9712 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

Action 3: National Incident Management Capacity 

Timely  identification,  communication  and  recovery  from  major  cybersecurity 

events  and  weaknesses  affecting  critical  information  infrastructure  can  often 

mitigate  the  damage  resulting  from  malicious  cyberspace  activity.  Best  practice 

indicates  that  these  efforts  are  most  effective  at  national  level  because  they 

provide  wider  participation 

in  analysis,  warning, 

information  gathering, 

vulnerability reduction, mitigation and recovery. Inevitably, the government needs 

to work with the private sector to coordinate a national response because private 

firms own the infrastructure and often have better skills. The government creates 

legal  and  regulatory  incentives  to  encourage  critical  infrastructure  owners  and 

operators  to  ensure  that  their  systems  are  resilient  to  attacks.  This  Strategy 

identifies the following actions regarding cyber incident response: 

•  Build  Bangladesh  Computer  Incident  Response  Team  (BD-CIRT)  at  the 

National Cybersecurity Council; 

•  Establish  a  public-private  framework  for  responding  to  major  cyber 

incidents; 

•  Encourage  development  of  business  continuity  and  disaster  recovery 

capacity; 

•  Develop  strategic  and  tactical  cyber  attack  and  vulnerability  assessment 

capacity; 

•  Encourage  the  development  of  private  sector  capacity  to  share  status 

information about the health of cyberspace; 

•  Coordinate  processes  for  voluntary  participation  in  the  development  of 

national public-private continuity and contingency plans; 

•  Create a Cyber Warning and Information Network at Cybersecurity Council; 

and 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9713 

 

•  Develop mechanism  to  share  information  about  cyber  attacks,  threats  and 

vulnerabilities  with  the  public  and  non-governmental  bodies  locally  and 

globally; 

•  Where  possible,  it  is  advisable  for  units  to  have  at  least  basic  computer 

forensic  capacity.  Such  capacity  will  require  software  tools  and  additional 
training. 

Action 4: Public-Private Partnerships 

The commercial sector owns and operates most of the critical infrastructure that 

Bangladesh  relies  on  home  and  abroad.  Clearly,  the  Government  alone  cannot 

secure cyberspace since it does not own or operate the infrastructure. Therefore, 

the  Government  of  Bangladesh  should  form  meaningful  partnership  with  the 

private sector on cybersecurity. The National Cybersecurity Strategy requires the 

Government  of  Bangladesh  and  its  agents  to  consult  the  private  sector  in  the 

development,  implementation  and  maintenance  of  regulation,  cybersecurity 

initiatives and policies. Cooperative relationships  with the private sector are vital 

because they: 

•  Facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  on  the  development  of  new  legislation 

and regulation between stakeholders; 

•  Enable  collaborative  work  and  sharing  of  training  courses  that  could  help 

alleviate the severe shortage of skilled cyber security professionals; and 

•  Enable  real 

time  exchange  of 

information  about  cyber 

threats  and 

vulnerabilities 

The  communication  channel  is  valuable  for  the  BD-CIRT  as  the  exchange 

complements the stretched national incident detection and warning resources. 

With  private  sector  input,  the  Government  shall  also  develop  a  coordinated 

national  strategy  for  participating  in  major  international  discussions  that  shape 

policy in areas such as territorial jurisdiction, sovereign responsibility and the use 

of cyberspace for war. Additionally, the Cybersecurity Coordinator or an  equally 

empowered party works with government departments and agencies, the private 

sector  and  academia  to  formulate  and  coordinate  Bangladesh’s  international 

cybersecurity positions. Thereafter, the ministries of Foreign Affairs should  work 
on improving international cooperation. 

9714 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

Action 5: Cyber security Skills and Training 

The  Action focuses  on  the  creation  of  programmes  to  increase  the  capability  of 

cybersecurity professionals in Managerial, Technical and Information Assurance 

areas. 

This  Action  requires  the initiation  of  a  programme  to train  a  cadre  of  citizens  to 

secure information flows. This Action focuses on the training of professionals, not 

creating  general  awareness.  This  Cybersecurity  Strategy  identifies  the following 

major activities: 

•  Adopt a national Cybersecurity Skills Framework; 

•  Create a continuum of cybersecurity job descriptions;  

•  Identify commercially available cybersecurity certifications;  

•  Deliver  or  manage  commercial  delivery  of 

training  or  certification 

examinations;  

•  Periodically measure Cybersecurity skills and training levels; 

•  Invest in mainstream cybersecurity education and research;  

•  Build cybersecurity capacity of national companies; and  

•  Work  with  global  partners  such  as  IMPACT  to  coordinate  cybersecurity 

training;  

It  is  important  that  prosecutors  and  judges  have  some  understanding  of  areas 

such  as  computers,  software,  and  networks  as  well  as  of  the  increasing 

importance  of  electronic  evidence.  Similarly,  legislators  should  have  some 

understanding  of  those  topics  and  of  whether  a  country’s  laws  are  adequate  to 

address  cybercrime.  It  may  also  be  helpful  to  train  senior  policy-makers, 

government officials, about the threats to electronic networks (for example, how 

the national banking system could be attacked) and about the threats  posed by 

electronic  networks  (for  example,  the  use  of  the  Internet  to  locate  vulnerable 

children for sexual trafficking). 

 

evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 11, 2014 

9715 

 

Action 6: National Culture of Cybersecurity 

The Action focuses on the need to raise awareness about cyber threats and the 
role all relevant stakeholders must play to secure their part of cyberspace. Many 
cyber threats materialize due to insecure user activities. The users could be end 
users or system administrators. A lack of awareness coupled with a general lack 
of  skilled  cybersecurity  professionals  increases  the  likelihood  that  attackers 
would  trick  users  into  performing  insecure  activities.  On  the  contrary,  user 
awareness helps create a cybersecurity culture that in turn reduces the likelihood 
and impact of cyber attacks. This Cybersecurity Strategy identifies the following 
major activities: 

•  Promotion of a national awareness programme to empower end users – at 
home  or  general  workforce  –  to  secure  their  own  cyberspace-linked 
systems; 

•  Implementation  of  a  cybersecurity  awareness  programme  for  government 

systems that contain classified data; 

•  Encouraging cybersecurity culture development in business enterprises; 

•  Adding  cybersecurity  awareness  to  the  national  education  curriculum  as  a 

way of spreading knowledge to pupils and their relatives;  

• Engaging civil society in outreach to children and individual users; 

•  Promotion  of  private-sector  support 

for  professional  cybersecurity 

certifications; 

Nations  are  increasingly  dependent  on  complex  systems  and  information 
technology. In many  cases,  information  and  communications  technologies  (ICT) 
vital to national and economic security are subject to disruption from a number of 
causes,  either  originating  from  within  or  outside  the  nation.  Leaders  in 
government  and  private  industry  are  increasingly  confronted  with  uncertainty 
about  cyber  risk  and  vulnerabilities.  This  uncertainty  stems  from  the  complexity 
and interconnectivity of evolving technology used to support critical systems. To 
ensure  security  and  economic  vitality,  nations  must  manage  cyber  security  in 
accordance with their own economic, social, and political considerations. 

†gvt bRiæj Bmjvg (DcmwPe), DccwiPvjK, evsjv‡`k miKvwi gy`ªYvjq, †ZRMuvI, XvKv KZ…©K gyw`ªZ| 

 kvn&-B-Avjg cv‡Uvqvix, fvicÖvß DccwiPvjK, evsjv‡`k dig I cÖKvkbv Awdm, 

 †ZRMuvI, XvKv KZ…©K cÖKvwkZ| web site: www.bgpress.gov.bd 

