www.ciberseguridad.gob.cl

The National Cybersecurity Policy is under a Creative 

Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Internacional.

Available in https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/

2

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

Table of contents

 

  1. 

Preliminary words  

  2. 

Introduction 

  3.  Why there is need for a national cybersecurity policy? 

  4. 

Current status of cybersecurity: regulations, institutions, risk overview  

  5. 

Policy roadmap 

  6. 

Policy objectives by 2022 

  7. 

Roles and institutional structure required to develop a national cybersecurity policy 

  8. 

Public policy measures 2017-2018 

  9. 

Annexes  

 

 

 

 

Annex Nº 1: Standards and institutions involved in cybersecurity in Chile 

Annex Nº 2: Risk and threat overview 

 5

 11

12

13

14

16

24

25

29

29

35

3

4

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

A Cyber-Security Policy for Chile

I

nformation  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs) 
are  a  set  of  tools  like  no  other  in  history,  that  has 
helped  people,  and  has  improved  organizational 
interaction, economic operations and both private and 
public communications.

Their  impact  has  been  deep  and  broad  in  our  society, 
and their reach extends day by day. People’s access to 
the  Internet  has  grown  a  45.3%  in  the  last  two  years, 
from a 52.2% by 2014 to 73.8% by March of 2016. Our 
national digital economy has grown around 11% in the 
same period, from 34 billion dollars in 2014 to 39 billion 
dollars in 2015.

This  impact  has  transformed  also  the  way  our  people 
use and understand technology.

The ICTs have had a social effect with no precedents in history, allowing our citizens to get informed, 
to organize themselves, and to participate from social life. Particularly, our children and adolescents 
make intensive use of social networks.

A transformation of this magnitude brings forth important challenges for our State, as it is imperative 
that all of this technology and its potential is used mainly to serve our people. We need to democra-
tize the usage of the Internet, and to transform it into a tool for inclusion, efficiency and certainty, by 
ensuring the security and privacy of all those who use it everyday.

Chile  must  stay  up-to-date  in  security  matters,  as  any  mistake,  or  any  successful  breach  to  our 
systems, may harm our people’s welfare or our rights, it may negatively affect our interests, or it may 
hinder or even impede the operation of critical services for the country.

Listening to this demand, my government program included the development of a Digital Security 
Strategy, in order to protect both private and public interests in the digital realm.

This commitment was confirmed in November 2015, when we presented the Digital Agenda 2020, 
wherein it was announced the creation of a digital security strategy which, finally, is being released 
today through this document.

This first policy was designed from an intense dialog between private and public parties. For months 
we listened to public services representatives, professional and labor guilds, researchers and experts 
from within and abroad. When the Interministerial Committee wrote the first draft of this policy, it 
was subject to a public hearing as mandated by Law 20.500 about public participation. Numerous 
contributions were received which, no doubt about it, helped to improve it. 

The national policy sets concrete goals and commitments for the overarching purpose of promoting 
and  ensuring  a  free,  open,  safe  and  resilient  cyberspace.  A  space  that  we  expect  it  may  allow  our 
fellow citizens to reach their maximum potential. As it also happens with the
Digital Agenda, and the Productivity, Innovation and Growth Agenda, we expect this new policy to 
allow us to reduce the access gap, to increase awareness about safe use of ICTs, and to ensure the 
sustained technological leadership our country has in the region.

Michelle Bachelet Jeria

President of Chile

5

6

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

interact has brought about a revolution that has left 

ICT penetration in every area in which we develop and 

no  one  indifferent.  Today  we  can  hardly  think  of  life 

without computer networks and that includes, of course, 

our social relations.

In  the  public  sector,  the  State  increasingly  transmits 

information and interacts with citizens via the Internet, 

thus  promoting  the  digital  government  and  fulfilling 

its  commitments  of  timely  delivery  of  services  and 

transparency.  Along  with  the  latter  and  in  order  to 

facilitate  internet  access  to  its  citizens,  the  State  has 

created  programs  that  enable  free  internet  access 

through the program WiFi ChileGob, a project that helps improve access in remote locations through 

Chile. In addition, the government is promoting the initiative “I choose my PC”, which seeks to increase 

equality and to bridge the digital divide by favoring vulnerable seventh grade children. This program 

has benefited more than 350,000 students. Since it was launched seven years ago.

In  this  context,  where  Internet  access  and  the  use  and  dependence  on  ICT  increases  significantly, 

the  criminological  phenomenon  associated  with  cyber  crime  and  cyber  attacks  has  worsened.  For 

example,  the  State  Information  Network  recorded  an  increase  of  more  than  one  hundred  million 

attacks, between 2014 and 2015, rising the 2016 to values exponentially higher by DDoS attacks.

In light of this reality, both the government of President Michelle Bachelet and the Digital Agenda 

2020 in particular consider the development of a digital security strategy that promotes protection 

of private users. Therefore, the government has worked since April 2015 through an Inter-Ministerial 

Committee on Cybersecurity, on the development of Chile’s first National Cybersecurity Policy, which 

has been fine tuned after a successful Citizen Consultation process carried out between February and 

March 2016.

While  the  National  Cybersecurity  Policy  addresses  with  particular  interest  the  prosecution  and 

punishment of cybercrime, it goes far beyond the punitive area, for a fundamental variable to reduce 

the risks associated with cyberspace and take advantage of its potential is awareness, training in and 

dissemination  of  cybersecurity  among  society.  Likewise,  exploiting  the  competitive  advantages  of 

our country in terms of internet access, digital market maturity and quality professionals, the Policy 

seeks to promote industrial and productive development in cybersecurity.

Thus,  I  am  convinced  that  the  implementation  of  the  measures  contained  in  the  cybersecurity 

policy  as  well  as  the  State  guidelines  that  it  considers  will  contribute  to  further  development  of  

interagency cooperation and public-private partnership, which will enhance the value of free, open 

and safe cyberspace as a way to achieve greater economic development of our country and greater 

welfare for all Chilean people.

Mahmud Aleuy Peña y Lillo

Undersecretary of the Interior

Chairman of the Interministerial Committee on Cybersecurity

7

8

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

It  has  been  a  long  time  since  cyberspace  ceased  to 

areas of social interaction. Without going any further, 

be part of science fiction to become one of the main 

Chile  has  the  highest  rate  of  Internet  penetration  in 

Latin  America,  with  more  than  70%  of  its  population 

connected.

This  has  allowed  its  people  to  use  digital  technologies 

intensively to communicate with one other, express their 

ideas,  share  their  causes  or  strengthen  personal  ties 

through social media, to carry out multiple transactions 

online and to take advantage of e-commerce facilities. 

However,  this  intensive  use  also  increases  our  levels  of 

dependence  on  the  internet  and  the  infrastructure  that  supports  it,  exposing  us  to  new  risks  and 

threats.

Therefore, one of the challenges undertaken by the Government has been to improve the standards of 

digital security of our country, in order to protect people and the exercise of fundamental rights such 

as privacy, freedom of expression and access to information, among others.

This policy is the first concrete result of this challenge, a result that is the fruit of collective work that 

we assumed in the Interministerial Committee on Cybersecurity, made up by the Undersecretariats 

of Interior, Foreign Affairs, Defense, Finance, General Secretariat of the Presidency, Economy, Justice, 

Telecommunications  and  the  National  Intelligence  Agency.  The  Committee  met  throughout  2015, 

holding  multiple  public  hearings  where  it  welcomed  representatives  from  trade  associations, 

companies, civil society, academics and national and international cybersecurity experts.

This policy was subject to an extensive public consultation process, through which fifty observations, 

comments  and  criticisms  were  received  which  certainly  enriched  the  document  that  you  have  at 

hand.

The policy outlines five strategic long-term goals, aimed at addressing the challenges that our country 

faces in cyberspace, incorporating not only the scope of action of the State but also considering the 

role of the private sector, the civil society and the academia in this important task.

The policy reflects a central tenet: security and freedom are complementary. Combating cybercrime 

and  other  threats  on  the  Internet  cannot  become  an  excuse  to  trample  human  rights  such  as 

privacy and freedom of expression on the contrary, they are means to fully guarantee these rights in 

cyberspace.

Now we face the great challenge of implementing the policy and monitoring its effectiveness, for 

which  it  is  essential  to  have  the  cooperation  of  all  stakeholders,  so  that  our  country  can  further 

progress in building an open, free and safe cyberspace for all.

 

Marcos Robledo Hoecker

Undersecretary of Defense

Executive Secretary Interministerial Committee on Cybersecurity

9

10

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

2 Introduction

The  massive  use  of  information  and  telecommunication  technologies  (ICT),  while  contributing  to 

the country’s development, also entails risks that may affect people’s rights, public security, critical 

infrastructure, digital government, and Chile’s essential interests and foreign policy. 

These  risks  may  arise  from  multiple  sources  and  be  translated  into  a  series  of  activities  including 

espionage,  sabotage,  fraud  or  cyber  attacks  carried  out  by,  inter alia,  other  countries,  organised 

groups or individuals.

There is important progress at an international level in the management of ICT-related risks. By 2015, 
over  40  countries  had  developed  a  cybersecurity1  strategy  or  policy  –some  of  which  are  already 

working on their second or third version. Note has also been taken of the important evolution in terms 

of  doctrine,  techniques  and  regulations  within  the  most  diverse  organisations  and  international 

forums. 

At  a  national  level,  the  challenge  lies  on  developing  a  policy  driving  the  country’s  actions  in 

cybersecurity matters, together with implementing and adopting the measures required to protect 

user  security  in  the  cyberspace,  by  taking  into  account  educational  strategies  focused  on  self-

care  and  prevention  in  the  digital  environment,  and  complying  with  President  Michelle  Bachelet’s 

programme  of  government  –which  proposes  “to  develop  a  digital  security  strategy  protecting 
private and public users”2. 

This  document  contains  the  political  guidelines  developed  by  the  Chilean  State  in  the  field  of 

cybersecurity, with a view to 20223, and aimed at having a free, open, safe and resilient cyberspace. 

1 
 
 
 

2 

3 

Further information in the following websites: 
https://ccdcoe.org/strategies-policies.html
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/national-cyber-security-strategies/ncss-map/
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Pages/National-Strategies.aspx

President Michelle Bachelet’s Government Programme, Page 57.

As explained in section V, “Roadmap”, this policy contains long-term guidelines aimed at this and the coming government, and a series 
of short-term measures to be planned and executed by each relevant administration. 

11

3 Why there is need for a national 

cybersecurity policy?

A. 

To protect people’s security in the cyberspace

People  are  to  be  ensured  a  security  level  allowing  them  to  carry  out  their  normal  personal,  social 

and community activities in the cyberspace, such as well as to exercise their fundamental rights as 

freedom of speech, access to information, protection of the private life and personal property.

B. 

To protect the country’s security

There is need to promote the safety of information networks and systems belonging to the public and 

private sector, especially the ones that are essential for the proper running of the country, ensuring 

there is continuity of basic services.

C. 

To promote cooperation and coordination between institutions

There is need to improve communication, coordination and cooperation actions between institutions, 

organisations and companies, both in the public and private sectors, at a national and international 

level, with the purpose of strengthening trust and provide a single answer to cyberspace risks.

D. 

To manage risks in the cyberspace

There is need to take into account the development of analysis and management processes for the 

use,  processing,  storage  and  transmission  of  information,  as  well  as  the  building  of  capacities  to 

prevent  and  recover  from  cybersecurity  incidents  that  may  arise,  in  order  to  achieve  a  stable  and 

resilient cyberspace.

12

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

4 Current status of cybersecurity: 

regulations, institutions, risk 
overview

A.  Regulations and institutions

The  current  institutional  structure  in  the  field  of  cybersecurity  is  based  on  different  bodies  and 

entities.  This  requires  the  strategic  coordination  of  different  efforts,  and  their  roles  and  duties,  as 

well as the establishment of common practices and technical criteria, with the purpose of improving 
efficiency and effectiveness in the field of cybersecurity4. 

The  country  has  in  place  a  set  of  legal  and  statutory  regulations  that  relate  directly  or  indirectly 

with the challenges of cybersecurity –which should be reviewed and updated in accordance with the 

guidelines set out in this policy and with Chile’s international commitments, for example, Law No. 

19,223 about cybercrime or Law No. 19,628 about the protection of private life, among other rights. 

B.  Risk overview

Because of the global reach of cyberspace, risks and threats may come from Chile and abroad, due 

both to natural and criminal activities, such as, for example, espionage and to surveillance actions 

carried  out  with  different  purposes,  thus  affecting  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of 
information assets in the cyberspace and, therefore, people’s rights5.

At a global level, there is plenty of evidence about cyber attacks and online espionage. The large-

scale interference with telecommunication networks, the outage of Internet services and espionage 

carried  out  against  governments  and  companies,  as  well  as  attacks  against  critical  infrastructure 

such as basic services, financial institutions and government entities have been openly covered in 

the global news.

Regionally, the countries affected with the highest number of cyber attacks in 2013 in Latin America 

were Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Mexico and Chile. Accessing or stealing information from infected 
computers or devices were a feature in the region6. 

Likewise, cybercrimes perpetrated in Chile are a confirmation of their cross-border nature, especially 

such  crimes  associated  with  the  fraudulent  use  of  credit  and  debit  cards  and  cyber  frauds  among 

others.

The policy takes into consideration this type of threats, especially the ones affecting the country’s 

critical infrastructure. 

4 

5 

6 

See Annex No.1 with a detail of the regulations and institutional structure currently existing in the field of cybersecurity.

See Annex No.2 containing information about the risks of cyberspace.

Prandini, P. & Maggiore, M. 2013. Ciberdelito en América Latina y El Caribe. Una visión desde la sociedad civil (Cybercrime in Latin 
America and the Caribbeann. A view from the civil society). Proyecto Amparo, Sección de Estudios. LACNIC Registro de Direcciones de 
Internet para América Latina y Caribe. pp. 3.

13

5 Policy roadmap

This cybersecurity policy is composed of two core elements: a State policy containing objectives by 

2022, and an agenda with specific measures to be implemented between 2017 and 2018.

The  objective  of  this  structure  is  proposing  a  general  overview  as  to  the  direction  the  country 

should take in the medium and long term, with the development of a set of measures that may be 

implemented and evaluated during this Government’s administration, thus leaving to the following 

administration the task of reviewing the policy and proposing an agenda that may be executed by the 

next administration.

A.  Policy objectives for 2022 

This policy sets out high level long-term objectives that allow driving the country’s efforts to pursue 

such goals, serving at the same time as a guide to prioritise and rationalise the measures contained 

in this document.

Additionally,  the  policy  includes  a  series  of  minimum  essential  roles  and  the  corresponding 

institutional design that shall govern the same both in the short term and in the medium and long 

term (2017-2022).

B. 

Timetable of measures 2017-2022 and evaluation

Upon development of the policy objectives, a timetable is proposed for implementation in the 2017-

2018 two-year period that will enable a joint effort from the Government and the private sector in 

the field of cybersecurity –focused on the adoption of prioritised measures and the preparation of a 

series of feedback that review and extend the policy’s scope by the end of 2017.

C. 

Integrated supplementary policies in the digital field

This cybersecurity policy is an integral part of a set of policies implemented by the Government or at 

a development stage in the digital field with the purpose of having clear and systematic definitions 

about cyberspace. 

 The Digital Agenda for 2020

The  Digital  Agenda  for  20207  is  a  roadmap  designed  to  guide  the  country’s  digital  development 

through the definition of medium term objectives, lines of action and concrete measures. Launched 

in  the  second  semester  of  2015,  this  Agenda  proposes  that  the  widespread  use  of  technologies 

becomes a means to reduce existing inequalities, with the opening of more and better opportunities 

for development and contributes to the respect of the rights of all Chilean women and men.

The  Agenda  includes  a  specific  measure  (No.  25)  focusing  on  the  development  of  a  cybersecurity 

strategy which will be executed through this policy. Likewise, this policy is enhanced and supplemented 

by  a  series  of  measures  contained  in  the  Agenda,  such  as  the  support  introduced  in  the  new  Law 

7 

Available in: http://www.agendadigital.gob.cl/

14

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

for the Protection of Personal Data, the safeguarding of Internet consumers, the development of a 

National  Telecommunications  Infrastructure  Plan,  and  the  upgrading  of  regulations  governing  the 

electronic signature, among measures.

  National cyber defence policy

Because  the  National  Defence’s  networks  and  information  systems  are  a  critical  infrastructure  for 

external security and the exercise of the country’s sovereignty, and by virtue of the constitutional 

and legal rights vested on the National Defence, during 2017 the Ministry of Defence will prepare 

and publish a set of cyber defence specific policies containing specific political definitions about how 

these networks will be protected and how the National Defence’s capabilities may cooperate in the 

development of a free, open, safe and resilient space for the country.

  International cyberspace policy

One of the high level objectives of this policy relates with the international relations and cooperation 

about cybersecurity in the global context. However, it is essential for the country to incorporate these 

and other objectives, such as the development of human rights, defence, and other related objectives 

in order to consolidate and integrate the same into Chile’s foreign policy.

With that in mind, this policy includes a specific measure related with the creation of a strategy in 

this field by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs which, in turn, is consistent with and executes measure 

No.11 of the Digital Agenda 2020 aimed at generating a country’s widespread view about Internet 

governance.

15

6 Policy objectives by 2022

A. 

The country will have in place a robust and resilient information 
infrastructure, prepared to face and recover from cybersecurity incidents, 
under a risk management approach

  1.  Concept. Risk identification and management

Cybersecurity is described as a condition presenting the least risk for cyberspace –understood as a 

set of physical and logical infrastructure, and the human interactions taking place in the same. Within 

this  set,  the  main  feature  to  be  protected  is  information  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability 

which, in turn, create a robust and resilient cyberspace.

This  framework  does  not  include  the  increased  capability  of  state  or  private  surveillance  actions 

by  using  digital  technologies,  which  relate  with  public  order  or  national  security  objectives  and 

are  discussed  in  other  instruments  having  a  different  focus.  Surveillance  actions  proposed  in  this 

instrument will only be aimed at managing the risks of information in the cyberspace. 

Prevention and management models for cyberspace will be created from the Policy, including physical 

risks that may affect the same, regularly updated by a continuous improvement model, which shall be 

the basis for technical measures to be adopted in order to prevent, manage and overcome actual risks, 

with an emphasis on service resilience and continuity within a set deadline and focus on maximising 

the country’s cybersecurity levels. 

  2.  Protection of the information infrastructure

Information  infrastructure  is  composed  of  people,  processes,  procedures,  tools,  installations  and 

technologies supporting the creation, use, transport, storage and destruction of information. 

There  is  an  especially  relevant  group,  within  information  structure,  for  a  country  to  keep  moving 

forward,  called  critical  information  infrastructure  (CII),  which  includes  the  installation,  networks, 

services  and  physical  and  information  technology  equipment  whose  impairment,  degradation, 

rejection,  interruption  or  destruction  may  have  an  important  impact  on  the  security,  health  and 

wellbeing of people and on the effective operation of the State and the private sector. 

Special  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  impact  that  an  information  security  incident  may  have  on 

physical infrastructures controlled or monitored from the cyberspace, and on the security of industrial 

surveillance sensors and devices enabling such actions. 

CIIs shall the designed with an architecture maximising their robustness and resilience against events 

that may render them non-operational, and enabling them to adapt to natural phenomena, human 

interventions and information interferences such as non-voluntary incidents or cyber attacks.

  3. 

Identification and prioritisation of critical information infrastructure

Sectors  included  in  the  definition  of  CII  are  very  similar  and  recurrent  in  various  international 

classifications.  In  Chile,  while  consideration  of  a  specific  policy  for  critical  infrastructure  is  under 

consideration,  information  infrastructure  in  the  following  sectors  will  be  considered  as  critical: 

16

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

energy,  telecommunications,  water,  health,  financial  services,  public  security,  transport,  the 

civil service, civil protection and defence.

The policy contains a full set of areas, roles and responsible State entities used to identify and specify 
the critical level of each sector. 

Technical  bodies  in  charge  of  executing  measures  derived  from  this  policy  shall  include  special 
cybersecurity standards for CIIs depending on the different levels of development, especially with 
regard to special processes.

The medium term will see the implementation of measures ensuring service continuity through the 
redundancy of the physical infrastructure of some CII, especially in the fields of telecommunications, 
civil service, civil protection and defence.

  4.  Equipment available to respond to cybersecurity incidents

According  to  best  practices  worldwide,  it  is  essential  to  have  available  prevention,  monitoring, 
management and response structures to face computer-related security incidents at a national level.

The basic body in this structure is the Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) or teams 
in charge of responding to computer security incidents. Chile needs today the human and financial 
resources,  a  clear  institutional  framework  and  a  mechanism  to  operate  in  coordination  so  as  to 
promote the creation and operation of the same at different levels of the national life.

Chile  will  have  a  national  CSIRT  in  place  to  collect  and  structure  information  received  from  other 
(national  and  international)  CSIRTs,  promoting  action  coordination  between  CSIRTs  in  each  sector, 
with the required authority to coordinate the technical response in the case of incidents endangering 
the country’s security.

The Government’s current CSIRT will be strengthened, with a specific CSIRT to be created in the area 
of the National Defence. Likewise, the need is also in place to evaluate the relevance of creating a 
CSIRT for critical infrastructure. 

The  creation  of  CSIRTs  by  sector  will  be  supported  by  different  public,  private,  academic  and  civil 
society stakeholders.

  5. 

Implementation of standardised mechanisms for reporting, managing 
and recovering from incidents

There will be centralised and standardised mechanisms for reporting cybersecurity incidents enabling 
the widespread and real time overview of incidents generated in the country. 

These mechanisms will be compulsory for the central Government and certain regulated sectors, and 
voluntary, in principle, for any stakeholders that may want to join them. The amount of information 
required will be restrictedly limited to what is needed to describe and manage the type of threat, 
especially avoiding the collection and processing of data affecting people’s private lives. 

For such purpose, the National CSIRT will keep a secure and confidential platform able to cooperate 
in case of cybersecurity incidents and gather the relevant information, and will create a network in 
conjunction with public and private bodies.

17

At the same time, both public bodies and CII will have institutional bodies responsible for information 
security,  together  management  and  recovery  plans  in  place  for  addressing  incidents,  with  special 
emphasis on business continuity and on minimising any damages caused by actual incidents.

In addition to the foregoing, the preparation of computer vulnerability reports by users and experts 
will be promoted through the adoption of guidelines for responsible information delivery, models to 
reward the detection of security problems, and other mechanisms promoting responsible disclosure.

  6.  Differentiated standards are required in the field of cybersecurity

Any information infrastructure governed by or providing goods and services to the Chilean Government, 
or services to the people, shall comply with a basic set of standards covering confidentiality, integrity 
and availability of the information and the systems operating the same, according to the risks and 
threats faced by them and in consistency with their size, maturity, critical state and confidentiality 
level of information and/or processes supported by them.

With regard to critical information infrastructure, any risk shall be properly evaluated and addressed 
pursuant  to  standards  including  CII’s  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability,  aimed  at  having  an 
effective and comprehensive security system in place that allows the prevention, management and 
recovery  from  cyber  attacks  and  other  information  security  incidents,  together  with  contingency 
plans for ensuring business continuity of their services.

Standards  and  best  practices  used  shall  be  compatible  with  international  efforts  ensuring  the 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  information,  without  setting  out  specific  solutions  –
except for qualified cases.

B. 

The State will protect people’s rights in cyberspace

  1.  Crime prevention and trust building in cyberspace

Crime prevention, dissuasion, control and punishment are critical to minimise risks and threats in 
cyberspace, thus contributing to trust building in connection with the activities carried out within 
the same.

There are multiple criminal activities carried out in cyberspace such as stealing strategic information, 
interrupting online service systems, information hijacking (ransomware), phishing, pharming and the 
fraudulent use of credit or debit cards, among other illicit activities.

At  a  global  level,  there  is  information  about  cyber  attacks  consisting  in  espionage  activities  and 
distributed  denial  of  service  (DDoS)  attacks  through  the  Internet,  the  large-scale  intercepting  of 
telecommunication networks against critical infrastructure such as, inter alia, banks, basic services 
and Government entities. This policy is aimed at minimising risks associated to these threats. 

In  addition  to  public  policies  developed  to  prevent  and  punish  the  above-mentioned  crimes,  it  is 
also  possible  to  build  trust  in  cyberspace  by  employing  the  same  technologies.  The  adoption  of 
technical solutions allowing to increase user security in cyberspace, especially in the case of solutions 
cooperating  with  identity  management  in  this  environment,  such  as  the  mass  adoption  of  digital 
certificates (digital signature) in websites, and by people and organisations will be promoted as a way 
to safeguard user communication and identity.

This policy also recognises the value placed on encryption technology, thus allowing the provision 

of  the  most  unprecedented  levels  of  information  confidentiality  and  integrity  levels  in  history. 

18

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

Measures  based  on  this  policy  shall  promote  encryption  adoption  for  online  users  according  to 

international standards, and under no circumstances the intentional use of unsafe technologies shall 

be promoted, or there will be and obligation by any person or organisation to provide digital services 

to  implement  ‘back  door’  mechanisms  compromising  or  increasing  any  risks  associated  with  the 

security technologies used.

  2.  Priority setting in the implementation of punishing measures

Unlike  crimes  committed  in  the  physical  space,  cyberspace  presents  some  challenges  to  crime 

prosecution  and  punishment.  Some  of  these  challenges  include,  inter alia,  the  identification  of 

authors,  the  time  elapsed  between  the  perpetration  of  a  crime  and  the  victim’s  reaction,  the  low 

rate  of  complaints  submitted  and  the  unlike  possibility  to  prosecute  the  perpetrator(s)  –because 

enforcement agencies operate within the State’s territorial borders while the cyberspace is essentially 

a borderless place.

Measures in place to punish these actions should be implemented by bearing in mind this context, 

and as a complement to this policy.

The  updating  of  Chile’s  legislation,  promoted  by  the  decision  to  adhere  to  the  Convention  on 
Cybercrime  of  the  Council  of  Europe8,  together  with  the  upgrading  and  strengthening  of  current 

regulations and the development of cross-cutting measures instead of the adoption of measures by 

sectors, are important objectives in this field. 

  3.  Multi-sectoral prevention

Because  cyber  attacks  and  cybercrime  may  be  perpetrated  by  State  bodies,  organised  groups  or 

individuals,  and  threats  may  come  from  inside  and  outside  the  country,  any  response  must  come 

from multi-sectoral actors involving the private sector, the academia, the civil society and, indeed, 

criminal prosecution and defence bodies, as well as victim advocacy organisations.

It is therefore essential to generate the proper spaces for coordination, meeting and cooperation, and 

strengthen significantly the existing technical skills and access to training by prosecutors and judges, 

the  investigation  and  forensic  capacities  of  the  police  bodies,  and  the  development  of  guidelines 

aimed at providing a minimum safeguard to the entire population. 

Definitions must be designed to gather, standardise and integrate data and information related with 

cybercrime, increase investigation capacity and generate evidence regarding such crimes.

 4.  Respect for and promotion of fundamental rights

All measures proposed by the policy should be designed and executed with a focus on fundamental 

rights  –because  of  their  fundamental  nature  and  indivisibility,  and  on  the  basis  that  cyberspace  is 
an environment where people have the same rights as in the physical world9. Therefore, the policy 

includes and promotes the following:

8 

9 

Available in: https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?documentId=09000016802fa41c

In this regard, Resolution A/HRC/20/L.13 from the UN Human Rights Council declared that “people’s rights should be also protected in 
the Internet”.

19

• 

The Internet is a global public asset; therefore, users may not be deprived from accessing the 
network but for reasons of force majeure duly based, with access never being denied by vague 
reasons such as public order, national security, or for the honour of any individual despite their 
capacity or title.

•  Regarding  the  foregoing,  and  taking  into  account  that  information  availability  is  an  essential 
characteristic of cybersecurity, this policy will support public and private efforts made for the 
access to information and culture by the population through digital channels.

•  Related with the above, the principle of respecting Internet neutrality is also included, so that 
Internet service providers may not discriminate or arbitrarily restrict the access to any content 
whatsoever, unless there is a legal justification to do that.

• 

• 

• 

This  policy  also  respects  and  promotes  the  respect  for  freedom  of  speech,  by  taking  into 
consideration  not  only  communication  media  but  also  the  population  as  a  whole,  the 
intermediaries  making  possible  to  communicate  these  messages  and  social  networks10.  Any 
interference  with  this  right  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  national  and  international 
standards in the field of human rights. 

The  protection  of  private  life  and  the  inviolability  of  user  communication  in  the  cyberspace, 
including the protection against the unauthorised gathering, process and publication of personal 
data; transparency in the management of such data by private and public stakeholders, and as 
mentioned above, the protection of essential technologies to ensure that users may safely and 
confidently use the cyberspace.

The  protection  of  due  process  with  regard  to  the  measures  affecting  information  security, 
seeking  that  surveillance  and  criminal  prosecution  measures  in  cyberspace  comply  with 
international standards with regard to protection such as the principles of suitability, need and 
proportionality11. These measures will not only be applicable to criminal prosecution by the State, 
but also to the actions of all its bodies, thus safeguarding the application of this right among the 
users of cyberspace. Massive and indiscriminate surveillance of cyberspace is a serious attempt 
against fundamental rights.

Efforts in the field of fundamental rights will especially take into account the rights of vulnerable 
groups,  such  as,  inter alia,  boys,  girls  and  young  people,  the  elderly,  disabled  persons  and  ethnic 
minorities. There will be also a gender focus making possible to visualise and address the inequalities 
faced by different users in cyberspace.

The  policy  will  seek  that  all  people  may  enjoy  a  safe  cyberspace  free  from  abuses  such  as  online 
bullying,  the  theft  of  personal  information,  large-scale  surveillance  and  other  practices  affecting 
especially the most underprivileged members of society. Particularly, efforts will be carried out at 
all levels so that cybersecurity is not considered luxurious for people or the country’s organisations. 

10  The role of Internet intermediaries has increasingly attracted attention because of the critical role they plan in ensuring rights such as 
freedom of speech. In this regard, reference frameworks such as the Manila principles may be consulted, [online] Available in https://
www.manilaprinciples.org/es

11  A useful analysis tool is the document “Principios Internacionales sobre la Aplicación de los Derechos Humanos a la Vigilancia de las 
Comunicaciones” (International Principles about the Application of Human Rights to the Surveillance of Communications). [online] 
Available in: https://es.necessaryandproportionate.org/text

20

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

C.  Chile will develop a cybersecurity culture based on education, good 

practices and accountability in the management of digital technologies

  1.  Cybersecurity culture

ICTs  promote  the  development  of  an  equitable  and  inclusive  cultural,  technological  and  economic 

heritage of the country and comprehensive people’s development. 

Therefore,  a  cybersecurity  culture  will  be  promoted  at  all  levels  with  the  purpose  of  making  the 

tools and knowledge available for society to understand this field of human relations including its 

advantages and risks, and may manage them properly. 

  2.  Community awareness and information

People  will  be  made  aware  of  the  risks  and  threats  involved  in  cyberspace  with  the  purpose  of 

achieving a safe use of platforms providing services to the community, both from public institutions 

and private agents. 

The  community  will  be  made  aware  of  the  good  use,  measures  or  personal  care  and  security  in 

cyberspace.

  3.  Cybersecurity education

This field will present many challenges to Chile’s educational system. Early and advanced education 

of the Chilean population should be a part of these challenges; therefore, digital gaps generated by, 

inter alia, inequitable access to resources, skills, infrastructure and connectivity should be addressed.

To  achieve  the  above  goal,  it  is  critical  to  implement  initiatives  promoting  and  developing  a 

conscious, competent, informed and responsible digital culture including all relevant stakeholders 

and understanding that this is a joint effort to achieve a common, long-term benefit.

D. 

The country will carry out cooperation actions with other stakeholders 
in the field of cybersecurity and will actively participate in international 
forums and discussions

 1.  Chilean foreign policy principles

Chile’s foreign policy is based on a series of principles driving its diplomatic work and actions, such as: 

the respect for international law; the promotion of democracy; the respect for human rights; conflict 

prevention; the pacific resolution of disputes and the commitment to cooperate in the international 

arena. In turn, these principles drive the interest of Chile’s foreign policy, namely: contribute to the 
strengthening of multilateralism and promote international peace and security12. 

The emergence of cyberspace, especially the Internet, as a public asset urges us to face the challenges 

of managing all types of risks, where interacting at an international level is particularly important in 

the light of the global and cross-border nature of the same.

Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting and multi-factorial concept which, at an international level, conveys 

the  possibility  to  build  common  capacities,  approaches  and  measures  with  the  cooperation  and 

12  Further information in: http://www.minrel.gov.cl/minrel/site/artic/20080802/pags/20080802194424.html

21

assistance  of  other  countries,  such  as  the  conviction  that  sustained  multilateral  diplomatic  work 

involving multiple stakeholders allows decreasing the risk of conflict in cyberspace.

To achieve the above, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be responsible for coordinating with other 

ministries and Government agencies the international cybersecurity policy.

  2.  Cooperation and assistance

Bilateral cooperation work will promote different types of relations with other countries in the field 

of cybersecurity, including assistance to and from Chile, exchange of information and experiences, 

the implementation and furtherance of mechanisms for facilitating political dialogue in this field, and 

the promotion of transparency and trust building in cyberspace, with an emphasis on multi-agency 

work.

  3.  Reinforce the participation in multilateral and multi-stakeholder work

Efforts must be focused on promoting digital as a free, open and safe environment for all users in the 

cyberspace.

The country needs to strengthen its work in this field, taking into consideration the special challenges 

faced in terms not only of the technical conditions, and the global nature and decentralised character 

of  the  network,  but  also  regarding  its  political  scope,  and  with  a  system  of  Internet  governance 

including multiple stakeholders where the private sector and civil society have a special role. 

Within  this  framework,  the  country’s  involvement  will  be  increased  in  the  multilateral  and  global 

arena, supporting regional, sub-regional and multilateral consultations in this field, especially in Latin 

America, and actively involving stakeholders in this debate.

  4.  Promote international regulations encouraging trust and security in the 

cyberspace

Although there are practically no specific regulation instruments, the cyberspace is actually regulated 

both by the existing national laws and by the general applicable international regulations; therefore, 

the challenge lies particularly on being able to identify and interpret the relevant regulations of the 

applicable international law.

However, there are some challenges that must be faced through specific international agreements 

and  regulations,  such  as  the  Convention  on  Cybercrime,  which  the  country  will  adhere  to,  with 

reservations and safeguards consistent with this policy.

Additionally, the debate and adoption of multilateral and bilateral agreements should be promoted 

in order to encourage cooperation and mutual assistance in the field of cybersecurity, both in terms 

of  formal  instruments  and  as  informal  agreements  and  arrangements  focused  on  international 

transparency and the trust building in this field.

E. 

The country will promote the development of a cybersecurity industry 
serving its strategic objectives

  1.  The importance of innovation and development in cybersecurity

Activities  aimed  at  protecting  domestic  security  and  foreign  defence  generally  require  a  strong 

innovation  and  development  element  promoting  an  increased  development  of  the  industry  at  a 

22

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

national level. Within this framework, the field of cybersecurity requires a special effort because of 
its original nature and strategic importance for the country as a whole.

  2.  Cybersecurity as a means to contribute to Chile’s digital development

While the size of the ICT sector represents 3~4, 12% share of the Chilean economy, in OECD countries 
this industry reports an average 6% share in the country’s economies13, generating a gap between 
both realities that Chile will partly resolve through the development of the cybersecurity component 
within this industry.

This will generate both an increased demand on the information technology industry and a higher 
industrial development in this field, helping the country to advance towards OECD’s indicators, as well 
as strengthening policy objectives.

  3.  Development of the cybersecurity industry in Chile

There are no specific figures regarding the level of development of the national industry apart from 
some studies exploring this alternative14. The country’s effort to develop a cybersecurity industry will 
be supported by studies describing the industry and identifying strategic fields for development in 
the short, medium and long time.

Particularly, a field which is regularly developed in compared experiences is the domestic industry 
related with the development and use of encryption standards by reason of its strategic importance 
for the country’s security abroad.

  4.  Contribute to the generation of an offer by the local industry

Measures  will  be  adopted  in  order  to  help  creating  and  strengthening  a  domestic  industry  for 
cybersecurity services, technologies and management through a programme and initiatives aimed at 
the production of new goods and services in this area. A development pole will be created in this area 
which is in line with the Productivity, Innovation and Growth Agenda15 and the Digital Agenda for 2020.

.

  5.  Generation of demand by the public sector based on the State’s 

strategic interests

The  generation  of  demand  by  the  public  sector  based  on  their  strategic  and  security  needs  and 
interests  will  support  the  strengthening  of  a  national  industry  focused  on  cybersecurity  services, 
technologies and management which is in line with international technical standards. 

13  There are studies giving an approximate value to the GDP contributed by the ICT sector such as the “Índice País Digital” carried out by 
the País Digital Foundation and UDD, submitted in January 2015. This study estimated that the ICT sector represents 3% of the total 
Chilean economy (source from 2012). Likewise, in March 2015 the Under-Secretariat of Economy commissioned to F&K Consultores 
the study “Status of the Digital Development in Chile”, which reported that the aggregate value of the ICT sector reaches 4.12% as 
compared with the total aggregated value (source from 2011).

14  Report “Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicación en Chile: Áreas de investigación y capacidades, informe de estado del arte” 
(Information  and  Communication  Technology  in  Chile:  Research  Areas  and  Capabilities,  State-of-the-art  Report),  Conicyt,  2010. 
“Índice País Digital”, País Digital Foundation in conjunctions with UDD, January 2015. “Status of the Digital Development in Chile”, F&K 
Consultores, March 2015.

15  Available in: http://www.agendaproductividad.cl/

23

7 Roles and required institutional 
structure to develop a national 
cybersecurity policy

A. 

Institutional structure for cybersecurity

It is essential for Chile, in order to fulfil this ambitious national cybersecurity policy and following the 

example of several other countries that have started this process some years ago, to have available 

a  cybersecurity  governance  model  responsible,  at  least,  for  carrying  out  such  roles  identified  as 

essential –which are not being addressed, or are executed with no coordination within the country; 

therefore, the creation of an institutional framework to take up that role is hereby proposed. 

A modern governance model and institutional framework which is in line with the needs of cyberspace 

and  the  country’s  digital  development,  will  be  a  matter  of  law  to  be  prepared  and  submitted  by 

responsible institutional actors. Additionally, the creation of an advisory consulting council composed 

of different sectors will be assessed. 

The  roles  identified  as  essential  are:  management  of  inter-institutional  relationships,  incident 

management, national and international point of contact, communications role, technical regulation 

and advisory role in general regulations, follow-up and evaluation of measures.

To carry out the above, correspondence of the cybersecurity framework with supplementary measures 

being developed in the area of digital governance within the State administration will be especially 

taken into account.

B. 

Transitional governance in cybersecurity

While the cybersecurity bill containing the final proposal for its institutional structure is discussed in 

the National Congress, certain essential roles identified up until now shall be temporarily performed 

by some of the institutions that are currently a part of the Government’s structure.

An example of this is the role played by CSIRT Gob, which will be technically responsible for managing 

incidents  arisen  within  the  State’s  Connectivity  Network,  while,  at  a  political  level,  it  has  been 

proposed to extend the term and scope of the Inter-Ministerial Cybersecurity Committee with regard 

to the communication, coordination and follow up roles of the different measures set out in the NCSP.

24

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

8 Public policy measures for 2017-2018

The measures below are an integral part of the public policy agenda to be implemented based on the 
strategic objectives described above16.

MEASURE

RESPONSIBLE - 
ASSISTING

OBJECTIVES 
NCSP

Prepare and forward to the National Congress a 

cybersecurity bill aimed at consolidating the institutional 

framework and incident management related with 

information security throughout the country.

MISP – MINDEF – 

MINHACIENDA - CICS 

(monitoring this measure)

Update Decree Law 83 about the State’s information 

security aimed at the adoption of new standards and the 

MINSEGPRES

creation of a model to control effective compliance.

Add a cybersecurity dimension to the preparation and 

MOP (Concessions 

management of contracts for public concession tenders.

Department)

Create a working group responsible for developing 

a regulation and obligation framework for critical 

MISP

infrastructures in Chile, from a risk management focus.

Create a technical regulation for the development or 

contracting of software within the State, pursuant to 

MINSEGPRES

standards for safe development.

Create a platform to add information about cybersecurity 

incidents.

CSIRT

Coordinate the creation of updated requirements for 

MTT – Super-intendence - 

regulated economic sectors

Identify a minimum set of risks for Critical Information 

Infrastructure

CSIRT

CSIRT

Implement a standardised template for cybersecurity 

incident reports. 

CSIRT, MINSEGPRES

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

 

16  The first body is the main responsible entity to carry out the task, and the other bodies support execution of the same. CSIRT means 
the current security equipment of the State’s Connectivity Network, which will gradually take on operational duties identified in 
this policy.
Public institutions are identified with the following acronyms: CICS, Comité Interministerial sobre Ciberseguridad (Interministerial 
Committee on Cyber Securiry; MISP, Ministerio del Interior y Seguridad Pública (Interior and Public Security Ministry); MTT, Ministerio 
de  Transportes  y  Telecomunicaciones  (Transport  and  Telecommunications  Ministry);  MINDEF,  Ministerio  de  Defensa  Nacional 
(National Defence Ministry); MINHACIENDA, Ministerio de Hacienda (Finance Ministry); ANI, Agencia Nacional de Inteligencia (National 
Intelligence Bureau); MINJUSTICIA, Ministerio de Justicia y Derechos Humanos (Ministry of Justice and Human Rights); MINSEGPRES, 
Ministerio Secretaría General de la Presidencia (Ministry of the President’s Office); MOP, Ministerio de Obras Públicas (Ministry of 
Public Works); MINEDUC. Ministerio de Educación (Ministry of Education); MINREL, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores (Ministry of 
Foreign  Affairs);  MSGG, Ministerio Secretaría General de Gobierno  (Ministry  of  the  Government’s  Office);  MINECON, Ministerio de 
Economía, Fomento y Turismo, (Ministry the Economy, Development and Tourism). 

  When a ministry is mentioned without identifying a specific public service or under-secretariat, the reference relates with the under-
secretariat participating in the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Cybersecurity or, should the corresponding ministry not be a part of 
the Committee, the corresponding ministry shall be responsible in general. 

25

MEASURE

RESPONSIBLE - 

OBJECTIVES 

ASSISTING

NCSP

10

11

Incorporate a cybersecurity dimension in the national 

MISP (CICS – monitoring this 

emergency system.

measure)

Prepare the regulation setting out safe mechanisms for 

exchanging information within the Government, between 

MISP - MINDEF - ANI– 

high level officers and other officials handling confidential 

MINREL- MINSEGPRES

or secret information.

Prepare a study about the resilience of telecommunication 

12

networks in Chile, proposing measures to improve it in the 

MTT

public and private fields.

13

Update the regulation on computer-related crimes.

MISP – MINJUSTICIA

14

15

Design and implement a standardised template to report 

MISP (with the police forces 

cybercrimes.

and ANI)

Promote the strengthening of investigation and forensic 

MISP (with ANI and the 

analysis skills related with cybercrime.

police forces)

Generate a first point for the dissemination of information 

16

to citizens based on the different digital channels and 

social networks enabled by the Internet. 

MISP – MSGG (CICS – 

monitoring this measure)

Mark the Cybersecurity Month in October each year, 

17

promoting and developing activities to raise awareness at 

MISP – MSGG (CICS – 

all levels. Additionally, participate in the Safe Internet Day 

monitoring this measure)

in February.

Design and implement a large-scale cybersecurity 

campaign and promote the implementation of 

18

dissemination programmes in partnership with the private 

sector in awareness campaigns, with an emphasis on 

vulnerable sectors and a gender perspective. 

MSGG (CICS – monitoring 

this measure)

19

Generate best practice guidelines both for citizens and the 

public sector.

CICS

Establish a cross-sectoral committee to promote 

20

cybersecurity at all levels and areas of the educational 

field.

Design and implement a cybersecurity campaign 

21

aimed at the elderly population, including training and 

dissemination.

MINEDUC- MINECON 

(Human Capital Committee)

(CICS – monitoring this 

measure)

MDS (Senama) - MINECON 

(Human Capital Committee) 

(CICS – monitoring this 

measure)

MINEDUC (Enlaces) – 

22

Include Internet security issues in MINEDUC’s specific 

MINECON (Human Capital 

programmes, promoting the ENLACES initiative. 

Committee) (CICS – 

monitoring this measure)

A

A

A

B

B

B

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

26

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

MEASURE

RESPONSIBLE - 

OBJECTIVES 

ASSISTING

NCSP

Strongly support the establishment, at an international 

level, of regional, sub-regional and multilateral political 

consultation processes, with special emphasis on the 

23

MINREL

region.

Advance the creation of bilateral work mechanisms, 

24

developing agendas and implementing cross-cutting 

MINREL

political consultation instances with partner countries.

25

26

27

Prepare a document containing Chile’s international policy 

MINREL – (CICS – monitoring 

about cyberspace and cybersecurity.

this measure)

Establish an inter-agency working group to address 

international issued related with cyberspace.

MINREL – OTHER

Encourage the exchange of experiences with other 

countries in the field of cyber-security, with emphasis 

on the implementation and evaluation of strategies and 

MINREL

policies.

Analyse the regulation and application of the current 

28

system of public procurement supporting production and 

strategic domestic interests.

MINHACIENDA (Chilecompra 

Division) - MISP - MINDEF

Carry out studies both describing the cybersecurity 

industry (offer) and the use of cybersecurity in the country 

(demand), with the purpose of creating special programmes 

to promote the cybersecurity industry in specific sectors.

CORFO - MINDEF - MINECON

Analyse tax incentives, subsidies or R+D+I schemes in order 

MINHACIENDA - MINECON 

to develop and adopt cybersecurity standards.

- CORFO

29

30

C

D

D

D

D

D

E

E

Process the new law on personal data, conferring powers to 

31

a specific body that may impose security and notification 

MINHACIENDA- MINECON

A, B

requirements in connection with data leakage. 

Develop one or more multi-sectoral cooperation 

32

opportunities with a series of social stakeholders (NGOs, 

companies, unions, and academia, inter alia).

CICS (committee 

coordinator)

A, B, C

Update Decree No. 5, 996 and Supreme Decree No. 1,299 

in line with the amendments to Supreme Decree No. 83, 

33

setting out the requirements to access the network (self-

MISP

assessment, online courses) and the obligation to report 

incidents by public bodies.

Carry out cyber exercises about cybersecurity incidents 

with different stakeholders in order to encourage the 

34

proper knowledge, research and dissemination of gaps, 

CSIRT

vulnerabilities and ways of mitigation in the national 

systems.

A, C

A, C

27

MEASURE

RESPONSIBLE - 

OBJECTIVES 

ASSISTING

NCSP

Incorporate cybersecurity standards in the State’s 

suppliers, requesting specific requirements for ICT 

MINHACIENDA (Chilecompra 

suppliers, and analysing other requirements for other 

Division)

suppliers.

Include a set of questions linked to cybercrime in the 

MISP (Under-Secretariat of 

National Urban Survey on Citizen Security (ENUSC).

Crime Prevention)

35

36

A, E

B, C

Prepare and regularly update a record of training offers 

37

for public servants about cybersecurity available in 

MISP – MINREL

B, C, D

international organisations and national institutions.

38

Adhere to and implement the Convention on Cybercrime of 

the Council of Europe.

MISP - MINREL - 

MINJUSTICIA- OFFICE OF 

B, D

THE PROSECUTOR

Encourage State support of R+D+I projects with public or 

39

private financing, whether national or international, in the 

CICS

field of cybersecurity.

Promote the development of advanced human capital 

40

regarding cybersecurity in the different technical-

professional or vocational areas.

CORFO – MINECON (Human 

Capital Committee) 

Support the export of national products and services in the 

41

field of cybersecurity, identifying international exhibitions 

and evaluating support actions.

MINREL (Prochile) – 

MINECON

C, E

C, E

D, E

28

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

9 Annexes

Annex Nº 1: Standards and institutions involved in cybersecurity 

in Chile

1. 

RELEVANT STANDARDS AT A NATIONAL LEVEL

a. 

Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile

•  Article 8, about public transparency

•  Article  19,  including  a  catalogue  of  fundamental  rights,  with  the  most  relevant  ones  being: 

No.  2,  equality  before  the  law;  Nos.  3  and  7,  due  process  and  individual  safety;  Nos.  4  and  5; 

protection of life and inviolability of communications; No. 12, freedom of speech and freedom of 

information, and Nos. 24 and 25, property and freedom of creation.

•  Article  24,  vesting  upon  the  person  who  acts  as  President  of  the  Republic  the  authority  to 

safeguard the public order in and the external security of the Republic, apart from the regulations 

that govern the authorities vested upon other State powers and bodies.

•  Articles 39 and following regulating specific situations that affect the normal operation of the 

State.

b. 

Laws

•  Criminal  Procedure  Code:  This  piece  of  legislation  regulates  criminal  investigation  and 

prosecution in Chile, and, within this framework, any investigation related with cybercrime that 

may be carried out in the country. Additionally, it regulates a set of intrusive measures that may 

affect the recipient’s private life or inviolability of communications and, therefore, the inviolability 

of their communication –for which purpose the Law demands certain legal requirements and a 

court order authorising the practice of such measures.

• 

Law No. 19,913, which creates the financial analysis unit and modifies a series of provisions 

in  the  field  of  money  laundering  and  bleaching:  This  law  regulates  some  investigation  and 

surveillance  measures  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  may  affect  the 

recipient’s  private  life  or  inviolability  of  communication  and,  therefore,  the  confidentiality  of 

their information –for which reason the Law in this case also requires a court order in conjunction 

with the fulfilment of the legal requirements of the case. 

•  Decree  Law  No.  211,  Free  Competition  Law:  As  in  the  previous  case,  this  law  authorises  the 

carrying out of intrusive in specific cases and in the same terms described above.

• 

Law  No.  19,974,  about  the  System  of  the  State’s  Intelligence  and  creating  the  National 

Intelligence  Bureau:  Within  the  framework  of  intelligence  information  gathering,  this  Law 

regulates the practice of special procedures to gather information, which has to be done under a 

court order and taking into account a series of legal safeguards restricting the gathering and use 

of this information.

29

•  Criminal Code: This legal piece is the country’s main criminal catalogue containing the description 

of a set of specific conducts together, with the associated sentences. Regarding cybersecurity, 

this code describes a series of conducts that may be carried out through cyberspace or affects 

the  elements  thereof,  having  a  key  relevance  in  the  development  of  policies  and  the  combat 

against cybercrime. 

•  Code of Military Justice: A legal piece containing specific provisions regarding crimes mostly 

perpetrated by members of the armed forces or at times of war. The provisions of this legal piece 

cover crimes related with espionage and disclosure of certified information to third parties, with 

the purpose of protecting the national security.

• 

Law No. 19,223 There is a sub-category in the field of cybercrime related with the disturbance of 

the logical components of cyberspace (computer programmes, information systems, databases) 

called  computer-related  crimes.  This  Law  sets  out  specific  criminal  definitions  describing  the 

non-authorised access, theft and destruction of information systems.

• 

• 

Law No. 20,009 covering the Loss, Theft or Robbery of Credit and Debit Cards.

Law  No.  18,168,  General  Telecommunications  Law:  This  piece  of  legislation  regulates  the 

legal framework of the country’s telecommunication industry which provides key physical and 

logical infrastructure for the national cyber space. One of its provisions set out the protection, 

confidentiality and integrity of the information through the criminalisation of offences related 

with  the  non-authorised  interception  (art.  No.  36B,  letters  b  and  c).  Two  recent  modifications 
are  especially  relevant  for  the  country’s  cybersecurity,  namely:  Law  No.  20,453  that  ensures 
the  principle  of  network’s  neutrality  for  Internet  consumers  and  users,  regulating  network 

management measures that may be adopted by Internet service providers and ensuring the duty 
of  confidentiality,  and  Law  No.  20,478,  about  business  recovery  and  continuity  when  the 
public telecommunications system is affected by critical and emergency situations, enacted 

after the earthquake that affected the country in 2010. As described by its name, this Law sets 

out a set of measures allowing maintaining the continuity of the country’s telecommunications 

and, therefore, the availability of information contained in the cyberspace.

• 

Law  No.  19,799  regarding  electronic  documents,  electronic  signature  and  signature 
certification services: This Law regulates the use of electronic documents in the country, with 

the  corresponding  mechanisms  to  ensure  information  integrity  and  confidentiality  by  the  use 

of  digital  signature,  together  with  a  system  guaranteeing  the  proper  operations  of  the  bodies 

providing this service.

• 

Law  No.  20,285  about  the  access  to  public  information:  This  piece  of  legislation  creates  a 

transparency scheme for the State’s activities, with active transparency obligations, which must 

be carried out through the website of each relevant public body; and passive obligations, which 

consist in providing the data that any person may require from these bodies, provided that this 

does not affect other rights and interests set out in the law -such as the State’s security and third 

party’s privacy, so that the confidentiality of the relevant is not affected. 

• 

Law No. 19,628 regarding the protection of private life: This law sets out a series of principles 

and rights relative to the management of personal data in the country that may be requested 

by the owner of the personal data to whom is in possession of or manages a record containing 

such data, together with the general application rules for the management of personal data by 

the public and private sectors in connection with the safeguarding of the data contained in such 

information.

30

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

c.  Decrees

•  Supreme Decree No. 83/2005 approving the technical regulations for the State administration 

bodies  about  the  security  and  confidentiality  of  electronic  documents:  This  decree,  which 

evolves  from  the  provisions  contained  in  Law  No.  19,799,  sets  out  a  regulation  for  the  public 

administration  of  the  State  about  the  security  and  confidentiality  of  electronic  documents, 

together  with  the  information  infrastructure  based  on  ISO  standard  27,000,  with  the  setting 

out of administrative measures such as the creation of information security committees in each 

public service. This decree is supplemented with Supreme Decree No. 93/2006 that approves 

the technical regulation for adopting measures aimed at minimising the detrimental effects 

of unwanted spam messages received in the mailboxes of the State administration bodies 

and their officers. As described, this decree sets out the measured aimed at preventing spam 

from being received by the State’s administration bodies.

•  Supreme  Decree  No.  1,299/2004  setting  out  new  regulations  for  the  State’s  Connectivity 

Network managed by the Ministry of the Interior and describing the technological procedures, 

requirements  and  standards  for  the  incorporation  to  such  network  by  public  bodies:  This 

decree, based on the provisions of the 2005 budget law, and Supreme Decree No. 5,996/1999, 

consolidates an intranet, named the State’s Connectivity Network, where a number of ministries 

and  public  bodies  should  be  interconnected.  Centralising  Internet  access,  this  network  has  to 

comply with security technical standards in line with IEEE and ISO standards.

•  Supreme Decree No. 1/2015 approving the technical standards for the systems and websites 

of  the  State  administration  bodies:  This  Decree  updates  the  technical  standards  for  the 

websites of the State administration bodies regulating certain conditions about confidentiality, 

availability and accessibility of information contained in those websites, all of them being key 

elements of cybersecurity. 

•  Supreme  Decree  No.  533/2015  that  creates  a  Cybersecurity  Inter-Ministerial  Committee: 

This decree creates an Inter-Ministerial Committee responsible for developing a proposal for the 

National Cybersecurity Policy, of which this Annex is an integral part. 

31

2. 

INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE FIELD OF CYBERSECURITY 

a.  Ministry of the Interior and Public Security

Body

Role

Mission

Undersecretary of 

Preventive Public 

the Interior

policy design 

The mission of the Ministry of the Interior and Public Security is to 

safeguard public security, coordinating, evaluating and monitoring the 

execution of inter-sectoral plans in the field of crime prevention and 

control (Art.1, Law No. 20,502), including cybercrime, and to design public 

policies in order to prevent, challenge and punish the same. In particular, 

the Organised Crime Department is responsible for developing strategies 

for combating cybercrime (Exempt Resolution No. 10,168, 3/12/2013). 

By virtue of Decree No. 5,996 of 1999, the MISP is responsible for 

implementing and operating, at a national level through the Computer 

Division, the State’s Connectivity Network (RCE). Supplementing the 

decree mentioned above, Supreme Decree No. 1,299 of 2004, grants this 

Undersecretary of 

Preventive Reactive 

State body the power to publish or disseminate the country’s official 

the Interior

Public policy design

regulations in the field of information security and to set out logic security 

regulations, standards and policies that public bodies included in the 

RCE shall be obliged to fulfil. This division was also granted the power to 

submit technical consultations to any State body. It is worth mentioning 

the RCE’s role as a tool to support Government cybersecurity. 

Investigations 

Policy (PDI), 

Cybercrime 

Investigation 

Brigade

Carabineros 

Police, OS9 

Department

Preventive and 

This Brigade is responsible for investigating crime under the direction of 

investigative

the Office of the Prosecutor, including cybercrime.

Preventive and 

investigative

According to Law No. 19,974 regulating this Department’s responsibilities, 

one of its duties is to: “propose regulations and procedures to protect the 

State’s critical information systems”, Art. 8, letter c).

b.  Ministry of National Defence

Body

Role

Mission

Defence Under-

Secretariat

Policy design

the relevant primary planning and policies to face the challenges of 

cybersecurity for the National Defence, and ensuring that it is in line with 

The Defence Under-Secretariat is responsible for developing and updating 

the secondary planning thereof.

The Armed Forces are responsible for protecting their own information 

infrastructure. Additionally, they cooperate in tasks related with the 

national cybersecurity and national intelligence systems. 

The Joint Staff is the Ministry of Defence’s permanent working and 

Joint Staff of the 

Preventive and 

advisory body in matters having a connection with the joint preparation 

Armed Forces 

reactive

and use of the Armed Forces, thus being responsible for preparing and 

updating the Defence’s secondary planning, together with other tasks 

relevant for the country’s cybersecurity. 

The Armed Forces, pursuant to the planning carried out, are responsible for 

executing the relevant institutional and operational plans. 

32

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

c.  Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications

In charge of designing public policy and monitoring compliance in the area of telecommunications, 

the  Telecommunications  Under-Secretariat  is  also  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  Law 

No. 20,478 about “Business Recovery and Continuity under Critical and Emergency Situation of the 

System of Public Telecommunications”, which task is executed through Decree No. 60/2012 setting 

out  the  Regulations  for  the  inter-operation  and  dissemination  or  alert  messages,  the  declaration 

and safeguarding of the telecommunications’ critical infrastructure, and the information regarding 

serious failures of the telecommunications systems. Likewise, this Under-Secretariat is responsible 

for monitoring the respect for the principle of the network’s neutrality set out in Law No. 20,453.

d.  Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism

This Ministry is responsible for designing public policies for encouraging productivity. The Ministry of 

Economy’s  mission  is  promoting  the  modernisation  and  competitiveness  of  the  country’s  productive 

structure, the private initiative, and the market’s efficient action, as well as the advance of innovation 

and the consolidation of the country’s economy at an international level; therefore, cybersecurity as a 

focus for national development is included in the Productivity, Innovation and Growth Agenda.

e.  Ministry of Justice and Human Rights

Pursuant  to  its  role  in  the  modernisation  of  the  justice  system,  as  well  as  in  the  development  of 

regulations and policies aimed at facilitating the access to and protection of people’s fundamental 

rights and citizen security, the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights is responsible for seeing to the 

ongoing  updating  and  technical  adequacy  of  legislation  to  the  challenges  posed  by  technological 

development.

f.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Performing  an  articulation  role  within  the  international  community  and  responsible  for  the 

international coordination of the national cybersecurity policy, the Ministry’s Dirección de Seguridad 

Internacional y Humana (Department for International and Human Security), (DISIN), is responsible 

for  identifying,  coordinating  and  promoting  Chile’s  cybersecurity  position  and  interests  within  the 

international community, in all its dimensions. Likewise, the Ministry coordinates and promotes Chile’s 

involvement in specialised international bodies and forums (Meridian, Octopus, OAS, UNASUR, ITU, IGF, 

UN expert groups, inter alia). It is also responsible for promoting bilateral relations in this field.

g.  Ministry of the President’s Office

With regard to the design of public policy in the area of digital government and digital development, 

the purpose of the Ministry of the President’s Office, through the State Modernisation Unit, is to make 

the State accessible for people, with the relevant modernisation of the State and digital Government. 

33

h.  University of Chile

Body

Role

Mission

NIC Chile

Technical body, 

domain, and for operating the technology allowing the efficient and safe 

administrator

operation of these names, so that people, companies and institutions may 

NIC Chile is the organisation responsible for the names containing the .CL 

be identified in the Internet.

CLCert’s main objectives are:

CLCert

Academic body, 

contact point with 

international CERTs 

and FIRST

-Provide, in a timely and systematic fashion, information about security 

vulnerabilities and threats.

-Disseminate, and make available to the community, information allowing 

the prevention and solution of this type of security incidents.

-Educate the general public about security matters, promoting policies 

allowing implementation thereof

i. 

National Standards Institute (Instituto Nacional de Normalización)

A  technical  body  responsible  for  setting  out  standards  and  accreditations,  the  National  Standards 

Institute (INN) is a private law, non-for-profit foundation created by CORFO in 1973 as a technical 

body in charge of overseeing quality infrastructure which, in the cybersecurity fields, relates with a 

series of ISO/IEC 27000 standards. 

j. 

Office of the Prosecutor

Exercising its role to lead the criminal prosecution process and carry out the public criminal action, 

the Office of the Prosecutor is an autonomous body responsible for investigating criminal offences, 

taking the accused before the courts and, if relevant, providing protection to victims and witnesses 

leading. 

k. 

Judicial Branch

The Judiciary, which has the exclusive power of hearing, resolving and executing sentences in civil 

and criminal lawsuits, is composed of courts having different competences, namely, civil, criminal, 

labour and family courts. With regard to cybersecurity, judges have the power to order some intrusive 

actions,  control  the  legality  of  criminal  investigations,  and  decide  upon  criminal  cases,  including 

cybercrime. 

34

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

Annex Nº 2: Risk and threat overview

1. 

SOURCES AND TYPES OF RISKS AND THREATS

Due to the global nature of cyberspace, risks come from threats both from Chile and abroad and have 

different origins relevant for the country, namely:

• 

Internal  incidents:  Involuntary  information  leakages,  accidental  interruption  of  information 

systems, or other involuntary incidents that may affect the confidentiality, integrity, availability 

and traceability of the information.

•  Natural  disasters  or  force majeure:  Earthquakes,  floods  and  other  disasters  that  may  affect 

cyberspace  caused  by  the  destruction  of  physical  infrastructures  essential  for  information 

availability.

•  Espionage  and  surveillance  activities  carried  out  by  State  actors:  Conducts  that  affect 

information confidentiality due to theft of the same for political or strategic purposes. Particularly 

important is the use of sophisticated tools known as APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) that, in 

turn, may benefit from non-published computer vulnerabilities of technologies in use.

•  Denial of Service and Distributed Denial of Service (DOS and DDOS) attacks: These attacks 

relate with the intentional overcharge of services provided in a computer system which, in turn, 

can be conducted from one point of the network, or distributed to coordinate the attack from 

various  points,  many  times  by  using  infected  devices  with  malicious  programmes  in  order  to 

achieve their objective. 

•  Cybercrime:  Criminal  activities  perpetrated  against  components  in  the  cyberspace  (non-

authorised access, information sabotage, information theft, information hijacking or ransomware) 

or employing tools in cyberspace as a means for such crimes (phishing, pharming, virtual fraud, 

and other related crimes).

•  Attacks against critical infrastructures through the cyberspace: An alteration in the operation 

of critical infrastructures (both physical and information infrastructure) carried out by electronic 

means, e.g. the large-scale disruption of financial systems, interference of basis services, physical 

damage to physical structures and other related attacks.

All  the  above  risks  and  threats  affect  the  confidentiality,  integrity,  availability  and  traceability 

of  information  assets  in  the  cyberspace  and,  in  the  medium-term  this  may  affect  the  country’s 

development  in  cyberspace,  thus  depriving  us  from  the  benefits  associated  with  the  digital 

government,  ways  of  social  organisation  facilitated  by  cyberspace  and  threats  to  the  security  of 

people and institutions in this field. Some cases may fit in more categories than the ones described 

herein.

2. 

RISKS AND THREATS IN THE GLOBAL CONTEXT

At a global scale, there are many examples of cyber attacks consisting in espionage activities and 

distributed  denial  of  service  (DDoS)  attacks  in  the  Internet.  Likewise,  the  large-scale  interception 

of  telecommunication  networks,  the  failure  of  Internet  services,  espionage  activities  against 

governments  and  companies,  as  well  as  attacks  against  critical  infrastructures  such  as  banks  and 

Government services, have been regularly in the news. There is also plenty of evidence with regard 

to legal abuses in the request for data to diverse providers of digital goods and services by countries 

where such providers are based. 

35

Some cases worth mentioning are: Iran (2010), whose nuclear centrifuges were disabled by a computer 

virus especially designed for such purpose; Estonia (2007), where part of its critical infrastructure was 

disabled  for  weeks;  disclosures  by  Edward  Snowden  (2013)  about  widespread  espionage  activities 

by  the  United  State’s  intelligence  agencies  –which  scope  is  still  undetermined  due  to  the  number 

and regularity of such disclosures; and espionage activities against companies in the defence field 

(Lockheed, 2011) and entertainment (Sony, 2014),also in the US, which scope seriously compromises 

the economic interests and fundamental rights of people around the world.

3. 

RISKS AND THREATS IN A REGIONAL CONTEXT

Regionally, the countries that have reported the highest number of cyber attacks in Latin America 

were  Brazil,  Argentina,  Colombia,  Mexico  and  Chile.  Accesses  and  information  theft  from  infected 

computers  –  called  botnets  –  were  widespread  in  the  region.  There  was  even  a  specific  type  of 

malicious code called dorkbot that generated over 80K actions against the virtual system, with higher 
concentrations in Chile (44%), Peru (15%) and Argentina (11%)17.

4. 

MALICIOUS ACTIVITIES DETECTED IN THE STATE’S CONNECTIVITY NETWORK

In Chile, the State’s Connectivity Network (RCE) is affected by many malicious or suspicious activities. There is an 

incident record related with distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks or alterations in Government website’s 

operations, with an increasing number of these incidents starting in 2010. Likewise, in 2015, at a general level, 

administrators of the Government network spotted the following patters:

17  Prandini, P. & Maggiore, M. 2013. Op. Cit.

36

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

Number of Records

Description

58375435

Attempts to access information in network devices through SNMP protocol.

45903511

Scanning of device administration ports in switch, router or security platforms.

19745086

Web flow with password transfer in clear text (no encryption). 

7805544

Detection of DNS dynamic updates.

5570661

Detection of TFTP flow (file transfer) by using tftp protocol.

4463394

Detection of portmap flows.

3359194

Detection of anomalous traffic in DNS ports.

2479277

Detection of remote desktop flows.

2077435

Detection of DNS queries by domains recognised as using malware.

2023403

Detection of recognition by PING.

1451708

Scanning of device administration ports in switch, router or security platforms.

1428461

Detection of wordpress access (key components).

1400697

Detection of MORTO malware.

1120311

Detection of NON encrypted traffic through a port usually used to transmit 

encrypted traffic (443). 

1106303

Detection of access to forbidden areas in websites. 

1025252

Flow of credentials in clear text of wordpress login (used in Government websites).

Patterns detected in the State’s Connectivity Network (RCE) in 2015.

(Source: IT Division of the Ministry of the Interior, 2016).

37

5.  CYBERCRIME IN CHILE

According to figures provided by the Office of the Prosecutor, regarding cybercrime between 2010 

and 2015, the number of cases submitted with the name “computer-related crime” was 4,648 cases, 

distributed as described below:

Cases of cybercrime 2010 - 2015

Office of the Prosecutor

s
e
s
a
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Year

Cases submitted as cybercrime in 2010-2015 by the Office of the Prosecutor, related only with the types of offences set out 

in Law No. 19,233 (Source: ULDDECO, Office of the Prosecutor, 201618).

Likewise, according to the data provided by the Investigations Police (PDI), during 2010-2015, a total 

number of 3,370 investigations distributed as described below:

Cases of cybercrime 2010 - 2015

Investigations Police

s
e
s
a
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Year

Number of cybercrime investigations carried out in 2010-2015 by the PDI (Source: Cybercrime Brigade, PDI, 2016).

The  Carabineros  Police,  on  their  part,  have  identified  different  types  of  illicit  behaviour  in  the 

cyberspace at a national level, the most common ones being the fraudulent access to systems; the 

purchase, sale and storage of child pornography; computer sabotage, and illicit banking operations 

(phishing). 

18  Chilean Office of the Prosecutor. A brief description of the current state of regulations and sentences in Chile regarding cybercrime. 
Specialised Unit for Investigating Money Laundering, Economic Crimes, Environmental Crimes and Organised Crime. As stated in the 
document mentioned, data presented are not the real total number of the cases as many of them are reported as fraud (Page 6).

38

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

Likewise,  cybercrime  perpetrated  in  Chile  confirm  the  cross-border  nature  of  illicit  acts  in  the 

cyberspace, specifically regarding the fraudulent use of credit and debit cards, where people from 

different nationalities have been found to plan and perpetrate such crimes.

 

Conclusion

The  information  contained  in  this  document  represent  a  threat  for  the  confidentiality,  integrity, 

availability  and  traceability  of  information  in  the  cyberspace,  which  affects  all  users  and  deprives 

them  from  using  cyberspace  in  a  safe  fashion,  violating  state  and  trade  secrets  and  threatening 

people’s fundamental rights, especially the rights connected with the protection of private life and 

communication inviolability.

For the reasons described above, it is essential to have policies in place to manage and minimize risks 

take into account such risks and threats, especially with regard to critical information infrastructure, 

with  proper  consideration  of  the  special  regulation  set  out  for  the  purchase  and  operation  of 

technological solutions and taking into account the international context in the field of cybersecurity.

39

40

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY (NCSP)
2017-2022

CICS

Comité
Interministerial 
sobre 
Ciberseguridad

w w w . c i b e r s e g u r i d a d . g o b . c l

Subsecretaría
del Interior
Ministerio del Interior
y Seguridad Pública

Subsecretaría
de Defensa

Ministerio de
Hacienda

Subsecretaría de 
Telecomunicaciones

Agencia
Nacional de
Inteligencia

