  
  
  

The National Medium- and Long-Term Program 
for Science and Technology Development (2006-

2020) 

  
  

An Outline 

  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  

The State Council 

The People’s Republic of China 

  
  
  
  

Table of Contents 

I.    Preface 
  
II.   Guiding Principles, Development Goals, and Overall Deployment  

1． Guiding Principles 
2． Development Objectives 
3.   Overall Deployment 
  

III． Main Areas and Priority Topics 
  

1. Energy 

(1)  Industrial energy efficiency  

(2)  Clean, efficient coal development and utilization, coal liquefaction, and 

gasification-based co-generation 

(3)  Oil and gas prospecting, development, and utilization under complex geological 

conditions 

(4)   Low-cost,  large-scale  development  and  utilization  of  renewable  energy 

resources 

(5)  Super large-scale electric power transmission and distribution and power grid 

safeguards 

  

2.  Water and Mineral Resources  

(6)   Optimized  distribution  and  comprehensive  development  and  utilization  of 

water resources  

(7) Comprehensive water conservation 
(8) Seawater desalination 
(9) Resources prospecting for additional reserves 

(10) Efficient development and utilization of mineral resources  
(11) Efficient development and utilization of maritime resources  
(12) Comprehensive zoning of resources 
  

3.  The Environment  

(13) Comprehensive pollutant control and waste recycling  

(14)  Functional  restoration  and  reconstruction  of  ecosystems  in  ecologically 

vulnerable areas 

(15) Maritime ecological and environmental protection 
(16) Global environmental change watch and response strategies  
  

4.  Agriculture  
(17) Germplasm development, preservation, innovation and targeted cultivation of 

new varieties 

(18) Healthy farming practices  in domestic animals,  poultry, and aquatic products, 

          (19) Deep processing and advanced storage and shipping of farm produce 

and associated epidemic disease prevention and control   

          (20) Integrated development and utilization of agro-forest biomass  
          (21) Agro-forest ecological safety and modern forestry  

          (22) Development and production of environment-friendly fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, 

and ecoagriculture 

         (23) Multifunctional farm equipment and facilities  
         (24) Precision farming and associated informatization  
         (25) Modern dairy industry  
  

5.  Manufacturing industry  

(26) Basic and generic parts and components 
(27) Digital and intelligent design and manufacturing  

(28) Green, automated process industry and corresponding equipment  

(29) Recycling iron and steel process techniques and equipment  
(30) Large-scale marine engineering technologies and equipment  
(31) Basic raw materials 

(32) Next-generation information functional materials and components 
(33) Key accessory materials and engineering processes for defense industry  
  
6.  Transportation Sector 
(34)  Transport  infrastructure  construction  and  maintenance  technologies  and 

equipment 

(35) High-speed rail transport system  
(36) Energy efficient and new energy-based Automobiles 
(37) Efficient transport technologies and equipment  
(38) Intelligent traffic control systems  
(39) Transport safety and emergency safeguard  
  

7.  Information Industry and Modern Service Industry  
(40)  Enabling  information  technology  and  major  application  software  for  modern 

service industry 

(41) Major next-generation internet technologies and services  
(42) High performance, dependable computers  
(43) Sensor networks and intelligent information processing  
(44) Digital media content platforms    
(45) High definition large flat-panel display  
(46) Core application oriented information security  
  

8.  Population and Health 
(47) Safe contraception and family planning, and birth defects prevention and 

treatment 

(48) Prevention and treatment of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, 

malignancies, and other major non-infectious diseases 

(49)  Prevention  and  treatment  of  common,  frequently-occurring  diseases  in  urban 

and rural communities 

(50) Traditional Chinese Medicine: impartation and innovation 
(51) Advanced medical equipment and bio-medicinal materials  
  

     9.  Urbanization and City Development  

(52) Urban planning and dynamic monitoring  
(53) Uplifting urban functions and space efficiency  
(54) Architecture energy efficiency and green buildings  
(55) Urban ecological residential environment and quality control  
(56) Urban information platforms  
  

10. Public Security 

(57)  National public security emergency information platforms  
(58) Major workplace accidents warning and rescue  
(59) Food safety and entry-exit quarantine 
(60) Major public emergency prevention and quick response 
(61) Biosafety measures 
(62) Major natural disasters prevention and preparedness  
  

11.  National Defense  
  

IV.  Major Special Projects  
  
V.   Frontier Technologies  
  

1.  Biotechnology  

(1)  Target identification technology  
(2)  Plant-animal varieties and drug molecular design technology  
(3)  Gene manipulation and protein engineering technology 
(4)  Stem cell based human tissue engineering technology 
(5)  Next-generation industrial biotechnology  
  

2.  Information Technology  

(6) Intelligent sensing technology  
(7) Ad hoc network technology   
(8) Virtual reality technology 
  

3.  Advanced Materials Technology   

(9) Intelligent materials and structural technology  
(10) High-temperature superconducting technology 
(11) Efficient energy material technology  
  

4.  Advanced Manufacturing Technology  

(12) Extreme manufacturing technology 
(13) Intelligent service robotics  

(14) Service life prediction technology for major products and facilities  
  

5.  Advanced Energy Technology  

(15) Hydrogen and fuel cell technology  
(16) Distributive energy supply technology  
(17) Fast neutron reactor technology  

(18)  Magnetic contained fusion technology  
  

6.  Marine Technology  

         (19) 3-D marine environment monitoring technology  
         (20) Ocean floor based multi-parameter fast sounding technology  
         (21) Natural gas hydrate exploitation technology  

(22) Deep-sea operation technology  
  

7.  Lasers Technology  
  
8.  Aerospace technology 
  

VI.  Basic Research  
  

1.  Disciplinary development  

(1)  Basic disciplines 
(2)  Cross and emerging disciplines 
  

2.  Frontier Scientific Issues  

(1)  Quantitative study and systematic integration of life process  
(2)  Condensed matters and novel effects 

(3)  Matters’ deep inner structures and physical laws at a cosmological scale  

(4)  Core mathematics and its application in cross-disciplines 

(5)   Earth  system  process  and  associated  resources,  environment,  and  disasters 

effects 

(6)  Chemical process in creating and transforming new matters  
(7)  Brain and cognitive sciences 

(8)   Innovation  in  scientific  experiments,  observational  methods,  techniques,  and 

equipment  

  

3.  Basic Research in Response to Major National Strategic Needs 

(1)  Biological foundations of human health and diseases  

(2)   Crop  genetic  improvement  and  scientific  issues  in  sustainable  agricultural 

development  

(3)  Human activities and their impacts on the Earth system  
(4)  Global change and regional response  

(5)  Complex systems, disaster formation, prediction and control 

(6)  Key scientific issues in sustainable energy development   

(7)  New principles and methodologies for materials design and fabrication 
(8)  Scientific basis of manufacturing under extreme environmental conditions 

(9)  Major mechanical issues in aeronautics and space science  
(10)  Scientific basis for the development of information technology  
  

4.  Major Scientific Research Programs 

(1)  Protein studies 
(2)  Quantum regulation studies 

(3)  Nanometer studies  
(4)  Growth and reproduction studies 
  

VII.  Reform of the S&T System and the Construction of a National Innovation System  
  

1.  Supporting and Encouraging Enterprises to Become the Main Player in Technological 

Innovation 

  
2.   Deepening  the  Institutional  Reform  and  Establishing  a  Modern  Research  Institute 

System  

  

3.  Advancing the S&T Management System Reform 
  

4.  Vigorously Pushing Forward the Construction of a National Innovation System with 

Chinese Characteristics  

  

VIII.  Major Policies and Measures 
  

1.  Financial and Taxation Policies Encouraging Technological Innovation at the 

Enterprise Level 

  
2.   Strengthening  Assimilation  and  Absorption  of  imported  technologies,  and  re-

innovation  

  

3.  Government Procurement Favoring Indigenous Innovation 
  

4.  Intellectual Property Rights Strategy and Technology Standards Strategy 
  

5.  Financial Policies Encouraging Innovation and Pioneering 
  

6.   Accelerating  industrialization  of  high  technologies  and  diffusion  of  advanced 

appropriate technologies 

  
7.   Perfecting  the  mechanism  for  combining  defense  and  civilian  sectors,  and  making 

defense part of civilian sector  

  
8.  Expanding international and regional S&T cooperation and exchanges 
  

9.  Improving scientific and cultural literacy of the entire nation, and building a 
social environment conducive to S&T innovation 

  

IX. S&T Input and S&T Infrastructure Platforms  
  

1.  Establishing a diversified, multi-channel S&T input system  
  

2.  Readjusting and optimizing input structures, and raising the cost-effectiveness of 

S&T expenditures  

  

3.  Strengthening the construction of S&T infrastructure platforms  
  
4.  Establishing a mechanism for sharing S&T infrastructure platforms  
  

X.    Talented Workforce Buildup 
  

1.  Accelerating the nurturing of a contingent of world caliber experts  
  

2.  Bringing into full play the important role of education in cultivating innovative talents 
  
3.  Supporting enterprises’ efforts in nurturing and attracting S&T talents 
  

4.  Intensifying efforts in attracting high caliber talents from overseas 
  

5.  Creating a cultural environment conducive to the Nurturing of Innovative Talents 

The 16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party commissioned the formulation 
of  an  outline  for  a  national  medium-  and  long-term  program  for  science  and  technology 
development in the context of the full-fledged construction of a well-to-do society and accelerating 
the socialist modernization drive, and the State Council has hereby prepared the following outline 
in compliance with the request. 
  

I .  Preface 

Since the founding of the People’s Republic of China, especially since the introduction of 
the policy of reform and opening to the outside world, the nation’s socialist modernization drive 
has attained universally acknowledged achievements. However, one has to be keenly aware that 
the nation is and will remain at a primary stage of socialism for a long time to come. In our effort 
to  build  a  well-to-do  society,  we  are  faced  with  both  rare  historic  opportunities  and  grave 
challenges. The nation’s economic growth shows an excessive dependence on the consumption of 
energy  and  resources,  with  high  associated  environmental  costs;  the  economic  structure  is 
irrational,  characterized  by  a  frail  agricultural  base  and  lagging  high-tech  industry  and  modern 
service  industry;  and  firms  lack  core  competitiveness  and  their  economic  returns  are  yet  to  be 
improved  as  a  result  of  weak  indigenous  innovation  capability.  There  are  a  whole  range  of 
problems concerning employment, distribution, health care, and national security that need prompt 
solution.  Internationally, the nation will be for a long period of time under enormous pressures 
from  developed  nations  who  possess  economic  and  S&T  superiority.  In  order  to  grasp  the 
opportunities  and  meet  the  challenges,  we  must  make  all-round  efforts,  including  coordinated 
overall development, deepening the system reform, improving democracy and the rule of law, and 
reinforcing social management. At the same time, we need to depend even more heavily on S&T 
progress  and  innovation  in  order  to  achieve  substantial  gains  in  productivity  and  advance  the 
overall economic and social development in a coordinated and sustainable manner. 
  

As the premier productive forces, science and technology are a concentrated reflection and a 
major  hallmark  of  advanced  productivity.  In  the  21st  century,  the  new  science  and  technology 

revolution is rapidly unfolding and gestating significant new breakthroughs, which will profoundly 
change the economic and social visages. Advances in information science and technology, still in 
the ascendant, will continue to be the dominant driving force for economic growth; rapid advances 
in life science and biotechnology will play a key role in improving quality of life; renewed efforts 
in  energy  science  and  technology  will  open  up  new  avenues  for  addressing  global  energy  and 
environmental issues; and exciting new breakthroughs in nanometer science and nanotechnology 
will  usher in  a profound technology  revolution.  Exciting breakthroughs in basic research fields 
will create whole new horizons for science and technology development  and economic growth. 
S&T  achievements  are  being  applied  and  transferred  at  an  ever  faster  pace,  thus  creating  new 
opportunities for catching up and leapfrogging. Therefore, we shall embrace the new era, meeting 
both opportunities and challenges brought on by the new S&T revolution with a global vision. In 
today’s  world,  many  countries  have  made  S&T  innovation  a  national  strategy  and  S&T  inputs 
strategic  investments  by  drastically  increasing  R&D  spending.  These  nations  lead  the  world  in 
deploying and developing frontier technologies and strategic industries and implement important 
S&T  programs  in  an  attempt  to  enhance  their  national  innovative  capability  and  international 
competitiveness. Confronted with the new international situation, we must have a greater sense of 
responsibility and urgency, by making S&T progress a major driving force for the economic and 
social  development  more  conscientiously  and  resolutely.  We  must  place  the  strengthening  of 
indigenous innovative capability at the core of economic restructuring, growth model change, and 
national  competitiveness  enhancement.  Building  an  innovation-oriented  country  is  therefore  a 
major strategic choice for China’s future development.  
  

Over more than five decades since the founding of New China, the consistent and painstaking 
efforts of several generations have led to huge, heartening achievements in the fields of science 
and  technology.  Major  S&T  accomplishments  hallmarked  by  nuclear  weaponry  and  satellite 
technology,  manned  space  flights,  hybrid  rice,  theory  of  oil  formation  from  continental  moist 
depression and associated application, and high performance computers, have greatly enhanced 
the nation’s comprehensive national strength, uplifted its international position, and inspired the 
whole nation. However, compared with the developed nations, China’s overall S&T level still has 
a fairly big gap to close, compared with that of developed nations. This is mainly reflected in the 
following areas: we have a low rate of sufficiency in key technology supply and a limited number 
of invention patents; the technological level remains low in some regions, particularly in the rural 
areas of the central and western regions; the quality of scientific research still needs significant 
improvement  due  to  a  shortage  of  top  notch  S&T  talents;  and  investments  in  science  and 
technology are still insufficient;  and there are numerous loopholes in  the existing S&T system. 
Despite the size of economy, our country is not yet an economic power primarily because of our 
weak innovative capacity.  
  

In  the  21st  century,  China,  being  a  large  developing  nation,  is  to  accelerate  its  S&T 
development and narrow down the gaps with the developed nations. To this end, the nation must 
make unremitting efforts for a long period of time, while it is also blessed with numerous favorable 
conditions.  

  
First, China’s sustained fast economic growth and social development creates a huge demand 
and  thus  lay  a  solid  foundation  for  the  S&T  development.  Second,  the  nation  has  a  fairly 
consummate system of academic disciplines, with a huge pool of talented people. It has developed 

world-class R&D capability in  a number of major fields,  thus  positioning itself for tremendous 
S&T developments in the future. Third, our country’s continued opening to the outside world has 
enhanced its S&T cooperation and exchanges with the rest of the world, allowing the country to 
share the fruits from the new S&T revolution. Fourth, by adhering to the socialist system, China 
is able to combine the political advantage of mobilizing efforts to do great things and the basic 
role of market mechanism in effectively allocating resources. This provides an important system 
guarantee for the prosperous development of S&T activities. Fifth, ours is a country with a 5000-
year history of civilization and a culture that is both broad and profound, capable of incorporating 
things of diverse nature, which favors the creation of a uniquely innovative culture. As long as we 
strengthen  our  national  confidence,  hold  scientific  concept  of  development,  implement  the 
strategies of rejuvenating the nation through science and education, work hard to catch up over the 
next 15 years or more, we will be able to produce brilliant S&T achievements that live up to the 
expectations of our times. 
  
II. Guiding Principles, Development Goals, and General Deployment 
  

1.  Guiding Principles 

  

The  first  20  years  of  the  century  are  a  period  of  important  strategic  opportunities  for  our 
country’s  economic  and  social  development  and  S&T  progress.   Under  the  guidance  of  Deng 
Xiaoping Theory and the “Three Representations” and by implementing the scientific concept of 
development and the strategy of rejuvenating the nation through science and education and talented 
people  and  proceeding  from  our  own  national  conditions  and  taking  people-based  approach, 
deepening  reforms  and  expanding  the  opening  to  the  outside  world,  we  must  strive  for  the 
prosperous development of China’s scientific and technological enterprise so as to realize the goals 
of  the  full-fledged  construction  of  a  well-to-do  society  and  provide  powerful  S&T  support  for 
building a harmonious socialist society.  
  

The  guiding  principles  for  our  S&T  undertakings  over  the  next  15  years  are:  “indigenous 
innovation,  leapfrogging  in  priority  fields,  enabling  development,  and  leading  the  future”. 
Indigenous  innovation  refers  to  enhancing  original  innovation,  integrated  innovation,  and  re-
innovation  based  on  assimilation  and  absorption  of  imported  technology,  in  order  improve  our 
national innovation capability. Leapfrogging in priority fields is to select and concentrate efforts 
in those key areas of relative strength and advantage linked to the national economy and people’s 
livelihood  as  well  as  national  security,  to  strive  for  breakthroughs  and  realize  leaping 
developments. Enabling development is an attempt to strive for breakthroughs in key, enabling 
technologies  that  are  urgently  needed  for  the  sustainable  and  coordinated  economic  and  social 
development. Leading the future reflects a vision in deploying for frontier technologies and basic 
research, which will, in turn, create new market demands and new industries expected to lead the 
future economic growth and social development.  The guideline is a summary of China’s practice 
and experience in  S&T  development  for more than a half  century, and  an important  choice for 
realizing the great renaissance of the Chinese nation.  
  

This  calls  for  placing  the  strengthening  of  indigenous  innovation  capability  at  the  core  of 
S&T  undertakings.  The  Party  and  government  have  long  advocated  and  paid  close  attention  to 
indigenous innovation. To press ahead with the modernization drive under conditions of opening 

to  the outside world,  we must earnestly study and draw on all the fine achievements of human 
civilization. During the past two decades or so since we began to pursue the policy of reforms and 
opening  to  the  outside  world,  our  country  has  imported  a  huge  amount  of  technologies  and 
equipment,  which  played  an  important  role  in  raising  the  overall  technological  level  of  our 
industries and promoting the country’s economic development. However, one should be clearly 
aware  that  importation  of  technology  without  emphasizing  assimilation,  absorption,  and  re-
innovation is bound to weaken the nation’s indigenous R&D capability, which in turn widens the 
gap with world advanced levels. Facts have proved that, in areas critical to the national economy 
and security, core technologies cannot be purchased. If our country wants to take the initiative in 
the fierce international competition, it has to enhance its indigenous innovation capability, master 
core technologies in some critical areas, own proprietary intellectual property rights, and build a 
number  of  internationally  competitive  enterprises.  In  a  word,  the  improvement  of  indigenous 
innovation capability must be made a national strategy that is implemented in all sectors, industries, 
and regions so as to drastically enhance the nation’s competitiveness.  
  

S&T talents are critical to increasing indigenous innovation capability. The first and foremost 
task is to create a favorite environment for cultivating and attracting S&T personnel, with high-
quality talents in particular, giving full scope to the enthusiasm and creativity of the broad masses 
of S&T personnel, so that a constant stream of talents is ensured and the best of S&T talents is 
brought  out.  We  should make  unremitting  efforts  to  build  a  large,  well-structured,  high-quality 
S&T workforce compatible with economic and social development and national defense work in 
order  to  ensure  the  talents  and  knowledge  base  for  the  nation’s  science  and  technology 
development.  
  

2.  Development Goals 

  

The general objectives for the nation’s S&T development (2006-2020) will be to: noticeably 
enhance  indigenous  innovation  capability  and  S&T  level  in  promoting  economic  and  social 
development and in maintaining national security, in an effort to provide powerful support for the 
building of a well-to-do society; noticeably improve comprehensive strength in basic research and 
frontier technology development; and attain a series of high world impact S&T achievements and 
join the ranks of innovative countries, thus paving the way for becoming a world S&T power by 
mid 21stcentury.  
  

Through efforts over the next 15 years, the nation will meet the following objectives in some 
major  scientific  and  technological  areas:  1)  mastering  core  technologies  in  equipment 
manufacturing  and  information  industry  that  are  critical  to  the  nation’s  competitiveness,  and 
bringing  the  technological  capability  of  manufacturing  and  information  industries  to  the  world 
advanced levels; 2) making the nation a world leader in overall agricultural S&T capability, raising 
the  comprehensive  capacity  of  China’s  agricultural  production,  and  ensuring  the  nation’s  food 
safety.;  3)  achieving  technological  breakthroughs  in  energy  development,  energy  conservation, 
and clean energy, and advocating optimized energy structures, with unit energy consumption of 
major  industrial  products  reaching  or  approaching  world  advanced  levels;  4)  establishing 
technological  development  models  featured  with  cyclic  economy  in  major  sectors  and 
municipalities,  and  providing  S&T  support  for  building  a  resource  saving  and  environment 
friendly  society;  5)  noticeably  enhancing  the  level  of  major  diseases  prevention  and  control, 

curbing  the  spread  of  major  diseases,  including  HIV/AIDS,  hepatitis  and  other  major  diseases, 
striving  for  breakthroughs  in  new  drugs  and  key  medical  equipment,  and  developing  a 
technological  capability  for  industrialization;  6)  in  defense  science  and  technology,  basically 
meeting  the  needs  in  developing  modern  arms  and  associated  information  technology,  and 
providing  S&T  support  for  safeguarding  national  security;  7)  establishing  a  world-caliber 
contingent of scientists and research teams, attaining high-impact innovative achievements in the 
mainstream  of  science  development,  bringing  the  technological  level  in  such  frontier  areas  as 
information, biology, materials, and space to world advanced levels; and 8) establishing a number 
of world-class research institutes and universities, and world-competitive industrial R&D centers 
so that a fairly comprehensive national innovation system of Chinese characteristics can take shape. 
  

By 2020, the nation’s gross expenditures on R&D (GERD) are expected to rise to 2.5% or 
above  of  the  gross  domestic  product(GDP)  with  the  rate  of  S&T  contribution  to  the  economy 
reaching 60% or above, and dependence on imported technology reduced to 30% or below, and 
the  annual  invention  patents  granted  to  Chinese  nationals  and  the  international  citations  of 
scientific papers moving into the top five countries.  
  

3.  Overall Deployment  

  

In the next 15 years, China’s S&T undertakings will be deployed as follows: 1) In light of 
our country’s concrete conditions and needs, identify a number of priority areas, break through 
some major technological snags so as to raise the nation’s overall S&T support capability.  This 
Outline identifies 11 priority areas for economic and social development, from which 68 priority 
topics of clearly defined missions and possible technical breakthrough in near term will be selected. 
2) Implement some special major projects that are in line with national objectives, and will lead to 
the leaping development or fill  up a blank. The Outline makes the arrangement  for  total  of 16 
special major projects. 3) To respond to future challenges, advance deployment will be made for 
frontier technologies and basic research topics, in order to ensure sustained innovative capability 
and  lead  future  economic  and  social  development.  The  Outline  selects  27  frontier  in  8 
technological fields, and 18 basic scientific issues as priorities. It also proposes to implement four 
major  scientific  research  programs.  4)  Deepen  the  S&T  system  reform  by  perfecting  relevant 
policies  and  measures,  increasing  S&T  investment,  strengthening  the  buildup  of  S&T  talents, 
and  promoting the creation of a national innovation system in order to provide reliable support for 
the nation to become an innovation-oriented society 
.  

Strategic  priorities  are  identified  according  to  the  urgent  needs  for  building  a  well-to-do 
society, international S&T development trends, and the nation’s overall strength. 1) Energy, water 
resources, and environmental protection related technologies are selected as priorities, in an effort 
to address major bottleneck issues in the economic and social development. 2) Efforts should be 
made  to grasp the rare opportunities presented by continued strong development of information 
technology and advanced materials, making proprietary intellectual property rights in equipment 
manufacturing and information industries a major breakthrough point for enhancing the nation’s 
industrial competitiveness. 3) Biotechnology is selected as a priority for the future development of 
the  high-tech  industry  together  with  enhanced  biotechnological  applications  to  agriculture, 
industry,  population  and  health.  4)  Accelerate  the  development  of  aerospace  and  marine 

technologies.  5)  Strengthen  basic  research  and  frontier  technology  development,  particularly 
interdisciplinary research.   
  

III. Main Areas and Priority Topics 

  

The nation’s S&T development shall be planned and deployed according to the principle of 
coordinated arrangement and advancement, with due consideration to priority areas and topics, so 
as  to  provide  full  and  forceful  support  for  addressing  urgent  issues  in  economic  and  social 
development”.   
  

Priority areas refer to such industries and sectors that are both critical to economic and social 
development  and  national  security  and  in  dire  need  of  S&T  support.  Priority  topics  within  the 
priority areas are defined as urgently needed technology clusters that have clearly defined missions, 
sound  technical  foundations,  and  promising  prospects  for  breakthroughs  in  the  near  term.  The 
principles for selecting priority topics are: 1) topics that are desirable for breaking up bottleneck 
constraints and for enhancing the sustainability of economic growth; 2) topics that are desirable 
for mastering key and enabling technologies and for improving core industrial competitiveness; 3) 
topics that are desirable for addressing major public good S&T issues and raising the capability in 
providing  public  services;  and  4)  topics  that  are  desirable  for  the  development  of  dual-use 
technologies designed to enhance the capability in ensuring national security.  
  

1.  Energy 

  

Energy is of crucial strategic importance to the national economy. Our country is currently 
suffering  from  sharp  discrepancies  between  energy  supply  and  demand,  an  irrational  energy 
structure,  and  low  energy  efficiency,  with  a  predominantly  coal-based  primary  energy 
consumption, resulting in severe environmental pollution. Over the next 15 years, meeting the fast 
growing demand for energy and for its clean and efficient utilization constitutes a major challenge 
for the development in energy-related science and technology.   
  

Development paths: 1) Take energy saving as a top priority and reduce energy consumption. 
Overcoming  technological  snags  critical  energy  saving  in  major  energy  consuming  sectors  and 
vigorously  develop  technologies  for  energy  saving  buildings  so  as  to  significantly  improve 
efficiency in primary and end use of energy. 2) Increase energy supply by promoting a diversified 
energy  structure.  While  raising  the  technological  level  of  oil-gas  utilization  and  hydroelectric 
power, it is encouraged to vigorously develop nuclear energy technology to acquire indigenous 
technology  development  capability  in  nuclear  power  systems.  Strive  for  breakthroughs  in 
renewable energy, including wind energy, solar energy, and biomass energy, and associated scale 
applications.  3)  Promote  clean  and  efficient  use  of  coal  in  order  to  reduce  environmental 
pollution.  It is encouraged to vigorously develop clean, efficient, and safe coal exploration and 
aim at the world advanced levels. 4) Strengthen the assimilation and absorption of imported energy 
technologies and associated re-innovation. Master core technologies in building major equipment 
for coal-fired and nuclear power generation. 5) Raise the technological capability of optimizing 
regional energy distribution.  Priorities will be given to developing advanced and reliable power 
transmission  and  distribution  technologies  to  realize  large  volume,  long  distance,  and  efficient 
power transmission.  

  
Priority topics:  
  
(1) Industrial energy efficiency 

Priorities will be given to research on and development of energy-saving technologies and 
equipment  for  major  high  energy  consumption  sectors,  including  process  industries,  such  as 
metallurgical,  chemical  industry,  and  transportation  industries.  Developing  energy-saving 
technologies for mechanical and electronic products, highly energy-efficient, long-life cycle LED 
products. Develop comprehensive utilization technologies at different energy gradients.  
  

(2) Clean, efficient coal development and utilization, coal liquefaction, and gasification-based 

co-generation 

Priorities  will  be  placed  on  developing  efficient  mining  technologies  and  equipment,  and 
efficient  power  generation  technology  and  equipment,  including  heavy  duty  gas  turbines, 
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC), high-parameter supercritical generators, and large 
supercritical  circulating  fluidized  beds  (CFB).  It  is  also  encouraged  to  develop  transformation 
technologies  for  coal  liquefaction,  coal  gasification,  coal  chemistry,  coal  gasification  based 
polygeneration,  and  technologies  and  equipment  for  comprehensive  control  and  utilization  of 
pollutants derived from coal burning. 
  

(3) Oil and gas prospecting, development, and utilization under complex geological conditions 
Priorities will be given to the development of technologies for oil-gas prospecting in complex 
environment and rock strata, technologies for efficient and scale development of low grade oil-gas 
resources,  technologies  for  increasing  oil  recovery  in  old  oil  fields,  and  technologies  for 
prospecting and mining deep oil-gas reserves. 
  

(4) Low-cost, large-scale development and utilization of renewable energy resources 

Emphasis  will  be  on  the  development  of  large  wind  power  generators,  construction 
technologies and equipment for coastal and inland wind fields as well as wind energy intensive 
areas in Western China, cost-effective technologies for solar photovoltaic batteries, technologies 
for solar-based power generation, technologies for built-in solar energy building structures, and 
technologies for developing and utilizing biomass and geothermal energy.  
  
(5) Safeguards of super large electricity transmission and distribution networks 

Priorities will be to develop technologies and equipment for long distance and large volume 
DC transmission, and for super high voltage AC transmission. Developing technologies for batch 
power  grid and  associated transmission and distribution, power quality monitoring and control, 
and  safe  power  supply  for  large  Internet  networks.，key  technologies  for  west-to-east  electric 
power diversion project, technologies for automated grid dispatch system, and technologies and 
systems for efficient transmission and distribution management.  
  
2．Water and Mineral Resources 
  

Water  and  mineral  resources  constitute  an  important  material  basis  for  the  sustainable 
economic and social development. Our country suffers from serious shortage of water and mineral 
resources,  a  low  rate  of  comprehensive  utilization  of  resources  such  as  mineral  resources  and 

irrigation water which far below that of internationally advanced levels. With complex geological 
conditions  for  resources  prospecting  and  increasing  difficulties,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for 
technologies that can improve resources prospecting and utilization and raise the level of resources 
utilization.    
  

Development paths: 1) Assign priority to resources saving. The focus will be research on 
technologies for agricultural water saving and urban cyclic water utilization, and technologies for 
trans-basin  water  diversion,  rainfall  and  flood  water  utilization,  and  sea  water  desalination.  2) 
Overcome  barriers  of  complex  geological  conditions  so  as  to  expand  the  existing  resources 
reserves.  Priorities  will  be  placed  on  studying  mine  formation  mechanism,  and  develop 
technologies for deep-mine evaluation and efficient prospecting, and fast prospecting technologies 
for  mineral  deposits  under  complex  geological  conditions  in  regions  such  as  the  Qinghai-Tibet 
Plateau.  Striving  to  discover  a  number  of  large  backup  resource  bases  for  additional  resources 
supply.  Develop  technologies  for  efficient  mining  and  comprehensive  utilization  in  order  to 
enhance  comprehensive  utilization  of  water  and  mineral  resources.  3)  Vigorously  develop  and 
utilize non-traditional resources.  Master key technologies for the development and utilization of 
coal-bed methane and marine minerals so as to raise the research and development capability of 
novel  resources  utilization.  4)  Strengthen  innovative  capability  in  developing  equipment  for 
resource prospecting. Vigorously develop technologies for high precision prospecting and drilling 
equipment, large mining machinery, and marine development platforms, to bring major resources 
prospecting equipment and facilities to world advanced levels.   
  
Priority topics:  
  

(6) Optimized distribution and comprehensive development and utilization of water resources 
Priorities will be given to developing technologies for the conversion and optimal distribution 
of atmospheric moisture, surface water, soil moisture, and underground water, technologies for the 
utilization  of  contaminated  water  and  rainfall  and  flood  water,  technologies  for  artificial  rain 
enhancement, and key technologies for water control projects in major river systems, including the 
Yangtze River and Yellow River, and for major hydrological projects such as the south-to-north 
water diversion project. 
  
(7) Comprehensive water conservation 

Priorities  will  be  to  developing  technologies  for  industrial  cyclic  utilization  of  water and 
water  efficient  production  activities.  Developing  outfitting  technologies  for  water  saving  in 
irrigation,  dry  land  farming,  and  biological  water  efficiency.  Strive  for  major  breakthroughs  in 
precision  irrigation  technology,  and  intelligent  farming  water  management  technology  and 
equipment. Develop water saving technologies and devices for daily life applications.  
  
(8) Seawater desalination 

Priorities will be given to developing technologies for seawater pre-handling, nuclear energy 
coupling  and  electricity-heat  cogeneration,  low-cost  membrane-based  desalination  and  critical 
materials,  and  comprehensive  utilization  of  salty  water.  Develop  seawater  desalination-based 
heating equipment for scale applications, seawater desalination facilities, and integrated coupling.   
  
(9)Resources prospecting for additional reserves  

technologies,  developing  air-born  geophysical  survey 

Priorities  shall  be  placed  on  studying  the  law  of  mineral  formation  mechanisms  and 
prediction 
techniques,  and  fast, 
comprehensive and in-depth prospecting technologies such as 3-D high-resolution earthquake and 
high-precision geomagnetism and geochemistry.   
  
(10) Efficient development and utilization of mineral resources 

Priorities will be on studying comprehensive technologies for deep and complex mining and 
wasteless mining; developing new processes and large equipment for automated ore preparation 
and smelting; and developing technologies for the utilization of low grade and complex mineral 
resources.  
  
(11) Development and utilization of maritime resources 

Priorities  shall  be  placed  on:  developing  prospecting  technologies  for  offshore  oil-gas 
deposits and comprehensive recovery technologies for thick-oil oilfields; developing technologies 
for  the  protection  and  effective  utilization  of  marine  biological  resources;  and  developing 
technologies for direct seawater utilization and comprehensive exploitation of seawater chemical 
resources.  
  
(12) Comprehensive zoning of resources 

Priorities will be given to: research on technologies for comprehensive optimization of water 
and  soil  resources,  farming  activities,  and  ecological  and  environmental  protection;  developing 
analytical techniques for the optimization of multi-variable based large area resources distribution 
corresponding  to  regional  distributions  of  water  and  land  resources;  and  establishing  decision-
making models for optimized development of water and land resources in different areas.  
  

2.  The Environment 

  

Ecological  and  environmental  improvement  constitutes  a  major  issue  concerning  the 
sustainable economic and social development and the quality of people’s livelihood. The country 
is  confronted  with  serious  environmental  pollution  problems,  with  an  increasingly  degraded 
ecosystem and a weak capability of handling pollutants. Global environmental issues have become 
an  international  concern.  China  needs  to  enhance  its  capability  in  being  involved  in  the  global 
efforts  for  environmental  change.  Sustaining  rapid  economic  growth  under  the  prerequisite  of 
overall  environmental  improvement  imposes  major  strategic  demands  for  innovation  in 
environment science and technology.   
  

Development  paths:  1)  Guiding  and  supporting  the  development  of  cyclic  economy. 
Vigorously  develop  integrated  clean  production  technologies  for  highly  polluting  industries, 
intensify the reduction of wastes and safe treatment of wastes, and strengthen the development of 
common technologies for the cyclic economy; 2) comprehensive control of regional environment. 
Conduct comprehensive control and treatment of water environment in drainage areas and regional 
atmospheric  pollution,  establish  technical  integration  and  demonstration  for  comprehensive 
control of typical ecologically degraded areas, and develop technologies for drinking water safety 
and  pre-warning  for  ecological  and  environmental  monitoring,  so  as  to  drastically  increase  the 
S&T  capability  for  environmental  quality  improvement.  3)  promoting  the  development  of 
environmental  protection  industry.  Priorities  will  be  given  to  developing  major  environmental 

protection equipment and facilities in line with the country’s concrete conditions, securing more 
market  share for domestic environmental protection products,  and raising  the technical  level  of 
environmental protection equipment. 4) Vigorously participate in international cooperation in the 
field of the  environment. Strengthen research on response strategies in implementing the global 
environment convention and on scientific uncertainties of climate change and their implications, 
develop  technologies  for  global  environmental  change  watch  and  greenhouse  gases  emission 
reduction, and enhance the capability in responding to environmental changes and in implementing 
the international convention.  
  
Priority topics:  
  
(13) Comprehensive pollutant control and waste recycling 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  pre-warning  technologies  for  regional  environmental  quality 
monitoring;  master  key  technologies  for  urban  atmospheric  pollution  control,  develop 
technologies for non-conventional pollutants, technologies for turning wastes into useful resources, 
and integration technologies for clean production in heavily polluting sectors; establish technical 
demonstration models for the cyclic economy. 
  

(14) Functional restoration and reconstruction of ecosystems in ecologically vulnerable areas 

Priorities will be given to developing dynamic monitoring technologies for typical vulnerable 
ecological areas, including Karst areas, the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, the middle and upper reaches 
of the Yangtze River and Yellow River, Loess Plateau, deserts and desertification lands, farming-
grazing  areas,  and  mining  areas;  developing  technologies  for  pasture  degradation  and  rodents 
control,  and  technologies  for  restoring  and  reconstruction  of  degraded  ecosystems;  developing 
ecological protection and restoration technologies for major engineering works such as the Three-
Gorge  Dam  project  and  the  Qinghai-Tibet  Railway,  and  complex  mining  areas;  establishing 
technical  support models for  restoring the functions of diverse ecosystems and maintaining the 
improvement; and establishing a comprehensive evaluation and technical assessment system for 
the functionality of ecosystems.  
  
(15) Maritime ecological and environmental protection  

Priorities will be given to developing technologies and equipment for marine ecological and 
environmental  monitoring,  strengthening  the  study  of  marine  ecological  and  environmental 
protection,  developing  technologies  for  offshore  ecological  and  environmental  protection  and 
repair,  and  sea  emergency  response  and  handling,  and  developing  high-precision  digital 
technologies for marine dynamic environment prediction.  
  
(16) Global environmental change watch and response strategies 

Priorities will be placed on developing technologies for accurate monitoring of large scale 
environmental  changes,  greenhouse  gases  emission  control  and  utilization,  including  carbon 
dioxide and methane utilization in major industries, biological carbon fixation and carbon fixation 
engineering, climate change study, biodiversity protection, ozone layer protection, and sustainable 
organic pollutants control. 
  

3.  Agriculture  

  

Agriculture  is  the  foundation  of  the  national  economy.  Our  country  is  increasingly 
constrained by natural  resources, with  its per  capita arable land and water resources noticeably 
lower  than  the  world  average.  The  growing  demand  for  major  agricultural  produces,  including 
grains  and  cotton,  and  pressures  of  yield  increase,  increasing  farmers’  income,  and  intensified 
competition  of  agricultural  products  will  be  a  long  standing  phenomenon.  China’s  agricultural 
structure  remains  irrational,  with  a  low  industrialization level  and  low  value-added  agricultural 
products.  The  poor  ecological  and  environmental  conditions  impose  serious  constraints  on  the 
sustainable agricultural development, coupled with thorny food and ecological safety problems. 
With the country’s basic situation and tough challenges it has to face, scientific and technological 
progress  constitutes a fundamental approach through which major agricultural problems  can be 
addressed.  It  includes  raising  the  agricultural  scientific  and  technological  level,  enhancing  the 
diffusion of advanced appropriate technologies, alleviating the constraints of resources, improving 
comprehensive  agricultural  productivity  in  a  sustainable  manner,  and  accelerating  the  pace  of 
agricultural modernization. 
  

Development  paths:  1)  Transform  conventional  farming  technologies  through  the 
introduction of high technologies so as to enhance comprehensive agricultural productivity in a 
sustainable manner. Priorities will be placed on carrying out research on applied biotechnology, 
strengthening  the  integration  and  compatibility  of  agricultural  technologies,  overcoming 
technological problems in crop breeding, efficient production, animal and aquatic breeding and 
production  and  diseases  control,  developing  diversified  compound  agricultural  operations, 
improving the quality of agricultural products, and sustaining yield increase. 2) Extend agricultural 
production chain in order to achieve an overall improvement of agriculture related industrialization 
and comprehensive  agricultural  returns. Priorities shall be given to  developing technologies for 
precision  and  deep  processing  of  agricultural  produce,  post-production  loss  reduction,  and 
commercial applications of green supply chains. Developing advanced technology and equipment 
for food processing and food safety monitoring. Developing a food processing industry featured 
with  healthy  foods,  and  a  modern  circulation  industry,  and  creating  more  room  for  increasing 
farmers’  income.  3)  Develop  technologies  for  comprehensive  agricultural  and  forestry 
development  while  ensuring  ecological  safety.  Priorities  will  be  to  develop  technologies  for 
environment  friendly fertilizers and pesticides, precision farming operations, resources-oriented 
utilization of agricultural and forestry residues, comprehensive agricultural environment control, 
promote the development of new farming industries, and raise the ecological environment quality 
of  agriculture  and  forestry.  4)  Develop  a  factory-like  agriculture  in  order  to  increase  labor 
productivity of farming activities. Priorities will be given to developing farming facilities related 
technologies, including farming environment regulation and efficient crop cultivation with super 
high  yield,  developing  modern  farm  machinery  with  multiple  functions,  and  accelerating  the 
integration and application of agriculture related information technology.  
  
Priority topics: 
  

(17) Germplasm development, preservation, and innovation in and targeted cultivation of new 

varieties 

Priorities  will  be  assigned  to  research  on  and  development  of  fine  agricultural  crop,  tree, 
pasture,  and  aquatic  species,  molecular  evaluation  of  germplasm,  animal  and  plant  molecular 

breeding  and  targeted  hybrid  breeding,  scale  seed  breeding,  reproduction,  and  comprehensive 
processing. 
  

(18)  Healthy  farming  practices  in  domestic  animals,  poultry,  and  aquatic  products,  and 

associated epidemic disease prevention and control  

Priorities will be on developing technologies for producing safe and high quality feedstuffs 
and facilities for scale healthy breeding; developing valid specific vaccines, and safe veterinary 
drugs and instruments; developing technologies for monitoring, diagnosing, preventing, treating 
and eradicating epidemic diseases affecting both  humans and animals; developing technologies 
for offshore and freshwater aquaculture and technologies and equipment for ocean-going fishery 
and storage and processing.  
  
(19) Deep processing and advanced storage and shipping of farm produce  

Priorities will rest on developing technologies and equipment for clean and deep processing 
of  agricultural  produce  and  specialty  agricultural  and  forestry  products,  post-production  loss 
reduction for grains and edible oils, green storage, fresh-keeping and delivery of live agricultural 
produce, and cold chain delivery.  
  
(20) Integrated development and utilization of ago-forest biomass  

Priorities will be on: developing key technologies for efficient, scale and low-cost cultivation, 
collection, and conversion of agricultural and forestry biomass; developing key technologies for 
biomass  energy  production,  including  methane,  fixed  and  liquid  fuels,  and  new  biomaterials; 
developing technologies for resource-oriented utilization of rural garbage and contaminated water, 
methane-based  power  generation,  and  new  biomaterial  equipment  possessing  proprietary 
intellectual property rights.  
  
(21) Agro-forest ecological safety and modern forestry 

Priorities will be placed on: developing technologies for establishing agriculture and forestry 
ecosystems,  technologies  for  regulating  forestry  and  pasture  ecosystems,  technologies  for 
monitoring, prevention and control of forest and pasture fires, and agriculture and forestry related 
diseases  and  pest  control;  developing  technologies  for  combating  biological  invasion  and 
ecological and meteorological disasters, technologies for the sustainable operation of ecological 
forestry  economy,  technologies  for  artificial  grassland  improvement  and  high  quality  grass 
breeding,  and  technologies  for  producing  environment  friendly  composite  materials  made  of 
bamboo or wood.  
  

(22) Development and production of environment-friendly fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, 

and eco-agriculture  

  

Priorities will be given to: developing key technologies for environment friendly fertilizers 
and  pesticides,  technologies  and  equipment  for  slow-release  fertilizers,  and  technologies  for 
comprehensive prevention and control of hazardous organisms featured with efficient, long lasting, 
and  safe  functions;  establishing  a  quarantine  pre-warning  system  n  response  to  invasion  of 
hazardous organisms; and developing environment friendly farming technologies that can improve 
soil  fertility,  reduce  soil  contamination  and  soil  erosion,  and  restore  the  functions  of  degraded 
grassland.  

  
(23) Multifunctional farm equipment and facilities 

Priorities  will  be  given  to:  research  on  and  development  of  key  multifunction  equipment 
suitable  for  our  country’s  farming  operations,  developing  economical  agriculture  and  forestry 
machinery, intelligent machinery with positioning and quantity adjustment functions, technologies 
and  equipment  for  healthy  breeding,  farming  machinery  and  technologies  with  protection 
functions, greenhouse facilities, and support equipment.  
  
(24) Precision farming and associated informatization  

Priorities will be given to developing digital technologies for collecting animal-plant growth 
and ecological environment related information, and technologies for real-time monitoring of soil 
elements, including moisture, fertilizer, light, and temperature; developing technical systems for 
precision  operation  and  management  and  digital  technology  dedicated  to  remote  rural  areas; 
developing technologies and equipment for viewable information service, agriculture and forestry 
ecosystem monitoring, and virtual farm technology. 
  
(25) Modern dairy industry 

Priorities will be assigned to research on and development of technologies for fast breeding 
of high quality stud bulls, and industrialized production of dairy cow fetus; developing advanced 
technologies  for  cow  feeds,  cultivation  and  effective  utilization  of  pasture;  developing 
technologies  for  diseases  prevention  and  control,  and  scale  breeding,  and  technologies  and 
equipment for dairy products deep processing.  
  

4.  Manufacturing Industry  

  

Manufacturing  industry  makes  a  mainstay  of  the  national  economy.  China  is  a  large 
manufacturing economy, but not yet a manufacturing power. China’s manufacturing technology 
has  a  weak  foundation,  with  a  limited  innovation  capability,  primarily  low-end  products,  high 
consumption of resources and energy, and serious pollution.  

Development  paths:  1)  raising  the  capability  of  equipment  design,  manufacturing,  and 
integration.  With  promoting  industrial  technological  innovation  as  a  starting  point,  realizing 
proprietary  design  and  manufacturing  of  high-end  programmed  machine  tools,  major  set 
equipment,  key  materials,  and  key  components;  2)  developing  environment  friendly 
manufacturing. Accelerating application of proven technologies in the entire manufacturing cycle 
of products, including materials and products development and design, processing, manufacturing, 
sale,  service,  recovery,  and  utilization.   Developing  environment  friendly  cyclic  manufacturing 
techniques featured with energy  efficiency. Making China’s manufacturing industry part of the 
internationally  advanced,  in  the  context  of  resources  consumption  and  environmental  loads;  3) 
transforming  and  upgrading  manufacturing  industry  using  high  technology.  Promoting 
information process in the industry, developing basic raw materials, raising the grade, technology 
content, and added values of products, and uplifting the overall technical level of manufacturing 
industry.   
  
Priority topics:  
  
(26) Basic and generic parts and components 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  key  technologies  for  major  basic  and  generic  parts  and 
components  and  associated  design,  manufacturing,  and  mass  production;  develop  advanced 
moulding and processing technologies for large and special parts and components; develop design 
and  manufacturing  technologies  for  generic  parts  and  components  as  well  as  precision  test 
instruments. 
  
(27) Digital and intelligent design and manufacturing 

Priorities  will  be  on  given  to  research  on  digital  design,  manufacturing,  and  integration 
technologies,  and  establish  a  number  of  industrial  platforms  for  digital  product  design  and 
manufacturing.  Develop  product-cycle  oriented  innovative  and  network-based  digital  and 
intelligent design approaches and technologies, computer-aided engineering analysis and process 
design and integration technologies.  
  
(28) Green, automated process industry and corresponding equipment 

Priorities will be to develop environment friendly processes and manufacturing technologies 
as  well  as  techniques,  processes  and  equipment  for  efficient  and  clean  utilization  of  resources; 
develop technologies for process scale-up, ecological industry concept-based system integration 
and automation; develop sensors and intelligent testing and control technologies, equipment, and 
control systems needed by process industries. Develop large cracking furnace technology, large 
steam  ethylene  cracking  technology  and  set  equipment,  and  large  energy  efficient  chemical 
fertilizer process and equipment.  
  
(29) Recycling iron and steel process techniques and equipment 

Priorities will be given to research on and development of new generation circular iron and 
steel processes based on smelting reduction and optimized utilization of resources, and with the 
combination of production, energy conversion, and recycling of wastes, which will be made a role 
model for the circular economy. Develop technologies for cyclic utilization of secondary resources, 
cogeneration technology for metallurgical processes, and gradient utilization technology for low 
thermal value steam. Develop technologies for efficient and low-cost clean steel production, non-
adhesive coking, integration design, manufacturing, and system coupling technologies for large 
continuous plate casters and continuous rollers. 
  
(30) Large-scale marine engineering technologies and equipment 
  
(31) Basic raw materials 

To  meet  the  needs  of  the  primary  industry,  priorities  will  be  placed  on  developing 
technologies for manufacturing high-performance composite materials and super large compound 
components, high-performance engineering plastics, light high-intensity metals and inorganic non-
metal  structural  materials,  high-purity  materials,  rare  earth  materials,  petrochemicals,  precision 
chemicals, catalysts, separating materials, light textile materials and associated applications, and 
environment friendly green and healthy materials.  
  
(32) Next-generation information functional materials and components  
  
(33)Key accessory materials and engineering processes for the defense industry 
  

5.  Transportation 

  

Transportation  represents  the  lifeline  of  the  national  economy.  Currently,  the  country’s 
existing  major  transport  facilities  and  core  technologies  deplore  a  large  gap  from  the  world 
advanced  levels,  as  characterized  by  inadequate  transport  capability,  lagging  construction  of 
comprehensive transport systems, poor coordination of various means of transportation, and high 
energy consumption and severe environmental pollution.    The construction of a full-fledged well-
to-do  society  imposes  greater  demand  for  the  transportation  sector,  calling  for  significant 
improvement of transport science and technology.  
  

Development path: 1) enhance indigenous innovative capability in aircraft, automobile, ship, 
and rail transport; 2) aim at providing a smooth, convenient and humanized transport services by 
strengthening  coordinated planning, developing technologies for traffic information  system and 
intelligent  process,  and  safe  and  high-speed  transport  systems,  improving  transport  networks’ 
capability  and  efficiency,  realizing  traffic  information  sharing  and  effective  connection  among 
different  traffic  means,  uplifting  the  technical  level  of  traffic  operation  management,  and 
developing  an integrated transport system;  3) promote the development  of transportation in  the 
direction  of  energy  efficiency,  environmental  protection,  and  safety  by  striving  for  major 
breakthroughs in key technologies necessary for such improvement; 4) master key technologies 
for the construction and maintenance of major national transport infrastructure while improving 
construction quality and cost-effectiveness. 
  
Priority topics: 
  

(34) Transport infrastructure construction and maintenance technologies and equipment   

Priorities will be given to developing critical technologies and equipment with respect to rail 
transport, cross-bay routes, offshore deep water harbors, large airports, large bridges and tunnels, 
integrated  3-D  traffic  hubs,  deep-sea  oil-gas  pipelines,  and  other  sophisticated  transportation 
infrastructure. 
  
(35) High-speed rail transport systems 

Priorities will be given to research on and development of key technologies for high speed 
rail transport control and speed regulation systems, locomotive building, rail line construction, and 
system integration in order to acquire set technologies. Carry out operation tests so as to master 
technologies for operation control, rail line construction, and system integration.  
  
(36) Energy-efficient and New Energy-based automobiles 

Priorities will be assigned to research on and development of key technologies for design, 
integration, and manufacturing of hybrid, alternative fuel, and fuel cell automobiles, power system 
integration  and  control  technologies,  automobile  computation  platform  technologies,  and 
technologies for high-efficiency and low-emission internal combustion engines, fuel cell engines, 
accumulator  batteries,  driving  motors,  and  other  critical  components,  and  technologies  for 
developing experiment and test techniques and infrastructure for automobiles using new energy.  
  
(37) Efficient transport technologies and equipment 

Priorities will be given to research on and development of heavy duty passenger cars, large 
power locomotives, special heavy duty vehicles, urban rail transit systems, large high-tech ships, 
large ocean-going fishing boats, scientific expedition ships, and novel shipping tools, including 
lower-altitude multipurpose aircrafts, and high  viscosity crude oil and multiphase flow pipeline 
transport systems.  
  
(38) Intelligent traffic control systems 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  technologies  for  traffic  information  platforms,  information 
sharing, modern logistic systems, urban traffic control systems, intelligent automobiles, and new 
-generation air traffic control systems.  
  
(39) Transport safety and emergency safeguards 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  technologies  for  traffic  accident  prevention  and  pre-warning, 
emergency  handling,  active/passive  safety  for  transport  tools,  techniques  for  traffic  accident 
reconstruction, fast traffic emergency response system, and quick search and rescue missions. 
  

6.  Information industry and Modern Service Industry 

  

The development of information industry and modern service industry constitutes a key link 
in  advancing  the  new  industrialization  drive.  The  increasingly  information  technology-based 
national economy and modern service industry impose a higher demand for the development of 
information technology.  
  

Development  paths:  1)  strive  for  breakthroughs  in  core  technologies  that  constrain  the 
development of information industry and master core technologies for integrated circuits and key 
components, major software, high performance computers, broadband mobile telecommunication, 
and the next generation internet, in order to upgrade indigenous development capability and overall 
technological level; 2) strengthen integrated innovation in information technology products and 
improve  design  and  manufacturing  capability  so  as  to  ensure  scalability,  user  friendliness,  and 
cost-effectiveness of information technology products, nurture new technologies and businesses, 
and enhance the competitiveness of information industry; 3) driven by market demand, attach more 
importance to and strengthen integrated innovation and develop  technologies and products  that 
support and lead the development of modern service industry while promoting the transformation 
and  technological  upgrading  of  the  traditional  industries;  4)  with  attention  focused  on  creating 
highly  credible  networks,  develop  network  information  security  technologies  and  products, 
establish  technical  support  systems  for  information  security,  and  develop  the  technological 
capability in handling information security emergencies.  
  
Priority topics: 
  

(40)  Enabling  information  technology  and  large  application  software  for  modern  service 

industry 

Priorities  will  be  given  to  developing  highly  credible  online  software  platforms,  large 
enabling  application  software,  mediumware,  built-in  software,  grid  computation  platforms  and 
infrastructure,  software  system  integration,  and  overall  solutions  required  by  modern  service 

industry,  including  finance,  logistics,  online  education,  media,  health  care  health,  tourism,  e-
government, and e-commerce. 
  
(41) Major next-generation internet technologies and services  

Priorities  will  be  to ：   develop  key  technologies  for  high  performance  core  network 
equipment,  transmission  equipment,  and  connecting  equipment;  develop  key  technologies  for 
scalability,  security,  mobility,  service  quality,  and  operation  management;  establish  a  credible 
network  management  system;  develop  intelligent  terminals  and  household  network  equipment, 
and develop broadband related new businesses and applications such as multimedia and network 
computation.  
  
(42) High performance, dependable computers  

Emphasizing  the  development  of  computation  methods  and  theories  that  embody  new 
concept, efforts will be made to develop new concept-based super trustworthy computer with at 
least a thousand trillion floating-point operations per second and the next generation server systems, 
and develop a range of key technologies for innovative system structures, mass storage, and fault 
tolerance.  
  
(43) Sensor networks and intelligent information processing 

Priorities  will  be  assigned  to:  developing  new  sensors  and  technologies  for  advanced 
automatic  barcode  identification,  radio  frequency  tags,  and  multiple  sensor  information-based 
intelligent information processing; developing low-cost sensor networks and real-time information 
processing  systems;  and  providing  more  convenient  and  more  powerful  information  service 
platforms and environment.  
  
(44) Digital media content platforms  

Priorities  shall  be  to  develop  critical  technologies  concerning  digital  media  content 
processing for a range of business sectors, including the cultural and entertainment market, radio 
and  TV  broadcasting,  and  audio-video  information  services,  developing  comprehensive  media 
information content platforms featuring easy accessibility, interaction, copyright protection, and 
effective management. 
  
(45) High definition large flat-panel display  

including  high  definition 

Priorities  will  be  given  to  developing  a  range  of  flat-panel  and  projection  display 
technologies, 
flat-panel  display  products,  organic 
electroluminescent display, field emission display, and laser display, with a view to establishing 
an industrial chain for flat-panel display materials and components.  
  
(46) Core application-oriented information security 

large 

Priorities  shall  be  to  develop  security  technologies  concerning  national  infrastructure 
information network and important information systems, develop novel coding technologies for 
network survival under complex large systems, active real-time protection, safe storage, network 
virus control, prevention of vicious attacks on web pages, and network credit systems.  
  

7.  Population and Health 

  

Building a harmonious society calls for stabilizing a low birth rate, raising population quality, 
and effectively preventing and controlling major diseases. Controlling population and improving 
population quality and health all depend on powerful support from science and technology.  
  

Development paths: 1) Birth rate control and population capacity building. Priorities will be 
given to acquiring key technologies for birth rate monitoring and reproductive health, developing 
a  series  of  drugs,  instruments,  and  health  products  for  reproductive  health  to  ensure  that  the 
country’s population is below 1.5 billion and birth defect rate is below 3%. 2) While adhering to 
the  principle  of  prevention  first  and  combining  health  improvement  and  diseases  control  and 
treatment,  carry  out  studies  on  critical  technologies  for  disease  prevention  and  early  diagnosis, 
thus ensuring markedly improved capability in the diagnosis and prevention and treatment of major 
diseases. 3) Strengthen inheritance and innovation in Traditional Chinese Medicine(TCM) and 
promote  TCM  modernization  and  internationalization.  While  inheriting  and  developing  TCM 
theory, efforts shall be made to establish technical approaches and standard regulatory systems for 
TCM through technological innovation and multi-disciplinary interaction so as to improve clinical 
treatment and promote a sound development of TCM. 4) Develop major new drugs and advanced 
medical  equipment. While overcoming key technological  snags in  developing new drugs, large 
medical equipment, medicinal materials, and drug release systems, accelerate the establishment of 
a national technical platform for drug development and propel indigenous innovation in major new 
drugs and novel medical equipment.  
  
Priority topics:  
  

(47) Safe contraception and family planning, and birth defects prevention and treatment 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  new  technologies  and  products  for  safe  and  effective 
contraception  and  for  the  prevention  of  sexually  transmitted  diseases,  develop  technologies  for 
efficient and safe early screening, test and diagnosis of birth defects and for biological treatment 
of inherited diseases.  
  

(48)  Prevention and treatment of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases,  malignancies, 

and other major non-infectious diseases 

Priorities will be given to developing key technologies for early warning and diagnosis of 
major diseases, including cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases and tumors, and for early 
intervention  in  disease  risk  factors  while  developing  key  technologies  and  solutions  for 
standardized, individualized and integrated treatment. 
  

(49)  Prevention and treatment of  common, frequently-occurring diseases  in urban and rural 

communities  

Priorities  will  be  given  to  research  on  and  development  of  technologies  for  monitoring, 
preventing,  diagnosing,  and  treating  frequently  occurring  and  common  diseases  in  addition  to 
developing  compact  mobile  medical  service  equipment  and  distance  diagnosis  and  technical 
service systems. 
  
(50) Traditional Chinese Medicine: impartation and innovation 

Priorities will be given to encouraging innovation in basic TCM theory, and inheriting and 
tapping  on  TCM  experience,  studying  TCM  diagnosis  and  therapy  and  associated  assessment 

techniques  and  standards,  carrying  out  research  on  and  development  of  modern  TCM  and 
manufacturing technologies. These efforts are designed to protect and utilize TCM resources in an 
effective and rational manner while strengthening the protection of intellectual property rights and 
establishing international cooperation platforms. 
  
(51) Advanced medical equipment and bio-medicinal materials 

Priorities will be to develop novel therapeutic equipment and conventional diagnostic and 
therapeutic  equipment,  digital  medical  technologies,  and  individualized  medical  engineering 
technologies and equipment in addition to studying nanotechnology-based biological drug release 
systems  and  tissue  engineering  and  developing  innovative  bio-medicinal  materials  such  as 
including proxy human tissues and organs.  
  
9. Urbanization and City Development 
  

China has entered a phase of rapid urbanization. Urbanization process and coordinated urban 

development are in earnest need of science and technology.  

  
Development paths: 1) By stressing scientific urban planning in cities and towns, efforts will 
be made to promote rational layout of urban and rural areas and associated scientific development. 
Develop key technologies for modern urban planning and dynamic monitoring and control so as 
to realize an organic combination of urban development planning and regional economic planning 
in response to the sustaining capacity of regional resources and environment. 2) In light of energy 
and  water  efficiency,  establish  resource  saving  cities,  strive  for  technological  breakthroughs  in 
urban  energy  efficiency  and  rational  development  and  utilization  of  new  energy,  and  develop 
resource efficient, long durability, green construction materials so in order to raise urban resources 
and  energy  efficiency.  3)  Raise  comprehensive  urban  management  level  by  strengthening  the 
application of information technology. Develop integrated digital urban management technology 
in  order  to  establish  an  efficient,  multifunctional,  and  integrated  technical  system  for  urban 
management.  4) Develop urban ecological residential environment and green building structures 
and noticeably improve urban living environment by utilizing technologies for hazardless handling 
and recycling of urban sewages and garbage and developing environment friendly technologies 
for improving urban residential areas and indoor environment, and noticeably raising the quality 
of urban living environment. 
  
Priority topics: 
  
(52) Urban planning and dynamic monitoring  

Priorities will be set up to develop technologies for urban layout design and system design, 
and  urban  infrastructures  and  public  service  facilities  planning  and  design.  Developing 
technologies  for  integrated  configuration  and  associated  sharing,  and  interactive  simulating 
prediction  and  dynamic  monitoring  of  a  range  of  urban  elements,  including  urban  planning, 
population, resources, environment, and economic development. 
  
(53) Uplifting urban functions and space efficiency 

Priorities will be to develop a range of technologies involving urban traffic system, intelligent 
urban  public  transit  management,  urban  utility  infrastructures,  and  disaster  prevention  and 

mitigation,  studying  the  formation  mechanism  of  urban  hot-island  effect  and  artificial  control 
technology,. Developing technologies for land mapping and resource saving, simulation prediction 
of urban spatial changes, and urban underground development and utilization. 
  
(54) Architecture energy efficiency and green buildings  

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  green  architecture  design  technologies,  architecture  energy-
saving  technology  and  equipment,  renewable  energy  devices,  and  integrated  application 
technology,  precision  construction  technologies  and  equipment,  energy  efficiency  and  green 
construction materials, and energy efficiency architecture standards. 
  
(55) Urban ecological residential environment and quality control  

Priorities  shall  be  given  to  developing  technologies  for  indoor  pollutants  monitoring  and 
cleanup,  ecological  control  of  urban  environment,  and  recycling  of  urban  garbage,  cyclic 
utilization of water, urban pollution control, minimal emission in residential areas, and intelligent 
management of ecological residential areas. 
  
(56) Urban information platforms 

Priorities will be to develop technologies for sharing urban online information, urban basic 
data  acquisition  and  updating,  urban  data  consolidation  and  mining,  multi-dimensional  urban 
construction  modeling  and  simulation,  urban  dynamic  monitoring  systems  and  associated 
application,  standards  for  urban  online  information  sharing,  and  urban  emergency  response 
services.  
  
10. Public Security 

Public security constitutes a footstone for national security and social stability. The country’s 
public  security  is  facing  severe  challenges,  which  in  turn  raises  major  strategic  demands  for 
scientific and technological support.  
  

Development paths: 1) Strengthen technical support for quick response to and handling of 
emergency events. With application of information and intelligent technologies at the core, efforts 
will  be  made  to  develop  a  national  public  security  system  featured  with  multifunction  and 
integrated emergency response support. Establish a public security technical system consisting of 
scientific prediction, effective prevention and control, and quick response mechanism. 2) Improve 
the capability of early detection and prevention. Priorities will be given to studies on technologies 
for monitoring, warning, and preventing coalmine and other production-related accidents, social 
emergency events, natural disasters, nuclear safety, and biosecurity. 3) Enhance comprehensive 
response and rescue capability. Focus shall rest on developing rescue technologies for coalmine 
disasters, major fires, major natural disasters, leakage of hazardous chemicals, and mass poisoning. 
4)  Accelerate  the  modernization  of  public  security  equipment  and  facilities.  Develop  major 
equipment  for  production  safety,  food  safety,  biosecurity  and  public  safety,  and  associated 
protection products and the relevant industries. 
  
Priority topics: 
  
(57) National public security emergency information platforms  

Priorities will be to develop technologies for all-round and obstacle-free risk source detection 
and  monitoring,  precision  positioning,  and  information  acquisition.  Develop  technologies  for 
multi-scale dynamic information analysis and handling, and decision making. Develop integration 
technology for a national public security emergency command platform and establish an integrated 
emergency decision-making platform featured with early monitoring, quick advance warning, and 
efficient handling.  
  
(58) Major workplace accidents warning and rescue 

Priorities will be to develop pre-warning and control technologies and associated equipment 
for  mine  gas,  water  bursting,  power  failures,  and  major  industrial  accidents,  including  open 
burning, explosion, and hazardous leakage. 
  
(59) Food safety and border entry-exit inspection and quarantine  

Priorities shall be to work on a range of key technologies concerning food safety and entry-
exit  quarantine  related  risk  assessment,  pollutants  tracking,  safety  standard  formulation,  and 
quarantine  monitoring  and  testing,  and  develop  intelligent  technologies  for  food  contamination 
prevention and control and high flux quarantine monitoring. 
  
(60) Major public emergency prevention and quick response  

Priorities will be set to work on technologies involving individual biological characteristic 
identification,  evidence  gathering,  quick  screening,  ratification,  and  simulation  prediction, 
technologies and equipment for distance positioning and tracking, real-time monitoring, evidence 
identification, and quick handling, fire-fighting in high-rise buildings and underground structures, 
distance probe of explosives, illegal drugs, and nuclear and biological sources of terrorism, and 
on-site handling and protection.  
  
(61) Biosafety measure 

Priorities will be to produce a range of technologies involving fast, sensitive, and specific 
monitoring  and  detecting,  including  technologies  capable  of  detecting  in-body  toxic  chemicals, 
advanced  disinfectors  and  fast  disinfection,  hazardous  medium  identification  and  control, 
biological invasion prevention and control, and vaccines, immunoadjuvant , antitoxin, and other 
drugs. 
  
(62) Major natural disasters prevention and preparedness 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  key  technologies  for  monitoring,  warning,  and  emergency 
handling  of  earthquakes,  typhoons,  torrential  rains,  floods,  and  geological  disasters;  develop 
monitoring  and  warning  technologies  for  forest  fire,  dam  breakage  and  leakage,  and  risk 
assessment techniques for major natural disasters.  
  

11. 

National defense 

  

IV. Major Special Projects 

  

Historically, the implementation of major special projects represented by A-bomb, H-bomb, 
satellites, manned space  flights,  and hybrid rice has played  a crucial role in enhancing China’s 
comprehensive strength. The United States, Europe, Japan, Korea, and others have all made the 

implementation of major special projects to meet national goals an important measure in raising 
their national competitiveness.   
In  the  course  of  defining  priority  topics  in  the  main  areas,  a  number  of  major  special  projects 
involving strategically important products, critical common technologies, and major engineering 
projects, are identified in line with national objectives. These major special projects are designed 
to strive for breakthroughs, taking full advantage of the socialist system in pooling up resources to 
do big things and the role of the market economy system as well. These major special projects are 
expected to spring from  scientific and technological progress in limited areas to a leapfrogging 
development in overall productivity while helping fill up the country’s strategic blanks. The basic 
principles under which major special projects are screened out are as follows:  
  

1) strategic industries that are closely linked to the major demands of the nation’s economic 
and social development, capable of coming up with core proprietary intellectual property rights, 
and  having  a  major  impact  on  indigenous  innovative  capacity  at  the  enterprise  level;  2)  key 
enabling  technologies  that  have  an  overarching  bearing  on  raising  the  overall  industrial 
competitiveness; 3) efforts that are aimed at overcoming major bottlenecks to economic and social 
development; 4) activities that combine both civilian and defense efforts or make defense part of 
the civilian industry and have a major strategic importance to maintaining national security and 
strengthening  comprehensive  national  strength;  5)  efforts  that  are  in  line   with  the  nation’s 
development  status  and  within the reach of its strength.  It  is  according to  the above-mentioned 
principles that a number of major special projects are selected to address a range of issues involving 
high  tech  industry  development,  traditional  industry  transformation,  bottlenecks  to  the  nation’s 
economic development,  raising people’s health level, and safeguarding national security. These 
major special projects will be implemented upon a further review and approval case by case in 
light  of  ranking  priority  of  the  nation’s  development  requirement  and  necessary  conditions  for 
implementation.  
  

In addition, dynamic readjustment will be made to pace the implementation of these major 
special projects as determined by the nation’s strategic needs and changing situation. For the major 
special projects aiming at strategic products, enterprises are expected to be the principal player in 
terms  of  research  and  development  and  investment.  They  will  start  from  research  on  and 
development  of  major  equipment  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  allocating  S&T  resources  through 
market mechanism while the starting fund appropriated by the state will be mainly used to address 
key and core technological snags. 
  

Major special projects are major strategic products, critical common technologies, and major 
engineering projects which are selected for realizing national objectives and must be completed 
by massing resources and making breakthroughs in core technologies within a set period of time, 
thus being the top priority in the nation’s science and technology development. The Outline has 
defined 16 major special projects, including core electronic devices, high-end generic chips and 
basic  software,  super  large-scale  integrated  circuit  manufacturing  technology  and  associated 
techniques,  the  next  generation  broadband  mobile  telecommunication,  high-end  numerically 
controlled machine tools and basic manufacturing technology, the development of large oil-gas 
fields and coal-bed methane, large advanced pressurized water reactors and high temperature gas-
coolant  reactor  nuclear  power  stations,  water  body  contamination  control  and  treatment,  new 
genetically  modified  varieties,  major  new  drugs,  prevention  and  treatment  of  major  infectious 

diseases  such  as  HIV/ADIS  and  viral  hepatitis,  large  passenger  aircrafts,  high  resolution  earth 
observation systems, manned space flights, and the moon probe.  The major special projects cover 
a  range  of  strategic  sectors  including  information  and  biotechnology,  major  pressing  issues 
concerning  energy,  resources,  the  environment,  and  public  health,  dual-use  technologies,  and 
defense technologies.  
  

V. Frontier Technologies 

  

Frontier technologies refer to major visionary, pioneering, and exploratory technologies in 
the realm of high technology. Frontier technologies constitute an important basis on which future 
high  technologies  stem  out  and  emerging  industries  grow.  They  represent  a  nation’s 
comprehensive high-tech innovation capability. Frontier technologies are selected in accordance 
with  the  following  principles:  1)  representing  the  development  direction  of  world  high-tech 
frontiers; 2) having a pioneering role in shaping and developing new industries in the future; 3) 
being  conducive  to  industrial  technology  upgrading  and  for  realizing  the  leapfrogging 
development; and 4) possessing a strong team of talented personnel and a sound R&D basis. Under 
the  above-mentioned  principles,  a  number  of  frontier  technologies  will  be  pre-deployed  in  an 
attempt to lead the future S&T development and raise the nation’s high-tech R&D capability and 
international competitiveness.  
  

1.  Biotechnology 

  

Biotechnology and life science  will become  an important  force triggering  a new  round of 
S&T  revolution  in  the  21st  century.  Genomics  and  proteomics  studies  are  leading  advances  in 
biotechnology in the direction of systemized research. Genome sequencing and genetic structure 
analysis  have  turned  in  the  direction  of  functional  genomic  studies  and  the  discovery  and 
application of functional genes. Drugs and animal-plant based directional molecular design and 
construction  have  become  an  important  direction  for  species  and  drug-related  studies. 
Development and application of frontier technologies, including biochips, stem cells, and tissue 
engineering,  breeds  major  breakthroughs  in  diagnosis,  therapeutic  treatment,  and  regenerative 
medicine.  Critical breakthroughs are required in the fields of functional genome, proteomics, stem 
cells, and therapeutic cloning, tissue engineering, biocatalysis, and conversion technologies. 
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(1) Target identification technology 

Target  identification  is  important  for  developing  new  drugs,  biodiagnostics,  and 
biotreatment.  Efforts  shall be focused on studying scale identification of key  genetic functions 
and their regulatory networks in the physiological and pathological process, making breakthroughs 
in  techniques  for  identification  of  functions  of  disease-causing  genes,  expression  manipulation, 
target screening, and verification, and innovative new drug manufacturing from “gene to drug”.  
  
(2) Plant-animal varieties and drug molecular design technology 

Plant-animal species and drug molecular design technology is made up of molecul docking, 
molecule simulation, and molecule design based on biomacromolecules’ 3-D structures. Priorities 
shall  be  given  to  studying  protein  and  dynamic  cellular  process  and  associated  bioinformatic 

analysis,  consolidation,  and  simulation.  Develop  virtual  plant-animal  species  and  drug  design 
technology,  simulation  technology  for  plant-animal  species  growth  and  pharmaceutical 
metabolism engineering, computer aided composite bank design, synthesizing, and screening.  
  
(3)Gene manipulation and protein engineering technology 

Gene manipulation technology is a key link to the utilization of genetic resources. Protein 
engineering constitutes an important approach to efficient utilization of genetic products. Efforts 
will  be  focused  on  developing  technologies  for  highly  effective  expression  and  regulation, 
chromosome  structuring  and  positioning,  coded  protein  gene  design  and  transformation 
technology,  protein  peptide  chain  decoration  and  restructuring  technology,  protein  structure 
analyzing technology, and scale protein isolation and purification technology. 
  
(4) Stem cell based human tissue engineering technology 

Stem cell technology is a process that can be used to develop in-vitro stem cells, or harvest 
different tissues or cells clinically needed through directional induced differentiation or isolation. 
It also can construct in-vitro human organs for replacement and repairing treatment. Priorities shall 
be  to  develop  therapeutic  cloning  technology,  in-vitro  stem  cells  construction  and  directional 
induction  technology,  in-vitro  human  tissue  construction  and  associated  scale  production 
technology, multiple human cell-based sophisticated tissue construction and dysfunction repairing 
technology, and biomanufacturing technology.  
  
(5) New-generation Industrial biotechnology 

Biocatalysis  and  biotransformation  constitute  the  mainstream  of  the  new  generation 
industrial biotechnology. Priorities will be to develop scale screening technology for functional 
strains,  directional  biocatalyst  upgrading  technology,  biocatalysis  technology  system  for  scale 
industrial  production,  clean  transformation  media  manufacturing  technology,  and  associated 
industrialized transformation process.  
  

2.  Information Technology  

  

As information  technology  will continue to  develop  in  the direction of high performance, 
low-cost, pervasive computation, and intelligent process, seeking new and innovative computing 
and processing approaches and associated physical  realization represents  a major for the future 
development  of  information  technology.  The  crossing  and  integration  of  nanotechnology, 
biotechnology,  and  cognitive  science  will  induce  advances  in  information  technology  that  are 
human-centered,  image  and  natural  language  comprehension-based,  and  featuring  biological 
characteristics, thus promoting innovation in numerous fields. Priorities will be to develop low-
cost ad hoc networks, individualized intelligent robots and human-machine interactive systems, 
high-flexibility attack free data networks, and advanced information security systems.  
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(6) Intelligent sensing technology   

Research  will  be  focused  on  intelligent  information  processing  and  control  technologies 
based on biological characteristics and image and natural language comprehension and centered 

on humans, while developing processing systems for Chinese language information, systematic 
technologies involving biological characteristics identification, and intelligent traffic systems.  
  
(7) Ad hoc network technology 

Priorities  will  be  to  develop  technologies  for  ad  hoc  mobile  networks,  ad  hoc  computing 
networks, ad hoc storage networks, and ad hoc sensor networks, low-cost real-time information 
processing  systems,  multi-sensor  information  integration,  individualized  interactive  interface, 
high-flexibility  attack  free  data  networks,  advanced  information  security  systems,  and  ad  hoc 
intelligent system and intelligent personal system.  
  
(8) Virtual reality technology  

Research  will  be  focused  on  technologies  for  integrating  different  disciplines,  including 
electronics,  psychology,  cybernetics,  computer  graphics,  database  design,  real-time  distribution 
system,  and  multimedia  technology  in  addition  to  studying  virtual  reality  technologies  and 
associated systems for related fields, including medicine, entertainment, arts, education, military 
affairs, and industrial manufacturing management. 
  

3.  Advanced Materials Technology  

  

Advanced  material  technology  will  go  for  composite  structural  functions,  intelligent 
functional  materials,  integration  of  materials  and  components,  and  environment-  friendly 
manufacturing and applications. Efforts will be made in seeking breakthroughs in material design, 
assessing, and characterizing, and in advanced manufacturing and processing technologies. Based 
on  studies  in  nano-science,  develop  nanomaterials  and  nanocomponents,  special  functional 
materials such as superconductor materials, intelligent materials, energy materials, super structural 
materials, and new generation optoelectronic information materials.  
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(9) Intelligent materials and structural technology 

Intelligent  materials  and  intelligent  structures  constitute  a  smart  or  intelligent  structural 
systems that integrate sensors, control, and drive (execution) and other functions. Priorities will be 
to develop technologies for intelligent material manufacturing and processing, intelligent structure 
design and manufacturing, key equipment monitoring, and failure control. 
  
(10) High-temperature superconducting technology   

Research  will  be  focused  on  novel  high-temperature  superconducting  materials  and 
associated manufacturing technology, superconducting cables, superconducting motors, and high 
performance superconducting electric devices while studying a range of sensitive detecting devices 
such  as  superconducting  biomedical  elements,  high-temperature  superconducting  filters,  high-
temperature superconducting injury-free detectors, and scanning magnetic microscopes. 
  
(11) Efficient energy material technology  

Research  will  be  focused  on  critical  technologies  for  solar  cell  related  materials  and 
associated key technologies, critical technologies for fuel cell materials, high volume hydrogen 
storage material technology, efficient rechargeable cell materials and associated key technologies, 

key  super  capacitor  materials  and  associated  manufacturing  technology,  and  efficient  energy 
conversion and storage material systems.  
  

4.  Advanced Manufacturing Technology  

  

Advanced manufacturing technology will be increasingly based on information, extremism, 
and  environmental  friendliness.  Such  a  tendency  will  create  a  foundation  on  which  future 
manufacturing industry will survive, and a key link to its sustainable development. Efforts will be 
focused  on  overcoming  difficulties  in  extreme  manufacturing  technology,  system  integration, 
coordination technology, intelligent manufacturing and application technology, set equipment and 
system design and verification technology, high reliability-based large sophisticated systems and 
equipment design technology.  
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(12) Extreme manufacturing technology 

Extreme manufacturing refers to the manufacturing components or functional systems at an 
extreme scale (extremely large or extremely small) or with extremely  powerful functions under 
extreme conditions or environment. Research will be focused on design, manufacturing, and test 
technologies for micro and nanometer electro-mechanic systems, and technologies for micro and 
nanometer  manufacturing,  super  precision  manufacturing,  giant  system  manufacturing,  and 
intense field manufacturing. 
  
(13) Intelligent service robots  

An intelligent service robot is an intelligent equipment integrated with a number of high-tech 
elements, able to provide diverse services needed by humans, in a non-structural environment. The 
focus will be on service robots and dangerous operation robots in order to study common basic 
technologies,  including  design  approaches,  manufacturing  techniques,  intelligent  control,  and 
application system integration.  
  
(14) Service life prediction technology for major products and facilities  

Service  life  prediction  technology  for  major  products  and  facilities  represents  a  key 
technology for improving operational reliability, safety, and maintainability. Efforts will be made 
to study prediction control and optimization technology for elements design for components and 
prototyping  process,  knowledge-based  prototyping  and  simulation 
technology,  onsite 
manufacturing  process  test  and  evaluation  technology,  component  service  life  prediction 
technology,  and  reliability,  safety,  and  service  life  prediction  technology  for  major  products, 
complex systems, and large facilities.  
  

5.  Advanced Energy Technology  

  

Advances  in  energy  technology  in  the  future  will  mainly  be  characterized  with  cost-
effectiveness,  efficiency,  and  clean  utilization  in  addition  to  novel  energy  sources.  Technology 
development with respect to the fourth generation nuclear energy system, advanced nuclear fuel 
cycle, and fusion energy has drawn increasing attention. Hydrogen, an ideal energy carrier that can 
be obtained through diverse approaches, will bring about new changes tor clean energy utilization. 

Fuel cell and distributive energy supply technology, featured with cleanness and flexibility, will 
eventually  become  an  important  form  of  terminal  energy  application.  Research  efforts  will  be 
focused on hydrogen utilization and distributive energy systems,  advanced nuclear  energy, and 
fuel  cycle  technology  in  addition  to  developing  technologies  for  fossil  fuel  energy  utilization, 
featured  with  efficiency,  cleanness,  and  near-zero  emissions,  and  low-cost  and  efficient  new 
renewable energy applications.  
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(15) Hydrogen and fuel cell technology  

Research efforts will focus on technologies for making hydrogen through the use efficient 
low-cost fossil fuel energy and renewable energy, cost-effective hydrogen storage and transport, 
technologies for manufacturing basic key fuel cell components, thermopile integration, fuel cell 
applications to power generation and automobile propulsion systems. Efforts will also be made to 
develop technical standards for hydrogen energy and fuel cell technology.  
  
(16) Distributive energy supply technology  

Distributive  energy  supply  technology  constitutes  an  important  means  of  providing 
comprehensive energy services featured with flexibility and energy efficiency. The focus will be 
on mastering technologies for fossil fuel-based mini gas turbines and energy conversion such as 
innovative  thermal  cycle,  energy  storage,  and  triple-generation  technology,  with  view  to 
establishing renewable energy based distributive terminal energy supply systems made up of mini 
gas turbines and fuel cells, supplemented by fossil fuel energy.  
  
(17) Fast neutron reactor technology  

A fast neutron reactor is a nuclear reactor where fission chain reaction is triggered by fast 
neutrons to realize nuclear fuel breeding. It is capable of full utilization of uranium resource in 
addition to handling long-life span radioactive wastes. Conduct research on and master fast neutron 
reactor design and core technologies, nuclear fuel and structural materials, while striving for major 
technological breakthroughs in sodium cycle, developing a 65MW experimental fast reactor for 
critical and grid power generation.  
  
(18) Contained magnetic fusion technology  

Taking  advantage  of  participating  in  research  on  and  construction  of  the  International 
Thermal-nuclear  Experimental  Reactor  project,  focus  our  research  on  technologies  concerning 
large superconducting magnets, microwave heating and driving, neutral beam injection heating, 
blanketing,  large  real-time  tritium  isolation  and  purification,  diverters,  numerical  modeling, 
plasma control and diagnosis, and key materials for an experimental reactor. Deepen the study of 
high-temperature  plasma  physics  and  exploring  non-Tokamak  approaches  for  some  energy 
applications.  
  

6.  Marine Technology 

  

More attention will be given to developing comprehensive marine development technology 
featured  with  multifunction,  multi-parameter,  and  long  lasting  operation  in  order  to  raise  the 
nation’s  comprehensive  technological  level  of  deep-sea  operations.  Research  will  focus  on 

developing technologies involving natural gas hydrates exploitation, sea-floor metal and mineral 
resources gathering and transport, on-site extraction, and large marine engineering projects. 
  
Frontier technologies: 
  
(19) 3-D marine environment monitoring technology  

3-D marine environment monitoring is a technology designed for synchronized monitoring 
of  marine  environmental  elements  from  space,  offshore  stations,  water  surface,  and  in-water. 
Research will be focused on remote marine sensing technology, acoustic probe technology, buoy 
technology,  shore-based  long-range  radar  technology,  and  marine  information  processing  and 
application technology.  
  
(20) Ocean floor-based multi-parameter fast sounding technology 

Sea-floor  based  multi-parameter  sounding  is  a  technology  for  synchronized  collection  of 
different parameters, including sea-floor geophysics, geochemistry, and biochemicals, capable of 
transmitting  information  and  data  on  a  real-time  basis.  Research  priority  will  be  on  sensor 
technology,  automatic  sensor  positioning  technology,  and  sea-floor  information  transmission 
technology under abnormal environment and conditions. 
  
(21) Natural gas hydrates exploitation technology 

Natural  gas  hydrate 

is  a  carbon  nitrate  bedded  at 

the  deep  seafloor  or 
underground.  Research will focus on prospecting theory and exploitation technology for such a 
compound, geophysics and geochemistry based gas hydrate prospecting and assessing technology. 
Strive for breakthroughs in gas hydrate drilling technology and safe mining technology. 
  
(22) Deep-ocean operation technology 

Deep-ocean operation technology is  an under-water process  for deep seafloor engineering 
operation and mining activities. Research focus will be on underwater carrying technology at a 
large  depth,  life  maintaining  system  technology,  high-power  dynamic  device  technology,  high 
fidelity sample collection and distance information transmission technology, deep-sea operational 
equipment manufacturing technology, and deep-sea space station technology.  
  
7. Lasers Technology 
  

7.  Aerospace Technology  

  

VI. 

Basic Research 

  

Basic  research  constitutes  an  important  source  for  high-tech  development,  a  cradle  for 
nurturing innovative personnel, a foundation for building an advanced culture, and an inner driving 
force  for  the  future  S&T  development  through  profound  understanding  of  natural  phenomena, 
unveiling natural laws, and acquiring new knowledge, new principles, and new methodology. The 
development  of  basic  research  shall  adhere  to  the  principle  of  combining  meeting  the  national 
objectives and encouraging free exploration. In addition, basic research activities shall observe the 
law of scientific development, respect scientists’ exploratory spirit, and pay more attention to the 
long  term  value  of  sciences,  with  stabilized  support,  visionary  deployment,  and  dynamic 

readjustment in line with new trends of scientific development. The Outline has made deployment 
in four major areas, involving basic and major scientific research activities that are in line with 
disciplinary development, scientific frontiers, and major national strategic demands. 
  

1.  Disciplinary Development  

  

An  overall  deployment  is  made  for  basic  disciplines,  taking  into  account  a  range  of 
characteristics of basic research activities, including long term efforts for limited breakthroughs, 
exploratory nature, and difficulties in predicting progress. The deployment is made as such that 
different disciplines are allowed to cross and infiltrate one another in an effort to bring out new 
growing points for disciplines.  It is expected that long-term and in-depth academic studies and 
accumulations will eventually lead to improved capability in original innovation and to advancing 
coordinated multi-discipline based development. 
  
(1)Basic disciplines  

Pay more attention to capacity building in basic theories and disciplines, with a coordinated 

development of mathematics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, earth sciences, and biology.  
  
(2) Cross and emerging disciplines 

Encourage  interweaving  and  melting  between  basic  disciplines,  between  basic  disciplines 
and applied disciplines, and between natural science and social science. Such a combination, more 
often than not, will lead to the birth of major scientific discoveries and new disciplines. It is one 
of the most active parts in scientific researche. In this context, it is worth a raised attention and 
well-thought deployment. 
  

2.  Frontier Scientific Issues  

  

The unity of micro and universal worlds, the combination of Reductionism and Entirety, the 
interwoven multidisciplinary practice, the infiltration of basic sciences such as mathematics into 
diverse other areas, and application of advanced technologies and means, all hallmark the major 
characteristics  of  modern  frontier  scientific  development.   They  are  conceived  with  major 
scientific breakthroughs, which makes people’s knowledge of objective world deeper and better. 
Frontier scientific issues are selected in line with the following principles: having a spurring role 
for the development of basic sciences, having a solid foundation, able to make a full display of 
China’s  strength  and  specialty,  and  desirable  for  raising  China’s  international  position  in  basic 
sciences.  
  
(1)Quantitative study and systematic integration of life process  

Main  research  directions:  gene  language  and  regulation,  model  biology,  epigenetics, 
untranslated  RNA,  life  structural  function  and  regulation  network,  life  reconstruction, 
bioinformatics,  computational  biology,  life  characteristics  in  extreme  environment,  origin  and 
evolution of life, systematic development, and evolutionary biology. 
  
(2)Condensed matters and novel effects 

Main  research  directions:  strongly  correlated  systems,  soft  condensed  matters,  condensed 
matters  of  novel  quantum  properties,  self-similar  cooperative  growth,  Open  Complex  Giant 

System (OCGS), Bose-Einstein Condensation, superfluid-superconducting mechanism, structural 
phase transformation emissions, condensed matters under extreme conditions, electronic structure, 
and diverse primary excitation processes.  
  
(3)Matters’ deep inner structures and physical laws at cosmological scale 

Main research directions: matter structures and physical laws at micro or universal scale and 
under  extreme  conditions,  such  as  high-energy,  high-density,  super  high  pressure,  and  super 
intense magnetic  field,  the theory of unifying all physical  laws, basic frontier issues of particle 
physics, substances of dark matter and dark energy, origin and evolution of the universe, formation 
and evolution of black holes and diverse celestial bodies and structures, impacts of solar activities 
on earth environment and disasters and associated prediction. 
  
(4) Core mathematics and its application in cross disciplines  

Main research directions: major issues concerning core mathematics, intercrossing between 
mathematics  and  other  disciplines,  and  new  mathematic  problems  in  scientific  research  and 
practical  applications  such  as  discrete  problems,  random  problems,  quantum  problems,  and 
mathematical theories and methodologies in a range of non-linear problems. 
  

(5) Earth system process and associated resources, environment, and disaster effects  

Main  research  directions:  interactions  between  different  earth  systems  (atmosphere, 
hydrosphere, biosphere, earth crust, mantle and core), in-depth earth drilling, physical, chemical, 
and biological processes in the earth system and associated resources, environment, and disasters 
effects, theory of continental and marine origin of mineral reserves, land, sea, air, and space based 
earth observation and probe systems, earth simulation systems, and earth system theory. 
  
(6) Chemical processes in creating and transforming new matters 

Main  research  directions:  function  design,  controllable  synthesis,  preparation  and 
transformation  of  new  specific  molecules  of  defined  structures,  condensed  molecules,  and 
polymeric molecules, environment friendly new chemistry system, formation and transformation 
of  matters  at  different  temporal  and  spatial  scales,  relationship  between  chemical  properties, 
performance, and structures of complex systems such as life process and ecological environment, 
and associated rules for transformation. 
  
(7) Brain and cognitive sciences 

Main research directions: cellular and molecular mechanism of brain functions, genesis and 
development  mechanism  of  major  brain  diseases,  relationship  between  brain  development, 
plasticity  and  human  intelligence,  the  process  of  higher  cognitive  functions,  including  learning 
memory  and  thinking,  and  associated  neuroscience  basis,  expression  of  brain  information  and 
brain-like information processing system, and dialogue between human brain and computer.  
  

(8) Innovation in scientific experiments, observational methods, techniques, and equipment  

Main  research  directions:  life  science  related  tests,  imaging,  analysis,  and  manipulation, 
featured with  dynamic, timing, no-injury, sensitivity, and high definition;  new technologies  for 
acquiring  matter  composition,  function,  and  structure  related  information,  and  associated 
characterizing technology, new observational means and approaches for information acquisition 
in earth and space research.  

  
3.Basic Research in Response to Major National Strategic Needs  
  

A  knowledge  based  society  has  intense  needs  for  the  development  of  science.  The 
competition  for  comprehensive  national  strength  appeals  to  basic  research  with  an  ascending 
tendency. Being a developing nation enjoying fast economic growth make it all the more necessary 
to stress that basic research must serve to meet the national objectives and help address key and 
bottleneck  issues  in  future  development.  In  this  context,  basic  research  directions  are  defined 
according to the following principles: having strategic, overall, and long term importance to the 
national economic and social development and to the national security; capable of playing a critical 
role in future development; and able to result in a combination of basic sciences and technology 
sciences, thus leading the future high tech development.  
  
(1) Biological foundations of human health and diseases 

Priorities will be selected to study the genesis and development process of major diseases, 
and associated molecular and cellular basis for interference; the role of nervous system, immune 
system,  and  endocrine  system  in  health  and  major  diseases;  dissemination  and  mutation  of 
pathogens and associated diseases causing mechanism; drug effects at molecular, cellular, and co-
regulating levels; interference of environment in physiological process; and theoretical system of 
traditional Chinese medicine.  
  

(2) Crop genetic improvement and scientific issues in sustainable agricultural development  

Priorities  shall  be  given  to  studying  crop  genes,  functional  genomes,  and  the  alike; 
biodiversity and genetic basis for new species breeding; crop stress resistance and mechanism for 
efficient utilization of moisture, nutrients, and sunshine; interactions between crops and ecological 
environment; and agro-biological safety and principles of major crop diseases control. 
  
(3) Human activities and their impact on the Earth system  

Research  will  be  focused  on  disaster  and  risk  prediction  for  resources  prospecting  and 
development  activities;  extensive  human  activities  in  major  river  basins  and  their  ecological 
implications, adaptability, and regional ecological safety; energy cycle of major ecosystems and 
associated regulation; biodiversity protection models; land use and changes in land cover; regional 
water  demand  and  ecological  equilibrium;  genesis  of  environmental  pollution  and  control 
principles;  and  sustainable  marine  resources  utilization  and  marine  ecological  environment 
protection. 
  
(4)Global change and regional response 

Priorities will be given to studying global climate change and its impact on China; large scale 
hydrological  cycle  and  its  response  to  global  change;  global  change  and  its  impact  on  regional 
water  resources;  interactions  between  human  activities  and  monsoon  systems;  sea-land-air 
interactions  and  mutation  of  Asian  monsoon  systems  and  associated  prediction;  carbon  cycle 
process in China’s offshore-land ecosystem; the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and polar regions and their 
response  to  global  change,  and  associated  climate  and  environment  effects;  climate  system 
modeling and associated simulation and prediction; greenhouse effect and associated mechanism; 
genesis and evolution of aerosols and its impacts on climate change, and associated control.  
  

(5) Complex systems, disaster formation, prediction, and control 

Research will focus on the relationship between micro-mechanisms and macro-phenomena 
in engineering projects, nature, and socioeconomic complex systems; mechanism and evolution of 
structure formation, and relationship between structure and system behavior in a complex system; 
movement of complex systems and associated system mutation and regulation; relativity between 
behaviors at different scales in a complex system, and new theory and methodology concerning 
complex systems. 
  
(6)Key scientific issues in sustainable energy development   

Research will be focused on the physical and chemical basis of efficient and clean fossil fuel 
energy utilization and transformation; high performance thermal energy transformation and key 
scientific issues in efficient energy storage; scale utilization of renewable energy and associated 
principles and new approaches; theory of safe, stable, and economic operation of power grids; and 
scientific basis of large-scale basic nuclear energy technologies and hydrogen technology. 
  
(7) New principles and methodologies for materials design and fabrication  

Priorities  will  be  given  to  studying  the  physical  and  chemical  basis  of  optimizing  basic 
materials; phase change and structure control mechanism; principles of multi-enhanced treatment; 
physical  and chemical properties of new materials; new physical mechanisms, new effects, and 
new  material  design,  including  artificial  structures,  minimization,  and  multifunction  based 
integration; new principles and techniques of material manufacturing; new principles of structure 
and performance characterizing; interactions between material service and the environment and 
associated performance evolution, failure mechanism, and service life prediction. 
  
(8) Scientific basis of manufacturing under extreme environmental conditions 

Research  will  focus  on  deep  matters  and  energy  interactions;  micro-scale  transmission  of 
high-density energy and matters; precision expression and measuring of micro-structural shape; 
scale  effects  on  manufacturing  prototyping,  property  formation  and  system  integration  and 
associated interfacing science; smooth movement certainty of a complex manufacturing system, 
and uniqueness of manufacturing subjects. 
  
(9) Major mechanical issues in aeronautics and space science  

Priorities shall be placed on studying the mechanical issues involving supersonic propulsion 
systems  and  super  high-speed  collision;  multidimensional  propulsion  systems  and  theory  of 
complex  movement  control;  theory  of  compressible  turbulent  flows;  high  temperature 
thermodynamics;  magnetic  fluid  and  plasma  dynamics;  microfluid  and  microsystem  dynamics; 
and structural dynamics of new materials. 
  
(10) Scientific basis for the development of information technology 

Priorities will be given to studying new algorithms and basic software theory; mechanisms 
of  virtual  computation  environment;  theory  and  methods  for  mass  information  processing  and 
knowledge mining; interactive theory; network security and credible and controllable information 
security theory. 
  

4.  Major Scientific Research Programs 

  

Four major scientific research programs are identified and deployed in line with the world 
S&T development trends and China’s major national strategic needs. These programs are qualified 
for  playing  a  strong  role  in  S&T  development,  triggering  a  rapid  improvement  of  sustainable 
innovation  capacity,  and  possessing  a  high-caliber  research  contingent.  Breakthroughs  in  these 
directions will noticeably raise the nation’s international competitiveness, advance its sustainable 
development, and realize leapfrogging development in selected areas.  
  
(1) Protein studies   

Protein is a principal carrier of life activities and an executor of different functions. An in-
depth study of protein’s diverse sophisticated structures and functions, interactions and dynamic 
changes can unveil the nature of life phenomena at molecular, cellular, and biological levels, which 
constitute  the  main  mission  for  the  post-genome  era.  In  the  meantime,  protein-related  research 
findings  will  result  in  a  range  of  new  biotechnological  activities,  spur  up  the  development  of 
pharmacy,  agriculture,  and  the  so-called  “green  industry”,  and  lead  the  future  development  of 
bioeconomy. In this context, protein study is an area of life science that sees fierce competition 
among developed nations.  
  

Research will be focused on transcriptomics, proteomics, metabonomics, structural biology, 
biological functions of proteins and associated interactions, protein-related computational biology 
and systems biology, methodologies for protein research, and relevant applied basic research.  
  
(2) Quantum regulation studies 

Microelectronics-based  information  technology  will  soon  reach  its  limit.  Hence,  the 
development of information technology is facing severe challenges: mankind has to find a new 
way out. In this context, quantum effects-based new information means brings up a new hope, and 
has  become  a  new  competition  target  among  the  developed  nations.  The  so-called  quantum 
manipulation  explores  new  quantum  information,  and  develops  a  range  of  related  sciences, 
including quantum informatics, correlated electronics, quantum communication, confined small-
scale quantum system and artificial photonic crystal. These will constitute a theoretical basis for 
the  future  information  technology  development.  As  a  visionary  discipline,  quantum  technology 
may produce an inestimable impact on the economic and social development over the next 20 to 
30 years. 

  
Priorities will be to study carriers of quantum communication and associated manipulation 
principles and methodologies; quantum computation, charge-spin-phase-trajectory relevancy, and 
new quantum manipulation methods; new quantum effects of confined small scale quantum system; 
macro quantum effects of photonic material; and new principles and technical basis for quantum 
manipulation characterizing and measuring.  
  
(3) Nanometer studies 

Matters  at  a  nanometer  scale  can  produce  a  bizarre  phenomenon  or  rule,  which  will 
eventually change the existing framework of relevant theories, allowing people to have a brand 
new knowledge of the matter world. This, in turn, will give birth to a new technology revolution, 
and create huge development space for materials, information, green manufacturing, biology, and 
medicine.  Nanoscience  and  nanotechnology  have  become  a  strategic  alternative  for  raising  a 

nation’s  core  competitiveness.  It  is  also  one  of  the  areas  where  China  expects  to  realize  the 
leapfrogging ing development.   
  

Research will be focused on controllable preparation and self-assembly of nanomaterials and 
associated functionality; nanomaterial structure, special properties, and manipulation mechanism; 
principles of nanoprocessing and associated integration; conceptual and principle-demonstrating 
nanocomponents; nanoelectronics, nanobiology, nanomedicine; optical, electronic, and magnetic 
properties  of  molecular  aggregates  and  biomolecules,  and  associated  information  transmission; 
single molecule behavior and associated manipulation; molecular machine design, assembly, and 
control;  characterizing  and  measuring  at  a  nanoscale;  and  applications  of  nanomaterials  and 
nanotechnology in the fields of energy, the environment, information, and medicine.   
  
(4) Growth and reproduction studies 

A range of eye catching scientific accomplishments, including animal cloning and stem cells, 
has  brought  about  huge  opportunities  for  the  future  development  of  life  and  medical  sciences. 
However, most of these findings remain unready to directly serve humans as a result of lacking a 
systematic  and  in-depth  knowledge  of  reproduction  and  development  process  and  associated 
mechanisms. China has a high population growth rate and a high birth defect rate. Confronted with 
a serious shortage of replacement organs, compounded by the coming peak of an aging population, 
the  nation  is  in  dire  need  of  breakthroughs  and  technological  innovation  in  reproduction  and 
growth-related theories.  
  

Research will focus on stem cell breeding, isolation, and manipulation;  generation, maturity, 
and fertilization of reproductive cells;  manipulation  mechanism for fetus  development; somatic 
dedifferentiation and animal cloning mechanism; degeneration of human reproductive functions 
and regressive mechanism; and safety and ethics of aided reproduction and stem cells technology.   
  

VII. 

Reform of the S&T System and the Construction of a National    Innovation 

System  

  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  policy  of  reform  and  opening  up,  the  nation’s  S&T  system 
reform  has  made  important  breakthroughs  and  substantial  strides  as  it  has  strictly  positioned 
around forging close links with the economy, aimed at strengthening technological innovation and 
conversion  and  industrialization  of  S&T  achievements,  stressed  structural  realignment  and 
mechanism shift, and adopted a series of major reformative measures. Nevertheless, one has to be 
keenly aware that China’s existing S&T system remains inadequate in meeting the needs of the 
socialist  market  economy  and  that  of  greater  economic  and  S&T  development.  First,  our 
enterprises  are  yet  to  become  a  principal  player  in  technological  innovation  as  their  innovative 
capability  remains  weak.  Second,  the  S&T  sector  is  compartmentalized,  resulting  in  dispersion 
and duplication of  efforts and low overall performance level.  S&T innovation capability in the 
public  good  sector  is  especially  weak.  Third,  S&T  management  at  the  macro  level  is  terribly 
uncoordinated, with  an S&T resources allocation pattern and evaluation  system falling short of 
accommodating the needs for the new S&T development and government mandate shift. Fourth, 
mechanisms  for  rewarding  outstanding  personnel  and  encouraging  innovation  and  pioneering 
activities  are  not  yet  consummate.  These  problems  have  seriously  compromised  the  nation’s 
innovation capacity building.  

  

Guiding thoughts for deepening the S&T system reform are defined as follows: promoting 
the full-fledged construction of a national innovation system with Chinese characteristics, focusing 
on  S&T  resources  distribution  efficiency  and  comprehensive  integration,  and  effecting  a 
breakthrough  in  building  an  enterprise-centered  technological  innovation  system  featuring  the 
integration  of  industry,  academia,  and  research,  so  as  to  greatly  advance  the  construction  of  a 
uniquely  Chinese  national  innovation  system  and  drastically  enhance  the  nation’s  indigenous 
innovation capability. 
  

At  present  and  over  a  period  of  time  in  the  future,  the  S&T  system  reform  will  strive  to 

accomplish the following major missions:  
  

1．   Supporting and Encouraging Enterprises to Become the Main Player in Technological 

Innovation  

  

Market  competition  is  an  important  driving  force  behind  technological  innovation  while 
technological innovation is the ultimate route to enhanced enterprise competitiveness. Along with 
deepened reform and opening up, Chinese enterprises are playing an increasingly important role 
in  technological  innovation. To substantially  enhance the motivity and vitality of technological 
innovation  at  the  enterprise  level,  more  agreeable  conditions  need  to  be  provided,  a  better 
environment created, and reforms deepened.  

  
Firstly, let economic and S&T policies play a guiding role in order to enable enterprises to 
become the major R&D spender. Efforts must be accelerated to create a unified, open, competitive, 
and orderly environment for the market economy by way of fiscal, taxation, and monetary policies 
so that enterprises, particularly large enterprises, are induced into increasing their R&D spending 
and  establishing  their  own  R&D  bodies.  National  engineering  laboratories  and  sectoral 
engineering centers should  be established at  transformed research institutes or large enterprises 
possessing  fairly  strong  R&D  and  technology  spin-off  capabilities,  in  collaboration  with 
universities and research institutes. Encourage technology innovation consortia of various forms 
initiated by enterprises, in collaboration with universities and research institutes, for the purpose 
of technology innovation capacity building. Secondly, reform the modality of S&T programs to 
enable enterprises to undertake national R&D missions. National S&T programs shall reflect more 
of the major industrial needs for science and technology, and attract more enterprises to be part of 
such programs. In the fields of obvious market application prospects, establish an enterprise-led 
mechanism  with  the  involvement  of  universities  and  research  institutes.  Thirdly,  perfect  the 
technology  transfer  mechanism  to  facilitate  the  integration  and  application  of  industrial 
technologies. Establish and perfect intellectual property rights related incentive mechanism, and 
an  IPR  trading  system.  Vigorously  develop  various  kinds  of  S&T  intermediary  service 
organizations to meet the needs of enterprises, facilitating knowledge flow and technology transfer 
between enterprises, and between enterprises and universities and research institutes. National key 
laboratories  and  engineering  (technology  research)  centers  shall  be  made  more  accessible  to 
enterprises. Fourthly, accelerate the establishment of a modern enterprise system so as to enhance 
the  innate  drive  for  enterprise  technology  innovation.  Technology  innovation  capacity  building 
shall  be  taken  as  important  indicator  in  measuring  the  performance  of  state-owned  enterprises 
while technology  factor-based distribution be made an important  part of  property rights  reform 

destined  for  the  high-  tech  industry.  Stick  to  the  direction  in  which  application-oriented  R&D 
institutes  are  transformed  into  enterprises  and  deepen  the  reform  of  property  rights  at  such 
institutes. This will not only lead to an improved management system and the establishment of a 
rational and effective incentive mechanism, but will also enable the transformed R&D institutes 
to  play  a  major  role  in  high  technology  industrialization  and  sectoral  technology  innovation. 
Fifthly, create a fine innovation environment to spur innovative activities at small- and medium-
sized enterprises(SMEs). As SMEs, particularly technology-based SMEs,  are highly innovative 
but frail in risk-taking ventures, a more favorable policy environment should be created for such 
enterprises by drafting and formulating preferential laws and policies, particularly in the context 
of market accessibility and anti-unfair competition. Vigorously develop an S&T investment and 
financing  system  and  a  venture  capital  mechanism  and  quicken  the  construction  of  S&T 
intermediary service bodies, so as serve the needs for technology innovation at SMEs.  

  

3.  Deepening Institutional Reform and establishing a Modern Research Institute System 

  

Research institutes engaged in basic research, frontier technology development, and public 
good research constitute a major force in the nation’s S&T innovation activities. Establish a stable, 
high caliber research contingent that serves national objectives and is devoted to S&T undertakings 
is crucial for the future and destiny the nation’s S&T enterprise. Thanks to efforts in restructuring 
and  personnel  diversion,  a  number  of  high  quality  research  institutions  have  merged,  to  which 
stable support from the government is critical. While giving ample scope to the important roles 
played by these research institutes, innovation capacity building must be taken as an objective, 
mechanism improvement a focal point, management system reform deepened, so as to accelerate 
the  establishment  of  a  modern  research  institute  system  under  the  principle  of  “clearly  defined 
terms of reference, scientific evaluation, orderly open access, and regulated management”.  

  
Firstly, strengthen the capacity building of research institutes in keeping with the terms of 
reference defined by the state. Earnest efforts must be made to address the problem where some 
research institutes suffer from undefined terms of reference, uncoordinated research efforts, and 
weak  innovative  capability.  The  allocation  of  resources  should  be  optimized  in  order  to  make 
concerted  efforts  in  creating  disciplines  and  research  bases  with  clear  superiority.  Public  good 
research institutes shall take advantage of technical strength in their respective fields, raising S&T 
innovation  and service  capability,  and addressing major S&T issues in  the social development. 
Basic  science  and  frontier  technology-oriented  research  institutes  shall  take  advantage  of  their 
disciplinary strength in uplifting research levels, striving for theoretical innovation and technology 
breakthroughs, and addressing major S&T issues. Secondly, establishing a stable S&T investment 
mechanism  designed  to  support  innovation  activities  at  research  institutes.  Given  the  fact  that 
disciplinary capacity building and major innovation achievements are the results of tireless efforts 
over  a  long  period  of  time,  state  treasury  should  provide  fairly  stable  appropriation  support  to 
research institutes engaged in basic research, frontier technology development, and public good 
research.  Per  capita  overhead  expenditure  level  will  be  raised  in  line  with  different  types  of 
research  institutes  in  support  of  disciplinary  capacity  building,  basic  research  activities,  and 
cultivation of talented S&T personnel. Thirdly, establish an operational mechanism conducive to 
original innovation at research institutes. Freely selected research topics are extremely crucial for 
raising the original innovation capability and for nurturing high caliber personnel. The support for 
free research topic selection based research should therefore be strengthened. While perfecting the 

system  under  which  the  director  assumes  all  power  and  responsibility  at  research  institutes, 
delegate more autonomous decision-making power to research institutes in S&T expenditure and 
personnel  affairs  so  as  to  ensure  greater  capability  in  coordinating  and  integrating  innovation 
activities at the institute level. Fourthly, work will be carried out to establish a system to assess the 
overall innovation capability of research institutes. Accordingly, a scientific and rational system 
will be established to make an overall assessment of institutional innovation capability in terms of 
the  quality  of  S&T  achievements,  the  buildup  of  S&T  talents,  and  management/operation 
mechanisms, in order to raise the management level and enhance innovation capability. Fifthly, 
efforts  will  be  made  to  put  in  place  an  effective  mechanism  for  opening  up  and  collaboration. 
Establish  a  personnel  management  system  featuring  the  combination  of  permanent  staff  and 
temporary or contract personnel by introducing a retainer and vacancy management mechanism 
for  full-fledged  open  recruitment  of  research  and  management  personnel.  For  the  purpose  of 
promoting knowledge flow, personnel mobility, and S&T resource sharing, effective mechanisms 
should  be  put  in  place  to  facilitate  various  forms  of  collaboration  between  research  institutes, 
enterprises, and universities.  
  

Universities are not only an important base for nurturing high caliber innovative talents but 
also  a  principal  player  in  basic  research  and  original  technology  innovation  activities  and  a 
commendable  force  in  addressing  major  S&T  issues  in  the  national  economy,  materializing 
technology  transfer,  and  effecting  technology  spin-off  and  commercialization.  Accelerating  the 
establishment  of  high  caliber  universities,  particularly  world-class  research  universities,  is  a 
prerequisite  for  enhancing  the  nation’s  S&T  innovation  and  establishing  a  national  innovation 
system.  At  present,  our  country  has  already  built  a  number  of  high-caliber  universities  with 
appropriate scales, comprehensive disciplines, and assembled talents, and these universities should 
be given full scope for their important roles in S&T innovation.  

research, 

frontier 

in  basic 

  
Vigorous  support  and  encouragement  need  to  be  provided  for  university-based  original 
innovation 
technology  development,  and  public  good 
research.  Universities should be encouraged to enter full-fledged cooperation with enterprises and 
research  institutes  so  that  they  can  provide  better  and  more  extensive  services  to  economic 
development at the national, regional, and sectoral levels. The capacity building of major academic 
disciplines and S&T innovation platforms at universities will be accelerated in order to nurture 
and assemble a number of world-class academic leaders and build up a faculty contingent with 
high  ethical  standards,  strong  innovative  spirit,  and  international  competitiveness.  Further 
accelerate the reform of university internal management system by optimizing education structure, 
S&T  related  organizational  structure,  and  innovation  mechanism  and  associated  management 
system. Establish a scientific, rational evaluation system and an operational mechanism conducive 
to the nurturing of high quality talents and the improvement of innovative capability, so that every 
talent finds ample scope for his abilities and a constant stream of talents is sustained.  Vigorous 
efforts should be made to explore ways and means of building a modern university system with 
Chinese characteristics.   
  
3.  Advancing the S&T Management System Reform 
  

In view of the protuberant problems in our country’s S&T management at the macro level, 
the reform of the S&T management system must be advanced, and be centered on improving the 

national  S&T  decision-making  mechanism,  overcoming  systemic  and  institutional  barriers, 
strengthening 
inter-province,  ministry/province,  defense/civilian  overall 
planning  and  coordination,  so  that  our  ability  can  be  substantially  enhanced  in  mustering  S&T 
resources for initiating major S&T undertakings.  

inter-ministerial, 

  
Firstly, a national S&T decision-making mechanism should be created and then constantly 
improved.  The  business  discussions  procedures  for  the  nation’s  major  S&T  decision-making 
should be improved so that a normative consultation and decision-making mechanism is in place. 
Efforts  should  be  made  to  expand  government  roles  in  overall  configuration  and  macro 
management of S&T development, strengthen coordination in formulating major S&T policies, 
implementing major S&T programs, and in constructing S&T infrastructures. Secondly, establish 
and improve a macro S&T coordination mechanism at the national level. Define the basic status 
of S&T policies as a national public policy and develop an interactive policy coordination system 
between national S&T policies and national  economic policies, in response to the objectives of 
promoting  S&T  innovation  and  indigenous  innovation  capability.  Create  a  mechanism  to 
coordinate inter-agency allocation of S&T resources. Accelerate government mandate shift at the 
government agencies in charge of S&T management, practice governance according to the law, 
and upgrade the macro management and service level. Ways by which programs are managed must 
be improved to bring into full play the role of government agencies and local authorities in program 
management and project implementation. Thirdly, the S&T review and evaluation system must be 
reformed  to  reflect  principle  of  fairness,  impartiality,  openness,  and  encouraging  competition, 
thereby creating conditions for the springing up of various types of talented people, especially the 
young. The review of major projects must be brought in line with national objectives. The peer 
review  system  should  be  improved  by  creating  a  reviewer  credibility  system  and  a  review 
mechanism involving international peers, by strengthening the supervision of the review process, 
and by expanding the openness of review activities and ensuring reviewees’ access to appropriate 
information.  Special  attention  and  support  shall  be  given  to  highly  innovative  small  projects, 
uncommon  projects,  and  interdisciplinary  projects,  with  emphasis  on  the  evaluation  of  quality, 
capability, and research level of individuals or teams, and on whether it is encouraging original 
innovation.  Establish  an  independent  review  system  to  evaluate  the  implementation  of  major 
national  S&T  programs,  the  Knowledge  Innovation  Program(KIP),  and  projects  funded  by  the 
National  Natural  Science  Foundation.  Fourthly,  reform  the  S&T  achievements  evaluation  and 
award  system.  Perfect  the  research  assessment  and  indicator  systems  in  light  of  different 
characteristics  of  S&T  innovation  activities  and  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  openness, 
fairness, rule abiding, and streamlined procedures. Avert excessive evaluation or desires for quick 
success  and  short-term  behavior.  For  innovation  activities  involving  market-oriented  applied 
research and experiments, evaluation shall be conducted mainly on the obtaining of proprietary 
intellectual property rights and the contribution to industrial competitiveness. Public good research 
activities  shall  be  evaluated  in  line  with  public  needs  and  social  benefits  derived,  while  basic 
research and frontier scientific exploration shall be evaluated in line with scientific significance 
and  academic  value.   Establish  a  personnel  assessment  system  capable  of  judging  personnel 
qualifications  in  different  S&T  fields.  Reform  the  national  S&T  award  system  by  reducing  the 
number and levels of awards. Give prominence to government conferred awards by focusing on 
talented  individuals  while  rewarding  prize-winning  projects.  In  addition,  the  creation  of  non-
governmental awards should be encouraged and regulated. 
  

4.  Vigorously Pushing Forward the Construction of a National Innovation System with 
Chinese Characteristics 

  

The objective for deepening S&T system reform is to advance and enhance the construction 
of a national innovation system. The national innovation system is a government-led public system 
which gives full play to the basic role of the market in resource allocation while letting various 
innovation players forge close links and interact with one another. Currently, the construction of 
the national innovation system with Chinese characteristics shall emphasize the following:  

  
Firstly,  build  an  enterprise-led  technology  innovation  system  featuring  the  combination  of 
enterprises, universities, and research institutes, which will be a breakthrough point for the full-
fledged construction of the national innovation. Only when such a system is led by enterprises, it 
can  ensure  the  market  orientation  of  technology  innovation  and  effectively  combine  industry-
university-research  strengths  for  the  enhancement  of  national  competitiveness.  Only  when 
enterprises, universities, and research institutes work together, can S&T resources be efficiently 
allocated,  the  vitality  of  research  institutes  be  activated,  and  enterprises  acquire  capabilities  in 
sustaining innovation. While drastically improving enterprises’ technology innovation capability, 
it is imperative to establish new mechanism allowing research institutes and universities to provide 
services  tailored  to  the  needs  of  enterprises’  technology  innovation  activities.  Secondly,  with 
creating an open, mobile, competitive, and collaborative operational mechanism at the core, efforts 
should be made to promote the collaboration and resource sharing between research institutes and 
with universities. Strengthen the construction of public good scientific research system. Develop 
research  universities  and  a  number  of  top-notch,  resource  sharing  basic  science  and  frontier 
technology bases. Thirdly, establish a national defense S&T innovation system highlighting the 
combination of both the defense and civilian needs as well as a civilianized defense industry by 
making defense S&T part of the civilian operations. Promote the close combination of civilian and 
defense S&T findings in a range of areas, including macro management, development strategies 
and  planning,  R&D  activities,  and  commercial  applications  of  S&T  findings.  Strengthen  the 
development of dual-use technologies, creating an environment where high caliber civilian S&T 
personnel provide services to defense S&T innovation, while defense related S&T achievements 
find quick conversion to civilian applications. Fourthly, establish regional innovation systems with 
diverse  characteristics  and  strengths.  Regional  innovation  system  planning  and  associated 
innovation  capacity  building  shall  be  made  in  a  unified  and  coordinated  manner,  taking  into 
account the characteristics and strengths of the regional economic and social development. Deepen 
the reform of the local S&T system, with a view to mustering S&T forces at the central and local 
levels. Take full advantage of the important roles played by universities, research institutes, and 
national high-tech industrial parks in establishing regional innovation systems in order to enhance 
S&T innovation support for the local economic and social development. Reinforce S&T capacity 
building  in  the  country’s  central  and  western  regions  while  earnestly  strengthening  the 
construction of grassroots S&T systems at the county (city) level. Fifthly, establish a socialized, 
networked S&T intermediary service system. In view of the fact that the S&T intermediary service 
sector is small in size, unitary in function, and weak in providing services, efforts should be made 
to vigorously nurture and develop S&T intermediary service organizations in diverse forms while 
taking full advantage of the important roles played by universities, research institutes, and social 
organizations  and  groups  in  providing  S&T  intermediary  services.  S&T  intermediate  service 
organizations should be guided in the direction of professionalism, scale, and standardization. 

  

VIII.  Major Policies and Measures 

  
To ensure the implementation of the missions defined in the Outline, efforts should be made 
formulate more effective policies and measures, in addition to addressing system and mechanism 
related  issues.  All  policies  and  measures  shall  be  made  as  such  that  they  are  conducive  to 
enhancing  indigenous  innovation  capability,  spurring  the  enthusiasm  and  creativity  of  S&T 
personnel, making full use of S&T resources both at home and abroad, supporting economic and 
social development through science and technology. The S&T policies and measures listed in the 
Outline are designed to address major discrepancies and protuberant problems we are facing today, 
but  will  be  adjusted  and  perfected  in  line  with  changing  situations  and  progress  in  the 
implementation of the Outline.  
  

1.  Financial  and  Taxation  Policies  Encouraging  Technological  Innovation  at  the 
Enterprise Level 

  

Encourage  enterprises  to  increase  R&D  spending  and  strengthen  technology  innovation 
capability.  Accelerate  the  imposition  of  a  consumption  based  value  added  tax,  and  make  the 
industrial payment to equipment procurement favored with a deductible value added tax. On the 
basis of further implementing a range of taxation holiday policies aimed at spurring technology 
innovation  and  accelerating  S&T  findings  spin-off  and  equipment  upgrading,  encourage  and 
support enterprises to develop new products, new techniques, and new technologies, by raising the 
level of incentive policies, including pre-tax deduction of enterprise R&D expenditure, in an effort 
to provide taxation holidays for the development of high tech businesses. Along with the reform 
of corporate income tax and corporate financial system, encourage enterprises to establish special 
funds earmarked for R&D activities.  Enterprises shall be allowed to accelerate the depreciation 
of  the  instruments  and  equipment  used  in  R&D  activities.  Enact  taxation  holiday  policies  for 
procuring advanced scientific instruments and equipment. Enhance foreign exchanges and fund 
raising support for enterprises establishing R&D facilities overseas, and provide convenience and 
quality service for Chinese enterprises’ investment overseas.  
  

Implement the PRC Law on Promoting Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises, and support 
the  establishment  of  various  types  of  SMEs,  in  order  to  take  full  advantage  of  their  vitality  in 
technology  innovation.  Encourage  and  support  SEM  initiated  collaborative  R&D  efforts  in  the 
form  of joint  venture or consignment by providing policy support for the  commercialization of 
innovation achievements.  
  

2.  Strengthening  assimilation  and  absorption  of  imported  technologies,  and  re-
innovation 

  

Adjust  and  improve  national  policies  on  industrial  technology  so  as  to  reinforce  the 
assimilation  and  absorption  of  imported  technologies  and  re-innovation.   Policies  should  be 
developed  to  encourage  indigenous  innovation  and  restrict  blind  and  duplicative  technology 
importation. 
  

Readjust the structure and priorities of government appropriations and establish special funds 
that can be used to support assimilation and absorption of imported technologies and re-innovation, 
and support the development of major technologies and equipment and critical common industrial 
technologies. Proactive policies and measures should be formulated increase investments through 
multiple channels in support of enterprise-centered efforts in the assimilation and absorption of 
imported technologies and re-innovation, in collaboration with universities and research institutes.  
  

Major national construction projects should be taken as major carriers of uplifting indigenous 
innovation  capability.  Through  the  implementation  of  major  national  construction  projects, 
assimilate and absorb a series of advanced technologies, master a number of critical technologies 
concerning  the  nation’s  strategic  interests,  and  develop  a  range  of  major  equipment  and  key 
products that possess proprietary intellectual property rights.  
  

3.  Government Procurement Favoring Indigenous Innovation  

  

Formulate  implementing  regulations  of  the  “PRC  Government  Procurement  Law”  to 
encourage and protect indigenous innovation. Establish a coordination mechanism for government 
procurement of indigenous innovative products. Government practices a first-buy policy for major 
domestically made high-tech equipment and products that possess proprietary intellectual property 
rights. Provide policy support to enterprises in procuring domestic high-tech equipment. Develop 
relevant technology standards through government procurement.  
  

4.  Intellectual Property Rights Strategy and Technology Standards Strategy 

  

Protecting  intellectual  property  rights  and  safeguarding  the  interests  of  IPR  owners  is  not 
only  necessary  for  perfecting  the  nation’s  market  economy  system  and  promoting  indigenous 
innovation, but also important for establishing the nation’s credibility and image in international 
cooperation. It is important to further perfect the nation’s IPR system, and create an agreeable legal 
environment that respects and protects IPR, increase public awareness of IPR, uplift the nation’s 
IPR management level, enhance IPR protection, and crack down on various IPR piracy activities 
according to law. In the meantime, it is necessary to establish a special IPR examination process 
for major economic activities, including mergers and acquisitions and technology trade, in order 
to avoid the loss of proprietary IPR.  Prevent the abuse of IPR intended to unfairly restrict market 
competition or obstruct the diffusion and application of innovation and S&T achievements. Make 
IPR management part of the entire S&T management process to raise the nation’s S&T innovation 
level. Reinforce S&T personnel’s IPR awareness while enabling enterprises, research institutes, 
and universities to attach more importance to and strengthen IPR protection. Give ample scope to 
the important role of industrial associations in IPR protection. Establish and perfect a professional 
employment qualification system and public credit system that are conducive to IPR protection. 
  

In  line  with  the  nation’s  strategic  demands  and  industrial  development  needs,  cultivate  a 
number  of  inventions  and  creations  of  major  importance  to  economic,  social,  and  S&T 
development  in  order  to  produce  indigenous  IPR.  Organize  enterprise-led  collaborative  efforts 
involving universities and research institutes in overcoming technological snags while providing 
support for patent application, standard formulation, and international trade.  
  

The development of technology standards should be made an important objective of national 
S&T  programs.  Government  agencies  concerned  and  industrial  associations  shall  strengthen 
guidance and coordination for the development  of major technology standards, which are to be 
adopted as a priority. Promote the system construction for technology laws and regulations and 
technology standards, and the integration of the development standards with scientific research, 
development, design, and manufacturing, in order to ensure the advanced nature and validity of 
standards. Encourage industry-academia-research collaboration in studying and developing major 
national technology standards, and associated priority adoption. Take an active part in international 
efforts  for  standards  development,  and  strive  to  make  our  country’s  technology  standards 
international standards. Strengthen the development of system construction for technology trade 
measures.  
  

5.  Financial Policies Encouraging Innovation and Pioneering 

  

Establish and perfect venture capital investment mechanism for innovation and pioneering 
activities,  and  prepare  and  formulate  laws,  regulations  and  policies  to  promote  the  healthy 
development  of  venture  capital  investment  destined  for  pioneering  activities.  Advance  the 
development of the second board stock exchange, and establish a multi-level capital market system 
that  accelerates  commercial  applications  of  S&T  achievements.  Encourage  qualified  high-tech 
enterprises  to  be  listed  on  the  main  and  second  board  stock  exchange  while  creating  agreeable 
conditions  for  small  and  medium-sized  high-tech  enterprises  to  be  listed  abroad.  Create  more 
relaxed  banking  and  foreign  exchange  policy  environment  for  high-tech  venture  capital  firms. 
Carry out experiment on circulating unlisted high-tech corporate real options at national high tech 
industrial  parks  and  gradually  establish  a  technology  property  rights  trade  market.  Explore  to 
establish a fund raising modality guided by state treasury appropriations, and mainstreamed by the 
investment from policy oriented banks and commercial banks, in an attempt to attract more capital 
into  venture  capital  investment  market.  Establish  a  nationwide  self-regulating  organization  for 
S&T venture capital investments while encouraging banking institutions to provide favorable loans 
to  major  national  S&T  industrialization  projects,  and  S&T  commercialization  activities.  Create 
intellectual property credit and other credit assurance systems, in order to encourage technology 
innovation at small and medium-sized enterprises, and create a healthy fund raising environment 
for them. Establish science and technology related financial cooperation platforms in diverse forms. 
Government  shall  encourage  banking  institutions  and  private  capital  become  part  of  S&T 
development and to improve and strengthen their services for high-tech enterprises, especially for 
small  and medium-sized S&T businesses. Encourage insurance companies to  enhance products 
and service innovation so as provide an overall risk guarantee for S&T innovation activities.   
  

6.  Accelerating  the  Industrialization  of  High  Technologies  and  the  Diffusion  of 
Advanced Appropriate Technologies  

  

High-tech  industrialization  shall  be  deemed  as  a  priority  in  economic  restructuring  and 
changing economic growth modalities. Vigorously develop the high-tech industries that can lead 
to breakthroughs in driving economic growth.  
  

Optimize  the  environment  for  high-tech  industrialization.  Efforts  should  be  continued  to 
strengthen the capacity building of high-tech industrialization bases, including national high-tech 

industrial parks, by formulating policies conducive not only to the development of national high-
tech  industrial  parks  but  also  to  helping  spur  the  development  of  adjacent  areas.  Establish 
information platforms for technology exchange and trade information, and provide policy support 
for  technical  development  and  associated  service  provided  by  S&T  intermediary  services, 
including  university  S&T  parks,  S&T  business  incubators,  productivity  promotion  centers,  and 
technology transfer centers. 
  

Enhance the support for  the diffusion of agricultural  technology in  order to  establish new 
mechanisms for diffusing advanced appropriate technologies to rural areas. The dissemination of 
agricultural  S&T  achievements  should  be  made  an  important  factor  for  qualifying  for  an  S&T 
award,  while  efforts  will  be  made  to  create  a  qualification  attestation  system  for  agricultural 
technology diffusion personnel, and encouraging S&T personnel to be part of front line diffusion 
efforts in different forms. Establish special funds for agriculture S&T achievements related spin-
off and diffusion, promoting the diffusion of advanced appropriate technologies in rural areas, and 
supporting technology innovation, invention and creation made by rural residents. The state shall 
provide  a  classified  guidance  and  support  for  the  diffusion  of  agricultural  S&T  findings, 
encouraging  and  supporting  the  development  of  diffusion  organizations  in  different  forms,  and 
created diversified diffusion systems.  
  

Support  industrial sector-oriented applications of critical  enabling technologies . Effective 
policies and measures will be worked out to support the development, diffusion, and application 
of  pre-competitive  industrial  technologies,  particularly  the  diffusion  and  application  of  key 
technologies in the fields of electronics and information, biology, information technology-based 
manufacturing, advanced materials, environmental protection, and energy efficiency. Promote the 
transformation  and  upgrading  of  traditional  industries,  and  strengthen  the  capacity  building  of 
technology  engineering  platforms,  industrialization  demonstration  bases,  and  intermediate  pilot 
bases.  
  

7.  Perfecting the Mechanism for Combining Defense and Civilian Sectors, and Making 
Defense Part of the Civilian Sector   

  

Strengthen  the  overall  planning  and  coordination  in  integrating  the  defense  and  civilian 
sectors.  The  S&T  management  system  that  separates  the  defense  from  the  civilian  must  be 
reformed to allow for the creation of a new S&T management system embracing both the defense 
and civic sectors. Encourage defense-related research institutes to work on civilian research topics, 
while  defense-related  R&D  activities  be  made  open  to  civilian  research  institutes  and 
industries.   Expand  the  scope  of  defense  procurement  from  civilian  research  institutes  and 
industries. Reform the management system to ensure fair competition between non-defense and 
defense research institutes for defense-related research and production contracts while establishing 
public  platforms  for  the  integration  of  the  defense  and  civilian  sectors,  and  for  dual-use 
applications.  
  

Establish a new mechanism adapting to the characteristics of both defense and civic scientific 
research activities. Coordinate the deployment of basic research in defense and civilian sectors, 
and strengthen the integration of research and development efforts in both sectors. Establish an 
interactive mechanism between the defense and civic sectors, coordinating the development and 

production of defense and civilian products, and fostering an organic combination of S&T efforts 
in both sectors. 
  

8.  Expanding International and Regional S&T Cooperation and Exchanges  

  

The  improvement  of  the  nation’s  indigenous  innovative  capability  calls  for  taking  full 
advantage of the merits derived from opening to the outside world, and a significantly higher level 
of international and regional S&T cooperation and exchanges in various forms.  
  

Encouraging  research  institutes  and  universities  to  establish  joint  laboratories  or  R&D 
centers with overseas research institutes; support the implementation of international cooperation 
projects under bilateral or multilateral S&T cooperation frameworks;  and establish a collaborating 
S&T  mechanism  between  the  mainland  and  Hong  Kong,  Macao  and  Taiwan,  to  strengthen 
communications and exchanges. 
  

Support  our  country’s  enterprises  in  their  “going  out”  efforts.  Expand  the  export  of  high 
technologies  and  products,  encouraging  and  helping  them  to  establish  R&D  centers  or 
industrialization bases overseas.  
  

Participate  actively  in  large  international  scientific  projects  and  international  academic 
organizations. Supporting our scientists and research institutes to be part of or take the lead in large 
international and regional scientific projects. A training system should be established in order to 
increase the ability of our scientists to engage in international academic exchanges and to take up 
senior  positions  at  major  international  academic  organizations.  Encourage  multinational 
corporations to establish their R&D centers in our country while offering favorable conditions for 
making our country the physical location of international academic organizations or their regional 
offices.  
  

9.  Improving Scientific and Cultural Literacy of the Entire Nation and Building a Social 
Environment Conducive to S&T innovation  

  

Implement  a nationwide scientific literacy  action plan.  Improve the scientific and cultural 
literacy  of  the  entire  nation  with  a  view  to  advancing  people’s  overall  development.  Advocate 
scientific  spirit,  spread  scientific  thinking  and  practices,  and  diffuse  scientific  knowledge. 
Strengthen popular science activities in rural areas, gradually establishing a training system that 
helps  raise  farmers’  farming  technologies  and  vocational  skills.  Organize  systematic  scientific 
exploration  and  experiencing  activities  in  different  forms  both  on  and  off  campus.  Strengthen 
innovation  oriented  education,  and  raising  teenagers’  innovation  awareness  and  capability. 
Strengthen science and technology related training for public servants at different levels.  
  

Strengthen  the  national  capacity  building  in  the  field  of  popular  science  by  rationally 
distributing and building popular science facilities and improving the quality of existing popular 
science  sites.   Establish  a  system  making  research  institutes  and  universities  accessible  to  the 
public  on  a  regular  basis,  while  strengthening  communications  and  exchanges  with  the  public 
through the implementation of S&T programs and projects. In order to bring about a flourishing 
development  in  popular  science  writings  and  creating  popular  science  brand  names,  encourage 

renowned scientists and other experts and scholars to become involved in popular science writings, 
developing major popular science topics, and fostering original popular science writings. Establish 
S&T communications as a major at  universities, in  order to  strengthen basic theoretical  studies 
concerning popular science and train popular science professionals.  
  

Establish a sound operational mechanism for popular science activities. Strengthen concerted 
efforts of government agencies, private groups, and large enterprises, facilitating interaction and 
collaboration between the S&T and education communities and the mass media. Encourage the 
development  of  business  oriented  popular  science  activities  by  relaxing  restrictions  to  allow 
private and overseas capital to access popular science activities and by formulating preferential 
policies for establishing diversified investment mechanisms. Advance the reform of public good 
popular  science  system  in  order  to  activate  vitality,  increase  service  conscientiousness,  and 
enhance sustainable development capability.  
  

IX. 

S&T Input and S&T Infrastructure Platforms 

  
S&T input and basic facilities platforms constitute a material basis for S&T innovation, and 
an important prerequisite and a fundamental guarantee for sustainable S&T development. Today’s 
S&T input is literally an investment in the future national competitiveness. Since the adoption of 
reform and opening up policy, the nation has seen continued increases in S&T input. However, to 
meet the major demand in greater S&T development and in the full-fledged construction a well-
to-do society, and compared with the developed and emerging industrialized nations, the nation’s 
total  and  intensity  of  S&T  input  remains  insufficient,  with  irrational  aspects  in  the  investment 
structure,  and  a  weak  S&T  infrastructure.  Given  the  fact  that  both  developed  and  emerging 
industrialized nations around the world have made the increase of S&T input a strategic measure 
to  raise  their  national  competitiveness,  our  country  should  respond  to  the  trend  and  need  for 
enhancing the nation’s indigenous innovation  and core competitiveness by drastically increasing 
its input in S&T activities and strengthening the construction basic S&T facilities, so as to ensure 
the fulfillment of the missions defined in the Outline.  
  

1.  Establishing a Diversified, Multi-channel S&T Input System 

  

Taking full advantage of the guiding role played by the government in enhancing S&T input, 
efforts are to be made to enhance government capability in mobilizing nationwide S&T resources 
through diverse financial means such as direct appropriations and referential taxation breaks. State 
treasury  appropriations  will  be  mainly  used  to  support  public  S&T  activities  that  cannot  be 
effectively  covered  by  the  current  market  system,  including  basic  research,  frontier  technology 
development,  public  good  research,  and  development  of  major  key  enabling  technologies,  in 
addition to its role in guiding industry and private sectors to enhance their S&T input. Government 
agencies at both central and local levels shall increase the proportion of S&T input in both annual 
budgeting and distribution of extra budgets, according to the PRC Law on S&T Progress, in an 
attempt  to  ensure  an  S&T  expenditure  growth  noticeably  higher  than  that  of  regular  financial 
revenues, and in  an effort to  gradually  raise the  weight  of state treasury  S&T appropriations in 
GDP.  Coordinate  expenditure  needs  for  implementing  planned  S&T  activities  in  line  with  the 
national  strength,  to  ensure  the  smooth  implementation  of  major  special  projects.  The  central 
government  will  continue  to  increase  its  investment  in  the  construction  of  major  S&T 

infrastructure, with a weighted appropriation support for construction activities at both central and 
local  levels.  While  increasing  government  appropriated  S&T  input,  efforts  should  be  made  to 
strengthen the principal position of enterprises in S&T input. In a word, these concerted efforts of 
all sectors are expected to  bring about  an increased R&D expenditure  year by  year, which will 
reach 2% by 2010 and 2.5% or above by 2020 as a percentage of GDP.  
  

2.  Readjusting and Optimizing Input Structures, and Raising the Cost-effectiveness of 
S&T Expenditures 

  

Support  will  be  strengthened  for  basic  research,  frontier  technology  development,  public 
good  research,  S&T  infrastructure,  and  popular  science  activities.  Make  appropriate  funds 
available for regular expenditures needed by research institutes (bases), research projects, and S&T 
infrastructure construction. Steadily enhancing the investment in basic research and public good 
oriented research institutes, making popular science expenditures part of the financial budgeting 
at an equivalent level, and gradually raising the input in popular science activities. Establish and 
perfect an S&T expenditure management system, in line with the rules of scientific research and 
characteristics  of  S&T  activities.  Regulate  the  use  of  S&T  appropriations  in  accordance  with 
relevant state regulations on budgeting, and improve the safety and effectiveness of appropriations. 
Increase the openness, transparency, and fairness of national S&T program management, gradually 
establishing  an  S&T  expenditure  assessment  system,  and  corresponding  evaluation  and 
supervision mechanism. 
  

3.  Strengthening the Construction of S&T Infrastructure Platforms 

  

S&T infrastructures platforms are an enabling system consisting of research and experiment 
bases, large scientific facilities, instrumentation, and equipment, scientific data and information, 
and natural S&T resources, supported by information and network technologies and shared by the 
public in their innovation activities. The construction of S&T infrastructure platforms will focus 
on the following: 
  

National research and experiment bases. Establish, in line with the nation’s major strategic 
needs, a number of national laboratories and scientific research and experiment bases, featuring a 
strong interdisciplinary research team and advanced level, in emerging fields or in the fields where 
China  has  a  specialty  or  strength.  Strengthen  the  capacity  building  of  national  key  labs,  and 
consistently raise its operation and management capability. Establish a national network for field 
scientific observation and research activities.  
  

Large  scientific  projects  and  facilities.  Pay  more  attention  to  the  role  played  by  scientific 
instruments  and  equipment  in  scientific  research,  and  strengthen  the  proprietary  research  and 
development of scientific instruments and equipment and associated test techniques.  Establish a 
number  of  large  scientific  projects  and  infrastructures,  including  high  performance  computers, 
large aerodynamic research and experiment, and scientific experiments under extreme conditions. 
Advance  sharing  and  construction  of  large  scientific  instruments,  equipment  ,  and  facilities, 
gradually forming up a nationwide sharing network.  
  

Scientific  data  and  information  platforms.   Establish  digital  platforms  ridden  with  S&T 
conditions  and  resources  related  information,  by  taking  full  advantage  of  modern  information 
technology  and  means,  facilitating  sharing  of  scientific  data  and  literatures,  building  an  online 
scientific research environment, providing relevant services to the whole society, and promoting 
the reform of means and approaches used in scientific research. 
  

Natural S&T resources service platforms. Establish a complete conservation system for plant 
and animal germplasm, microbes and bacteria species resources, and human genetic resources, and 
create  a  protection  and  utilization  system  for  natural  S&T  resources,  including  experimental 
materials, specimens, and mineral fossils.   
  

National  technical  system  for  standards,  metrology,  and  test.  Develop  and  formulate  high 
accuracy and high-stability metrological bench standards and standard specimen system.  Establish 
technology standards for major fields, and improve test lab systems, attestation and certification 
systems, and associated technical measures for technology trade. 
  

4.  Establishing a Mechanism for Sharing S&T infrastructure Platforms 

  

The establishment of an effective sharing system and mechanism constitute a key link and 
prerequisite  for  the  development  of  S&T  infrastructure  platforms.  Under  the  principle  of 
“consolidating,  sharing,  perfecting,  and  upgrading”,  and  taking  into  account  successful  foreign 
experience, formulate standards and regulations involving different S&T resources, and establish 
a policy and law system promoting S&T resources sharing. Encourag flexible sharing modalities 
in line with different S&T resources and conditions, and break up the existing divided, closed, and 
redundant pattern.   
  

X. 

Talented Workforce Buildup 

  

S&T innovation is rooted in S&T personnel.  Human resource has become a most important 
strategic  resource.  It  is  important  to  advocate  the  strategy  of  national  capacity  building  with 
talented  people,  strengthening  the  capacity  building  of  S&T  personnel,  and  providing  human 
resource support for the implementation of the Outline.  
  

1.  Accelerating the Nurturing of a Contingent of world caliber experts 

  

Reinforce the nurturing of disciplinary leaders and advancing the buildup of innovative teams, 
through major scientific research and construction projects, at major disciplines and research bases, 
and  through  international  academic  exchanges  and  cooperation  projects.  Pay  close  attention  to 
discovering and nurturing strategic scientists and S&T management personnel. Formulate special 
policies to attract high caliber experts in the core areas. Further break up the old practice that ranks 
a person according to seniority, overcoming the desire for quick results. Lose no time in nurturing 
young and middle-aged high caliber experts.  Improve and perfect a range of high caliber personnel 
systems, including the job title system, academician system, special government allowance system, 
and postdoctoral system. Establish a high caliber expert screening system, in an effort to let more 
talented people come out. 
  

2.  Bring  into  Full  Play  the  Important  Role  of  Education  in  Cultivating  Innovative 
Talents 

  

Strengthen the organic combination of S&T innovation and personnel nurturing, encouraging 
research  institutes  to  nurture  research  oriented  personnel,  in  collaboration  with  universities. 
Encourage undergraduates to take part in research activities, in order to cultivate their exploration 
enthusiasm  and  scientific  spirit  in  innovation  activities.  Universities  shall  make  a  rational 
distribution  of  interdisciplines  and  emerging  disciplines,  and  restructure  subject  composition 
accordingly,  in  line  with  the  nation’s  S&T  development  strategies  and  market  demand  for 
innovation  personnel.  Strengthen  vocational  education,  continuing  education  and  training,  and 
paying more attention to the training of technicians for diverse technical applications, in response 
to the needs of the economic and social development. Deepen the reform of the curriculum design 
of  primary  and  middle  schools,  promoting  quality-centered  education,  and  raising  studnets’ 
scientific and cultural literacy. 
  

3.  Supporting Enterprises’ Efforts in Nurturing and Attracting S&T Talents  

  

The  state  encourages  enterprises  to  recruit  and  nurture  high  caliber  S&T  personnel,  with 
corresponding  policy  support.  Encourage  and  guide  S&T  personnel  at  research  institutes  and 
universities to work on innovation or create their own S&T businesses. S&T personnel at research 
institutes and universities are allowed to take extra jobs for technology development at enterprises. 
Encourage  university  graduates  to  work  for  firms.  Encourage  enterprises  to  nurture  technology 
talents, in collaboration with universities and research institutes. High caliber engineering talents 
can  be  nurtured  through  multiple  channels  and  diverse  modalities.  State-owned  high-tech 
businesses are allowed to introduce a range of incentive policies, including real options in honor 
of high caliber technicians and management personnel. Explore ways to establish a distribution 
system made up of diverse elements, including knowledge, technology, and management. Support 
industry to attract and recruit foreign scientists and engineers. 
  

4.  Intensifying Efforts in Attracting High Caliber Talents From Overseas  

  

Formulate  and  implement  programs  to  attract  returned  service  of  high  caliber  overseas 
Chinese  students,  with  priorities  on  attracting  high  caliber  personnel  and  expertise  in  shortage. 
Establish  talents  attracting  centers  tailored  to  the  characteristics  of  overseas  Chinese  students, 
through  diverse  approaches.  Enhance  the  financing  of  the  return  of  high  caliber  personnel. 
Strengthen  the  construction  of  pioneering  centers  for  overseas  Chinese  students.  Perfect  the 
policies and measures in favor of returned service of overseas Chinese students. Create more open 
recruitment opportunities for high caliber innovation talents. Gradually open up the recruitment of 
senior post vacancy before overseas candidates, including lab directors, academic leaders of major 
research  institutes.  Adopt  attractive  policies  and  measures  to  attract  high  caliber  overseas  S&T 
personnel or teams to work in China. 
  

5.  Creating a Culture Environment Conducive to the Nurturing of Innovative Talents  

  

Advocate  the  patriotism  featuring  hardworking  and  dedication,  and  a  teamwork  spirit  of 
pragmatism,  innovation,  collaboration  and  indifference  to  fame  and  wealth.  Encourage  rational 

skepticism  and  criticism,  respecting  individuality,  tolerating  failures,  encouraging  academic 
freedom and democracy, supporting exploration and standing out among peers, and respecting new 
theories and concepts. Stimulate innovative thinking, activate academic atmosphere, and strive to 
create  a  tolerant,  harmonious,  healthy,  and  upbeat  innovation  culture.  Strengthen  the  ethics 
building in research activities while curbing flippancy and unethical practices in scientific research 
activities.   
  

The implementation of the outline of the National medium and long term S&T development 
plan calls for a strengthened leadership and coordination as it has a broad coverage, long time span, 
and demanding requirements. Effective measures shall be adopted to ensure the implementation 
of the missions defined in the Outline. 1) Strengthening the interface between the Outline and the 
national economic and social development plan for the 11th five-year period.  The Outline shall 
be  implemented,  according  to  the  priority  list,  abreast  with  the  implementation  of  the  national 
economic and social development plan for the 11th five-year period, in an attempt to increase the 
feasible  implementation  of  the  Outline.   The  implementation  will  cover  a  sequence  of  efforts, 
including  priority  topics,  major  special  projects,  cutting-edge  technology,  basic  research, 
construction  of  infrastructure  platform,  and  S&T  system  reform,  from  which  priorities  will  be 
selected to start immediately, or to be dealt with  within the 11th five-year period. Working out 
matching arrangements and deployment in the national economic and social development plan for 
the 11th five-year period. 2) Formulating practical and feasible supporting policies. Development 
objectives, major missions, and policies and measures defined in the Outline are direction pointing 
and guiding in nature, and need practical and feasible supporting policies to go along with. These 
policies will cover: supporting industry to be the mainstream of technology innovation, promoting 
digestion, absorption, and re-innovation of imported technologies, government procurement tilting 
to proprietary innovations, increasing S&T input, S&T fund efficiency, deepening the reform of 
S&T system, establishment of national innovation system, accelerating high tech industrialization, 
capacity building for S&T personnel, and promoting the combination of defense and civic sectors 
and making defense part of the civic applications. The above-mentioned policies shall be prepared 
and enacted in such a manner that authorities concerned will take a lead, with the participation of 
involving government agencies. The policies shall be prepared based on a thorough survey and 
investigation, in an attempt to make them closely associated and coordinated with other policies 
concerning  industry,  banking,  finance,  taxation,  and  economy.   The  policies  shall  be  made  and 
implemented  in  a  prompt  manner.  3)  Establishing  a  dynamic  readjustment  mechanism  for 
implementing  the  Outline.  It  is  important  to  establish  a  dynamic  readjustment  mechanism  for 
implementing  the  Outline,  based  on  economic  and  social  analysis,  technology  prediction,  and 
regular evaluation, in an attempt to keep abreast with the fast S&T development in the world, and 
changes brought up by the domestic economic and social development.  It is also meaningful to 
make  a  timely  and  necessary  readjustment  of  the  development  objectives  and  major  missions 
defined in the Outline, in line with new trends and breakthroughs of S&T development both at 
home  and  abroad,  and  with  the  new  demands  rising  from  China’s  economic  and  social 
development.   Some  of  the  missions  will  possibly  be  strengthened  and  enhanced,  while  some 
others  readjusted.  4)  Strengthening  the  organizing  and  supervision  of  the  implementation.  It  is 
necessary to take full advantage of the initiatives of localities, government agencies, and private 
groups to organize the implementation, under a unified leadership of the Central Committee of the 
Chinese  Communist  Party  and  the  State  Council.   Government  agencies,  in  particular,  national 
authorities in charge of S&T management, development and reform, and finance, shall live up to 

their  respective  responsibility  through  a  close  coordination,  and  strengthen  concrete  guidance. 
Provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions shall implement the Outline in line with local 
development status.  
  

The implementation of the Outline is associated with the full-fledged construction of a well-
to-do society, the success of socialist modernization drive, and the great renaissance of the Chinese 
nation.   Under  the  leadership  of  the  Party  Central  Committee  headed  by  Secretary  General  Hu 
Jingtao, and with  the guidance of Deng Xiaoping  Theory and the important  doctrine of “Three 
Representations”,  the  nation  will  go  all  out  to  materialize  the  grand  blueprint  of  science  and 
technology development, and build an innovation-oriented nation with steadfast confidence and 
determination.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  

 

