3701 

Document 
Conpes     

 

 

National Council on Economic and Social Policy 

Republic of Colombia 

National Planning Department 

 

 
 

POLICY GUIDELINES ON  

CYBERSECURITY AND CYBERDEFENSE  

Ministry of the Interior and Justice 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs  

Ministry of Defense 

Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies 

Department of Security Administration 

National Planning Department-DJSG-DIFP-DIES-OI 

Office of the Attorney General 

 

Version: Draft 

Bogotá D.C., July 14Th of 2011 

 

 

Summary: 

 

The  purpose  of  this  document  is  to  generate  policy  guidelines  on  cybersecurity1  and 

cyberdefense2 with the aim of developing a national strategy to counter the rise in cyber threats that 

have  significant  impact  on  the  country.  In  addition,  it  examines  past  experiences,  both  within  the 

country and abroad, as well as the country's legal framework on the subject.  

 

The core issue hinges on the fact that the state’s current capacity to confront cyber threats is 

hampered by weaknesses and the lack of a national strategy in this area. Based on the foregoing the 

causes and effects have been identified from which to develop prevention and control policies against 

the increase in cyber threats.  In  order  to enable  the  strategy's  implementation, this  document  offers 

specific  recommendations  for  entities  directly  and  indirectly  involved  in  this  issue.  This  was  the 

position that the Colombian government adopted when it included this issue in the Plan Vive Digital 

[Live Digital Plan] within the framework of the 2010-2014 National Development Plan “Prosperity 

for All.” 

 

 

Classification:   H011, H411, R011 

 

Keywords:  Cyber  threat,  cyberspace,  cyberdefense,  cybersecurity,  information  security,  critical 

infrastructure, CERT, ColCERT.  

 

                                            

1. 

2. 

 

The state’s capacity to minimize the level of exposure of its citizens to cyber threats or incidents. 

The  state’s  capacity  to  prevent  and  counter  any  cyber  threat  or  incident  that  undermines  national 
sovereignty. 

iii 

 

CONTENTS 

I. 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ 1 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

BACKGROUND  ................................................................................................................. 2 
National Framework  ................................................................................................. 6 
A. 
B. 
International Framework  ........................................................................................ 10 

ANALYSIS ......................................................................................................................... 13 
Core Problem .......................................................................................................... 13 
A. 
B. 
Effects of the Core Problem .................................................................................... 14 

OBJECTIVES  ................................................................................................................... 16 
A. 
Overarching Objective ............................................................................................ 16 
Specific Objectives  ................................................................................................. 16 
B. 

V. 

PLAN OF ACTION  .......................................................................................................... 25 

VI. 

FINANCING ....................................................................................................................... 28 

VII.  RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................... 28 

VIII.  SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY.............................................................................................. 32 

IX. 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS  ................................................................................................. 33 

ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................................... 37 
 

 

 

v 

 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  use  of  information  and  communication  technologies  brings  with  it  changes  and 

permanent threats and has become one of the cornerstones of the globalized world. At the same time, 

the evolution of these technologies has brought an increase in the use of technological resources for 

criminal purposes all over the world. 

The continual evolution, spread, and sophistication of cyber attacks, as well as technological 

convergence,3 highlight the need to adopt measures and controls to protect the state from these new 

threats.4 The increased capacity to commit crime in cyberspace as well as the use of new technologies 

to generate cyber threats, constitute a common concern for all countries, given that they significantly 

impact information security in both public and private spheres, including civil society.  

Tackling the issues of cybersecurity and cyberdefense entails a commitment on the part of the 

national  government  to  guarantee  information  security.  Therefore,  although  this  document  aims  to 

provide a policy framework for the issues of cybersecurity and cyberdefense in particular, the entities 

involved  will  be  responsible  for  developing  that  framework  and  creating  mechanisms  by  which  to 

ensure  information  security  nationwide.  To  achieve  the  foregoing,  consideration  will  be  given  to 

technical  rules  and  national  and  international  standards,  as  well  as  international  initiatives  on 

protection of critical infrastructure and cybersecurity. 

Bearing in mind that the government needs to be aware of and act comprehensively against 

cyber threats, a strategy is needed that includes the creation of appropriate bodies to perform the task 

of  providing  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  against  any  cyber  threats  or  incident  that  could 

                                            

3. 

Technological  convergence  is  the  tendency  for  different  technological  systems  to  evolve  towards 
performing  similar  tasks.  Convergence  can  refer  to  previously  separate  technologies  such  as  voice 
(and telephony features), data (and productivity applications), and video that now share resources and 
interact  with  each  other  synergistically  (Jenkins,  Henry  (2006)  Convergence  Culture,  New  York 
University Press, New York). 

4.  A  potential  cause  of  an  unwanted  incident,  which  may  result  in  harm  to  a  system  or  organization. 

(ISO/IEC 13335-1:2004). 

 

- 2 - 

compromise information,5 impair the country's critical infrastructure, and jeopardize the security and 

defense of the state. The adoption of a national policy on cybersecurity and cyberdefense involving 

all sectors of society, under the leadership of the Ministry of Defense and in coordination with other 

state entities, is an imperative of the highest priority.  

This document identifies as the overarching objective of this policy the strengthening of the 

state’s  capacity  to  confront  cyber  threats  to  its  security  and  defense.  It  also  defines  three  specific 

objectives:  1)  To  implement  appropriate  mechanisms  to  prevent,  provide  assistance,  control,  and 

offer  recommendations  on  cyber  incidents  and/or  emergencies  for  protecting  the  country's  critical 

infrastructure;  2)  To  design  and  execute  specialized  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  training  plans; 

and, 3) To strengthen the legal framework and law enforcement in this area.  

 

This document sets out a plan of action for putting into effect the policy on cybersecurity and 

cyberdefense, which will be entrusted to the entities involved. 

II. 

BACKGROUND 

In April 2007, the government of Estonia sustained what is generally regarded as the biggest 

cyber attack in history; it affected the office of the president, the parliament, most ministries, political 

parties,  and  two  major  banks.  The  attack  triggered  a  crisis  that  necessitated  the  intervention  of  the 

international  community  and  alerted  NATO.  As  a  result,  in  August  2008,  NATO  launched  the 

Cooperative  Cyber  Defence  Centre  of  Excellence  (CCD  COE),  whose  mission  is  to  protect  the 

Organization's  members  from  attacks  of  this  type,  provide  training  to  military  personnel,  conduct 

research on electronic defense techniques, and develop a legal framework for pursuing this activity. 

                                            

5.  Cyber threat: The appearance of a potential or actual situation in which an agent has the capacity to 
produce  a  cyber  attack  against  the  population,  territory,  and  political  organization  of  the  state. 
(Ministry Of Defense Colombia)   

Cyber incident: One or a series of unexpected or unwanted cybersecurity events that have a significant 
probability of compromising the operations of an entity or threatening information security. (Ministry 
Of Defense Colombia)   

 

- 3 - 

There are two other significant cyber attacks that are also worth mentioning.  The first was 

against  the  United  States  in  July  2009,  when  a  series  of  attacks  affected  the  White  House,  the 

Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  the  Department  of  Defense,  the  Federal  Aviation 

Administration,  and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission.6  The  other  event  was  that  reported  by  Spain's 

Guardia  Civil  in  March  2010,  when  it  dismantled  one  of  the  largest  so-called  zombie  computer 

networks,7 known as the mariposa (or butterfly) botnet8, composed of more than 13 million infected 

IP addresses9 distributed across 190 countries. Colombia was the fifth worst-affected country by this 

network. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

No. 

COUNTRY 

% 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

INDIA 

Mexico 

BRAZIL 

KOREA 

COLOMBIA 

RUSSIA 

EGYPT 

MALAYSIA 

UKRAINE 

10 

PAKISTAN 

19.14 

12.85 

7.74 

7.24 

4.94 

3.14 

2.99 

2.86 

2.69 

2.55 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. 

COUNTRY 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

PERU 

IRAN 

SAUDI ARABIA 

CHILE 

KAZAKHSTAN 

UNITED ARAB 

EMIRATES 

MOROCCO 

ARGENTINA 

UNITED STATES 

% 

2.42 

2.07 

1.85 

1.74 

1.38 

1.15 

1.13 

1.10 

1.05 

 

 

 

TABLE 1: Latin American countries worst affected by a zombie network in March 2010 

Source: www.infospyware.com 

                                            

6.  Report to Congressional Requesters, United States Government Accountability Office, March 2010, 

http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10338.pdf  

7. 

8. 

Term used to refer to personal computers which, after being infected by some type of malware, can be 
used by a third party to carry out hostile activities. This use occurs without the consent or knowledge 
of the machine's user. 

The name given to a network of computers that combines their resources to perform a common task 
and  shares  the  workload  among  all  the  computers  (FireEye  –  Arbornet).  A  botnet's  originator  can 
control  the  infected  computers/servers  remotely,  usually  through  a  means  such  as  IRC:  Newer 
versions of these botnets are focusing on control environments via HTTP, greatly simplifying control 
of these machines. Their purposes are usually nefarious. 

9.  A numerical label assigned, logically and hierarchically, to the interface (communication/connection 
element)  of  a  device  (normally  a  computer)  within  a  network  that  uses  the  IP  protocol  (Internet 
Protocol). www.iso.org  

 

- 4 - 

As regards the private sector, a study found that the average cost to each company that was a 

victim  of  cyber  attacks  was  US$2  million  a  year.10  Of  the  organizations  involved,  42%  rated 

cybersecurity as their main priority, bearing in mind that 75% of them suffered some form of security 

breach  in  the  12  months  prior  to  the  study.  Other  factors  that  were  identified  as  being  critical  to 

security were staff shortage, new information technology initiatives, and compliance problems with 

information technology standards.11  

In Colombia use of information and communication technologies has increased significantly, 

raising the country's level of exposure to cyber threats. According to graph 1, the number of Internet 

users  went  up  by  354%  between  2005  and  2009.  The  number  of  Internet  subscribers  increased  by 

101% between 2008 and 2010, reaching a total of 4,384,181 fixed and mobile Internet subscribers. 

Of those, 39% are fixed subscribers and 61% are mobile subscribers, as graph 2 shows.  

 

Source: Data reported by network providers and services to SIUST, DANE 

Graph 1.  Internet users, 2005 - 2009 

 

 

                                            

10.  Source: http://www.symantec.com/es/mx/business/theme.jsp?themeid=state_of_enterprise_security 

11.  Source: http://www.symantec.com/es/mx/business/theme.jsp?themeid=state_of_enterprise_security 

 

- 5 - 

Graph 2.  Internet subscribers, 2008 - 2010 

Source: Data reported by network providers and services to SIUST 

 

 

The Internet has become an increasingly popular medium among users of banking services. 

According  to  the  Financial  Superintendency  of  Colombia,  in  2010,  30%  of  financial  and  non-

financial transactions were carried out online, which, as graph 3 shows, represent an increase of 12% 

in the number of operations carried out using in this way compared with 2008.  

 

 

Graph 3.  Financial and non-financial operations, by medium, 2010 

Source: Transactions and Operations Report, Financial Superintendency of Colombia 

 

 

- 6 - 

The  value  of  financial  operations  conducted  online  in  2010  came  to  1.237  billion  pesos, 

which amounts to a rise of 121% compared to 2008. 

As regards cybersecurity, Colombia has also been the target of attacks. One notable incident 

occurred in the first half of 2011 when the "hacktivist" group that calls itself Anonymous attacked the 

portals of the office of the president, the Senate, the online government portal, and the Ministries of 

the Interior and Justice, Culture, and Defense, leaving their websites off-line for several hours. The 

attack  was  launched  in  protest  against  a  proposed  law  regulating  responsibility  for  online 

infringements  of  copyright  and  related  rights.  This  group  has  indiscriminately  targeted  public  and 

private sector entities,  including  PayPal,  the  Swiss  bank  PostFinance, MasterCard, Visa,  and  Swiss 

government websites.  

Also worth mentioning are the complaints that have also been reported by private citizens to the 

Colombian  police.  From  January  to  December  2009,  the  police  dealt  with  575  cyber  offenses 

recognized  by  Law  1273  of  2009.12    These  offenses  included  abusive  access  to  a  computer  system 

(259),  computer  and  related  theft  (247),  data  interception  (17),  violation  of  personal  data  (35), 

unauthorized  assets  transfer  (8),  website  impersonation  (5),  computer  damage  (3),  and  unlawful 

obstruction of a computer system (1).  In 2010, the number of offenses and infringements increased 

by  73%,  to  a  total  of  995  cyber  offenses.  The  biggest  increase  came  in  the  area  of  computer  theft, 

where the number rose from 247 to 502,13 equivalent to 103%. 

A. 

National Framework 

In  order  to  put  Colombia's  legal  framework  in  perspective  it  is  important  to  mention  the 

country's lawmaking efforts in chronological order, as follows: 

                                            

12   Law 1273 criminalized behavior connected with cyber offenses and information and data protection. 

13.  Data reported by the National Police's Crime and Operational Statistics System (SIEDCO) 

 

 

LAW / 

RESOLUTION 

Law 527 of 1999 
- ELECTRONIC 

TRADE 

Law 599 of 2000 

Law 962 of 2005  

- 7 - 

SUBJECT MATTER 

Defines  and  regulates  access  to  and  use  of  data  messages,  electronic  trade,  and  digital 
signatures,  as  well  as  establishing  the  certification  entities  and  introducing  other 
provisions.” 

Enacts  the  Criminal  Code.  The  Law  maintains  the  structure  of  the  definition  of  the  crime  of 
"unlawful violation of communications," recognizes copyright as a legal interest, and includes a 
number of conducts indirectly connected with cybercrime, such as the offer, sale, or purchase of 
an instrument apt for use to intercept private communications between persons. The Law also 
defined  "Improper  access  to  a  computer  system"  as  follows  “Art.  195.  Anyone  who  gains 
improper  access  to  a  computer  system  protected  with  a  security  measure  or  remains  within 
same against the will of someone entitled to exclude them shall be liable to a fine.”  

 

Introduces  provisions  on  streamlining  of  administrative  formalities  and  procedures  of 
government  agencies  and  entities,  as  well  as  of  private  persons  who  perform  public 
functions  or  provide  a  public  service.  Provides  for  the  incentive  of  using  integrated 
technological  mechanisms  to  reduce  the  time  and  cost  of  procedures  for  those  subject  to 
administration. 

Law 1150 of 

2007 

Introduces  measures  to  encourage  efficiency  and  transparency  in  Law  80  of  1993,  and 
issues  other  general  provisions  on  procurement  using  public  funds.  In  particular,  the  law 
establishes  the  possibility  for  the  public  administration  to  issue  administrative  decisions, 
documents, and notices by electronic means, to which end it provides for the development 
of the Electronic Government Procurement System (SECOP).   

Law 1273 of 

2009  

Amends the Criminal Code and creates a new legally protected interest called information 
and  data  protection.  The  Law  comprehensively  protects  systems  that  use  information  and 
communication technologies, among other provisions. 

Law 1341 of 

2009 

Defines principles and concepts relating to the information society and the organization of 
information  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs).  This  law  also  creates  the  National 
Spectrum Agency as well as issuing other provisions. 

 

- 8 - 

LAW / 

RESOLUTION 

SUBJECT MATTER 

On network security of network providers and telecommunications services. This resolution 
amends Articles 22 and 23 of CRT resolution 1732 of 2007 and Articles 1(8) and 2(4) of 
CRT  resolution  1740  of  2007.    This  rule  recognizes  the  obligation  for  network  providers 
and/or telecommunications services that offer Internet access to implement security models 
in accordance with the specific characteristics and needs of their network, in order to help 
improve  the  security  of  their  access  networks  in  keeping  with  the  security  frameworks 
defined  by  the  ITU,  abiding  by  the  principles  of  data  confidentiality,  data  integrity,  and 
availability  of  network  elements,  information,  services,  and  applications,  as  well  as 
measures  for authentication, access, and  non-repudiation. It also establishes obligations to 
be  met  by  network  providers  and 
the  area  of 
communications inviolability and information security. 

telecommunications  services 

in 

Sets  the  minimum  security  and  quality  requirements  on  information  management  through 
goods and services distribution media and channels for clients and users. 

Communications 

Regulation 
Commission 

resolution 2258 of 

2009 

Circular 052 of 
2007 (Financial 
Superintendency 

of Colombia) 

 

TABLE 2: Domestic standards 

 

Different initiatives have been devised in a number of sectors, which CONPES has drawn on 

as research and reference papers for preparing this document: 

 

INITIATIVE 

LEAD ENTITY 

SCOPE 

Information 
Model  for 
Government Strategy 

Security 
the  Online 

Online Government 
Program - Ministry of 

Information and 
Communication 

Technologies 

This security model is founded on the set of strategic policies 
that  underpin  online  government,  such  as  “protection  of 
personal  information"  and  “credibility  and  trust  in  online 
government.”  It  establishes  the  following  as  fundamental 
elements of information security for government agencies: 1) 
Availability  of  information  and  services.  2)  Information  and 
data integrity. 3) Information confidentiality. 

 

- 9 - 

INITIATIVE 

LEAD ENTITY 

SCOPE 

Recommendations  to  the 
national  government  for 
implementing  a  National 
cybersecurity Strategy 

Telecommunications 
Regulation Commission 

the 

national 

this  document 

the  Communications  Regulation 
In 
government 
Commission 
offers 
recommendations  for 
the  establishment  of  a  National 
Cybersecurity  Strategy;  puts  suggests  suitable  public-private 
collaboration and cooperation mechanisms; identifies ways to 
deter  cybercrime;  recommends  the  implementation  and 
development  of  cybersecurity  legal  frameworks  consistent 
with  international  standards;  offers  recommendations  for  the 
development  of  response  systems  for  network  security 
incidents,  including  surveillance,  analysis,  and  incident 
response;  and  proposes  guidelines  for  introducing  a  national 
cybersecurity  culture  in  order  to  improve  protection  of 
critical information infrastructure in Colombia. 

CCIT 

- 
CSIRT- 
Computer 
Security 
Incident  Response  Team 
for 
service 
providers (ISPs). 

Internet 

Colombian  Chamber  of 
Informatics 
and 
Telecommunications 
(CCIT) 

The Colombian Computer Security Incident Response Team, 
which  is  in  direct  contact  with  the  security  teams  of  its 
member  companies  (the  largest  Internet  service  providers  in 
Colombia).  It  has  the  capacity  to  coordinate  attention  and 
response 
to  any  requests  and  complaints  concerning 
computer security problems that it receives. 

 

Table 3: National initiatives 

 

Furthermore,  Colombian  government  agencies  have  been  raising  awareness  about  the 

importance  of  developing  a  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  policy  since  2007.  To  that  end,  the 

national  government,  in  partnership  at  the  international  level  with  the  Organization  of  American 

States  (OAS),  through  the  Inter-American  Committee  against  Terrorism  (CICTE),  organized  a 

workshop  on  cybersecurity  awareness  in  May  2008,  followed  by  a  national  roundtable  in  October 

2009. As an upshot of the above activities, government agencies requested the Ministry of Defense to 

lead  the  way  in  implementing  cybersecurity  policies  and  establish  mechanisms  to  respond  to  any 

cybercrimes and incidents that might affect the nation. This request arose as a result of the need for 

an in-depth analysis of the specific features of the national security scheme, the technical capabilities 

in place in the Ministry of Defense, and a study of the international context. In the final  analysis it 

emerged  that  the  Ministry  of  Defense  had  the  greatest  capacity  for  handling  these  issues  in  an 

efficient and coordinated manner.  

Accordingly,  over  the  last  two  years,  the  Ministry  of  Defense  has  worked  to  position  the 

issue of cybersecurity and cyberdefense on the national agenda.  

 

- 10 - 

While Colombia does not yet have cyber incident response agencies, it does have capabilities 

and expertise that have allowed it to be a part of commissions that have assisted other governments in 

the  region  (Panama,  Dominican  Republic,  and  Mexico)  in  planning  their  respective  Computer 

Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). 

Finally, it is noteworthy that the issue of cybersecurity and cyberdefense was included in the 

2010-2014  National  Development  Plan  “Prosperity  for  All,”  as  part  of  the  Plan  Vive  Digital  [Live 

Digital  Plan]  spearheaded  by  the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies,  the 

purpose  of  which  is  to  encourage  widespread  Internet  use  with  the  aim  of  taking  a  leap  toward 

democratic prosperity. 

B. 

International framework 

The principal international instruments on cybersecurity and cyberdefense are: 

INSTRUMENT 

SUBJECT MATTER 

Council  of  Europe  Convention  on 
Cybercrime14  (CCC),  also  known  as 
the  Budapest  Convention 
on 
Cybercrime 

Adopted in November 2001; in force 
as of July 1, 2004. 

The main objective of the Convention is the adoption of legislation to 
facilitate  the  prevention  of  criminal  conduct  as  well  as  to  contribute 
efficient  tools  in  the  area  of  criminal  law  with  which  to  detect, 
investigate, and punish unlawful behavior. 

The  Convention,  together  with  its  additional  protocol  concerning  the 
criminalization  of  acts  of  a  racist  and  xenophobic  nature  committed 
through computer systems, is the only binding international instrument 
in  this  area.    The  Council  considers  that  cybercrime  requires  a 
common  criminal  policy  aimed  at  the  protection  of  society  against 
cybercrime15  ,  in  particular  by  adopting  appropriate  legislation  and 
strengthening  international  cooperation.  It  should  be  noted  that 
although  the  CCC  originated  in  the  European  region,  it  is  an 
instrument that is open to all countries for accession. 

                                            

14.  Any crime committed using a computer or a computer service (Ministry of Defense of Colombia). 

15.  Hypothetical  or  imaginary  environment  or  space  of  those  immersed  in  the  world  of  electronics, 
informatics, and cybernetics. (Free translation of the definition coined by the Academy of the Spanish 
Language) 

 

- 11 - 

INSTRUMENT 

SUBJECT MATTER 

Adoption  of  a  Comprehensive  Inter-American  Strategy  to  Combat 
Threats  to  Cybersecurity:  A  Multidimensional  and  Multidisciplinary 
Approach to Creating a Culture of Cybersecurity. 

The Strategy envisages three lines of action: 

  Creation of a Hemispheric Network of Computer Security Incident 
Response Teams (CSIRTs).16 This task  was assigned to the Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE). 

 

Identification  and  adoption  of  technical  standards  for  a  secure 
Internet  architecture.  This  task  is  being  carried  out  by  the  Inter-
American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL). 

  Adoption and/or adaptation  of the legal tools necessary to protect 
Internet  users  and  information  networks  from  criminals  and 
organized  crime  groups  that  exploit  these  systems.  This  was 
assigned to the Meeting of Ministers of Justice or Other Ministers 
or Attorneys General of the Americas (REMJA). 

Which  establishes  the  guidelines  of  the  Andean  Common  External 
Security  Policy.  Among  others,  the  objectives  of  that  policy  are  to 
prevent,  combat,  and  eliminate  new  security 
threats  and,  as 
appropriate,  their  interactions,  through  cooperation  and  coordinated 
measures  to  confront  the  challenges  that  those  threats  pose  to  the 
Andean Community. 

Aimed  at  promoting  consideration  of  pertinent  international  concepts 
designed  to  strengthen  the  security  of  worldwide  information  and 
telecommunication systems. 

OAS  General  Assembly  resolution 
AG/RES. 2004 (XXXIV-O/04). 

 

Andean Community Decision 587 

adopted on July 10, 2004 

Consensus on cybersecurity17 of the 
International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), in the framework of 
the United Nations, in pursuance of 
the Tunis Agenda for the 
Information Society (2005). 

UN  General  Assembly  resolution  The General Assembly calls upon member states to promote further at 

                                            

16   Por sus siglas en inglés: Visit www.first.org.  

17   The collective and coordinated operational response of a country, which recognizes information as a 
critical  asset  for  safeguarding  its  governance  and,  therefore,  develops  and  ensures  standards  and 
systematic  practices  geared  toward  individuals,  technologies,  processes,  and  regulatory  and 
enforcement aspects. 

 

- 12 - 

INSTRUMENT 

SUBJECT MATTER 

64/25 “Developments in  the field of 
information and telecommunications 
in 
international 
security” (2009) 

the  context  of 

multilateral levels the consideration of existing and potential threats in 
the field of information security, as well as possible measures to limit 
the threats emerging in this field, consistent with the need to preserve 
the free flow of information 

This  resolution  continues  the  Assembly's  follow-up  together  with 
resolutions  53/70  of  4  December  1998,  54/49  of  1  December  1999, 
55/28 of 20 November 2000, 56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 
November  2002,  58/32  of  8  December  2003,  59/61  of  3  December 
2004, 60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 
5 December 2007 and 63/37 of 2 December 2008. 

 

Table 4: International legal framework on cybersecurity 

 

 

There are Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRT) in place in 13 countries in 

the  region:  Argentina  (ArCERT),  The  Bahamas  (Royal  Bahamas  Police),  Bolivia  (CRISIS),  Brazil 

(CTIR-GOV),  Canada  (CCIRC),  Chile  (CORE/  Min.  Interior),  Guatemala  (CSIRT-  GT),  Paraguay 

(CSIRT-Py),  Peru  (PerCERT),  Suriname  (SurCSIRT),  United  States  (USCERT),  Uruguay 

(CERTUy),  and  Venezuela  (VenCERT).18    According  to  the  Carnegie  Mellon  University  database 

(CERT- CC, www.cert.org/csirts/national/contact.html#), there are 55 national CERTS worldwide. 

 

In  addition,  as  the  following  table  shows,  different  parts  of  the  world  have  seen  the 

implementation  of  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  policies,  the  incorporation  of  new  technological 

capacities, and the activation of agencies to perform these functions: 

 

COUNTRY 

GERMANY 

GOVERNMENT MEASURES 

1. 

 The  German  government  launched  its  Strategy  on  Cybersecurity  in  February 
2011.  In  April  2011,  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  launched  the  National 
Cyberdefense Center. 

AUSTRALIA 

Opened  the  Cyber  Security  Operations  Centre  to  coordinate  government 
measures steps to deal with incidents in cyberspace. 

CANADA 

Safety 

Canada 

the 
Public 
 Canadian  Cyber  Incident  Response  Centre  (CCIRC)  and  in  October  2010 
adopted Canada's Cyber Security Strategy. 

implemented 

                                            

18.  CICTE/OAS 

 

- 13 - 

COUNTRY 

GOVERNMENT MEASURES 

UNITED STATES 

Established the  unified Cyber Command,  which reports to the National Security 
Agency  (NSA),  DHS:  National  Cyber  Security  Division,  US-CERT:  United 
States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  and  the  White  House  Cyber 
Security  Office.  The  International  Strategy  for  Cyberspace  was  adopted  in  May 
2011. 

ESTONIA 

FRANCE 

In  2008  it  created,  together  with  other  European  countries,  NATO,  and  United 
States,  the  Cooperative  Cyber  Defense  Center  of  Excellence.  2008  also  saw  the 
adoption of the Cyber Security Strategy. 

Created  the  French  Network  and  Information  Security  Agency  (FNISA),  which 
monitors  governmental  and  private  computer  networks  in  order  to  protect  them 
from  cyber  attack.  An  Information  Systems  Defense  and  Security  Strategy  was 
adopted in February 2011.  

Table 5: Cyberdefense measures adopted at the international level 

    

III. 

ANALYSIS 

A. 

Core Problem 

The  agencies  involved  in  the  preparation  of  this  document  have  concluded  that  the  current 

capacity  of  the  State  to  deal  with  cyber  threats  has  major  weaknesses.  Despite  the  existence  of 

governmental,  private,  and  civil-society  initiatives  to  counter  the  impact  of  such  threats,  an 

appropriate, coordinated, interagency approach is missing.   

At  present,  Colombia  is  one  of  a  number  of  countries  that  do  not  have  a  national 

cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  strategy  that  includes  an  organizational  system  and  a  legal  and 

institutional  framework  strong  enough  to  confront  the  latest  cybersecurity  challenges.  Unlike  the 

majority  of  Latin  American  countries,  Columbia  has  not  yet  implemented  a  national  CSIRT  or 

CERT.19  

                                            

19.  Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), equivalent  to a CSIRT but registered  with Carnegie 

Mellon University.  

 

- 14 - 

The  increasing  number  of  Internet  users,  as  well  as  the  strong  dependence  of  Colombia's 

critical  infrastructure  on  electronic  media  and  the  considerable  rise  in  the  number  of  cybersecurity 

incidents and crimes have highlighted the country's high vulnerability to cyber threats, such as use of 

the Internet for terrorist purposes, sabotage of public services, espionage, and theft, among others. 

B. 

Effects of the core problem 

The  main  effects  of  the  above  problem  are  an  increase  in  cybercrime  and  the  risk  of 

unauthorized  access to information, impairment  of the  normal  operation and  continuity  of  services, 

and ongoing impunity in tackling offenses of this type.  

There are three (3) main problem areas:  

1. 

Cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  initiatives  and  operations  are  not  adequately 

coordinated 

Although  a  number  of  institutional  efforts  exist  (in  both  the  private  and  the  public 

sector),  the  study  has  found  that  no  agencies  have  been  established  at  the  national 

level  to  coordinate  and  implement  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  operations. 

Accordingly,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  establish  enough  adequate  mechanisms  to 

curb cyber attacks and protect state interests in cyberspace. Efforts to raise awareness 

and generate a culture of prevention and safety on the issue of cybersecurity in the 

public and private sectors as well as civil society have been weak. 

2. 

Insufficient  availability  and  coverage  of  specialized  training  in  cybersecurity 

and cyberdefense 

 

 

Expertise  in  the  areas of  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  in  both  the  public  and the 

private  sector  is  limited.  Although  a  number  of  higher  education  institutions  in  the 

country  offer  specialty  courses  in  computer  security  and  computer  law,  the  study 

noted  that  the  availability  of  specialized  academic  programs  in  these  areas  is  low. 

Accordingly,  a  significant  number  of  students  who  embark  on  some  form  of 

 

- 15 - 

education in the area of information security do so by enrolling in programs offered 

by foreign institutions that do not address the Colombian reality in any depth.  

The  training  and  education  offered  to  public-  and  private-sector  employees  to 

respond as the first line of defense to cybercrime is deficient. Very often, the chain of 

custody  of  digital  evidence  is  lost,  hampering  forensic  investigations.  Furthermore, 

there are a limited number of training programs available for agencies that serve as 

judicial police in this area. 

3. 

Weak regulation and legislation on information and data protection. 

In  spite  of  the  existence  of  laws  and  regulations  on  information  security, 

shortcomings persist that impede a timely response to cyber incidents and offenses. 

The  Colombian  Congress  recently  passed  the  Intelligence  and  Counterintelligence 

Law,  which  introduces  monitoring  and  oversight  mechanisms  for  these  activities. 

However,  this  law  needs  to  be  made  much  more  specific  in  terms  of  scope  and 

operability, so that cybersecurity and cyberdefense can be adequately addressed. 

In  terms  of  international  standards,  one  of  the  instruments  that  would  enable  the 

country  to  draw  level  with  the  international  community  is  the  Council  of  Europe's 

Convention on Cybercrime, under which it would have to meet certain requirements, 

such as the establishment of judicial cooperation mechanisms, including extradition, 

points  of  contact  available  on  a  twenty-four  hour,  seven-day-a-week  basis  to 

facilitate investigation, and log-keeping20 by ISPs,21 for the requisite amount of time. 

In specific areas, such as ISP regulation, significant progress was made in terms of 

standards  toward  the  end  of  2009.  The  obligation  was  introduced  for  ISPs  to 

                                            

20.  A  log  is  an  official  record  of  events  over  a  particular  period  of  time.  For  computer  security 
professionals a log serves to keep a record of data or information as to the who, what, when, where, 
and why with regard to an event involving a particular device or an application. 

21. 

Internet service providers (Currently in Colombia these entities also provide telephony and television 
services, thus becoming providers of integrated telecommunications services.) 

 

- 16 - 

implement security models in keeping with the particular features and needs of their 

networks, with the aim of helping to enhance the security of their access networks, 

complying with the rules on data confidentiality and integrity, as well as availability 

of  network  elements,  information,  services  and  applications,  in  addition  to 

mechanisms  for  authentication,  access  and  non-repudiation,  and  obligations  in  the 

area of in the area of communications inviolability and information security. . It was 

found, however, with regard to ISP network security, for example, that logs are not 

stored  for  a  sufficient  length  of  time,  so  that,  at  a  given  point,  they  can  be  used  as 

evidence or contribute to cybercrime investigations. 

IV. 

OBJECTIVES 

A. 

Overarching Objective 

To strengthen the capabilities the state to confront threats that undermine its security 

and  defense 

in  cyberspace  (cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense),  creating  the  necessary 

environment and conditions to provide protection therein. 

This  will  require  the  involvement  of  all  government  sectors  and  institutions  with 

responsibilities  in  the  area  of  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense,  creating  an  environment  of 

participation  in  which  all  stakeholders  act  with  a  common  purpose  under  consensualized  strategies 

and coordinated efforts. It is also vital to inform the public and raise awareness about all aspects of 

information  security;  strengthen  levels  of  international  cooperation  and  partnership  in  areas  of 

cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense;  support  investigations  of  computer  attacks,  and  protect  the  public 

from the consequences of those attacks.  

B. 

Specific objectives 

 

 

1. 

To  implement  appropriate  bodies  to  prevent,  provide  assistance,  control, 

produce recommendations, and issue rules on cyber incidents or emergencies, in 

order to confront threats and risks to national cybersecurity and cyberdefense.  

 

- 17 - 

Through this objective, agencies will be established with the necessary technical and 

operating  capacity  to  ensure  the  country's  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense.  To  that 

end, the national government will need to create the following bodies: 

Graph 5: Coordination Model 

Source: Ministry of Defense 

 

a. 

An  Intersectoral  Committee  charged  with  devising  a  strategic  vision  for 

information  management  and  with  introducing  policy  guidelines  for 

technology 

infrastructure  management 

(hardware, 

software, 

and 

communications),  public  information,  and  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense. 

This  committee  would  be  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  Republic  and  its 

members  would  include,  as  a  minimum,  the  Chief  Advisor  on  National 

Security,  the  Minister  of  Defense,  the  Minister  of  Information  and 

Communication  Technologies,  the  Director  of  the  Department  of  Security 

Administration (DAS) or the entity serving as such, the Director of National 

Planning, and the Coordinator of ColCERT.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 18 - 

Depending on the topics to be addressed, the Committee would also have the 

possibility  to  invite  other  national  actors  representing  academia  and  the 

private  sector,  as  well  as  international  experts  and  representatives  of  other 

state institutions. 

b. 

Colombia's  Cyber  Emergency  Response  Team  (ColCERT)  will  be  the 

agency  that  coordinates  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  nationwide.  It  will 

provide  assistance  to  and  work  in  partnership  with  other  national  bodies, 

including  the  Police  Cyber  Center  (CCP)  and  the  Joint  Cyber  Command 

(CCOC).  

ColCERT will be a Ministry of Defense working group composed of civilian 

officials,  military  personnel  and  representatives  of  other  entities.  It  will 

receive guidelines from the Intersectoral Committee.  

ColCERT’s central objective and mission will be to coordinate the necessary 

measures to protect the Colombian state's critical infrastructure against cyber 

emergencies that threaten or compromise national defense and security.  

ColCERT will have the following specific objectives:  

• 

To  coordinate,  together  with  the  Intersectoral  Committee,  the 

development 

and 

promotion 

of 

policies, 

procedures, 

recommendations,  protocols,  and  guidelines  on  cybersecurity  and 

cyberdefense  in  concert  with  the  relevant  stakeholders,  as  well  as 

ensuring their implementation and compliance.  

• 

To  promote  local/sectoral capacity  building,  as  well  as  the  creation 

of  sectoral  CSIRTs  for  the  operational  handling  of  cybersecurity 

incidents  affecting  the  country's  critical  infrastructure,  the  private 

sector, and civil society 

 

- 19 - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

To coordinate and advise CSIRTs and other entities in the public and 

private  sectors,  as  well  as  civil  society,  on  computer  incident 

response. 

To  offer,  on  demand,  prevention  services  against  cyber  threats, 

responses 

to  computer 

incidents,22  as  well  as 

information, 

awareness-building, and training to all entities. 

To  coordinate  the  implementation  of  public-private  initiatives  and 

policies  on  awareness  raising  and  specialized  skills  development  in 

the areas of cybersecurity and cyberdefense. 

To  provide  assistance  to  government  security  and  investigation 

agencies  in  prevention  and  investigation  of  crimes  involving 

information and communication technologies. 

To  foster  a  knowledge  management  system  in  the  area  of 

cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  designed  to  improve  the  services 

rendered by ColCERT. 

To  provide  the  CCP  and  CCOC  with  computer  intelligence 

whenever necessary.  

To act as international point of contact with its counterparts in other 

countries, and with international agencies involved in this issue. 

ColCERT  is  due  to  start  operating  in  the  second  half  of  2011  within  the 

following the relational scheme:  

 

                                            

22.  An  unwanted  or  unexpected  event  that  occurs  in  cyberspace,  which,  in  different  circumstances,  can 

harm individuals and affect or cause losses to processes and businesses 

 

- 20 - 

ColCERT Relational Scheme 

 

 

Graph 6: ColCERT Relational Scheme  

Source: Ministry of Defense  

 

ColCERT  will  also  lead  and  implement  the  National  Network  of  CSIRTS 

and Investigation Agencies. The Network will comprise sectoral CSIRTs and 

state investigation bodies, and its purpose will be to facilitate and strengthen 

cooperation  and  support  ties  within  the  country  with  a  view  to  resolving 

cybersecurity incidents, through a highly secure platform. 

c. 

The  Armed  Forces  Joint  Cyber  Command  (CCOC)  will  be  headed  by  the 

General  Command  of  the  Armed  Forces,  who  will  have  the  authority  to 

delegate  his  functions  within  the  Armed  Forces  subject  to  the  areas  of 

expertise that exist in the sector.  It will prevent and counter all cyber threats 

or attacks that affect the country's assets and interests.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 21 - 

The CCOC will have the following general functions: 

• 

To  strengthen  the  technical  and  operational  capabilities  of  the 

country in order to enable it to confront computer threats and cyber 

attacks  through  implementation  of  protection  measures  at  both  the 

hardware and software level, as well as introduction of cyberdefense 

protocols.  

• 

• 

To protect critical infrastructure and reduce the computer risks to the 

country's  strategic  information,  as  well  as  strengthen  protection  for 

the computer systems of Colombia's security forces. 

To develop neutralization and response capabilities for dealing with 

computer  incidents  and  attacks  against  the  country's  security  and 

defense.  

The  CCOC  will  follow  national  guidelines  and  work  in  coordination  with 

ColCERT.  

d. 

The  Police  Cyber  Center  (CCP)  will  be  in  charge  of  cybersecurity  in 

Colombian territory, offering information, assistance, and protection against 

cybercrime.  Its  activities  will  include  prevention,  assistance,  investigation, 

and  prosecution  of  computer  crime  in  the  country,  as  well  as  providing 

information  about  vulnerabilities  to  cyber  attack  on  its  website.  It  will 

receive  and  heed  the  national  cybersecurity  guidelines  and  work  in 

coordination with ColCERT. 

The CCP will consist of a team appointed by the national police, which will 

be  in  charge  of  the  operational  response  to  cybercrime.  The  operational 

structure  of  the  CCP  will  comprise  the  Virtual  Immediate  Assistance 

Command  (CAI  Virtual),  a  prevention  group,  an  incident  management 

 

- 22 - 

group, and an investigation group. The task of CAI Virtual will be to receive 

information and reports of cybercrimes, and to classify the criminal conduct 

found.  It  may  also  receive  requests  for  talks,  training  courses,  or  visits  to 

raise  awareness  about  security  issues  as  it  will  be  in  charge  of  cybercrime 

prevention  and  awareness  building,  which  will  always  be  carried  out  in 

coordination with ColCERT. 

The  CCP  will  investigate  cybercrime  and  provide  support  in  prosecuting 

cases classified as computer crimes.   

In general terms, its functions will be as follows:  

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

To protect the citizenry from cyber threats/crimes. 

To  respond  at  the  operational  level  to  cybercrime,  carrying  out 

coordinated  efforts 

in 

the  areas  of  prevention,  assistance, 

investigation,  and  support for prosecution  of  computer  crime  in the 

country. 

To  provide  advisory  services  on  vulnerabilities  and  threats  in 

computer systems. 

To  inform  the  public  to  enable  preventive  steps  against  the  loss  of 

availability, integrity, and/or confidentiality of information. 

To  provide  assistance  and 

investigate, 

in  coordination  with 

ColCERT, cyber vulnerabilities, threats and incidents that undermine 

the country's critical computer infrastructure.  

To  foster  awareness  of  cybersecurity  policies  in  partnership  with 

stakeholders. 

CCP is due to commence operations in 2011. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 23 - 

2. 

Provide  specialized  training  in  information  security  and  broaden  lines  of 

investigation in cybersecurity and cyberdefense. 

This objective will make it possible to generate  -and strengthen existing- capacities 

in the area of cybersecurity, so as to be able to deal with threats that undermine the 

proposed aims.  

At first, training will be provided to staff directly involved in tackling and managing 

cyber  incidents.  This  training  will  gradually  be  extended  to  all  other  government 

agencies. As part of its training plans, ColCERT, with support provided by the OAS 

Inter-American  Committee  against  Terrorism  (CICTE)  and  others,  will  carry  out  a 

training program for all other civil servants, in addition to implementing awareness 

raising  programs  for  the  general  public.  Similarly,  the  Ministry  of  Defense  will 

endeavor  to  phase  in  theoretical  and  practical  courses  on  information  security, 

cybersecurity, and cyberdefense at officer and NCO training schools.  

In  the  same  way,  the  CCP  will  seek  the  collaboration  of  programs  that  support  the 

implementation  of  the  accusatory  oral  criminal  justice  system,  such  as  the 

International  Criminal  Investigative  Training  Assistance  Program  (ICITAP),  ATA, 

OPDAT,  together  with  national  agencies,  such  as  the  School  of  Criminal 

Investigation,  Criminalistics  and  Forensic  Sciences  of  the  Office  of  the  Attorney 

General  and  the  Rodrigo  Lara  Bonilla  Judiciary  School,  among  others,  in  order  to 

introduce  legal  training  programs  on  computer  security  for  judicial  police, 

prosecutors, and judges.  

3. 

Strengthen  the  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  laws,  bolster  international 

cooperation,  and  move  toward  accession  by  Colombia  of  the  various 

international instruments in this area  

The  purpose  of  this  objective  is  to  develop  the  necessary  legal  tools  to  ensure 

effective and efficient prevention, investigation, and prosecution of cybercrime.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 24 - 

Thus, moves will be made toward the enactment of the necessary legal framework to 

comply  with  international  treaties  in  this  regard  as  they  are  adopted  into  the 

constitutional body of laws. At the same time, efforts will be made to introduce the 

necessary  regulations  to  implement  the  country's  laws.  The  institutions  responsible 

for  cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  should  seek  and  evaluate  their  participation  in 

different  international  cooperation  networks  and  mechanisms  (Council  of  Europe, 

OAS,  and  FIRST),  with  a  view  to  preparing  the  country  to  tackle  the  increasing 

cybersecurity  challenges  that  exist  on  the  international  plane,  as  well  as  to  respond 

more efficiently to cybersecurity incidents and offenses. 

Colombia will face the challenge of positioning itself as a regional leader in the area 

of  cybersecurity  through  exchange  of  good  practices,  expertise,  and  experience, 

giving particular attention to promoting the country's experience in the cybersecurity 

and  cyberdefense  policy  development  process.  To  that  end,  decision-makers  and 

experts  on  the  subject  will  have  to  attend  international  conferences,  seminars,  and 

specialized meetings to discuss cybersecurity issues.  

In order to achieve all of the foregoing, ColCERT and the CCP will have to combine 

their initiatives with those of the private sector and civil society.  

 

 

 

 

- 25 - 

V. 

PLAN OF ACTION 

 

 

Entidad Dependencia Implementar la Institucionalidad Adecuada:1AprobarloslineamientosdePolíticaparaeldesarrolloeimpulsodelaestrategiadeciberseguridadylaciberdefensa,presentadosen este documento.Departamento Nacional de PlaneaciónSubdirección General14/07/201114/07/20112SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalyalMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicacionesadoptarelmecanismodecoordinaciónintersectorialmásadecuadoparaemitirloslineamientosrectoresdelcolCERT.Encaso de no existir uno, se solicita su creación.Ministerio de Defensa Nacional, Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Información y las ComunicacionesDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional / Despacho de Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/20123SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalcrearelGrupodeRespuestaaEmergenciasCibernéticas de Colombia – colCERT.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/20114SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalqueunavezcreadoelcolCERT,emitalosmodelosdeseguridadenelciberespacioqueminimicenelnivelderiesgoalquelasentidadesestánexpuestas.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201130/06/20125SolicitaralMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicacionesyalaComisióndeRegulacióndeComunicacionesrealizarelacompañamientoalMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalenlasactividadesqueseconsiderenpertinentesparalaconformaciónyeldesarrollo de las actividades del colCERT.Ministerio del Tecnologías de Información y las Comunicaciones, Comisión de Regulación de las ComunicacionesDespacho del Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones, Director Ejecutivo de la Comisión de Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/20156SolicitaralMinisteriodelInteriorydeJusticia,alMinisteriodelTecnologíasdeInformaciónylasComunicaciones,yalDepartamentoAdministrativodeSeguridadoquienhagasusveces,destinarrecursohumanoconconocimientostécnicosy/ojurídicoseneltemadeseguridaddelainformaciónyciberseguridad,paraapoyarlaejecucióndeactividadesdelcolCERT.   Ministerio del Interior y Justicia, Ministerio del Tecnologías de Información y las Comunicaciones, DAS o quien haga sus vecesDespacho del Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones / Dirección General Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad14/07/201131/12/20127SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalcrearel Centro Cibernético Policial – CCP. Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/20118SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalcrearel Comando Conjunto Cibernético – CCOC.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/20119SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalrealizarencoordinaciónconelMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicacionesestudiosenseguridaddelainformación,asícomolaidentificacióndelainfraestructura crítica nacional.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/201210SolicitaralMinisteriodelasTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicacionesemitirundocumentoconlasdirectricesentemasdeseguridaddelainformaciónbasadoenestándaresinternacionales,quedeberánserimplementadasporlasentidadesdelsectorpúblico. Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones Despacho de Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/2013Fecha de finalizaciónAcción concretaInformación del Responsable de la ejecución # AFecha de inicio- 26 - 

 

 

Entidad Dependencia11SolicitaralaComisióndeRegulacióndeComunicacionesrealizarunanálisisregulatorioacercadelosaspectostécnicosquedebencumplirlosproveedoresderedesyserviciosdetelecomunicacionesparagarantizarlosprincipiosdeconfidencialidaddedatos,integridad de datos y disponibilidad, así como las medidasparaautenticaciónyaccesodelosusuariosalaredyelnorepudiodelascomunicacionesy,encasodeserrequeridoapartirdetalanálisis,llevaracabolosajustesaquehayalugarfrentealmarcoregulatoriovigente. Comisión de Regulación de las ComunicacionesDirector Ejecutivo de la Comisión de Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/201512SolicitaralMinisteriodelasTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicaciones,facilitarloscanalesinstitucionalesparaqueelcolCERTpuedarealizarlasensibilizaciónyconcienciaciónentemasdeseguridadcibernética.Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones Despacho de Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/201213SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalencoordinaciónconelMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicaciones,diseñarlascampañas de sensibilización y concienciación en temas de seguridad cibernética. Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/201214SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalimplementargradualmenteasignaturasenseguridaddelainformación,ciberdefensayciberseguridad(teórico-prácticas),enlasescuelasdeformaciónydecapacitacióndeoficiales y suboficiales.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/201515SolicitaralMinisteriodeDefensaNacionaladelantarunplandecapacitaciónentemasdeseguridaddelainformaciónparalosfuncionariosdelEstado,conelapoyodeorganismos internacionales.Ministerio de Defensa NacionalDespacho de Ministro de Defensa Nacional14/07/201131/12/201516SolicitaralMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicaciones,alMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalyalDepartamentoAdministrativodeSeguridadoaquienhagasusveces,diseñareimplementarplanesdecapacitaciónenloreferenteaseguridadinformática,investigaciónyjudicializacióndedelitos informáticos, para policía judicial.  Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones,  Ministerio de Defensa Nacional, DAS o quien haga sus veces Despacho del Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones, Despacho del Ministro de Defensa Nacional, Dirección General DAS14/07/201131/12/201517SugeriralaFiscalíaGeneraldelaNaciónencoordinaciónconelConsejoSuperiordelaJudicaturadiseñareimplementarplanesdecapacitaciónsobretemasdeinvestigaciónyjudicializacióndedelitosinformáticos,parapolicía judicial, jueces y fiscales. Fiscalía General de la NaciónCoordinador Nacional de Delitos Informaticos14/07/201131/12/201418SolicitaralMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicacionesrealizarlasgestionesnecesariasconelMinisteriodeEducaciónNacionalyelSENA,paralageneracióndeunplandecapacitaciónparaelsectorprivadoentemasdeciberseguridadydeseguridad de la información. Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones Despacho de Ministro de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones14/07/201131/12/2013Fecha de finalizaciónBrindar capacitación especializada en seguridad de la información y ampliar las líneas de investigación en ciberseguridad y ciberdefensa:# AAcción concretaInformación del Responsable de la ejecución Fecha de inicio- 27 - 

 

 

 

Entidad Dependencia19SolicitaralMinisteriodelInteriorydeJusticiarealizarencoordinaciónconelelMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalyelMinisteriodeTecnologíasde Información y Comunicaciones, un documento enelqueseanalicelanormatividadactualyseproponganlasmodificacionesnecesariasenmateriadeseguridaddelainformaciónyproteccióndedatos,paraprevenirelciberdelito,identificandolasdificultadesdeinterpretaciónyaplicación. Ministerio del Interior y JusticiaDespacho de Ministro del Interior y Justicia14/07/201131/12/201320SolicitaralMinisteriodelInterioryJusticia,encoordinaciónconelMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalyelMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicaciones,conbaseenelanálisisrealizado,adelantarlasiniciativastendientesaexpediroreformarlasleyesqueseannecesariasasícomoreglamentaraquellasaquehayalugar,enarasdegarantizarelmarconormativoadecuadoparalaciberseguridad,laciberdefensa y la seguridad de la información. Ministerio del Interior y JusticiaDespacho de Ministro del Interior y Justicia14/07/201131/12/201321SolicitaralMinisteriodeRelacionesExterioresapoyaralcolCERT,enmateriadecooperacióninternacional,enlostemasdeciberseguridad,ciberdefensayseguridadinformática,enlosqueseincluyaladesignacióndelcolCERTcomopuntodecontactointernacionalentemasreferentes a la ciberseguridad y la ciberdefensa.Ministerio de Relaciones ExterioresDespacho de Ministra de Relaciones Exteriores14/07/201131/12/2012Ministerio de Relaciones ExterioresDespacho de Ministra de Relaciones Exteriores14/07/201131/12/2012Ministerio de Relaciones ExterioresDirección de Asuntos Políticos Multilaterales14/07/201131/12/2012¹ Las Leyes se consideraran implementadas con la presentación del proyecto. Información del Responsable de la ejecución Fecha de inicio22SolicitaralMinisteriodeRelacionesExteriores,estudiarlaviabilidadyconvenienciaparaColombiadeadheriralosprincipalesinstrumentosinternacionalesenmateriadeseguridaddelainformaciónyproteccióndedatos,coneldirectoapoyodelMinisteriodeDefensaNacionalyelMinisteriodeTecnologíasdelaInformaciónylasComunicaciones.Encasodequeelestudioproduzcaunarecomendaciónpositiva,iniciarlostrámitesdeadhesiónalinstrumento que corresponda. Fecha de finalizaciónFortalecer la legislación y la cooperación internacional en materia de ciberseguridad y ciberdefensa:# AAcción concreta- 28 - 

VI. 

FINANCING 

The cost of implementing the cybersecurity and cyberdefense guidelines that ColCERT will 

issue for public-sector entities will also be covered by the budget allocated to each entity.  

 

The initial implementation of ColCERT, the CCP, and the CCOC in the Ministry of Defense 

will entail the following appropriations from the Ministry: 

 

 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

$ 1,428,444,328  

$ 5,400,000,000  

$ 5,000,000,000  

$ 4,600,000,000  

This budget also covers ColCERT operating with a staff of six (6) officials from the Ministry 

of  Defense  and  other  public-sector  entities.23  Moving  forward,  ColCERT,  with  the  endorsement  of 

the  cybersecurity  intersectoral  coordination  mechanism  adopted,  may  consider  it  necessary  to 

increase the size of the group, which would require a revision of the budget included herein and the 

support provided by each entity.   

 

It is important to point out that additional funds will be allocated for 2011 in order to assist 

the General Command of the Armed Forces in implementing the CCOC.  

 

In  2011,  the  funding  for  the  three  centers  will  be  provided  by  the  operating  budget.  From 

2012  onward,  the  funding  will  come  from  investment  in  three  projects  that  have  already  been 

registered in the Investment Projects Bank. 

VII.  RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies, the 

Ministry  of  the  Interior  and  Justice,  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  National  Planning 

                                            

23.  The  staff  from  other  public-sector  entities  will  be  assigned  to  the  group  under  a  temporary 

commission.  

 

- 29 - 

Department, and the Department of Security Administration make the following recommendations to 

the National Council on Economic and Social Policy (CONPES): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implement the appropriate institutional framework: 

1. 

Approve  the  policy  guidelines  presented  in  this  report  for  the  development  and 

implementation of the cybersecurity and cyberdefense strategy. 

2. 

Request 

the  Ministry  of  Defense  and 

the  Ministry  of  Information  and 

Communication  Technologies  to  adopt  the  most  suitable  intersectoral  coordination 

mechanism  for  issuing  the  ColCERT  guidelines.  Should  none  exist,  it  is  requested 

that one be created. 

3. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense  to  create  the  Colombian  Computer  Emergency 

Response Team (ColCERT). 

4. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense,  once  ColCERT  has  been  established,  to  issue 

cybersecurity guidelines that minimize the level of risk to which entities are exposed. 

5. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  and  the 

Communications  Regulation  Commission  to  work  with  the  Ministry  of  Defense  on 

such activities as are deemed pertinent for establishing and implementing ColCERT's 

activities. 

6. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  and  Justice,  the  Ministry  of  Information  and 

Communication Technologies, and the Department of Security Administration or the 

entity  serving  as  such,  to  assign  human  resources  with  technical  and/or  legal 

expertise in the area of information security and cybersecurity in order to assist in the 

implementation of ColCERT's activities.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 30 - 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Request the Ministry of Defense to create the Police Cyber Center (CCP).  

Request the Ministry of Defense to create the Joint Cyber Command (CCOC). 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense,  in  coordination  with  the  Ministry  of  Information 

and  Communication  Technologies,  to  carry  out  information  security  studies  and 

identify the country's critical infrastructure. 

10. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  to  issue  a 

document  containing 

information  security  guidelines  based  on 

international 

standards, which public-sector entities would be required to implement.  

11. 

Request  the  Communications  Regulation  Commission  to  carry  out  a  review  of 

regulations  on  technical  aspects  to  be  met  by  telecommunications  services  and 

network providers in order to conform to the principles of  data confidentiality, data 

integrity,  and  availability,  as  well  as  authentication  and  user  network  access 

mechanisms, and non-repudiation of communications; and request the Commission, 

if  necessary,  based  on  the  review,  to  implement  the  appropriate  adjustments  to  the 

regulatory framework in force.  

Provide specialized training in information security and broaden lines of investigation 

in cybersecurity and cyberdefense. 

12. 

Request the Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies, to facilitate 

institutional  channels  to  enable  ColCERT  to  carry  out  awareness  raising  on 

cybersecurity. 

13. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense,  in  coordination  with  the  Ministry  of  Information 

and  Communication  Technologies,  to  design  cybersecurity  awareness  raising 

campaigns.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 31 - 

14. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense  to  phase  in  courses  on  information  security, 

cybersecurity  and  cyberdefense  (theory-practical)  at  officer  and  NCO  training 

schools. 

15. 

Request  the  Ministry  of  Defense  to  carry  out  a  civil-servant  training  program  on 

information security and cybersecurity, with the support of international agencies 

16. 

Request the Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies, the Ministry 

of  Defense,  and  the  Department  of  Security  Administration  or  the entity  serving  as 

such,  to  design  and  implement  training  programs  for  judicial  police  on information 

security and on computer crime investigation and prosecution. 

17. 

Suggest to the Office of the Attorney General of the Nation that, in coordination with 

the Superior Council of the Judicature, it design and implement training programs on 

computer  crime  investigation  and  prosecution  for  judicial  police,  judges,  and 

prosecutors.  

18. 

Request the Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies to make the 

necessary arrangements with the Ministry of Education and the SENA to develop a 

cybersecurity and information security training program for the private sector.  

Strengthen laws and international cooperation on cybersecurity and cyberdefense:  

19. 

Request the Ministry of the Interior and Justice to prepare, in coordination with the 

Ministry  of  Defense  and  the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication 

Technologies,  a  document  that  reviews  the  standards  in  place  and  proposes  the 

necessary modifications as regards information security and data protection, in order 

to  prevent  cybercrime,  as  well  as  identifying  difficulties  in  terms  of  interpretation 

and enforcement.  

 

- 32 - 

 

 

 

20. 

Request the Ministry of the Interior and Justice, in coordination with the Ministry of 

Defense  and  the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies,  to 

implement,  based  on  the  review  carried  out,  initiatives  to  enact  or  reform  the 

necessary laws, and, as appropriate, adopt implementing regulations for laws, in a bid 

to  ensure  an  adequate  legal  framework  for  cybersecurity,  cyberdefense,  and 

information security.  

21. 

Request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with regard to international cooperation in 

the  areas  of  cybersecurity,  cyberdefense,  and  information  security,  to  support 

ColCERT in those instances for which it has been designated the international point 

of contact for cybersecurity and cyberdefense. 

22. 

Request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to examine the feasibility and advisability of 

Colombia's  accession  to  the  principal  international  instruments  on  information 

security and data protection, with direct assistance from the Ministry of Defense and 

the  Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies.  Should  the  study 

result  in  a  positive  recommendation,  initiate  the  formalities  for  accession  to  the 

appropriate instrument or instruments.  

VIII.  SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

usCERT – Estados Unidos: http://www.us-cert.gov  

 

Carnegie Mellon University/CERT Coordination Center: http://www.cert.org/csirts/  

 

U.S. National Strategy To Secure Cyberspace http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb/  

 

Forum Of Incident Response Security Teams (FIRST): http://www.first.org  

 

 

- 33 - 

Inter-American  Committee  against  Terrorism  (CICTE),  Organization  of  American  States: 

http://www.cicte.oas.org  

 

Inter-American Cooperation Portal on Cybercrime: http://www.oas.org/juridico/english/cyber.htm 

 

ENISA Setting-up Guide. A Step-by-Step Approach on How to Set up a CSIRT. 
 

IX. 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

 
BotNet:  The  name  given  to  a  network  of  computers  that  combines  their  resources  to  perform  a 

common task and shares the workload among all the computers (FireEye – Arbornet). 

 
CERT: Computer Emergency Response Team. (Carnegie-Mellon University)   

 
Computer risk: The possibility that a concrete threat could exploit a vulnerability in order to cause a 

loss or harm to an information asset. (ISO Guide 73:2002) 

 
Convergence: Coordinated evolution of formerly discrete networks towards uniformity in support of 

services and applications. (Rec. ITU-T Q.1761, 3.1) 

 
Critical infrastructure: The array of computers, computer systems, and telecommunications, data, and 

information networks, whose destruction or interference could weaken or impact on the security of a 

country's economy, public health, or both. (CRC resolution 2258 of 2009) 

 
CSIRT: Computer Security Incident Response Team. (http:// www.first.org) 

 
Cyber  attack:  An  organized  and/or  premeditated  act  by  one  or  more  persons  to  harm  or  cause 

problems to a computer system via cyberspace. (Ministry of Defense of Colombia) 

 
Cybercrime: An illegal or abusive activity connected with computers or communications networks in 

which a computer is used as a tool to commit the offense or the target of the offense is a computer 

system (or its data). (Ministry of Defense of Colombia) 

 

 

- 34 - 

Cyberdefense:  The  state’s  capacity  to  prevent  and  counter  any  cyber  threat  or  incident  that 

undermines national sovereignty. 

 
Cyber incident: Any real or suspected adverse event in relation to the security of computer systems or 

computer networks:  http://www.cert.org/csirts/csirt_faq.html CERT/CC. 

 
Cybernetic:  Adjective  meaning  of  or  relating  to  cybernetics  (e.g.,  cybernetic  organ,  cybernetic 

process). (Translation of the definition coined by the Academy of the Spanish Language)  

 
Cybernetics: The science or discipline that studies automatic communication and control mechanisms 

or  the  operating  technology  of  connections  in  living  beings  and  in  machines.  (Translation  of  the 

definition coined by the Academy of the Spanish Language)  

 
Cybersecurity: The state’s capacity to minimize the level of exposure of its citizens to cyber threats 

or incidents. 

Cyberspace:  The  physical  and  virtual  environment  composed  of  computers,  computer  systems, 

computer  programs  (software),  and  telecommunications,  data,  and  information  networks,  in  which 

users interact with each other. (CRC resolution 2258 of 2009). 

 
Cyberterrorism:  The  convergence  of  terrorism  and  cyberspace.  It  is  generally  understood  to  mean 

unlawful  attacks  and  threats  of  attack  against  computers,  networks,  and  the  information  stored 

therein. To qualify as cyberterrorism, an attack should result in violence against persons or property, 

or at least cause enough harm to generate fear. Examples include attacks that lead to death or bodily 

injury, explosions, plane crashes, water contamination, or severe economic loss. (Dorothy Denning, 

Georgetown University) 

Cyber threat: The appearance of a potential or actual situation in which an agent has the capacity to 

produce  a  cyber  attack  against  the  population,  territory,  and  political  organization  of  the  state. 

(Ministry of Defense of Colombia) 

 
DDoS:  Distributed  Denial  of  Service.  Ataques  Distribuidos  de  Denegación  de  Servicio. 

(http://www.rediris.es) 

 

 

- 35 - 

DOS:  Denial  of  Service.  Service  not  available  to  a  person  or  process  (application)  when  necessary 

(availability). (http://www.rediris.es) 

 
Electronic Services (or e-Services): The improvement in the provision of public services to citizens 

via cyberspace.  

ICTs:  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  Collection  of  resources,  tools,  equipment, 

computer  programs,  applications,  networks,  and  media  that  enable  the  compilation,  processing, 

storage,  and  transmission  of  information  as  voice,  data,  text,  video,  and  images.  (Law  1341/2009 

TIC) 

 
IP  (Internet  Protocol):  A  numerical  label  assigned,  logically  and  hierarchically,  to  the  interface 

(communication/connection  element) of  a device (normally  a  computer)  within a  network  that uses 

the IP protocol. (http://www.iso.org)  

 
ISO:  International  Organization  for  Standardization,  which  has  its  headquarters  in  Geneva, 

Switzerland.  A  worldwide federation  of  national  standards institutes  promoting  the  development  of 

standardization of goods and services. (http://www.iso.org) 

 
ISO 27001: ISO standard for information security management systems transcribing the second part 

of BS 7799. It is certifiable. (http://www.iso.org)  

 
ISO 27002: Code of practice for information security management (transcript of ISO 17799). It is not 

certifiable.  (http://www.iso.org) 

 
ISP:  Internet  service  providers.  In  Colombia  these  entities  also  provide  telephony  and  television 

services, which makes them providers of integrated telecommunications services. 

 
IT: Information technologies. 

 
Logical  security:  Consists  of  the  application  of  barriers  that  guard  access  to  data  whereby  only 

authorized persons are allowed access. (http://www.segu-info.com) 

 
Logs:  An  official  record  of  events  over  a  particular  period  of  time.  For  computer  security 

professionals, a log serves to keep a record of data or information as to the who, what, when, where, 

and why with regard to an event that involves a particular device or application. 

 

- 36 - 

 
NAP  (Network  Access  Point)  Colombia:  The  national  connection  point  for  ISP  networks  in 

Colombia,  which  ensures  that  Internet  traffic  to  and  from  our  country  only  uses  local  or  national 

channels. (www.nap.com.co) 

 
NTC5411-  1  Information  and  communication  technologies  security  management.  (ICONTEC 

International publications catalog)  

 
Telecommunications:  Any  transmission  and  reception  of  signs,  signals,  writing,  images  and  sound, 

data, or information of any  nature  by  wire,  radiofrequency,  optical  media,  or  other  electromagnetic 

systems. (MinTIC resolution 202 of 2010).  

 
Threat: Potential security breach. (Rec. UIT-T X.800, 3.3.55) 

 

UNESCO - United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

 
Zombies:  The  name  given  to  computers that  have  been  remotely  infected  by  a  malicious  user  with 

some  kind  of  software  that,  upon  infiltrating  the  manipulated  computer  without  the  consent  of  the 

user allows  a third  party  to  use  it  and  perform  illicit  activities  over the  web.  [Instituto  Nacional  de 

Tecnologías de la Comunicación, (INTECO) – CERT, Spain]. 

 

- 37 - 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

CCD: Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence 

CCIT: Colombian Chamber of Informatics and Telecommunications 

CCOC: Joint Cyber Command 

CCP: Police Cyber Center 

CICTE: Inter-American Committee against Terrorism  

COINFO:  Intersectoral  Committee  on  Information  Policy  and  Management  in  the  Public 

Administration 

ColCERT: Cyber Emergency Response Team of Colombia (Ministry of Defense of Colombia) 

CONPES: National Council on Economic and Social Policy 

CRC: Communications Regulation Commission 

DAS: Department of Security Administration 

FIRST: Forum on Incident Response Teams 

FBI: Federal Bureau of Investigation 

IEC: International Electrotechnical Commission 

ISO: International Organization for Standardization  

ITU: International Telecommunication Union 

MDN: Ministry of Defense. 

MinTIC's: Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies 

NATO: North Atlantic Treaty Organization 

OAS: Organization of American States 

UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

 

 

