 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE NATIONAL  

 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF  

THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- Zagreb, 7 October 2015 (Official Gazette No 108/2015) - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... 3 

2.  PRINCIPLES................................................................................................................................... 6 

3.  GENERAL GOALS OF THE STRATEGY ................................................................................... 7 

4.  SECTORS OF THE SOCIETY AND FORMS OF COOPERATION OF CYBER SECURITY 

STAKEHOLDERS .................................................................................................................................. 8 

5.  CYBER SECURITY AREAS ......................................................................................................... 9 

5.1 Electronic communication and information infrastructure and services ....................................... 9 

5.1.1 Public electronic communications (A) ................................................................................... 9 

5.1.2 E-Government (B) ................................................................................................................ 11 

5.1.3 Electronic financial services (C) .......................................................................................... 12 

5.2 Critical communication and information infrastructure and cyber crisis management (D) ........ 13 

5.3 Cybercrime (E) ............................................................................................................................ 16 

6. 

INTERRELATIONS OF THE AREAS OF CYBER SECURITY ............................................... 18 

6.1 Protection of information (F)....................................................................................................... 18 

6.2 Technical coordination in the treatment of computer security incidents (G) .............................. 21 

6.3 International cooperation (H) ...................................................................................................... 22 

6.4 Education, research, development and raising security awareness in cyberspace (I).................. 24 

7. 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGY ............................................................................... 27 

APPENDIX: TERMS AND ACRONYMS........................................................................................... 29 

Terms ................................................................................................................................................. 29 

Acronyms .......................................................................................................................................... 31 

 

 

 

 

2 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

 
Nowhere has technological development been  more dynamic and comprehensive than in the 
area of communication and information technology. The focus has always been on the  rapid 
development and introduction of new services and products, while the security-related aspects 
usually had little influence on the broad acceptance of new technologies. 

The  life  cycles  of  modern-day  information  systems,  from  the  process  of  planning, 
introduction and usage to their withdrawal  from  use are very short, which often makes their 
systematic  testing  impossible  and  is  most  commonly  applied  as  an  exception,  in  expressly 
prescribed cases.  

Users usually have minimal knowledge of the technology they are using, and the technology 
is applied in such a way that makes it very hard to estimate the security characteristics of the 
majority  of  commercial  products  regarding  the  protection  of  user  data  confidentiality  and 
privacy. Due to that, users’ attitude towards the communication and information technology is 
based almost exclusively on blind confidence.  

Modern societies are deeply imbued with communication and information technology. People 
are  nowadays  connected  using  various  technologies  for  the  transmission  of  text,  image  and 
sound, including the increasing Internet of Things (IoT) trend. 

While  a  deviation  in  the  normal  functioning  of  a  certain  kind  of  communication  and 
information system could go unnoticed, improper operation of some other systems could have 
harsh consequences for the functioning of the State; it can cause loss of life, damage to health, 
great  material  damage,  pollution  of  the  environment  and  the  disturbance  of  other 
functionalities essential for the proper functioning of the society as a whole.    

From the beginning of the development of communication and information technologies until 
the present day, deviations in their proper functioning have occurred due to different reasons, 
from human error or malicious action to technological error or organizational omission.  

The  creation  of  the  Internet  and  connecting  a  number  of  communication  and  information 
systems  of  the  public,  academic  and  economic  sectors,  as  well  as  citizens,  created  the 
contemporary cyberspace composed not only of this interconnected infrastructure, but also of 
the  ever  growing  amounts  of  available  information,  and  users  communicating  increasingly 
among  themselves  using  a  growing  number  of  different  services  -  some  completely  new, 
some traditional, but in a new, virtual form.   

Deviations in the proper operation of these interconnected systems or their parts are no longer 
merely  technical  difficulties;  they  pose  a  danger  with  a  global  security  impact.  Modern 
societies  counter  them  with  a  range  of  activities  and  measures  collectively  called  “cyber 
security”. 

The  term  “cyber”  entered  the  Croatian  legal  system  upon  the  ratification  of  the  Budapest 
Convention  on  Cybercrime1  back  in  2002.  Following  from  that,  the  term  “cyber”  is  most 
                                                           
1  Act  on  the  Ratification  of  the  Convention  on  Cybercrime  (Official  Gazette  No  09/02)  and  Act  on  the 
Ratification of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime, concerning criminalisation of acts of a 
racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (Official Gazette No 04/08). 

3 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

commonly  used  as  an  adjective  describing  something  that  includes,  uses,  or  is  related  to 
computers and especially the Internet.   

The original term “cybernetics” (“kibernetika” in Croatian) was formed in the mid-twentieth 
century  and  it  denotes  a  science  of  automatic  control  systems  and  control  processes  in 
biological,  technical,  economic  and  other  systems  in  general.  The  adjectival  form 
“cybernetic”  (“kibernetički”  in  Croatian)  is  used  nowadays  in  the  Croatian  language  in  a 
similar way, with the same, previously introduced meaning  as the prefix “cyber-“ has in the 
English  language.  The  term  “cybernetics”  is  nowadays  rarely  used  in  the  Croatian  language 
with  its  original  meaning,  like  the  term  “cybernetics”  in  the  English  language.  The  term 
predominantly used in technical sciences dealing with systems control is “automatic control”. 
The term much more common, in the broader sense of meaning of the concept of cybernetics, 
referring  to  control  processes  in  different  systems,  is  “systems  theory”,  introduced  in  the 
second half of the past century.  

Recognising the importance of  security  within  cyberspace  as a common responsibility of all 
the  society’s  segments  prompted  the  making  of  this  Strategy.  Its  purpose  is  achieving  a 
systematic and coordinated implementation of the activities necessary for improving Croatia’s 
capabilities in the area of cyber security, with a view to building a safe society in cyberspace. 
The goal is also to take advantage of the full market potential of the information society as a 
whole, and especially cyber security products and services. 

Since  this  is  the  first  comprehensive  Croatian  Strategy  in  the  area  of  cyber  security,  the 
Strategy’s primary objective is to recognise organisational problems in its implementation and 
broaden the understanding of the importance of this issue in the society. 

In order to establish new functionalities, improve the efficiency of the relevant actors’ work, 
use more efficiently the existing resources and better plan the requirements and establishment 
of  new  resources,  it  is  necessary  to  encourage  coordination  and  cooperation  of  all  the  state 
authorities, legal entities with public authority and other society sectors. 

Therefore,  the  Strategy’s  fundamental  role  is  to  connect  and  bring  mutual  understanding  of 
this  complex  issue  in  various  sectors  of  the  society  and  among  various  bodies  and  legal 
entities as the stakeholders of this Strategy with different competences, responsibilities, tasks, 
needs, expectations and interests. This is particularly important for ensuring the required level 
of understanding of the complex operational and technical issues of cyber security, which is 
necessary  for  the  central  public  authorities  and  decision  makers  in  all  the  sectors  of  the 
society, as it is for the security of the citizens, prosperity of the entire society, and thus for the 
end  goal  of  this  Strategy:  implementing  the  law  and  respecting  all  the  fundamental  human 
rights in the new, virtual dimension of the society. 

In  order  to  cover  the  very  broad  and  complex  area  of  this  Strategy  and  harmonise  the  joint 
efforts  of  the  numerous  stakeholders  that  participated  in  the  making  of  this  Strategy,  the 
method applied for developing its contents included defining the basic principles of approach 
to  the  area  of  cyber  security,  defining  the  objectives  of  the  Strategy,  and  the  scope  of 
application of the Strategy in relation to the entire society.   

Following from the above, Croatia’s priority areas of cyber security were determined and they 
were  analysed  primarily  in  relation  to  the  general  goals  of  the  Strategy.  Special  objectives 

4 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

were defined in the same way for each of the cyber security areas determined in the Strategy. 
Implementation measures for those objectives will be elaborated in more detail in the action 
plan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Strategy.  In  this  way  it  was  possible  to  also  include  the 
particularities of each individual area related to the society sectors defined by the Strategy and 
forms of mutual cooperation and coordination of various cyber security stakeholders.  

The  interrelations  of  cyber  security  areas  were  defined  in  order  to  also  cover  those  cyber 
security segments which, according to estimates, are common for most or all of the previously 
determined cyber security areas. The interrelations of cyber security areas are very important 
for  improving  and  achieving  more  efficiently  the  objectives  and  measures  in  cyber  security 
areas.  Special  objectives  are  therefore  also  defined  in  the  Strategy  for  the  interrelations  of 
cyber security areas. Those objectives are considered to have key importance in improving the 
level  of  security  in  cyberspace.  Special  attention  is  again  focussed  on  the  sectors  of  the 
society defined in the Strategy, as well as forms of cooperation and coordination of the efforts 
of cyber security stakeholders. 

 

 

 

 

5 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  PRINCIPLES 

 

 

Comprehensive  nature  of  the  approach  to  cyber  security  by  covering  cyberspace, 
infrastructure  and  users  under  the  Croatian  jurisdiction  (citizenship,  registration,  domain, 
address); 

Integration  of  activities  and  measures  arising  from  different  cyber  security  areas  and  their 
interconnection and supplementation in order to create a safer cyberspace; 

Proactive  approach  through  constant  adjustment  of  activities  and  measures,  and  adequate 
periodic adaptation of the strategic framework they stem from; 

Strengthening  resilience,  reliability  and  adjustability  by  applying  universal  criteria  of 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  certain  groups  of  information  and  recognised 
social  values,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the  appropriate  obligations  related  to  the 
protection of privacy, as well as confidentiality, integrity and availability for certain groups of 
information,  including  the  implementation  of  appropriate  certification  and  accreditation  of 
different kinds of devices and systems, and also business processes in which such information 
is used; 

Application of basic principles as basis of the organisation of modern society in the area 
of cyberspace as the society’s virtual dimension: 

Application  of  law  to  protect  human  rights  and  liberties,  especially  privacy, 
ownership and all other essential characteristics of an organized contemporary society; 

Developing  a  harmonised  legal  framework  through  continued  improvement  of  all 
the  segments  of  regulatory  mechanisms  of  state  and  sector  levels,  and  through 
harmonised initiatives of all the sectors of the society, that is, bodies and legal entities 
that are stakeholders in this Strategy; 

Application  of  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  through  a  systematically  elaborated 
transfer  of  power  to  make  decisions  and  report  on  cyber  security  issues  to  the 
appropriate  authority  whose  competences  are  closest  to  the  matter  being  resolved  in 
areas  important  for  cyber  security,  from  organization  through  coordination  and 
cooperation  to  the  technical  issues  of  responding  to  computer  threats  to  certain 
communication and information infrastructure; 

Application  of  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  make  the  level  of  protection 
increase and related costs in each area proportional to the related risks and abilities in 
limiting the threats causing them.  

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

 

 

6 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.  GENERAL GOALS OF THE STRATEGY 

Systematic  approach  in  the  application  and  enhancement  of  the  national  legal 
framework to take into account the new, cyber dimension of the society, keeping in 
mind  the  harmonisation  with  international  obligations  and  global  cyber  security 
trends; 

Pursuing  activities  and  measures  to  increase  the  security,  resilience  and 
reliability of cyberspace, which need to be applied in order to ensure the availability, 
integrity  and  confidentiality  of  the  respective  groups  of  information  used  in 
cyberspace, both by the providers of various electronic and infrastructure services and 
by the users, namely all legal entities and individuals whose information  systems are 
connected to cyberspace; 

Establishing  a  more  efficient  mechanism  of  information  sharing  necessary  for 
ensuring a higher level of general security in cyberspace, whereby each stakeholder is 
required,  especially  concerning  certain  groups  of  information,  to  ensure  the 
implementation of adequate and harmonised standards of data protection; 

Raising  security  awareness  of  all  cyberspace  users  with  an  approach  that 
distinguishes  between  the  particularities  of  the  public  and  economic  sectors,  legal 
entities  and  individuals,  and  which  includes  the  introduction  of  the  necessary 
educational  elements  into  regular  and  extracurricular  school  activities,  along  with 
organising  and  implementing  various  activities  aimed  at  making  the  broader  public 
aware of certain current issues in this domain; 

Stimulating the development of harmonised education programmes in schools and 
higher  education  institutions,  through  targeted  and  specialist  courses,  by  connecting 
the academic, public and economic sectors; 

Stimulating  the  development  of  e-services  through  building  user  confidence  in  e-
services by defining the appropriate minimum security requirements; 

Stimulating  research  and  development  in  order  to  activate  the  potential  and 
encourage harmonised efforts of the academic, economic and public sectors; 

Systematic  approach  to  international  cooperation  which  makes  possible  an 
efficient  transfer  of  knowledge  and  coordinated  information  sharing  amongst  the 
different competent national authorities, institutions and sectors of the society, with a 
view  to  recognising  and  creating  capabilities  for  successful  participation  in  business 
activities in a global environment. 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

 

 

 

7 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.  SECTORS OF THE SOCIETY AND FORMS OF 

COOPERATION OF CYBER SECURITY 
STAKEHOLDERS  

 

Defining the sectors of the society and their meaning for the purposes of this Strategy, as 
well  as  forms  of  cooperation  of  the  cyber  security  stakeholders,  also  provided  the 
definition of the scope of this Strategy. 

For the purposes of the Strategy, sectors of the society and their definitions are: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Public  sector  with  various  competent  authorities  which  are  the  stakeholders  of  the 
Strategy,  other  state  authorities,  bodies  of  local  and  regional  self-government  units, 
legal entities with public authorities and institutions representing in various ways the 
users  of  cyberspace  and  entities  obliged  to  apply  the  measures  arising  from  the 
Strategy; 

Academic  sector  in  close  cooperation  with  the  state  authorities  which  are  the 
stakeholders  of  the  Strategy,  and  other  education  institutions  from  the  public  and 
economic  sectors  representing  in  various  ways  the  users  of  cyberspace  and  entities 
obliged to apply the measures arising from the Strategy; 

Economic sector in close cooperation with the competent state and regulatory bodies 
which are the stakeholders of the Strategy, especially legal  entities subject to  special 
regulations  concerning  critical  infrastructures  and  defence,  as  well  as  all  other  legal 
entities and business entities representing in various ways the users of cyberspace and 
entities  obliged  to  apply  the  measures  arising  from  the  Strategy,  with  all  the 
particularities of those legal and business entities, with regard to their scope of work, 
number of employees and markets they cover; 

Citizens  in  general,  representing  the  users  of  communication  and  information 
technologies and services. The state of security in cyberspace reflects on the citizens 
in various ways. It also refers to the citizens who do not use cyberspace actively, but 
their data is in cyberspace. 

Forms of cooperation of cyber security stakeholders envisaged by the Strategy are: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Coordination within the public sector; 

National cooperation of the public, academic and economic sectors; 

Consultation with the interested public and informing the citizens; 

International cooperation of cyber security stakeholders.  

All  these  forms  of  cooperation  are  carried  out  in  a  systematic  and  coordinated  manner,  in 
accordance  with  competences,  capabilities  and  objectives,  and  according  to  the  functionally 
elaborated cyber security areas defined in the Strategy. 

8 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  CYBER SECURITY AREAS 

 

Cyber security areas are defined in accordance with the evaluation of Croatia’s priority needs 
at  the  time  of  drafting  the  Strategy  and  they  cover  the  security  measures  in  the  area  of 
communication and information infrastructure and services, where we have public electronic 
communications, e-Government and electronic financial services as infrastructure of primary 
strategic interest for the entire society. 

Protection  of  critical  communication  and  information  infrastructure  is  also  a  very  important 
area  of  cyber  security.  It  may  be  present  in  each  of  the  three  infrastructure  areas  mentioned 
above,  but  has  significantly  different  characteristics  and  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the 
criteria for recognising those characteristics. 

Cybercrime has been present in the society for a long time in different forms, but at today’s 
level of development of the society’s virtual dimension it poses a constant and growing threat 
to  the  development  and  economic  prosperity  of  every  modern  state.  That  is  why  countering 
cybercrime is  also  considered  a priority  cyber security  area  and it is  necessary to  define the 
strategic goals to improve the efforts in countering this type of crime in the coming period. 

The  area  of  cyber  defence  represents  the  part  of  the  defence  strategy  falling  under  the 
responsibility  of  the  ministry  in  charge  of  defence  issues.  It  is  the  subject  of  separate 
elaboration  and  action,  which  will  be  pursued  using  all  the  necessary  elements  arising  from 
this Strategy. Cyberterrorism and other cyber aspects of national security are dealt with by a 
small number of the competent bodies within the security and intelligence system and require 
a  separate  approach,  and  that  will  also  include  the  use  of  all  the  necessary  elements  arising 
from this Strategy.  

Cyber security  areas  are analysed in  relation  to  the  general  goals  of the  Strategy  in order to 
identify the special  objectives aimed at  achieving improvements  in  each  individual area  and 
the measures necessary for achieving the goals of the Strategy. The special objectives, as well 
as the measures that will be further elaborated by the Action plan for the implementation of 
the Strategy, are determined with regard to the defined society sectors and the influence of the 
cyber  security  area  on  each  individual  sector,  but  also  with  regard  to  the  forms  of  mutual 
cooperation  and  coordination  of  cyber  security  stakeholders.  The  principles  defined  by  the 
Strategy are followed in the elaboration of the cyber security areas. 

 

5.1 Electronic communication and information infrastructure and services  

5.1.1 Public electronic communications (A) 
 
Public  electronic  communications  include  the  provision  of  an  electronic  communications 
network  and/or 
the  provision  of  an  electronic  communications  service.  Electronic 
communication  and  information  infrastructure,  performing  of  activities  including  electronic 
communication networks and services, spatial planning, building, maintenance, development 
and  use  of  electronic  communication  networks,  electronic  communication  infrastructure  and 

9 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

other related equipment, as well as managing and using the radio frequency spectrum, address 
space and numbering, as the naturally limited public goods, are of interest for the Republic of 
Croatia.  

The  legal,  regulatory  and  technical  provisions  adopted  at  the  EU  level,  related  to  data 
protection,  privacy  and  legitimate  interests  of  legal  entities  in  the  area  of  electronic 
communications, require continued harmonisation in order to make sure that there will be no 
impediments  to  promoting  and  developing  new  electronic  communication  networks  and 
services among the EU Member States. 

The basic objectives of the Republic of Croatia related to cyber security in the area of public 
electronic communications are: 

 
Objective  A.1  Inspection  of  technical  and  organizational  measures  taken  by  operators  to 
ensure  the  security  of  their  networks  and  services,  and  directing  the  operators  of  public 
communication networks and/or services with the aim of ensuring a high level of security and 
availability of public communication networks and services. 

It is necessary to cover the various requirements imposed on the operators, from quality and 
availability  of  networks  and  services,  through  requirements  regarding  data  protection, 
requirements for ensuring adequate attention in implementing security measures based on the 
appropriate international standards, requirements for implementing legal obligations of secret 
surveillance  of  electronic  communication  networks  and  services,  to  the  necessity  of 
developing and constantly improving security cooperation and information exchange with the 
bodies  responsible  for  computer  security  incidents  in  the  area  of  public  electronic 
communications and criminal prosecution authorities.  

 
Objective A.2 Direct technical coordination between the national regulatory authority for the 
area of electronic communications and national and international authorities responsible for 
the area of information security. 

It  is  necessary  to  establish  and  continuously  develop  inter-sectoral  collaboration  of  national 
regulatory authorities and authorities responsible for the area of information security and data 
protection policy, and establish coordination and exchange of experiences in cooperation and 
requirements arising from the international framework.   

 
Objective A.3 Encouraging the providers of public communication networks and/or services 
to use the national centre for Internet exchange in providing services to users in Croatia. 

traffic  among 

the  users  of  different  service  operators  using 

The  non-profit  service  Croatian  Internet  eXchange  (CIX)  provides  mutual  exchange  of 
internet 
the  shortest 
communication  path  within  the  national  system  of  public  electronic  communications.  This 
kind of Internet exchange represents a security requirement for operators providing services to 
state  authorities,  but  it  also  calls  for  efficient  and  economic  national-level  connecting  of  all 
the other economic sector users and citizens of the Republic of Croatia.  

10 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.1.2 E-Government (B) 
 
E-Government is Croatia’s strategic goal, ensuring a quick, transparent and secure service for 
all  citizens  via  cyberspace.  For  this  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  establish  a  system  of  public 
registries and operate it on the basis of clearly defined rights, obligations and responsibilities 
of the competent public sector bodies. In order to ensure the necessary level of security for the 
information  stored in  such registries, a common  base  has to  be used  for  secure exchange of 
information  within  the  system  of  the  government  information  infrastructure  -  a  federated 
identification and  authentication system (NIAS in  Croatia, see Footnote 2). The Republic of 
Croatia  will  continue  developing  and  improving  its  electronic  communication  with  the 
citizens. It will also continue interconnecting the state bodies and bodies of the public sector 
in general. Special attention will be paid to: 

1.  Availability of information from public registries to all public sector bodies, citizens and 
other  users  in  accordance  with  regulations  on  personal  data  protection,  secrecy  of 
information,  information  security  and  regulations  on  the  right  of  access  to  public 
information;  

2.  Systematic  development  of  the  government  information  infrastructure,  including  spatial 
planning,  building,  maintenance,  development  and  use  of  electronic  communication 
networks and infrastructure for the needs of the public sector; 

3.  Systematic protection and security of government information infrastructure in accordance 

with information systems security regulations; 

4.  Croatian  Government’s  central  management  of 

the  development  of  government 

information infrastructure, based on the agreed requirements and priorities; 

5.  Harmonising informatization plans and projects with the standards and other determinants 

regarding the building of information infrastructure in Croatia and the European Union; 

6.  Interoperability, scalability and information re-use; 
7.  Rationalisation of expenditure on building and protection of information infrastructure at 

the level of all public sector bodies. 

 

Objective B.1 Encouraging the interconnecting of information systems of public sector bodies 
and their connecting to the public Internet using government information infrastructure. 

Public  sector  bodies  that  are  not  covered  by  the  law  regulating  the  area  of  government 
information  infrastructure  will,  in  cooperation  with  the  state  bodies  competent  for  the 
development  and  security  of  government  information  infrastructure,  conduct  an  analysis  of 
the  needs  and  capabilities  of  connecting  to  the  government  information  infrastructure  and, 
based  on  its  results,  plan  the  connection  to  the  government  information  infrastructure  or 
additional protection measures.  

 
Objective B.2 Raising the security level of public sector information systems. 

The current state of implementation of information systems security measures in public sector 
bodies  will  be  analysed  and  the  dynamics  will  be  defined  for  the  application  of  the  NIAS 
system  and  the  appropriate  standards  (ISO  27001,  etc.).  Organizational  and  technical 

11 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

standards  for  connecting  to  government  information  infrastructure;  conditions  and  activities 
necessary  to  launch,  implement,  develop  and  monitor  projects  related  to  government 
information  infrastructure;  management,  development  and  other  elements  necessary  for  the 
functioning of government information infrastructure will be continuously evaluated through 
the coordination of the competent bodies, including security authorities.  
 
Objective  B.3  Establishing  criteria  for  use  of  certain  authentication  levels  among  e-
Government service providers and credentials providers.  

The  standard  single-factor  authentication,  i.e.  level  2  credentials  according  to  the  document 
“The criteria for determining the level of authentication quality assurance for NIAS”2, is not 
at a satisfactory  security  level  for access  to sensitive information.  A satisfactory solution, in 
terms  of  reducing  security  risks,  which  is  also  acceptable  for  use  in  the  framework  of  e-
Government services, is using the credentials of higher (level 3) or highest (level 4)  security 
levels. The competent authorities will conduct an analysis and work in a coordinated manner 
in  order  to  establish  the  criteria  for  use  of  certain  authentication  levels  among  the  e-
Government  service  providers  and  credentials  providers.  The  analysis  will  also  include  an 
assessment of possibilities of using the e-Citizens ID card for the purposes of e-Government 
and  other  public  and  financial  services.  It  will  also  cover  other  aspects  related  to  national 
possibilities to establish the appropriate accreditation and certification capabilities in the area 
of qualified electronic signatures, in accordance with the EU requirements. 
 

5.1.3 Electronic financial services (C) 
 

Information technology and its benefits are also widely used in the area of providing financial 
services. Achieving satisfactory levels of security is  the goal  of  every  modern state, and the 
basic  goals  of  the  Republic  of  Croatia  related  to  cyber  security  in  the  field  of  electronic 
financial services are:  
 
Objective C.1 Undertaking activities and measures for increasing the security, resilience and 
reliability of cyberspace, with the aim of stimulating  the development of electronic financial 
services. 

Continually  stimulate  the  providers  of  electronic  financial  services  to  introduce  new 
mechanisms  of  protection  against  malicious  activities  and  improve  the  existing  ones,  in 
accordance with current threats and risk assessments. In doing so, special attention has to be 
given  to  the  identification  and  authentication  of  the  users  of  electronic  financial  services, 
authorization  of  financial  transactions  and  timely  detection  and  limitation  of  the  impact  of 
unauthorized activity.  

                                                           
2 https://www.gov.hr/UserDocsImages//e-Gradjani_dok//NIAS%20-
%20Kriteriji%20za%20odredjivanje%20razine%20osiguranja%20kvalitete%20autentifikacije%20u%20sustavu
%20NIAS%20(Ver.%201.2).pdf (in Croatian) 

12 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Objective  C.2  Enhance  information  sharing  about  computer  security  incidents  among  the 
providers  of  electronic  financial  services,  regulatory  and  supervisory  bodies  and  other 
relevant authorities. 

Creating  the  conditions  for  the  implementation  of  efficient  information  sharing,  which  will 
also  improve  the  process  of  treating  computer  security  incidents,  prevent  the  occurrence  of 
such incidents in the future or ensure that their impact is limited. Particular attention has to be 
paid  to  the  protection  of  personal  data  and  other  information  covered  by  legal  restrictions 
related to information use and information sharing, building trust among the parties involved, 
and establishing protocols and mechanisms that will ensure efficient and secure collection of 
information and information sharing. Computer security incident related information sharing 
includes  the  providers  of  electronic  financial  services,  regulatory  and  supervisory  bodies, 
bodies  competent  for  computer  security  incidents  in  the  area  of  public  electronic 
communications, and criminal prosecution authorities.  
 

5.2 Critical communication and information infrastructure and cyber crisis 
management (D) 
 

The  enactment  of  the  Act  on  Critical  Infrastructures3  and  subordinate  legislation  created  the 
legislative  preconditions  for  successful  risk  management  in  the  critical  communication  and 
information infrastructure, within the designated critical infrastructure sectors, in order to: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Increase  the  resilience/reduce  the  vulnerability  of  communication  and  information 
systems; 
Mitigate  the  consequences  of  negative  events  (natural  disasters  and  technical-
technological accidents) and possible attacks (intentional and unintentional); 
Enable quick and efficient recovery and resumption of operation. 
 

Pursuant  to  the  Decision  of  the  Croatian  Government4,  the  sector  of  communication  and 
information technology has been designated as one of the sectors from which the central state 
administration  bodies  identify  critical  national  infrastructures  by  applying  the  appropriate 
method.  Its  subsectors  have  been  designated  as  follows:  electronic  communications,  data 
transmission,  information  systems  and  provision  of  audio  and  audio-visual  media  services. 
These  subsectors  are  further  divided  into  the  following  sections:  electronic  communication 
networks,  infrastructure  and  the  related  equipment,  information  infrastructure  and  terrestrial 
radio broadcasting systems.  

Continuation of activities in the area of critical communication and information infrastructure 
protection is a strategic interest, for the purpose of making all the necessary conditions for its 
functioning and continued operation.  

                                                           
3  Published in the Official Gazette, No 56/13. 
4  Decision  on  designation  of  sectors  from  which  central  state  administration  bodies  identify  critical 
national infrastructures and critical infrastructures sector sequence list (Official Gazette 108/13).  

13 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Communication and information systems that run the critical infrastructure or are essential for 
its functioning represent critical communication and information infrastructure, regardless of 
which critical infrastructure sector they belong to. 

It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  identification  of  critical  communication  and  information 
infrastructure and prescription of mandatory technical and organizational measures, including 
procedures  of  reporting  about  computer  security  incidents,  be  carried  out  in  a  coordinated 
manner  by  central  state  bodies  responsible  for  certain  critical  infrastructure  sectors,  critical 
infrastructure owners/operators and competent technical and security-related state authorities.  

In  addition,  establishing  a  cyber  crisis  management  system  that  will  ensure  a  timely  and 
efficient  reaction/response  to  a  threat  and  the  recovery  of  infrastructure  or  service  is  of 
particular interest to the Republic of Croatia in terms of security.  

The system of cyber crisis management in Croatia needs to be established in accordance with 
the following requirements:  

1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

Harmonisation with the national crisis management solutions, 
Inclusion  of  the  protection  of  critical  national  communication  and  information 
infrastructure, 
Harmonisation  with  international  cyber  crisis  management  systems  of  the  EU  and 
NATO, 
Harmonisation  with  national  competences  of  the  bodies  legally  responsible  for  the 
coordination of the prevention of and the response to computer threats to the security 
of information systems. 

In that sense, it is necessary to: 
 
Objective  D.1  Determine  criteria  for  identifying  critical  communication  and  information 
infrastructure.  

The criteria for identifying critical communication and information infrastructure must follow 
and  further  elaborate  the  methodology  of  approach  envisaged  by  the  Act  on  Critical 
Infrastructures.  Critical  communication  and  information  infrastructure  is  determined  in  the 
framework  of  the  sectors  designated  by  the  aforementioned  Decision  of  the  Croatian 
Government on designation of sectors from which central state administration bodies identify 
critical  national  infrastructures  and  critical  infrastructures  sector  sequence  list.  The  criteria 
defined for designating critical communication and information infrastructure must arise from 
the methodology applied by the Act on Critical Infrastructures. If the situation analysis proves 
it  necessary,  they  can  be  further  elaborated  and  prescribed  by  the  appropriate  subordinate 
legislation.  

 
Objective  D.2  Determine  binding  security  measures  to  be  applied  by  owners/operators  of 
designated critical communication and information infrastructure. 

It is necessary to determine a set of security measures to be applied systematically by all the 
designated owners/operators of critical communication and information infrastructure, as well 
as the necessary relation to the general information security regulations, in segments such as 

14 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

personnel  security  clearance  requirements  or  the  need  to  determine  a  certain  type  of 
information as classified.     

 
Objective D.3 Strengthen prevention and protection through risk management. 

The  priority  is  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act  on  Critical 
Infrastructures in segments concerning the sector risk analysis of critical communication and 
information  infrastructure, sector plans  for  ensuring the work of critical communication and 
information  infrastructure,  and  security  plans  of  owners/operators  of  critical  communication 
and information infrastructure. 

The sector risk analysis includes:  

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

Identification of critical functions (procedures, information, networks, etc.); 
Identification of threats; 
Assessment of threats, vulnerabilities and impact; 
Analysis and prioritisation of risks; 
Determining acceptable risk and risk treatment. 
 

this  critical 

Sector  plans  for  ensuring  the  work  of  critical  infrastructure  and  security  plans  of 
owners/operators  of 
infrastructure  contain  measures  and  activities  for 
preparedness,  prevention,  protection,  response  and  recovery  in  case  of  computer  security 
incidents with adverse impact on the functioning of the critical infrastructure sector,  namely 
production  and  delivery  of  goods  and  services  and  other  functions  of  critical  infrastructure 
owners/operators,  the  operation  or  functioning  of  which  is  based  on  critical  communication 
and information infrastructure. Special attention has to be paid to the professional training of 
the individuals who will be involved in the  procedure of designating critical communication 
and information infrastructure.   

 
Objective  D.4  Strengthen  public-private  partnership  and  technical  coordination  in  the 
treatment of computer security incidents.  

Within the sectors of critical infrastructure designated by the aforementioned Decision of the 
Croatian Government on designation of sectors from which central state administration bodies 
identify  critical  national  infrastructures  and  critical  infrastructures  sector  sequence  list,  it  is 
necessary to encourage public-private partnership through central bodies of state government 
competent  for  certain  sectors,  in  order  to  ensure  unhindered  functioning  of  the  business 
entities  representing  the  owners/operators  of  critical  infrastructure.  It  is  necessary  to 
determine  the  appropriate  procedures  of  oversight,  coordination,  and  information  sharing 
concerning  the  necessary  security  information.  Information  sharing  is  conducted  among  the 
competent  sectoral  entities  and  owners/operators  of  critical  infrastructures,  with  bodies  in 
charge  of  computer  security  incidents  in  areas  of  public  electronic  communication  and 
information  infrastructure  and  services,  and  with  the  criminal  prosecution  authorities. 
Technical coordination in the treatment of computer security incidents is undertaken through 
the cooperation of the bodies with developed capabilities in responding to such incidents.  
 

15 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Objective  D.5  Develop  capacities  for  efficient  response  to  a  threat  that  may  result  in  cyber 
crisis.  

It is necessary to build a national system of cyber crisis management in Croatia as part of the 
national crisis management system, where the responsibilities of the relevant participants will 
be  uniformly  defined  on  the  basis  of  the  authorities’  existing  competences  and  additional 
defining of the authorities’ roles in cases that constitute crises. 

The national cyber crisis management system has to ensure:  
  Systematic monitoring of the state of security of the national cyberspace for the purpose 

of detecting threats that may result in cyber crisis, 

  Periodic reporting on the state of cyber security, 
  Efficient planning of actions during cyber crisis,  
  Harmonised and coordinated action of state authorities during cyber crisis. 

To that end, it is necessary to thoroughly analyse the current situation, especially in relation to 
the  legal  framework  and  any  improvements  it  may  require  in  the  context  of  possible 
introduction of new competences necessary in dealing with this issue. Based on the results of 
the  analysis,  the  definition  of  the  concept  of  cyber  crisis  in  the  framework  of  a  broader 
concept of the national level crisis management will be proposed, along with the criteria for 
identifying a cyber crisis.   

 

5.3 Cybercrime (E) 
 

Computer  crime,  or  cybercrime,  is  crime  that  involves  computer  systems,  programmes  and 
data,  committed  in  cyberspace  by  using  communication  and  information  technologies  and 
poses a threat to achieving a safer information society.  

The establishment of effective prevention measures, but also the criminal law response to this 
type  of  crime,  are  the  key  elements  for  achieving  the  appropriate  level  of  protected, 
unobstructed operation and security of computer systems. 

High-quality and successful countering of this form of crime requires: 
 
Objective  E.1  Continued  enhancement  of  national 
international obligations.  

legislation, 

taking 

into  account 

As rapid  technological  growth  brings along new  modalities of committing criminal  offences 
using computer systems and networks, followed also by the development of legislation in this 
domain at the international level, it is necessary to constantly monitor, analyse and, if needed, 
amend the national legislation in accordance with the emerging changes.  

 

Objective  E.2  Improve  and  stimulate  international  cooperation  for  efficient  information 
sharing. 

The globalisation of cybercrime as a phenomenon in which the perpetrators know no physical 
state  borders,  legislation  differences  in  the  states  in  which  they  act  and  ignore  language 

16 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

barriers,  requires  close  cooperation  of  the  EU  and  NATO  Member  States  and  international 
cooperation with third countries, for the purpose of timely identification of every new form or 
threat,  as  well  as  their  source,  and  in  order  for  the  response  to  a  certain  threat  to  follow  as 
quickly as possible.  It  is therefore necessary to  use the available possibilities of the existing 
cooperation  models  through  contact  points  and  the  possibilities  of  swift  information  sharing 
through the channels of Europol, Eurojust and other international organisations. 

 

Objective  E.3  Good  inter-institutional  cooperation  for  efficient  information  exchange  at 
national level, especially in case of computer security incident.  

A  computer  security  incident  requires  quick  and  adequate  treatment.  It  is  necessary  to 
establish  high  quality  coordination  of  all  the  bodies  that  can  contribute  in  a  particular  case. 
The  existence  of  permanent  “contact  points”  would  contribute  to  direct  and  effective 
communication and thus also to the prevention and more efficient treatment of the incident. 

 

Objective  E.4  Strengthening  human  resources,  adequate  development  of  relevant  state 
bodies’  competences  and  technical  capabilities  for  discovering,  conducting  criminal 
investigation and prosecuting criminal cases in  cybercrime domain, along with securing the 
necessary funding. 

The  development  of  electronic  communication  infrastructure  and  introduction  of  new 
innovative services is accompanied by the emergence of new, increasingly sophisticated ways 
of  committing  criminal  offences  in  cybercrime  domain.  These  processes  require  continued 
strengthening  of  human  resources,  appropriate  upgrading  of  forensic  tools  and  systems,  and 
systems for secret surveillance of electronic communication networks and services.  

 

Objective  E.5  Encouragement  and  constant  development  of  cooperation  with  economic 
sector. 

Encouragement  and  constant  development  of  cooperation  with  the  economic  sector 
(especially  with  the  national  regulatory  authorities  and  legal  entities  in  the  public  electronic 
communications sector and the sector of electronic financial services), as well as information 
sharing about all the new computer security incidents that have been registered, to enable the 
economic sector to recognise a potential incident that could constitute a criminal offence and 
update  its  own  security  system  in  a  timely  manner,  and  to  enable  the  state  administration 
bodies to promptly react to a possible criminal offence. Additionally, good cooperation with 
the economic sector should  be used to  stimulate  communication aimed  at educating the  end 
users  of  certain  services,  thus  directly  contributing  to  the  prevention  of  a  particular 
cybercrime occurrence.    

 

 

17 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.  INTERRELATIONS OF THE AREAS OF CYBER 

SECURITY  

 

The  interrelations  of  cyber  security  areas  are  defined  in  accordance  with  the  assessment  of 
Croatia’s  needs  at  the  time  of  drafting  the  Strategy  and  they  cover  cyber  security  segments 
estimated  to  be  common  to  all  or  most  of  the  previously  selected  cyber  security  areas.  The 
selected interrelations of cyber security areas are: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Protection of information; 

Technical coordination in the treatment of computer security incidents;  

International cooperation, and  

Education, research, development and raising security awareness in cyberspace. 

The interrelations of cyber security areas are essential for the improvement and more efficient 
achievement  of  the  goals  and  measures  in  cyber  security  areas.  The  Strategy  therefore  also 
defines  special  objectives,  regarding  the  interrelations,  which  are  considered  crucial  for 
enhancing  the  level  of  security  in  cyberspace,  with  special  reference  to  the  defined  society 
sectors and the influence of each interrelation of cyber security areas on certain sectors of the 
society  and  forms  of  cooperation  and  mutual  coordination  in  the  work  of  cyber  security 
stakeholders. The elaboration of interrelations of cyber security areas is done according to the 
principles defined by the Strategy. 

 

6.1 Protection of information (F) 
 

In  the  life  cycle  of  a  piece  of  information,  as  soon  as  it  is  generated,  it  is  necessary  to 
determine  whether  it  belongs  to  a  certain  group  of  protected  information  and  apply  the 
appropriate  set  of  measures  to  protect  such  information.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  every 
protected  information  owner  and  data  controller,  but  also  every  protected  information 
processor  and  every  authorised  user  of  protected  information,  not  only  to  take  care  of  the 
confidentiality  and  privacy  of  the  information  they  use  in  their  work,  but  also  to  be 
accountable  for  the  integrity  and  availability  of  the  information  that  is  released  publicly  in 
cyberspace (web sites, social networks, etc.). 

In order to direct the handling of protected information in an appropriate manner, especially 
on  the  part  of  the  entities  responsible  for  protected  information,  the  following  groups  of 
protected  information  were  identified  in  drafting  this  Strategy  as  the  most  important  special 
groups  of  protected  information  which  require  the  implementation  of  adequate  protection 
policy: classified information, unclassified5 information, personal data and trade secret. 

                                                           
5 Group of information appropriately marked, used only for official purposes in the government sector, which 
does not have the characteristic of being secret.  

18 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In cyber security areas identified by this Strategy there is a great need for information sharing 
concerning the information that in most cases represents one of the above mentioned special 
groups of protected information.  

Each of these protected information groups is regulated by an appropriate package of acts and 
subordinate  legislation,  and  the  problems  encountered  so  far  in  practice  were  in  most  cases 
related  to  the  implementation  policies  of  information  protection,  especially  in  legal  entities, 
and to a broader lack of understanding and awareness in different society sectors of the need 
and necessity to develop a culture of handling certain groups of protected information.   

The  following  is  required  in  order  to  improve  the  state  of  security  and  provide  all  the 
prerequisites  for  unobstructed  information  sharing  concerning  such  information  among  the 
different competent stakeholders involved in certain cyber security activities: 

 

Objective F.1 Improvement of national regulations in the area of trade secrets. 

It  has  been  detected  that  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  the  area  of  trade  secrets  at  the 
national level, which should be consistent with the ongoing unification of this field started in 
2013  by  the  EU  among  Member  States.  The  current  situation  may  lead  to  legal  uncertainty 
and  it  is  considered  necessary  to  elaborate  the  criteria  for  designating  and  protecting  trade 
secrets,  with  mandatory  application  of  the  duty  of  care  principles  by  those  responsible  in 
using this group of protected information.  

 

Objective  F.2  Encouraging  continuous  cooperation  of  authorities  competent  for  special 
groups  of  protected  information  in  national  environment 
to  achieve  alignment  in 
implementation of relevant regulations.  

It has been detected that interdepartmental and inter-sectoral coordination of the entire society 
is necessary for harmonising certain implementing elements of legal regulations. Emphasis is 
placed  on  the  need  and  importance  of  exchange  of  experiences  among  the  national  and 
international authorities competent for certain groups of protected information in the national 
environment, as well as following all the current amendments to the rules regulating access to 
information, especially in the EU and NATO environment, and in the scope of the needs and 
obligations of Croatia as a member of the EU and NATO. Measures from the Action plan for 
the implementation of the Strategy have to focus the attention towards the institutions, namely 
all  the  entities  responsible  for  protected  information.  The  role  of  the  entities  responsible  for 
protected information is  to  ensure a uniform approach to  the implementation of the relevant 
regulations  on  the  part  of  all  the  protected  information  processors.  This  also  applies  to  the 
authorised users of such information in the framework of the appropriate internal information 
security policies implemented by those processors and users. 

 

Objective  F.3  Determining  criteria  for  identifying  national  electronic  registries,  which  are 
critical information resources, and entities responsible for their protection. 

Inadequate  policies  of  protecting  information  in  national  electronic  registries  are  one  of  the 
important  problems  that  have  been  detected.  The  problem  lies  in  the  cumulation  of  a  large 

19 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

amount of information from a certain group (e.g. data gathered for all citizens at the national 
level),  which  makes  the  vulnerability  of  such  information  resources  critical  for  other 
interconnected  information  resources,  too.  It  is  necessary  to  analyse  this  area  carefully  and 
determine  the  criteria  for  defining  national  electronic  registries  which  represent  critical 
information resources, as well as the additional requirements for the protection of such critical 
information  resources.  This  has  to  be  conducted  following  the  possibility  of  applying 
regulations  on  critical  national  infrastructures  on  the  one  hand  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
possibly  relating  to  the  criteria  for  determining  as  classified  the  registries  of  information 
which, when put  together in  electronic form,  become critical  at  the national  level  and in  the 
sense described. 

 
Objective F.4 Improving the way protected information is handled by entities responsible for 
protected  information,  protected  information  processors  and  authorised  users  of  protected 
information. 

Despite  the  satisfactory  regulations,  harmonised  with  international  requirements  of  the  EU 
and  NATO,  there  is  room  for  practical  implementation  improvements  in  the  use  and 
information sharing of both classified information and personal data, especially in relation to 
legal  entities  and  the  handling  of  electronic  information,  regardless  of  whether  the  legal 
entities appear as protected information processors or users. Special attention must be paid to 
the  specificity  of  cyberspace  and  services  based  on  computer  infrastructure,  software 
platforms  or  cloud  development  applications.  It  is  necessary  to  develop  adjusted  contract 
supplement templates (appendices, annexes, clauses). These templates would be appropriately 
unified  and  prepared  for  various  forms  of  practical  application,  thereby  indicating  to  the 
entities obliged to apply legal regulations the details of implementation of all the obligations 
highly  important  for  information  protection.  This  would  refer  especially  to  contracts  the 
implementation  or  conclusion  of  which  requires  access  to  and  use  of  protected  information. 
The particularities of cyberspace and e-services would also be covered, that is, the conditions 
of  using  infrastructure  as  a  service  (IaaS),  platform  as  a  service  (PaaS),  or  software  as  a 
service  (SaaS).  These  issues  are  viewed  in  the  context  of  certain  groups  of  protected 
information and accompanying regulatory requirements, and with regard to the particularities 
of cyberspace and cloud computing services. The mentioned issues include: problems related 
to  information  that  is  not  physically  controlled  by  the  owner  in  the  course  of  transmission, 
processing or storing; problems related to different legal responsibilities of service providers 
within various legal frameworks (national, EU, third countries); related issues of the relevant 
national  framework for identification, authentication  and authorisation (IAA) of the users of 
certain electronic services in public and economic sectors.  

 

Objective F.5 Unification of approach in using the set of standards ISO/IEC 270006. 

The  set  of  standards  ISO/IEC  27000  is  used  in  several  sectors  of  the  society  for  protecting 
different  groups  of  information  (e.g.  protection  of  personal  data,  protection  of  unclassified 

                                                           
6 Set of international standards for the area of information security management, accepted as the Croatian 
standard “HRN ISO/IEC 27000”. 

20 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

information,  guidelines  of  the  Croatian  central  bank  for  credit  institutions,  rules  of  the 
national telecommunications regulatory authority for public electronic service providers). The 
competent  sectoral  authorities  and  the  competent  authorities  for  the  defined  groups  of 
protected information should analyse the possibility of unifying the approach and adopting the 
positive  experiences  and  best  practices  in  the  application  of  the  same  set  of  standards  in  a 
different application context, but with very similar application goals. This will provide more 
cost-effective solutions for all the entities obliged to implement regulations and, at the same 
time,  ensure  a  better  understanding  of  the  best  security  practice  and  provide  national-level 
solutions which will be much more efficient in terms of security.    

 

6.2 Technical coordination in the treatment of computer security incidents 
(G) 
 
Technical  coordination  is  one  of  the  primary  functions  to  be  applied  in  the  treatment  of 
computer security incidents which resulted in the disruption of availability, confidentiality or 
integrity of information, in order to return to the pre-incident state. Considering the technical 
sophistication  of  modern-day  attacks,  a  high  level  of  technical  capability  of  the  CERTs7 
personnel  is  crucial,  as  they  are  the  bodies  in  charge  of  preventing  and  responding  to 
computer  security  incidents.  Further  enhancement  of  inter-sectoral  organisation  and 
information sharing regarding computer security incidents represent the necessary conditions 
for  efficient  technical  coordination,  keeping  in  mind  the  protection  of  sensitive  information 
(statistics, anonymization) for the purposes of incident treatment or regular reporting, and in 
order  to  get  a  clearer  picture  of  the  state  of  security  in  cyberspace  at  the  national  level  in 
Croatia.  The  mentioned  national  level  includes  the  consolidation  of  statistical  indicators  of 
society  sectors  through  the  competent  CERTs  for  the  national  and  sectoral  levels.  The 
services  and  user  base  of  each  CERT  have  to  be  clearly  defined,  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  of  subsidiarity  in  responding.  This  principle  refers  to  the  activities  of  one  or  more 
CERTs responsible for communication and information infrastructure in which the computer 
security  incident  occurred  and  in  which  it  is  being  treated.  Especially  important  are  the 
prevention  activities  requiring  a  small  investment  but  offering  the  possibility  of  achieving 
significant effects and preventing major damage. 

Technical  coordination  plays  an  important  role  in  the  treatment  and  resolution  of  computer 
security incidents and the following is necessary for its improvement: 

 

Objective  G.1  Continuous  enhancement  of  existing  systems  for  collecting,  analysing  and 
storing information about computer security incidents and making sure that other information 
essential for quick and efficient treatment of such incidents is up-to-date. 

Collecting,  analysing  and  storing  information  about  computer  security  incidents  is  very 
important  for  monitoring  the  trends  and  situation  in  national  cyberspace.  Information  about 

                                                           
7  In  the  context  of  the  Strategy,  the  term  CERT  refers  to  every  organisational  unit  (or  subunit  including 
individuals) responsible for coordination, prevention of and protection against computer threats.  

21 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

computer security incidents is collected in the competent CERTs according to the principle of 
subsidiarity,  and  it  is  consolidated  and  monitored  in  central  sectoral  authorities.  Bearing  in 
mind the particularities of the different society sectors and selected cyber security areas, types 
of information about computer security incidents will be defined, as well as the ways of and 
prerequisites for exchanging such information among the central sectoral authorities. Central 
sectoral  authorities  will  submit  periodical  reports  to  the  National  Cyber  Security  Council8 
about  the  trends,  situation  and  important  incidents  in  the  recent  period.  Central  sectoral 
authorities  will  submit  appropriate  reports  to  sectoral  stakeholders  on  computer  security 
incidents.  Special  attention  will  be  paid  to  the  improvement  of  the  existing  systems  for 
collecting, analysing and storing incident-related information. 

 
Objective  G.2  Regular  implementation  of  measures  for  improving  security  by  issuing 
warnings and recommendations. 

The  centrally  collected  information  about  computer  security  incidents  has  to  be  analysed, 
exchanged  and  shared  with  the  competent  national  regulatory  authority  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders.  Based  on  the  analyses  of  that  information  and  information  collected  in  other 
ways,  bodies  responsible  for  the  security  of  public  information  systems  and  bodies 
responsible  for  the  security  of  government  information  systems  will  apply  measures  for 
improving the security by defining warnings and recommendations. 

 

Objective  G.3  Establishing  constant  information  sharing  regarding  computer  security 
incidents, as well as relevant information and expertise in solving specific cybercrime cases. 

Information  that  becomes  known  to  criminal  prosecution  authorities  and  the  security  and 
intelligence system bodies in solving cybercrime cases significantly contributes to the overall 
picture of cyber security in Croatia but also to better prevention. It is therefore necessary that 
those  bodies  and  the  competent  CERTs  constantly  exchange  the  appropriate  information  to 
the extent possible considering the competences and needs of certain stakeholders. Other than 
exchanging technical information, cooperation is necessary in the area of expertise, especially 
in solving more complex cybercrime cases.  

 

6.3 International cooperation (H) 
  
 
Cyberspace and the related technologies and knowledge have an increasing role in the overall 
development of the society, including the political, security, economic and social dimensions. 
It is quite clear how necessary it is to  apply the same principles of security,  rule of law and 
guarantees of established rights and freedoms to all individuals and legal entities in this field 
of human activity, too, in the same way they are  applied out of cyberspace. Considering the 
fact  that  the  international  aspect  is  self-evident  in  the  development,  production  and  use  of 

                                                           
8 See chapter 7. 

22 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

information  and  communication  equipment,  software,  services  or  networks,  the  need  is  also 
clear for coordinated action, at both the national and international level.  

National  interest  and all  the necessary  activities  will be pursued  according to  the principles, 
values and obligations based on the Croatian Constitution, the Charter of the United Nations, 
international  law,  international  humanitarian  law  and  the  relevant  legal  and  strategic 
frameworks of Croatia and the EU, as well as other international obligations arising from the 
membership in the United Nations, NATO, Council of Europe, Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe and other multilateral platforms and initiatives.  

Croatia’s priorities in the area of cyber security at the international level include: 

  

Objective  H.1  Strengthening  and  broadening  international  cooperation  in  foreign  and 
security policy areas with partner states, especially within EU and NATO, including mutual 
cooperation with third states. 

Organising  international  cooperation  of  different  cyber  security  stakeholders,  aimed  at 
applying  a  systematic  approach  to  international  cooperation.  Coordination  of  international 
cooperation  should  be  organised  in  such  a  manner  as  to  harmonise  the  participation  of 
competent  national  bodies  in  appropriate  international  meetings  with  partner  bodies  with 
corresponding competences. International cooperation has to be accompanied by appropriate 
reports of the competent national authorities as the key stakeholders in international activities. 
Those  reports  should  be  exchanged  and  shared  with  the  other  appropriate  cyber  security 
stakeholders with thematically related competences.  

 
Objective  H.2  Strengthening  of  international  legal  framework,  with  emphasis  on  promoting 
and improving the implementation of the Council of Europe’s Convention on Cybercrime and 
accompanying protocols.  

It  is  necessary  to  form  close  connections  among  the  different  cyber  security  stakeholders, 
especially  those  with  diplomatic  and  judicial  competences,  in  order  to  ensure  Croatia’s 
effective  participation  in  the  development  of  international  legal  framework  and  adequate 
harmonisation and development of the national legal framework in this area.   

 
Objective H.3 Continuation and development of bilateral and multilateral cooperation under 
existing and future agreements with international associations. 

In  order  to  meet  Croatia’s  obligations  and  improve  the  national  capability  in  implementing 
joint  activities  in  the  area  of  cyber  security,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  an  efficient  and  clear 
framework  of  cooperation  between  cyber  security  stakeholders  in  Croatia  and  certain 
international  partners  and  associations,  staying  in  line  with  the  national  competences  of  the 
bodies engaged in such international cooperation. 

 
Objective H.4 Promoting a concept of trust-building in cyber security.  

Participation in diplomatic activities in the framework of international organisations and other 
forums, to contribute to Croatia’s efforts directed towards trust-building aimed at reducing the 
risk of conflicts caused by the use of information and communication technologies. 

23 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Objective  H.5  Participating  in  and  organising  international  civilian  and  military  exercises 
and other expert programmes. 

Participating in international exercises and expert meetings in the area of cyber security and 
organising  them  is  necessary  for  ensuring  efficient  development  and  strengthening  of  the 
capabilities for a coordinated national and international response to cyber security threats, as 
well  as  harmonisation,  testing  and  improvement  of  the  achieved  implementation  level  of 
cooperative  defence  of  cyberspace.  In  organising  and  participating  in  such  activities  it  is 
necessary  to  follow  and  coordinate  them  with  regard  to  national  competences  of  certain 
bodies as stakeholders of Croatia’s cyber security. 

  
Objective  H.6  Strengthening  cooperation  in  the  area  of  risk  management  for  European 
critical infrastructures. 

The  Croatian  Act  on  Critical  Infrastructures  defines  the  concept  of  European  critical 
infrastructures and prescribes their designation and protection. In accordance with the Council 
Directive  2008/114/EC  on 
identification  and  designation  of  European  critical 
infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection, Member States are 
required  to  cooperate,  establish  information  sharing,  and  exchange  experiences  and  best 
practices to achieve the best and most efficient protection of the identified European critical 
infrastructures. 

the 

 

6.4 Education, research, development and raising security awareness in 
cyberspace (I) 
 

For  building  a  safe  society  and  using  the  market  potential  of  the  information  security  and 
information  society as a  whole, it is  necessary to apply  a systematic  approach  to raising the 
level of the entire society’s competences in the area of cyber security.  

Appropriate educational activities have to be directed towards the following target groups: 

  Formal education participants - it is necessary to ensure that primary and secondary school 
pupils and students attending professional and university studies acquire knowledge of the 
dangers  they  can  encounter  in  the  virtual  environment;  skills  and  competences  to 
successfully ensure their own safe use of information and communication technologies at 
all levels of formal education, and awareness of the need to protect personal data; 

  Various  population  segments  -  including  all  population  segments  in  the  process  of 
learning  about  information  security  through  the  concept  of  lifelong  learning  and  raise 
awareness of the need for protection;  

  Data  controllers,  personal  data  recipients,  data  processors  and  all  other  persons  coming 
into  contact  with  critical  national  infrastructures  and  databases  containing  groups  of 
protected information - ensure a higher level of education in the area of cyber security and 
raise awareness of the need to protect electronic information; 

24 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  Experts  who  will  be  dealing  with  information  security  -  develop  graduate,  postgraduate 

and specialist study programmes in accordance with market needs. 
 

In order to achieve the goals of the Strategy, the following actions are required in the area of 
education, research, development and awareness raising: 
 

Connect  all  educational  institutions  in  order  to  systemise  programmes  and  curricula, 
and  avoid  unnecessary  paralleling  or  implementation  of  teaching  programmes  in 
information  security  of  questionable  quality.  It  is  necessary  to  connect  institutions 
such  as  the  State  School  for  Public  Administration,  Police  Academy  and  Judicial 
Academy with  the universities, especially the units  with  established and high-quality 
programmes in the area of information security, personal data protection, cybercrime, 
etc.  

Raise  the  level  of  knowledge  about  information  security  in  all  the  segments  of  the 
society with campaigns including public media. 

Considering  the  insufficient  education  of  pupils  in  the  area  of  cyber  security,  except 
for  their  school  IT,  implement  content  related  to  cyber  security  awareness  raising  in 
other school subjects as interdisciplinary content. 

Call  pupils’  and  parents’  attention  to  the  threats  in  the  information  society  in 
homeroom  classes,  PTA  meetings,  thematic  lectures  and  other  extracurricular 
activities.  

Include cyber security topics in professional development programmes for teachers. 

Include  segment-specific  cyber  security  topics  in  training  programmes  for  civil 
servants. 

Bind  electronic  service  providers  to  provide  information  on  the  consequences  of 
security  risks  and  protection  mechanisms  for  a  particular  product  or  service.  Bind 
service  providers  to  incorporate  security  measures  and  provide  information  on 
security-related  issues  and  security  implications  for  those  services  or  products  in  a 
manner understandable to the user. 

Define strategic research sectors in the area of information security (from the point of 
view of defensive and offensive technologies, methods, algorithms, devices, software 
and  hardware).  Encourage  research  teams  and  research  projects  in  the  area  of 
information  security  according  to  the  guidelines  in  areas  of  strategic  interest  for  the 
Republic of Croatia in terms of research and practical application. Strategically enable 
Croatia  to  have  capacities  for  research,  development,  production,  verification, 
assessment  and  expert  evaluation  in  the  area  of  information  security.  Improve 
communication  between  the  academic,  economic  and  public  sectors  and  information 
sharing regarding information security.  

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

 

25 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Croatia’s basic objectives related to  education, research, development  and awareness  raising 
in the area of cyber security are:  

 

Objective I.1 Development of human resources in the area of communication and information 
technology security. 

It is necessary to systematically educate persons involved in the implementation of education 
programmes  (teachers,  lecturers,  head  teachers,  associate  experts  and  others)  about  cyber 
security.  Cyber  security  elements  must  be  included  into  formal  education  programmes  and 
systematically applied, especially in the four major education groups, from pre-school through 
primary  and  secondary  education  to  higher  education.  Youth  should  be  encouraged  to  deal 
with  information  security  in  a  lawful  way.  Graduate,  doctoral  and  specialist  study 
programmes  in  the  area  of  cyber  security  must  be  stimulated.  It  is  necessary  to  plan  and 
implement specialised training for civil servants, technical staff and other personnel using  in 
various manners communication and information technologies or working on their protection 
and the protection of their users.  

 
Objective I.2 Developing and raising security awareness in cyberspace. 

It is necessary to establish mechanisms enabling cyberspace users and service providers to be 
constantly aware of how to use it safely. Targeted educational campaigns have to be launched 
to reach the wider public. According to the instructions of the sectoral regulatory authorities, 
service  providers  will  conduct  additional  activities  for  adequate  protection  of  service 
providers and users. 

 
Objective I.3 Development of national capabilities, research and stimulation of economy.  

The  development  of  national  capabilities  in  various  areas  of  information  security  has  to  be 
stimulated, both in the academic sector through research, and in the economic sector through 
the development of new products and services.  Government bodies will apply a coordinated 
approach  to  stimulate  public-private  partnership,  connecting  of  the  academic,  state  and 
economic  sectors,  and  presenting  and  promoting  the  solutions  developed  in  Croatia  on  the 
global market.  

 

 

 

26 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGY 

 

 

Action plan for the implementation of the Strategy, made for the purpose of implementing the 
Strategy,  elaborates the  defined strategic  goals  and determines the implementation measures 
necessary  for  achieving  those  goals,  along  with  the  competent  authorities  and  the  list  of 
deadlines for their implementation.   

Action  plan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Strategy  allows  for  systematic  oversight  of  the 
implementation of the Strategy and serves as a control mechanism which will show whether a 
certain measure has been implemented in its entirety and has produced the desired result, or it 
should be redefined in accordance with the new requirements. 

In order to determine in due time whether the Strategy is achieving the desired results, namely 
if the defined goals are being accomplished and the established measures implemented within 
the  planned  time  frame,  it  is  necessary  to  set  up  a  system  of  continuous  monitoring  of  the 
implementation  of  the  Strategy  and  Action  plan,  thus  also  setting  up  a  mechanism  for 
coordinating  all  the  competent  government  bodies  in  creating  the  appropriate  policies  and 
responses to threats in cyberspace.  

For  the  purpose  of  reviewing  and  improving  the  implementation  of  the  Strategy  and  Action 
plan  for  its  implementation,  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Croatia  will  establish  the 
National Cyber Security Council9 (hereinafter “the National Council”), which will: 

  Systematically monitor and coordinate the implementation of the Strategy and discuss all 

issues relevant to cyber security, 

  Propose measures to improve the implementation of the Strategy and Action plan for the 

implementation of the Strategy, 

  Propose the organisation of national exercises in the area of cyber security, 

  Issue recommendations, opinions, reports and guidelines related to the implementation of 

the Strategy and Action plan, and 

  Propose  amendments  to  the  Strategy  and  Action  plan  or  propose  the  adoption  of  a  new 

Strategy and action plans, in accordance with the new requirements. 

 

Based  on  the  requirements  described  in  the  area  of  cyber  crisis  management,  the  National 
Council will: 

  Address  issues  essential  for  cyber  crisis  management  and  propose  measures  for  higher 

efficiency, 

  Analyse  the  reports  on  the  state  of  security  submitted  by  the  Operational  and  Technical  

Cyber Security Coordination Group, 

  Issue periodic assessments of the state of security, 
                                                           
9 Interdepartmental panel composed of the authorised representatives of the competent bodies with national or 
sectoral policy and coordination responsibilities.  

27 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  Define cyber crisis action plans, 

  Issue  programmes  and  action  plans  for  the  Operational  and  Technical  Cyber  Security 

Coordination Group and direct its work.  

 

To ensure the support for the work of the National Council, the Government of the Republic 
of Croatia will establish the Operational and Technical Cyber Security Coordination Group10, 
which will: 

  Monitor  the  state  of  security  in  national  cyberspace  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  threats 

that may result in cyber crisis,  

  Issue reports on the state of cyber security, 

  Propose cyber crisis action plans, 

  Perform other duties according to the issued programmes and activity plans. 

 

The  representatives  in  the  interdepartmental  body,  the  Operational  and  Technical  Cyber 
Security  Coordination  Group,  mutually  ensure  access  to  operational  information  from  their 
scope for the purpose of coordinated action during cyber crises.  

 
The  entities  tasked  with  the  measures  from  the  Action  plan  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Strategy are responsible for monitoring and collecting information on the implementation and 
efficiency  of  the  measures  and  are  required  to  submit  consolidated  reports  to  the  National 
Council  once  a  year,  no  later  than  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  current  year  for  the 
previous year or, if necessary, more frequently, namely at the request of the National Council. 
 
The National Council will submit the reports on the implementation of the Action plan for the 
implementation of the Strategy to the Government of the Republic of Croatia no later than the 
end of the second quarter of the current year for the previous year.  
 
The Strategy will be revised after three years of implementation, based on the reports of the  
entities tasked with the measures from the Action plan for the implementation of the Strategy. 
The  National  Council  shall  submit  to  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Croatia  a 
consolidated report with the proposed amendments to the Strategy no later than the end of the 
year of revision.  
 

                                                           
10 Interdepartmental panel composed of the authorised representatives of the competent bodies with operational 
and technical responsibilities. 
 

28 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX: TERMS AND ACRONYMS 

 

Terms 
 

Authorised  users  of  protected  information  -  users  of  protected  information  whose 
authorisation, i.e. right of use, is based on legal or contractual basis, but who are not entities 
responsible for protected information or protected information processors.  

Computer security incident - one or more computer security  events  that  have disturbed or 
are disturbing the security of the information system. 

Credentials  -  set  of  information  used  for  introducing  the  user  of  electronic  service,  which 
serves as proof for electronic identity (e-ID) verification, in order to grant access to electronic 
services (e-services).  

Critical communication and information infrastructure - communication and information 
systems  whose  disturbed  functioning  would  significantly  disturb  the  work  of  one  or  more 
identified critical national infrastructures.  

Cyber (computer) crime - criminal offences against computer systems, software support and 
data; committed in cyberspace using information and communication technologies.  

Cyber  crisis  -  event  or  events  in  cyberspace  which  could  cause  or  have  already  caused  a 
significant  disturbance  in  Croatia’s  social,  political  and  economic  life.  Such  a  situation  can 
eventually  affect  the  security  of  people,  democratic  system,  political  stability,  economy, 
environment and other national values, that is, national security and defence in general. 

Cyber  security  -  encompasses  activities  and  measures  for  achieving  the  confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information and systems in cyberspace.  

Cyberspace - space in which communication among information systems takes place. In the 
context of the Strategy, it encompasses the Internet and all the systems connected to it. 

Electronic  communication  and  information  infrastructure  -  includes  computer  and 
communication systems and software support used for data transmission, processing, storing. 

Electronic  communication  and  information  services  -  commercial  and  non-commercial 
services provided using information and communication systems.  

Electronic  financial  services  -  financial  services  provided  directly  to  users  by  their 
authorised providers via electronic communication and information infrastructure (e.g. online 
and mobile banking, ATMs, EFTPOS systems). 

Electronic  financial  service  providers  -  subjects  authorised  by  the  competent  authority  to 
provide electronic financial services. 

Entities  responsible  for  protected  information  -  protected  information  owners  and 
information controllers. 

29 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Financial  services  -  services  in  the  area  of  banking,  funds  transfer,  securities  market, 
investment fund shares, insurance, leasing and factoring. 

Government  information  infrastructure  -  consists  of  the  common  government  base  for 
secure information  exchange and information  exchange tools such as metaregistry, technical 
standards, classifications, public registries, NIAS, the e-Citizens system, and the government 
information infrastructure networks HITRONet and CARNet. 

Identification and authentication system - system for establishing and verifying the identity 
of individuals, devices or services in information systems. 

Information  -  different  groups  of  electronic  records  which  are  of  value  to  the  users  that 
handle them. 

Information security  -  the state of  confidentiality, integrity and  availability of information, 
achieved by the application of appropriate security measures. 

Internet - global network connecting various internet networks based on the TCP/IP protocol 
(such as CARNet or HITRONet in Croatia).  

Protected information - information which, due to its content, has special importance to the 
values  protected  in  a  democratic  society,  for  which  reason  it  is  recognised  by  the  state  as 
classified  information,  unclassified  information,  personal  data  or  trade  secret,  and  to  which 
specific  handling  requirements  apply  in  relation  to  information  characteristics  such  as 
confidentiality, integrity, availability and privacy. 

Protected  information  processing  -  every  action  or  set  of  actions  performed  on  protected 
information,  such  as  collection,  recording,  organising,  storing,  adaption  or  alteration, 
withdrawal,  consultation,  usage,  transmission,  publishing,  or  making  it  otherwise  available, 
alignment  or  combining,  blocking,  erasure  or  destruction,  and  performing 
logical, 
mathematical and other operations on such information.  

Protected  information  processors  -  individuals  or  legal  entities,  state  authorities  or  other 
bodies  that  process  protected  information  on  behalf  of  the  entity  responsible  for  protected 
information. 

Security  measures  -  general  rules  of  information  protection  implemented  at  physical, 
technical or organisational level.  

Sensitive  information - groups of information used only  for official  purposes, or  groups of 
information  protected  by  appropriate  regulations,  but  not  having  the  characteristic  of  being 
secret (e.g. personal data or unclassified information, i.e. marked information for official use 
only).  

 

30 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acronyms  
CARNet 

CERT 

Croatian Academic and Research Network – academic network 
infrastructure.  

(Computer Emergency Response Team) Common acronym for a group of 
experts responsible for treating security incidents in computer networks. 
In the context of the Strategy, the acronym CERT is used for any 
organisational unit, sub-unit or individual responsible for coordination, 
prevention of and protection from computer threats to information 
systems security. Other than CERT, the acronym CSIRT (Computer 
Security Incident Response Team) also exists in international practice.  

Croatian  

Internet eXchange 

Croatian national centre for Internet exchange hosted at the University 
Computing Centre (Srce), open to all internet service providers in Croatia 
(for commercial and non-commercial or private networks). 

(CIX) 

EFU 

e-Citizens 

Electronic financial services. 

The e-Citizens system is part of the government information system. It 
consists of the central state portal, national identification and 
authentication system and users’ personal mailbox system. 

EU 

European Union. 

e-service 

Electronic service. 

EUROJUST 

The European Union's Judicial Cooperation Unit. 

EUROPOL 

The European Police Office. 

EFTPOS system  Electronic Fund Transfer Point Of Sale - point of sale terminal for non-

cash payment in which transactions are processed electronically.  

HITRONet 

Computer communication network of state administration bodies. 

ISO/IEC 27000 

Set of international standards for the area of information security 
management, accepted as the Croatian standard “HRN ISO/IEC 27000”. 

NATO 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

NIAS 

OIB 

National identification and authentication system. 

Personal identification number. 

Strategy 

National Cyber Security Strategy. 

 

31 of 31 

