 

 
 
 
Policy Document 
 
Cybersecurity Strategy of the Republic 
of Cyprus 

Network  and  Information  Security  and  Protection  of  Critical 
Information Infrastructures 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Version 1.0 

23 April 2012 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................................... 3 

1. 

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................. 5 

1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 

Network and Information Security ................................................................................................................... 5 
Critical Information Infrastructures .................................................................................................................. 6 
Vision ................................................................................................................................................................ 7 
Aims and Objectives ......................................................................................................................................... 7 
Guiding Principles ............................................................................................................................................. 7 

2. 

STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................................... 8 

2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 

European Policy ................................................................................................................................................ 8 
Network and Information Security in the Republic of Cyprus ........................................................................ 10 
Competent/Relevant Authorities and Observers of the Republic of Cyprus .................................................. 11 
Threats in Cyberspace Today .......................................................................................................................... 12 

3. 

STRATEGIC RESPONSE ................................................................................................................................. 14 

Priority Areas .................................................................................................................................................. 14 
3.1 
Splitting the Actions – Phases A and B ........................................................................................................... 15 
3.2 
Organisational Structure ................................................................................................................................ 15 
3.3 
Legal Framework ............................................................................................................................................ 18 
3.4 
Cooperation between the State and the Private Sector ................................................................................ 18 
3.5 
Identification of Critical Information Infrastructures ..................................................................................... 20 
3.6 
Threat Landscape Analysis.............................................................................................................................. 21 
3.7 
National Cybersecurity Framework ................................................................................................................ 21 
3.8 
3.9 
Incident Response .......................................................................................................................................... 22 
3.10  National and International Cyber Exercises.................................................................................................... 23 
Training and Capability Development ............................................................................................................ 24 
3.11 
3.12 
Security Culture (Awareness) ......................................................................................................................... 25 
Cooperation with External Agencies and International Working Groups ...................................................... 25 
3.13 
Development of a National Contingency Plan for Critical Information Infrastructures ................................. 26 
3.14 
3.15 
Interdependencies .......................................................................................................................................... 28 

4.  NEXT STEPS ................................................................................................................................................. 29 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 

Immediate Actions – Phase A ......................................................................................................................... 29 
Cost of Implementation .................................................................................................................................. 29 
Planning of Actions 2012 - 2015 ..................................................................................................................... 30 
Results Assessment and Strategy Review....................................................................................................... 30 

APPENDIX I -  OVERVIEW OF STRATEGY ACTIONS ............................................................................................. 31 

APPENDIX II - 

ACTION INTERDEPENDENCIES ................................................................................................. 33 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Information  and  communications  technologies  and  systems  are  one  of  the  most  important  drivers  of 
social and economical development today, whilst undoubtedly being necessary tools for the operation 
of functional and social structures in any country.  As a result of this, a vital need is created for these 
technologies  to  offer  security  in  their  use,  which  is  defined  as  the  preservation  of  the  principles  of 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  information  during  its  transmission,  processing  and 
storage.  These  principles lead to the  building of  trust  in information systems and electronic services, 
which is considered a prerequisite for the continued development and growth in this valuable sector of 
the  economy.    Network  and  information  security,  and  more  generally  cybersecurity,  operates  to 
maintain the above principles. 

This  Strategy  aims  to  establish  a  safe  electronic  environment  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  with  specific 
considerations  and actions for the  protection of critical information infrastructures, whose  disruption 
or  destruction  would  have  severe  consequences  to  vital  societal  functions.    The  development  and 
preparation of this Strategy has followed a  holistic approach  for responding to threats in cyberspace, 
recognising that a valid strategy must offer multiple levels of security. 

The  European  Commission  has  set  strong  targets  for  the  area  of  network  and  information  security, 
which are evident from its intensified activities in this area, in cooperation with member states and with 
ENISA (European Network and Information Security Agency).  The new European Regulatory Framework 
for Electronic Communications places special emphasis on the area of security and integrity of networks 
and  services,  and  also  on  the  area  of  protection  of  personal  data.    One  of  the  main  targets  of  the 
Commission is the development of National Strategies  for network  and information security (like this 
document),  the  development  of  National  Contingency  Plans  for  related  matters  and  the  creation  of 
CERTs (Computer Emergency Response Teams) for incidents that involve electronic security breaches. 

Even  though  the  area  of  network  and  information  security  is  not  a  new  one,  and  there  have  been  a 
number of related actions by various competent state authorities in the past, this document represents 
the  first  organised  approach  for  coordinated  response  to  threats  that  manifest  in  cyberspace,  on  a 
National level.  The following priority areas have been identified to meet this target: coordination of the 
governmental  stakeholders,  development  of  a  complete  legal  framework,  technical  and  procedural 
measures,  capability  development  and  training,  productive  collaboration  between  the  public  and 
private sector and the creation or adaptation of the necessary structures and instruments within the 
Cyprus Government.  This strategy document contains a series of actions that have been identified to 
achieve the goals discussed above, in the following areas: 

Legal Framework 

  Organisational structures 
 
  Collaboration between the public and private sectors 
 
  Threat landscape analysis 

Identification of Critical Information Infrastructures 

 

 

3 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

Incident response 

  National Cybersecurity Framework 
 
  National and International Cyber Exercises 
  Capability Development 
  Awareness 
  Cooperation with external agencies and international working groups 
  Development of a National Contingency Plan for Critical Information Infrastructures 
  Modelling and analysis of interdependencies. 

Short summaries of the Actions, together with an initial graphical assessment of the interdependencies 
between them, are presented in Appendices I and II respectively. 

This document also analyses the immediate actions that are to be taken within Phase A (see section 3.2), 
as well as the next steps that must follow, such as the detailed planning and costing for each action, the 
prioritisation and planning of the national cybersecurity programme, and the assessment of the results 
of  the  strategy  actions  that  will  follow.    It  should  be  noted  that  the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  of  the 
Republic  of  Cyprus  will  be  reviewed  on  a  regular  basis,  taking  into  account  the  results  of  the 
assessment process, as well as new threats that appear (and will continue to appear) in cyberspace.  The 
targets  are  to  perform  a  holistic  assessment  of  the  results  of  the  above  actions  and  to  update  the 
strategy accordingly so that it continues to be in a position to provide the maximum benefit to Cypriot 
society. 

 

 

 

 

4 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

1.1  Network and Information Security 

Information  and  communications  technologies  and  systems  are  one  of  the  most  important  drivers  of 
social and economical development today, whilst undoubtedly being necessary tools for the operation 
of  functional  and  social  structures  in  any  country.    As  cyberspace  develops,  the  protection  of  the 
electronic  systems  present  in  organisations  of  all  kinds  becomes  all  the  more  important,  so  that  any 
activity  conducted  through  these  systems  is  safe  and  secure.    A  basic  security  system must  cover  the 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  high  availability  of  infrastructure  and  information,  while  allowing  the 
operation of the  infrastructure to be  reliable, flexible and controlled.   Infrastructure  security refers to 
the  capability  and  resilience  of  the  infrastructure  against  threats  and  malfunctions  that may  afflict  its 
constituent  parts.    Relevant  security  measures  that  are  taken  mainly  target  the  increase  of  readiness 
levels and the strengthening of preventative mechanisms, the identification and response to potential 
risks  (including  malicious  actions  or  attacks),  as  well  as  putting  in  place  measures  for  mitigation  and 
recovery  from  malfunctions,  failures  and  the  availability  of  services  that  are  offered,  covering  also 
emergency or crisis situations. 

In this document, the terms ‘network and information security’ and ‘cybersecurity’ are used.  ‘Network 
and  information  security’  refers  to  the  preservation  of  the  principles  of  confidentiality,  integrity  and 
availability,  as  they  are  described  below.    ‘Cybersecurity’  refers  to  the  broader  security  of  networked 
systems  that  operate  in  cyberspace,  i.e.  in  most  cases  connected  to  the  Internet,  and  this  term  also 
covers the safe and secure usage of these systems by end users. 

It is clarified that the applicable level of information security must be guided through the determination 
of the value of the information to be protected (irrespective of the form of that information, whether it 
be physical or electronic).  The value parameter will be taken into account during the implementation of 
the  actions  described  in  the  present  document,  especially  those  that  are  related  to  informing  people 
regarding security to foster awareness and a security culture.  As a general principle, information must 
be protected appropriately, according to its value. 

Network  and  Information  Security  is  a  basic  and  necessary  consequence  of  the  development  and 
pervasiveness  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies.    Taking  into  account  the 
globalisation  of  communications,  especially  with  the  use  of  the  Internet  but  also  the  continuously 
increasing dangers that users are faced with at all levels, it has become vital to take adequate protection 
measures  but  also  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  cooperation  between  all  parts  of  society,  the  public  and 
private sectors, on a national, European and international level.  Citizens, businesses and governments 
strongly need to be able to trust the media through which important information and data, personal or 
otherwise, is transmitted. 

The  safe  development  of  information  and  communication  technologies  is  important  for  citizens  and 
societies,  for  growth  in  employment  (and  the  economy  in  general),  on  the  national  but  also  the 

 

5 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
European and international level.  Investments in the area of security serve to increase the trust of users 
in  new  services  and  contribute  to  the  wider  development  of  the  economy  and  society  itself.  
Governments,  as  well  as  businesses,  must  evaluate  their  investments  in  this  area,  with  the  basic 
criterion  being  the  costs  associated  with  failures  of  their  information  technology  or  communication 
systems against malicious actions or natural causes. 

‘Security’, 
preservation of three principles: 

in  the 

information  and  communications  technology  world,  generally  refers  to  the 

 

 

confidentiality of information, i.e. to only allow access to information to authorised persons, 
integrity of information, i.e. the protection of information from any unwanted modification or 
destruction, 

  availability  of  information  or  systems,  i.e.  for  a  system  to  be  able  to  provide  service  and/or 

information when it is requested. 

The preservation of the above principles aims to ensure network and information security to the highest 
possible degree, in relation to: 

 

 

 

the protection of information/data in transit, 
the protection of information/data in processing, 
the protection of information/data in storage. 

Going beyond the protection of infrastructure, systems and information, the preservation of a high level 
of  security,  as  per  the  principles  described  above,  is  necessary  in  order  to  built  trust  in  information 
systems, communications and other electronic services  that  are offered by the government and other 
important organisations in Cyprus.  The development of trust on behalf of citizens in these systems and 
ensuring  secure  transactions  in  cyberspace  will  contribute  to  a  significant  degree  to  the  economic 
development of Cyprus and to meeting the targets of the Digital Agenda for Cyprus.  

1.2  Critical Information Infrastructures 

Information infrastructures have  greatly increased in recent  years in the Republic of Cyprus, and they 
have penetrated into almost every part of the life of the average citizen.  These infrastructure are used 
not only directly (e.g. through the use of telephony, the Internet, etc.), but also indirectly, since almost 
all  of  the  services  that  are  offered  by  the  government  and  used  by  citizens  are  heavily  supported  by 
them.  Some  of these  information  infrastructures  form a  critical  part of Cypriot economy and society, 
either  through  the  provision  of  vital  goods  and  services,  or  forming  a  supporting  platform  for  other 
(critical) infrastructures.  These are thus considered to be critical information infrastructures, given that 
their  disruption  or  destruction  would  have  severe  consequences  to  vital  governmental  and  societal 
functions. 

It  thus  becomes  necessary,  via  a  wider  framework  of  a  cybersecurity  strategy  of  a  country,  to  place 
special emphasis on the protection of such critical information infrastructures.  A number of actions that 
are described in the present document cover the protection of critical information infrastructures, and 

 

6 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
also the wider area of cybersecurity, given that these two areas are closely related and always interact 
with each other. 

Section 3.6 describes, in further detail, the criteria that will be used to identify the critical information 
infrastructures in the Republic of Cyprus.  The work that will follow for the development of a National 
Contingency Plan for critical information infrastructures is described in section 3.14 and forms a priority 
of this strategic plan. 

1.3  Vision 

The  vision  of  the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  of  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  is  the  operation  of  information  and 
communications technologies in Cyprus with the necessary levels of security, to the benefit of every user. 

1.4  Aims and Objectives 

The development of this strategy and the actions that have been identified have the following aims and 
objectives: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the  development  and  preservation  of  a  safe  and  secure  electronic  business  environment  in 
Cyprus, 
support  of  the  targets  of  the  government  that  have  been  identified  in  the  ‘Digital  Cyprus’ 
strategy programme to develop conditions for an Information Society, 
the development of trust, on behalf of citizens and organisations/businesses, in e-government 
services, including the preservation of information and data in transit, processing and storage, 
the  establishment  of  a  safe  electronic  environment  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  for  all  of  its 
citizens, including children, 
the mitigation of the effects of threats in cyberspace and the effective response to emergencies, 
the  support  of  a  future  coordinated  national  response  plan  for  the  protection  of  critical 
infrastructures (beyond ICT) in the Republic of Cyprus. 

1.5  Guiding Principles 

The structure and contents of this document are based on the following guiding principles: 

 

 

 

the  development  of  strategy  and  policy  within  a  framework  of  cooperation  between  all 
competent authorities, taking into account the competences of each governmental stakeholder, 
the development of a holistic approach to face threats in cyberspace, 
the  recognition  that  a  valid  strategy  must  offer  multiple  levels  of  security  (layered  security, 
defence in depth, etc.), 
the use of open processes in all stages of implementation of the Strategy, 

 
  and  the  setting  of  ambitious  goals  with  the  will  for  the  Strategy  and  its  actions  to  contribute 

tangibly to the improvement of the levels of electronic security in Cyprus. 

 

 

7 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

2.  STRATEGIC CONTEXT 

2.1  European Policy 

Security matters form an important pillar of the Digital Agenda for Europe, and this specific European 
policy covers a number of important topics related to network and information security.  The position of 
the  European  Commission  regarding  these  issues  is  covered  in  detail  in  the  strategy  document  for 
Network and Information Security (NIS).  In addition to this, and as part of the application of European 
policy in this area, the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) was created and has 
been  operational since  2004.  This organisation is headquartered in Herakleion, Crete and it develops 
pan-European  and  international  actions  in  the  area  of  network  and  information  security,  helping  the 
application of European policy, the dissemination of information and best practices, the harmonisation 
and  coordination  of  common  actions,  the  organisation  and  execution  of  European  and  international 
cyber exercises and also international cooperation and coordination.  The renewal of ENISA’s operations 
(in time), with expanded terms of mandate, is the subject of intensive consultations during this period at 
the Council of Ministers level, and also in the European Parliament, given that everyone recognises the 
necessity of such an organisation to exist and operate in Europe. 

The  new  European  Regulatory  Framework  for  Electronic  Communications  (with  a  May  2011  date  of 
entry  into  force  on  a  pan-European  level),  places  special  emphasis  on  the  area  of  security,  mainly  in 
topics relating to: (a) the  security and integrity of networks  and services,  as well as the application of 
regulatory measures and cooperation mechanisms on a national and pan-European level, together with 
national  notification  mechanisms  for  security  breach  incidents,  contained  in  the  Framework  Directive 
(2002/21/EC,  as  amended),  and  (b)  the  security  of  personal  data,  the  processing  of  such  data  and 
related  security  breaches, the  protection  of  data  contained  within  customer  terminal  equipment,  and 
the use of automated calling systems and communication without human intervention, contained in the 
Directive on Privacy and Electronic Communications (2002/58/EC, as amended). 

Additionally,  cybersecurity  matters  have  recently  been  placed  high  on  the  agenda  of  the 
Telecommunications  Ministerial1  Council  of  the  European  Union.    The  Council,  during  its  recent 
meetings, has examined policy and the actions to follow, including the preparation of new Directives in 
the area of security and especially for Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP). 

The Council has also requested the cooperation between Member States, the European Commission and 
third  countries  for:  (a)  the  identification  and  securing  of  parts  of  critical  infrastructure  that  could,  if 
damaged  or  destroyed,  have  severe  negative  effects  on  member  states,  and  (b)  the  exchange  of 
information  and  best  practices,  while  (c)  urging  member  states  to  encourage  effective  cooperation 
between public  and private sector entities, both within the member states  themselves  and with third 

                                                           
1 The finalisation of the new European Strategy for Internet Security will form part of the activities of the 
Telecommunications Ministerial Council under the Cyprus Presidency of the Council. 

 

8 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
countries.    The  Council  has  also  asked  to  be  updated,  together  with  the  European  Parliament,  on  an 
annual basis by member states and the European Commission regarding their actions in these matters. 

After  the  meeting  of  the  Telecommunications  Ministerial  Council  on  the  27th  of  May  2011,  in  which 
these  matters  were  discussed,  the  European  Commission  announced  the  actions  that  it  expects  the 
member states of the European Union to undertake, asking for the commitment of all those involved for 
the  promotion  of  common  goals.    Specifically,  the  European  Commission  is  requesting  that  member 
states and the Council state their strong commitment to the improvement and strengthening of national 
security in cyberspace to the best of their abilities, with the target of securing a high level of protection 
within the European Union and more effective collaboration on the international level. 

As  such,  the  European  Commission  is  planning  to  monitor  the  performance  of  the  member  states 
closely, as regards meeting the three basic targets that are being promoted on the European level: 

(a) The operation of national / governmental Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) in 
 
each member state and the creation of a common and functional network of national / governmental 
CERTs in Europe by 2012, which will be supported by effective national cybersecurity strategies. 

 
(b) The organisation of regular national and pan-European exercises for security in cyberspace 
(with  CERTs  participating  as  a  prerequisite),  in  which  a  pan-European  cyber  exercise  which  has  been 
scheduled for the second half of 2012 is included. 

 
(c)  The  development  of  national  contingency  plans  for  network  and  information  security,  and 
incidents in cyberspace, and the contribution of all member states to the development of a European 
contingency  plan  for  emergencies  in  cyberspace  within  2012.    Based  on  national  experiences,  such  a 
plan must lay the foundation and define appropriate processes for effective communications between 
member states in situations where common threats and malicious attacks affect a number of member 
states. 

On a national level, the actions described in points (b) and (c) above form part of the actions that are 
included in this Strategy.  The action referred to in point (a) above is already in progress in the Republic 
of Cyprus and is regulated by separate secondary legislation that is published by the Commissioner for 
Electronic Communications and Postal Regulation, while the correct operation of CERTs/CSIRTs in Cyprus 
is a basic precondition for the development of the strategic planning that is described in this document.  
These  same  points  were  the  subject  of  a  special  Ministerial  Conference  that  took  place  in  Hungary  in 
April  2011,  in  the  context  of  the  work  plans  of  the  Presidency  of  the  Council  and  of  the  European 
Commission during the first half of 2011.  All member states were represented at this conference, which 
was under the auspices of the Telecommunications Ministerial Council and under the area of network 
and information security.  The conference conclusions cover the duties of the member states in detail, 
as  described  in  this  section.    Specifically  regarding  the  matters  related  to  CERTs,  the  conference 
conclusions state that: 

 

 

9 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

«put in place well-functioning and operational national/governmental CERTs as soon as possible; 
provide technical support to the EU institutions in setting up  their own CERT by 2012; establish a well-
functioning network of CERTs at EU level, which will include the CERT for the EU institutions;».  

In summary, the European Union, in recent years, has been planning, preparing and executing actions to 
strengthen its position in relation to cybersecurity.  Its aim is to effectively handle the rapidly increasing 
rates of crimes and attacks in cyberspace, and the European Commission is asking from member state 
governments to seriously examine the issue of security in cyberspace. 

The  statement of  Neelie  Kroes,  Vice-President of the  European  Commission  for  the  Digital  Agenda  on 
the EU website is indicative:  

"Cyber-attacks are a very real and ever-increasing threat. Whether against individual countries, 
companies or most recently against the European Commission, they can paralyse key infrastructure and 
cause huge long-term damage”. She also added that:  “Setting up this CERT pre-configuration team is a 
further demonstration of how seriously the EU Institutions take the cyber-security threat." 

2.2  Network and Information Security in the Republic of Cyprus 

The  Republic  of  Cyprus  and  especially  the  Ministry  of  Communications  and  Works  (MCW),  and  the 
competent coordinating authority2 for Network and Information Security in Cyprus, which is the Office 
of  the  Commissioner  of  Electronic  Communications  and  Postal  Regulation  (OCECPR),  have  recognised 
the essential role of security topics in the promotion of new communications services, the use of new 
technologies  and  more  generally  in  the  development  of  an  information  society.    Towards  this  end,  a 
number of specific actions and policies have been promoted on the national level: 

(a)  In 2006, the  Ministry of Communications and Works (MCW) approved a policy  document3, 
through  which  a  number  of  specific  actions  in  the  area  of  network  and  information  security  are 
promoted,  via OCECPR:  the  formation of  Computer Emergency Response  Teams  (CERTs /  CSIRTs),  the 
creating of an institutional framework for the security and integrity of information infrastructures, and 
the raising of awareness of all stakeholders and Cypriot society about relevant security matters. 

(b) In 2010, upon recommendations by OCECPR which were received favourably by ENISA, MCW 
also approved a detailed policy document4 regarding the operation of a governmental and an academic 
CERT.  The Cypriot CERTs are being formed with the extension potential to cover the private business 
sector  at  a  later  stage.    The  founding  of  the  CERTs  has  been  formalised  via  secondary  legislation 
P.I.358/2010. 

                                                           
2 Based on the provisions of the legislation that pervades its operations, OCECPR is responsible for the security of 
electronic  communications  infrastructures,  as  well  as  for  the  information  that  is  transmitted  through  or  stored 
within them. 
3 Policy Document on Network and Information security 2006 
4  Policy  Document  on  the  Formation  of  Emergency  Response  Teams  for  Incidents  related  to  Network  and 
Information Security (CSIRT/CERT) 2010 

  10 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

(c)  Within  2012,  new  provisions  are  being  introduced  into  The  Regulation  of  Electronic 
Communications  and  Postal  Services  Law  of  2004  (112(I)2004),  which  stem  from  the  new  Regulatory 
Framework  for  Electronic  Communications5  and  which  cover  matters  related  to  network  and 
information  security.    These  new  provisions  have  been  applied,  on  a  European  level,  since  25th  May 
2011. 

(d) The  Republic  of Cyprus, in cooperation with the relevant  stakeholders, has committed, via 
the Telecommunications Ministerial Council, to contribute to European and international collaboration 
for responding to threats and challenges in cyberspace. 

The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  that  is  described  in  this  document  adopts  and  complements  the 
actions discussed above.  Based on the provisions of this strategy and the priorities of the Republic of 
Cyprus, the actions related to network and information security form part of the wider strategy for the 
development  of  an  Information  Society6,  and  will  also  allow  for  Cyprus  to  contribute  actively  in  the 
planning process for protecting European critical information infrastructures from 2012 onwards. 

2.3  Competent/Related  Authorities  and  Observers  of  the  Republic 

of Cyprus 

Beyond  the  policies  and  actions  that  are  mentioned  in  section  2.2,  there  are a  number  of  authorities 
within  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  that  are  active  in  the  security  of  networks,  services,  information 
technology  systems  and  information  itself,  in  addition  to  having  direct  or  indirect  input  on  critical 
security  matters.    Each  authority  has  direct  or  indirect  responsibilities  in  the  area  of  network  and 
information security, as well as interdependencies between them that must be taken into account for 
the implementation of this strategy. 

The competent/related authorities that are involved at this stage are the following: 

  Office of the Commissioner of Electronic Communications and Postal Regulation (OCECPR) 
  Department of Information Technology Services (DITS) 
  Cyprus Police 
  National Guard General Staff 
  National Security Authority 
  Central Intelligence Service 
  Office of the Commissioner for Personal Data Protection 
  Ministry of Communications and Works (MCW) 
  Department of Electronic Communications (DEC) 
  Civil Defence Force 
  Cyprus Fire Service 
  Unit for Combating Money Laundering 

                                                           
5 "Better Regulation" Directive 2009/140/EC, και "Citizens' Rights" Directive 2009/136/EC 
6 See ‘Digital Cyprus’ document, as approved by the Council of Ministers in February 2012. 

 

  11 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
The following authorities of the Republic of Cyprus are to be kept informed of the activities described 
herein and are observers at this stage: 

Law Office of the Republic of Cyprus 

 
  Auditor General 
 
  Central Bank of Cyprus. 

Internal Audit Service 

It is noted that the  competent  authority of the  Republic of Cyprus that has responsibilities relating to 
Classified Information (CI) and European Union Classified Information (EU CI) is the National Security 
Authority.  Even though this document is not aimed exclusively or directly at the protection of Classified 
Information,  any  electronic  transmission  of  such  information  is  essentially  implemented  through 
communications infrastructure of communications service providers. 

2.4  Threats in Cyberspace Today 

The use of computers and communications systems has nowadays penetrated our lives to a very high 
degree,  and  so  our  level  of  dependence  on  these  technologies  for  much  of  our  daily  activity  is 
increasing.  These  technologies  are  used today in many sectors beyond just for communications: they 
are used for the production and distribution of energy, the management of water and sewage systems, 
financial services,  in the  armed forces  and  law enforcement,  governmental departments  and services, 
health  services,  etc.    Even  though  the  benefits  stemming  from  information  and  communications 
technologies  (ICT)  are  huge,  new  network  technologies  have  introduced  a  plethora  of  security  issues 
that are taken advantage of by malicious actors that target vulnerabilities in infrastructure and network 
components, such as computers, routers, switches, etc. 

The  last  few years  have  seen  multiple threats appearing  in  communications  networks,  especially  with 
the explosion in the use of the Internet by citizens.  ICT has been used in malicious ways for theft from 
bank accounts, access to confidential information, damage to important websites (consequent denial of 
access  to  the  public),  etc.    Examples  of  information  that  has  been  stolen  from  companies  include 
confidential  contracts,  product  designs,  credit  card  information,  account  numbers  and  other  personal 
data.    Such  incidents  can  induce  severe  damages  to  an  organisation,  given  that  its  reputation  and 
customer trust can be seriously affected, in addition to any direct (monetary) damages.  The probability 
of such incidents occurring can however be significantly reduced if appropriate measures are taken by 
an organisation or enterprise. 

It  has  been  observed,  on  a  global  level,  that  not  only  is  the  frequency  of  attacks  in  cyberspace 
increasing, but also the complexity of such attacks.  The public, in most cases, is not aware of the extent 
of these attacks, nor of the damages that can be caused by them.  A relatively recent phenomenon that 
is  being  observed  in  cyberspace  is  that  of  ‘botnets’  –  automated  virtual  networks  involving  large 
numbers  of  computers  (some  have  been  reported  with  tens  of  thousands  of  ‘members’)  that  are 
controlled  by  malicious  actors.    These  computers  can  be  found  in  homes  and  businesses,  and  also 

 

  12 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
perhaps in governmental departments, without the users themselves being aware or having knowledge 
of this, and they are being used for large scale attacks in cyberspace. 

In  addition  to  the  consequences  to  persons  as  described  above,  it  is  not  difficult  for  problems  to  be 
created  for  nation  states  themselves.    Interference  with  a  nation  state’s  communications  has  always 
been an inextricable part of military conflicts.  Nowadays, given that many of an army’s communications 
systems include computers, some nation states have already developed electronic weapons for attacks 
in cyberspace that can be used as part of a wider military offensive (or even for terrorist actions if they 
fall into the wrong hands).  In addition to this, any vulnerabilities in the ICT systems of the armed forces 
could lead to the leak of very sensitive information to unauthorised users.  The operations of modern 
military forces are dependent on ICT to a large extent and a serious cyber attack could have dramatic 
consequences to the defensive capabilities of a country.  The strength, stability and safe operations of a 
country are now fully dependent on the smooth running of its infrastructures, and as can be seen from 
the examples mentioned above, cyber attacks cannot be ignored. 

It is noted that the strategic response (see section 3) and the actions described in this document do not 
relate  to  the  handling  of  military  issues  in  network  and  information  security,  nor  to  the  handling  of 
related  terrorism  issues;  however,  the  examples  discussed  above  serve  to  highlight  the  level  of 
dependence  on  the  technologies  that  are  discussed  in  this  document  that  military  networks  and 
information have. 

 

 

  13 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

3.  STRATEGIC RESPONSE 

3.1  Priority Areas 

The strategic response of the Republic of Cyprus to the previously mentioned threats can be split into a 
number  of  priority  areas  that  have  been  identified  for  the  optimal  protection  of  critical  information 
infrastructures.  The areas that have been prioritised in relation to the needs of the Republic of Cyprus 
are the following, as shown in Figure 1: 

 

 

Legal Framework 

Technical and Organisational 

Measures and Procedures 

Coordination of 
governmental 
stakeholders 

 

 

 

 

Capability Development 

Immediate Response to 

Significant Incidents 

Productive Collaboration between the Public and Private Sector 

 

Figure 1: Priorities of the Cybersecurity Strategy of the Republic of Cyprus 

 

 

 

coordination of governmental stakeholders to ensure correct and efficient cooperation, 
creation of a comprehensive legal framework  by the  competent authorities  of the state, that 
covers all aspects of network and information security, including cybercrime and the protection 
of personal data, 
formulation of technical and organisational measures and procedures to harden the security of 
relevant hardware, software and physical spaces, to the required degree, 

  14 

 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

  development of the necessary skills, training and awareness in security topics, for those that 

are directly involved and also for the public, 

  productive  collaboration  between  the  public  and  private  sector,  on  both  the  national  and 

 

international level, 
creation  or  adaptation  of  the  necessary  structures  and  instruments  within  the  competent 
authorities  and  the  more  generally  the  Cyprus  Government,  to  secure  the  demands  and 
capabilities of immediate incident response. 

3.2  Splitting the Actions – Phases A and B 

The  rest  of this  chapter  presents  the  actions  that  have  been  identified  for  the implementation of  the 
strategic plan.  Current organisational structures and available resources are not at a level that would 
allow  an  immediate  start  to  all  of  the  actions  that  have  been  identified,  and  as  such  each  action 
description that follows also indicates the phase in which it will be executed: 

  Phase A 

o  Phase A includes all of the actions that OCECPR is in a position to start in the immediate 

future with the resources that are currently available to it. 

  Phase B 

o  Phase B includes the actions that OCECPR will be in a position to coordinate once a new 
organisational structure has been developed, with the necessary resources to carry out 
the implementation of this Strategy in its entirety. 

Each action description mentions the phase in which it will be executed and the actions that mention 
both  phases  will  be  partly  completed  in  each  phase.    It  is  noted  that  this  does  not  mean  that  actions 
implemented in Phase A will necessarily be completed within that phase.  The majority of the actions of 
this  Strategy  will  continue  to  be  executed  on  a  long-term  basis  for  the  continued  protection  of 
cyberspace in Cyprus. 

3.3  Organisational Structure 

The  area of  network  and  information  security  is  a very  large  and  complicated  subject,  and  one  which 
involves a number of stakeholders, as shown in section 2.3.  Each competent or relevant authority has 
its  own  areas  of  responsibility  and  it  is  important  to  uphold  these  differences.    However,  due  to  this 
multi-stakeholder approach to security matters, it is vital for all involved to understand and accept that 
the maintenance of acceptable levels of security in the electronic world can be accomplished  only via 
cooperation between the different stakeholders involved, within a framework of coordinated response 
to the various threats that have already been mentioned. 

It  follows  that  the  coordination  of  the  competent  or  relevant  governmental  authorities  is  absolutely 
necessary.  This coordination activity is productive when performed by an entity which is in a position to 
organise and coordinate the various actions of the Republic of Cyprus for correct response to the threats 
that are around today, as well as rising and new threats in cyberspace.  This entity must have: 

  15 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

 

 

 

the appropriate legal authority and defined responsibility in order to carry out its duties, 
the necessary skills and capabilities to respond appropriately to the obligations of the role, 
the necessary links and good working relationships with the competent or relevant authorities 
of  the  Republic,  the  electronic  communications  providers  in  Cyprus,  the  private  sector 
stakeholders  and  international  working  groups  and  fora  that  are  relevant  to  the  area  of 
cybersecurity. 

Taking  into  account  the  fact  that  the  definition  and  creating  of  an  integrated  and  complete 
organisational structure is necessary for the optimum implementation of the strategic actions, but also 
that  the  processes  involved  to  accomplish  this  are  affected  by  external  factors  related  to  the  current 
severe  financial  crisis  that  is  manifesting  in  Cyprus,  and  the  lengthy  recruitment  procedures  involved, 
the  implementation  of  such  an  organisational  structure  will  form  part  of  Phase  B  of  the  strategy 
activities.  This will have the following benefits: 

  The planning and executing of the actions that have been identified as being of an urgent nature 
and  with  immediate  priority,  for  which  the  legal  framework  is  already  in  place,  will  not  be 
delayed. 

  Existing structures will be leveraged to the maximum extent possible, with gradual upgrading of 

their capabilities to the required level. 

  The  associated  financial  burden  will  be  gradual  and  in  line  with  the  capabilities  of  the  Cyprus 

economy. 

  Cypriot  authorities  will  be  in  a  position  to  fulfil  their  commitments  both  on  the  national  and 
European level, where relevant activities are being pushed forward with rapid and demanding 
timelines. 

  The  necessary  time  will  be  given  for  the  appropriate  needs  assessment,  in  relation  to  the 
requirements for the strategy implementation, the coordination of activities and the supervision 
of incident response mechanisms and related actions. 

Phase A will formulate the cooperation framework between OCECPR, as the coordinating body, and the 
other competent authorities for the implementation of the high priority actions, such as developing the 
plan  for  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures,  the  operation  of  the  governmental 
CSIRT/CERT,  the  assessment  and  improvement  of  the  readiness  levels  of  network  infrastructures  as 
regards  their  resilience  to risk  and  their  response  to  security  threats,  the  handling  and  notification  of 
security incidents on networks, systems and information, and the organisation of national exercises with 
additional  participation  in European exercises.   These  activities  refer  to the wider responsibilities that 
OCECPR  has  in  the  area  of  network  and  information  security,  and  section  2.2  discusses  the  specific 
actions that have been prioritised and have been included in this strategy.  At this point, an agreed basis 
for  cooperation  is  required  between  the  competent  authorities,  and  which  will  be  expanded  and 
adjusted as the strategy programme progresses. 

 

  16 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

Action 1 -  Phase A – Formulation of the framework for collaboration and information exchange 
with OCECPR, and between public authorities, so that OCECPR will be in a position to effectively 
coordinate  the  nation’s  strategic  response  in  the  area  of  cybersecurity  and  the  protection  of 
critical  information  infrastructures,  as  well  as  coordinating  the  actions  that  relate  to  other 
stakeholders in the priority areas that can be addressed immediately. 

 

 

The  way  that  existing  activities  in  the  area  of  network  and  information  security,  that  fall  under  the 
responsibilities of OCECPR, are planned and executed is based on its existing organisational structure.  
The present structure and resources are not adequate to take on and execute all of the actions that are 
described in this document.  As a result of this, and in tandem with pushing forward with the immediate 
priorities  based on  current  urgent  national  and  European  commitments  and  needs  of  the  Republic  of 
Cyprus,  OCECPR,  in  cooperation  with  the  other  competent  authorities  in  the  Republic,  will  study  and 
submit recommendations regarding new policy for its reorganisation to the Minister of Communications 
and Works, so that it will be in a position to fully coordinate the very large volume of work associated 
with the areas of network and information security and cybersecurity. 

Action 2 -  Phase  A  –  OCECPR  will,  at  the  appropriate  time  and  in  cooperation  with  the  other 
competent authorities, develop a report regarding new policy for its reorganisation, so that it 
will  be  in  a  position  to  fully  coordinate  the  efforts  of  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  for  optimum 
implementation, application and supervision of all of the actions and the effective response to 
threats that are prevalent in cyberspace today, as well as rising threats that will appear in the 
future. 

 

OCECPR  will  also  coordinate  the  formation  of  a  number  of  working  groups,  which  will  take  over  the 
implementation  of  the  rest  of  the  actions  that  are  described  herein.    These  working  groups  will  be 
staffed by personnel with the necessary technical and other skills from the competent authorities of the 
state,  as  well  as  by  experts  from  the  private  sector  and  representatives  of  critical  information 
infrastructure operators (see also section 3.5). 

For the identification and assessment of potential risks, it may be the case that the members of some of 
the  working  groups might  need  access  to  classified  information;  that  is  the  information that  refers to 
vulnerabilities in critical parts of each network or system that will be deemed as important or critical.  
Taking  into  account  that  the  relevant  risk  assessments  must  be  conducted  in  tandem  with  the 
development  of  plans  to  respond  to  incidents  relating  to  these  risks,  and  also  the  development  of 
contingency  plans  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  related  disasters,  the  composition  of  the  working  groups 
must be such that confidentiality is assured. 

 

  17 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

Action 3 -  Phase A/B – Formation of working groups, with representatives from the public and 
private sectors (as necessary), to implement the Strategy Actions. 

 

 

3.4  Legal Framework 

Legislation  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  already  covers  a  large  number  of  areas  relating  to  network  and 
information  security,  as  well  as  cybercrime  (and  other  electronic  crime)  matters.    However,  it  is  still 
considered necessary to identify all relevant laws in Cyprus and to update them where needed, and also 
to promote the creation of new primary and secondary legislation to cover all of the provisions of this 
Strategy.    This  legislation  (whether  new  or  updated)  must  cover  processes  for  the  prevention, 
deterrence and dynamic response to all forms of cybercrime, and also be harmonised with the relevant 
law and directives of the European Union. 

International cooperation with other member states of the European Union, as well as third countries, 
will  be  required  in  the  areas  of  network  and  information  security  and  the  protection  of  critical 
information  infrastructures.    As  such,  specific  legal  issues  may  arise  regarding  the  processing  and 
handling  of  electronic  threats  whose  sources  could  be  outside  of  the  boundaries  of  the  Republic  of 
Cyprus.  It is thus considered necessary to create an appropriate legal infrastructure also regarding the 
effective cooperation with entities outside Cyprus to solve related problems as they arise. 

Action 4 -  Phase B – Creation of an appropriate legal framework to fully support the provisions 
of the Cybersecurity Strategy.  All relevant laws of the competent authorities must be assessed 
for any updated needs. 

3.5  Cooperation between the State and the Private Sector 

The State will make significant efforts in the area of network and information security, and especially on 
the topic of critical information infrastructure protection within Cyprus.  The strategic initiative in these 
areas can only come from the State, which is responsible for ensuring the cooperation between relevant 
stakeholders on a national and international level. 

The  State  recognises  that  the  role  of  the  private  sector  in  the  security  and  protection  of  critical 
information infrastructures is extremely important, for the following reasons: 

  The  private  sector  (including  the  semi-governmental  electronic  communications  provider) 
operates the majority of the critical communications infrastructure of the government, e.g. the 

 

  18 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

public  communications  networks  that  are  used  by  the  different  government  departments,  as 
well as by the business and academic worlds, and the citizens of the Republic. 

  The State relies on the private sector, not only for the communications networks, but also for 
the  provision of  the  equipment  that  it  uses,  and  for  the  implementation of many  of  activities 
that are related to network and information security, whether those are conducted as a matter 
of course for security reasons or for the reliable operation of their systems and services, or they 
are imposed on the operators via legal and / or regulatory measures. 
It  is  considered  a  given  that  the  private sector  contains  accumulated  technical  know-how  and 
specialised human resources, and there are also organisations that can help and contribute to 
the best possible development of the Republic of Cyprus in these areas. 

 

Taking the above into consideration, the Republic of Cyprus sets a high priority on consultation with the 
private sector for the achievement of its goals, the implementation of the provisions of this Strategy, the 
continuous improvement of the actions and effects of the Strategy, as well as for the gaining of further 
technical skills and specialisation. 

Action 5 -  Phase  A/B  –  Comprehensive  survey  of  the  private  sector,  for  the  identification  of 
groups and stakeholders that can contribute in a positive way to the improvement of the levels 
of electronic security in the Republic of Cyprus, while simultaneously creating the conditions for 
developing close collaborative relationships. 

 

During  the execution  of  the  Action  described  above,  the  State  will  seek out  cooperation with  existing 
competent  authorities  which  determine  the  way  that  important  sectors  operate,  such  as  the  Central 
Bank  of  Cyprus  regarding  the  banking  sector.    In  addition  to  this,  a  mechanism  for  providing  regular 
updates  to  the  private  sector  will  be  put  in  place,  regarding  the  progress  being  made  in  the  planned 
actions,  to  help  achieve  convergence  in  the  activities  of  the  public  and  private  sectors  regarding  the 
provisions of this Strategy. 

Beyond  what  has  been  described  above,  the  PPP  (Public-Private  Partnership)  model  is  emphasised, 
which  is  considered  on  a  European  and  international  level  to  be  an  effective  model  of  cooperation 
between entities in the public and private sectors.  With the requisite preparatory work, the possibility 
of  creating  a  dynamic  PPP  in  the  area  of  critical  information  infrastructure  protection  will  be 
investigated, and which will: 

 

 

 

contribute to the development of trust between the public and private sectors in the area of 
network and information security, 
create a safe cooperation framework to achieve common security goals, 
facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  related  to  new  threats  in  cyberspace  and  solutions  for 
their avoidance, 

  allow cooperation in research and innovation in related topics, 

  19 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

  help to set ambitious but feasible targets for the realising the vision of the Strategy, 
 

cooperate with PPPs in other member states of the European Union in the same area, via active 
participation in related working groups. 

Action 6 -  Phase  B  –  Investigate  the  possibility  of  creating  a  dynamic  PPP  (Public-Private 
Partnership)  in  the  area  of  critical  information  infrastructure  protection  in  the  Republic  of 
Cyprus  and  promote  active  cooperation  with  international  entities  through  participation  in 
international fora.  The use of the PPP to foster trust between the State and private sector will 
be of primary importance. 

3.6 

Identification of Critical Information Infrastructures 

The need for the protection of critical information infrastructures, as highlighted and explained in this 
document,  is  necessary  to  minimize  the  negative  impacts  and  possible  catastrophic  consequences  of 
malicious acts  or natural disasters  on infrastructure, on a national level within the Republic of Cyprus 
but also because of potential negative effects to other countries, as a consequence of the high levels of 
interconnection and interdependence between international communications networks.  The question 
is raised as to which particular infrastructures should be considered (and designated) as ‘critical’.  Each 
stakeholder  (electronic  communications  companies,  governmental  departments  and  services,  security 
forces,  armed  forces,  hospitals,  financial  institutions,  energy  and  water  providers,  etc.)  will  consider 
their  infrastructure  as  vitally  important  and  the  ideal  situation  would  be  the  complete  and  total 
protection of all information infrastructures in the Republic of Cyprus, without exception. 

However,  given  that  such  an  approach  is  not  feasible,  it  is  necessary  to  identify  and  assess  the  truly 
critical infrastructures within the Republic of Cyprus and to target them for the best possible protection.  
These  critical  infrastructures  will  be  identified  and  assessed  based  on  a  number  of  predetermined 
criteria.  For the determination of these criteria, as well as national conditions, related activities of the 
European  Commission  and  ENISA  (European  Network  and  Information  Security  Agency)  will  also  be 
taken into consideration, with the appropriate adaptation for Cyprus.  The public sector, as well as the 
private  sector,  must  contribute  to  the  determination  and  assessment  of  critical 
information 
infrastructures, within the boundaries of the relevant working group(s). 

The steps that will be  followed for the  identification of critical information infrastructures will include 
the following: 

  Determination  of  services  that  will  be  targeted 

(e.g.  voice  communications,  data 

 

 

communications, data storage, data processing), that could be classed as critical, 
Identification  of  infrastructures  that  are  technically  indispensable  for  the  operation  of  these 
services, 
Introduction  of  objective  criteria  for  the  level  of  protection  that  each  infrastructure  element 
needs,  with  categorisation  of  infrastructures  and  the  use  of  criteria  such  as  the  number  of 

  20 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

affected users, the sensitivity level of the information that is concentrated, stored, transmitted 
or processed on these infrastructures, etc. 
check the criteria with the development of scenarios that consider the disruption of operation 
of selected infrastructure, within the bounds of regular exercises. 

 

Action 7 -  Phase A – Identification and assessment of the critical information infrastructures in 
the  republic  of  Cyprus,  to  better  target  activities  and  actions  for  their  protection,  with  the 
contribution of both the public and private sectors. 

3.7  Threat Landscape Analysis 

Section 2.4 mentioned the general threats that can manifest in cyberspace.  It is important to note that 
available  information  on  the  specific  mix  of  threats  that  appear  in  Cyprus  and  which  can  rise  in  the 
future  is  limited.    The  protection  of  information  infrastructures  can  be  achieved  through  general 
measures  only  (to  some  extent),  but  the  strategic  response  to  threats  in  cyberspace  will  be  greatly 
improved if the main threats that are actually present and manifest in Cyprus become known.  This will 
not  only allow  better  targeting of response measures, but  also better targeting of the most  prevalent 
threats if the necessary protective controls are put in place gradually through a feasible implementation 
programme for the provisions of this Strategy. 

A comprehensive threat landscape and attack analysis is therefore necessary (including attacks that are 
widespread  in  Cyprus  and  other  European  countries),  so  that  the  improved  targeting  of  response 
methods can be achieved, as discussed above.  This analysis will be combined with the most prevalent 
threats  that  are  discussed  in  European  and  other  international  reports  for  a  more  complete  and 
comprehensive review. 

Action 8 -  Phase B – Comprehensive survey to record current threats and attacks in cyberspace 
that  have  been  published  in  Cyprus,  as  well  as  monitoring  new  threats  that  appear  in  the 
European and international space. 

3.8  National Cybersecurity Framework 

The  easiest  and  most  effective  method  to  achieve  an  acceptable  level  of  security  in  all  critical 
information infrastructures in the Republic of Cyprus is to develop a National Cybersecurity Framework, 
which  will  be  used  as  the  basis  for  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures,  and  for 
information  assurance.    This  framework must  be  developed  based on  international  security  standards 
and include the following (among others): 

 

  21 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

  Governance and risk management 
  Vulnerability assessment 
  Regular penetration testing 
  Management of physical spaces, hardware and software 
  Appropriate staff authorisation 
  Physical security and environmental management 
  Making use of CERTs for incident management (see section 3.9) 
  Continuous  monitoring  of  electronic  communications  for  malicious  attacks  to  determine 

incidents in progress. 

This Framework must be adopted by all operators of critical information infrastructures, and must also 
be examined for adoption by all government departments and other important organisations in Cyprus.  
To achieve this target, the National Cybersecurity Framework will be developed in such a way so that it 
can  be  promoted  within  the  remainder  of  the  private  sector,  for the  optimum  protection of  all  those 
that use electronic communications services. 

Action 9 -  Phase B – Development of a National Cybersecurity Framework which will promote 
the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  as  well  as 
governmental departments and services. 

 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  specific  targets  that  will  be  set  for  the  protection  levels  for  these 
technologies  and  systems  will  be  determined  based  on  appropriate  risk  analysis  and  balancing  these 
levels with the associated cost of implementing specific controls to respond to threats in cyberspace.  A 
usual method used is to keep the related annual costs below the annual estimated cost of damages or 
losses if these threats were to manifest on information and communications networks and systems. 

3.9 

Incident Response 

Ensuring the full functionality of Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs/CSIRTs) within Cyprus is 
an integral and vital part of this Strategy, and also of meeting our commitments as a nation. 

The main functions of a CERT are the prevention of serious incidents related to network and information 
security,  as well  as  the  immediate  and  appropriate  response  to  such  incidents when  they occur.   It  is 
emphasised  that  for  the  correct  operation  of  a  CERT/CSIRT,  the  following  are  required:  (a)  necessary 
infrastructure  and  (b)  staffing  with  appropriately  trained  (to  a  very  high  level)  personnel.    A  basic 
prerequisite for such services to operate effectively is strong support from the State. 

The cooperation between CERTs/CSIRTs that operate in each member state lies within the framework of 
European  cooperation  in  the  area  of  information  security.    Given  the  target  of  integrating  Cypriot 

 

  22 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
CERTs/CSIRTs into these cooperation mechanisms, their full functionality must be ensured so that they 
may gain the necessary certifications to allow their participated in relevant European working groups. 

Action 10 -  Phase  A  –  Ensure  the  full  functionality  of  Computer  Emergency  Response  Teams 
(CERTs/CSIRTs),  with  immediate  priority  for  the  operation  of  the  Governments  CERT/CSIRT.  
Necessary  certifications  and  memberships  will  be  obtained  to  allow  their  participation  in 
relevant European working groups. 

 

Action 11 -  Phase  B  –  Assessment  by  OCECPR,  in  cooperation  with  the  CERTs/CSIRTs,  of 
expanding their activities or creating new CERTs/CSIRTs to cover the needs of the private sector 
and the business community.  

3.10  National and International Cyber Exercises 

The significant need for cooperation between the government and different stakeholders, both within 
the  public  and  private  sectors,  has  been  examined  in  sections  3.3  and  3.5.    The  development  of  this 
cooperation, and especially of associated trust, is of the utmost importance. 

However, it is not enough to just  create the necessary  cooperation mechanisms, if these mechanisms 
are  not  assessed  and  tested  on  a  regular  basis,  especially  via  the  emulation  of  crisis  situations.    The 
completion of such exercises has proven to be a very valuable tool for ensuring the readiness levels of 
the  competent  authorities  to  handle  a  potential  crisis,  e.g.  the  loss  of  a  significant  part  of  a  large 
communications network.  Exercises that have been conducted so far in other member states, and also 
on a pan-European level, have shown that the mechanisms to face such a crisis already exist; the missing 
piece  of  the  puzzle  is  usually  the  cooperation  and  coordination  modalities  between  the  competent 
authorities  involved,  i.e.  who  will  communicate  with  whom  in  a  crisis  situation,  how  can  rapid 
cooperation between the involved authorities specifically be achieved, etc. 

The  need  for  completing  cyber  exercises  that  involve  handling  realistic  scenarios  (where  the  players 
involved  have  no  a  priori  knowledge  of  the  events  that  are  to  follow)  has  been  recognised  on  the 
European level and the first pan-European cyber exercise (Cyber Europe 2010) has already taken place.  
The Republic of Cyprus has much to gain for organising and actively participating in such cyber exercises.  
Naturally,  this  gain  is  maximised  with  the  organisation  of  similar  national  exercises  with  realistic 
scenarios.    The  completing  of  such  exercises  will  contribute  to  the  maximisation  of  the  Republic’s 
readiness  levels  to  withstand  significant  events  in  the  area  of  network  and  information  security  that 
could potentially affect a large part of the population. 

 

  23 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
It  is  noted  that  the  element  of  confidentiality  must  be  taken  into  account  during  all  cooperation  and 
exchange  of  information  and  experiences  with  international  organisations  and  working  groups,  as 
described in section 3.3 regarding the formation of the working groups. 

Action 12 -  Phase  A  –  Planning  and  organisation  of  regular  national  cybersecurity  exercises, 
with increasingly realistic scenarios,  as well as active participation in pan-European and other 
international cyber exercises. 

3.11  Training and Capability Development 

The appropriate technical training and development of capabilities in the cyberspace security area is a 
necessary  prerequisite  for  the  smooth  operation  of  security  systems,  as  well  as  for  the  correct 
implementation of any actions related to this theme.  The development of such capabilities is of major 
importance and the target is to create a suitable workforce, both within and outside of the public sector, 
which will have the necessary technical know-how and experience to implement the provisions of this 
Strategy. 

As  such,  the  government  will  support  the  appropriate  personnel  training  in  the  area  of  electronic 
security, via the following actions: 

Identification of appropriate (and available) training programmes and certifications, 

 
  Promote the uptake of such programmes within the government, 
  Creation of a suitable workforce with the necessary specialised knowledge, 
 

Inclusion of relevant certifications and experience into job descriptions that relate to electronic 
security, 

  Support activities in Cypriot higher education institutions in the area of network and information 
security, through the inclusion of electronic security topics in their curricula and the institution 
of related research programmes. 

It  is  noted  that  this  action  refers  to  the  education  and  training  of  professionals  in  the  area  of 
cybersecurity and not in awareness raising measures for the public (see section 3.12). 

Action 13 -  Phase  B  –  Development  of  suitable  human  resources  that  will  have  the  necessary 
technical  know-how  and  certifications  to  implement  the  provisions  of  this  Strategy  to  a  high 
level,  in  the  mid-  and  long-term,  and  inclusion  of  these  skills  and  certifications  into  the  job 
descriptions for related positions. 

 

  24 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

3.12  Security Culture (Awareness) 

The dimensions of potential threats to cybersecurity, as discussed in section 2.4, clearly show that this 
issue concerns all users of information infrastructures, given that any connected computer could serve 
as  an  entry  point  or  malicious  and/or  harmful  elements  to  local  cyberspace.    This  includes  the  vast 
majority  of  the  citizens  of  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  given  that  most  of  them  today  makes  use  of  the 
Internet on a regular basis. 

It  is  very  important  for  Internet  users,  as  well  as  users  of  IT  systems  in  every  workplace  have  a 
satisfactory  level  of  knowledge/awareness  regarding  the  potential  threats  that  they  must  protect 
themselves from. 

The Republic of Cyprus will promote a National Awareness Programme for cybersecurity matters, which 
will include the following: 

  Creation  of  informational  material,  as  well  as  use  of  existing  (and  available)  material  from 
external sources (e.g. ENISA), for citizens regarding safe and secure Internet use, with a focus on 
the protection of personal data, ethical behaviour in cyberspace and protection of children on 
the Internet, 

  Distribution  of  this  informational  material  through  multiple  media,  e.g.  television,  radio,  SMS, 

websites, leaflets/booklets, lectures, etc. 

  Development of small duration training seminars for working professionals, 
  Development of specialised training seminars for governmental users of IT systems that contain 

sensitive and/or classified information, 

  Promotion of the development of a positive security culture in all government departments and 

services, as well as in private businesses. 

Action 14 -  Phase  B  –  Development  of  a  comprehensive  National  Awareness  Programme  for 
cybersecurity matters, covering all users of electronic systems, from governmental workers to 
citizens of the State. 

 

Reaching the appropriate level of knowledge and awareness in Cyprus, combined with the development 
of skilled human resources for key positions, will contribute significantly in the long run to securing IT 
systems that are part of cyberspace. 

3.13  Cooperation with External Agencies and International Working 

Groups 

As has been discussed extensively previously in section  3.5, cooperation of the main body responsible 
for ensuring the security of cyberspace in the Republic of Cyprus with other stakeholders is not merely a 

 

  25 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
choice, but has become absolutely necessary to achieve the required targets and results.  Problems and 
threats  in  cyberspace  cannot  be  fully  mitigated  by  a  single  country  alone,  and  as  such,  constructive 
cooperation between states on the European level is required. 

The  Republic  of  Cyprus,  through  the  activities  of  OCECPR  and  of  the  other  competent  authorities,  is 
already  represented  to  a  high  degree  at  most  relevant  working  groups  and  international  fora  which 
operate under the auspices of the European Commission and of ENISA.  The continued representation of 
the  Republic  of  Cyprus  at  such  fora  and  working  groups  is  an  integral  part  of  this  Strategy,  with  the 
target of active participation and contribution of Cyprus to significant decisions that are made via the 
work of these groups.  Close ties will be created with respective competent authorities in other member 
states  of  the  European  Union,  and  these  ties  will  be  leveraged  for  the  continuous  development  and 
improvement of the strategic response capabilities of the Republic of Cyprus in cybersecurity. 

Full  support  of  actions  and  activities,  that  aim  to  improve  the  cybersecurity  levels  of  European 
information  infrastructures,  as  well  as  participation  in  other  international  activities  and  related 
groups7, will also be continued. 

It  is  noted  that  the  element  of  confidentiality  must  be  taken  into  account  during  all  cooperation  and 
exchange  of  information  and  experiences  with  international  organisations  and  working  groups,  as 
described in section 3.3 regarding the formation of the working groups. 

Action 15 -  Phase  A  –  The  Republic  of  Cyprus  will  continue  to  build  upon  its  constructive 
cooperation  with  the  rest  of  the  European  Union  member  states,  through  its  representation 
and active contributions to relevant working groups and fora.  This cooperation will support the 
actions  and  activities  on  a  Union  level  to  improve  the  level  of  cybersecurity  in  the  whole  of 
Europe. 

3.14  Development  of  a  National  Contingency  Plan  for  Critical 

Information Infrastructures 

The  measures  and  actions  that  have  been  discussed  in  preceding  sections  will  contribute,  to  a  large 
extent,  to  the  improvement  of  cybersecurity  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  including  both  the  public  and 
private  sectors.    The  implementation  of  all  of  the  actions  in  an  organised  and  effective  way  will  help 
reach the target of a safer and more secure information society. 

However,  no  technological  system  or  set  of  measures  and  actions,  regardless  of  how  comprehensive 
they  are,  will  be  able  to  protect  cyberspace  to  an  absolute  degree,  especially  the  critical  information 
infrastructures  of  any country.    Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  is  essential  to  develop a  National  Contingency 
Plan for Critical Information Infrastructures.  The target of this plan will be to guide and develop detailed 

                                                           
7 E.g. IMPACT (International Multilateral Partnership Against Cyber Threats). 

  26 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
processes  and  measures  that  will  be  taken  when  a  large  scale  crisis  affects  the  operations  of  critical 
information infrastructures (as will be defined and identified in the relevant action described in section 
3.6) in the Republic of Cyprus to a significant degree. 

The creation and development of the National Contingency Plan will be performed in tandem with the 
identification  of  critical  information  infrastructures  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  and  will  include  the 
following activities: 

  Designation of categories and hierarchies of critical infrastructures, based on their contribution 

to the operation of vital communications and information services, 

  Designation  of  the  level  of  protection  required  for  each  part  of  this  infrastructure  (e.g. 
redundancy,  alternative  routes,  physical  security,  etc.)  to  minimise  the  effects  of  its  potential 
damage or destruction, 

  Development  of  early  warning  systems  and  processes  to  monitor  critical  infrastructures, 

potentially with the help of the CERTs, 

  Creation  of  (or  improvement  of  already  existing)  emergency  communications  networks  which 
are  independent  from  the  main  networks,  and  if  possible,  using  alternative  means  of 
communication entirely (e.g. wired, mobile and satellite networks), 

  Development of comprehensive communications and management processes, between critical 
information  infrastructure  operators,  for  the  handling  of  a  potential  crisis  and  to  achieve 
constructive collaboration between them, 

  Organisation of regular national cyber exercises with realistic crisis scenarios (see section 3.10) 

 

 

to test and improve the processes developed above, 
Identification of all the critical information infrastructures that are connected to other countries, 
or which provide services that could affect information infrastructures in other countries, 
Identification of  available resources  in  terms of  equipment  and  infrastructure,  where  deemed 
useful  or  necessary,  between  the  relevant  departments  and  services,  and  the  creation  of 
synergies for covering each other’s resources and services in emergencies. 

ENISA has prepared a comprehensive document8 which describes best practices for the development of 
National Contingency Plans for critical information infrastructures, and which will be taken into account 
for the development of the related plan for the Republic of Cyprus; it emphasises the importance of a 
comprehensive cybersecurity and protection of critical information infrastructures strategy as a basis.  It 
is noted that these above provisions, where needed, will be leveraged for the contribution of Cyprus to 
the  development  of  a  wider  European  Contingency  Plan  for  the  protection  of  European  critical 
information infrastructures, whose abnormal operation would have negative impact in more than one 
member state. 

                                                           
8ENISA Good Practice Guide on National Contingency Plans for Critical Information Infrastructure 

  27 

 

 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

Action 16 -  Phase A – Development of a National Contingency Plan, which will contain detailed 
processes  and  measures  that  will  be  taken  when  a  large  scale  crisis  affects  the  operations  of 
critical  information  infrastructures  in  the  Republic  of  Cyprus  to  a  significant  degree,  with  the 
aim of maintaining their operation at an acceptable minimum level until full restoration. 

3.15  Interdependencies 

This  Strategy  places  special  emphasis  on  the  interdependencies  and  interactions  between  the  actions 
that  are  described,  even  though  each  one  has  its own  specific  and  separate targets,  for  its  successful 
completion.    The  strategic  response  to  threats  against  network  and  information  security  must  be 
approached in a holistic fashion and it needs to be understood that many of these actions have to be 
implemented in combination, with the target of maximal success of such a strategic response. 

Interdependencies are also evident in other levels of this response.  As can be seen in section 2.3, there 
are  a  number  of  competent  authorities  handling  different  aspects  of  security,  each  one  with  its  own 
areas  of  responsibility.    Despite  the  fact  that  duplication  needs  to  be  avoided,  all  interdependencies 
must  be  recognised  and  the  cooperation  between  these  authorities  must  be  ensured  so  that  the 
specialised  knowledge  and  capabilities  within  each  authority  can  be  leveraged  to  maximum  effect.  
These interdependencies are large in number, and so it is necessary to identify and study them, as well 
as incorporate them into any future actions or response plans that may be developed. 

In  addition  to  this,  operators  of  critical  information  infrastructures  must  explore,  as  part  of  their 
activities  to  manage  threats  and  risks  and  for  the  development  of  business  continuity  plans,  the 
interdependencies that they have for the secure management of their infrastructures, at all levels.  In 
other words, the following questions needs to be answered: 

  On whom does the business depend in relation to security? 
  Who depends on the business in relation to security? 

It  is  noted  that  an  initial  depiction  of  the  interdependencies  between  the  actions  described  in  this 
document can be found in Appendix II. 

Action 17 -  Phase  A/B  –  Identification  and  study  of  the  interdependencies  that  exist  for  the 
implementation of this Strategy.  These interdependencies will initially be identified as existing 
in the relationships between the actions themselves, the relationships between the competent 
authorities of the State, and the relationships between the critical infrastructure operators with 
their suppliers, customers and staff.  These interdependencies must be recognised and accepted 
by all relevant stakeholders. 

 

 

  28 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 

4.  NEXT STEPS 

4.1 

Immediate Actions – Phase A 

It has been deemed necessary that a number of the actions, that have been identified and described in 
this  document,  need  to  start  immediately,  independently  of  the  implementation  of  the  remaining 
provisions of the strategic response.  Taking into account the activities that are prioritised in section 3.2, 
and  their  associated  actions  described  herein,  the  following  activities  must  begin  in  2012:  the 
identification  of  critical  information  infrastructures  (section  3.6),  the  development  of  a  National 
Contingency  Plan  for  these  infrastructures  (section  3.14),  ensuring  the  full  operation  of  Computer 
Emergency Response Teams for incidents related to network and information security (CSIRT/CERT) and 
the planning and participation of Cyprus in the pan-European exercise Cyber Europe 2012 (section 3.10). 

Specifically, the actions to be performed within Phase A are as follows: 

  Action 1 – Collaboration Framework 
  Action 2 - Organisational Structure 
  Action 3 (partial implementation) – Creating of Working Groups 
  Action 5 (partial implementation) – Survey of the Private Sector 
  Action 7 - Identification of Critical Information Infrastructures 
  Action 10 – Ensuring the Full Operation of the CERTs 
  Action 12 – National and International Exercises 
  Action 15 – International Cooperation 
  Action 16 - Development of a National Contingency Plan for Critical Information Infrastructures 
  Action 17 – (partial implementation) Modelling and Analysis of Interdependencies. 

This  document  provides  synopses  of  the  most  important  actions  that  have  been  identified  for  a 
coherent strategic response, so that cyberspace (and more generally the networks and information that 
are  used  on  a  daily  basis)  is  secured,  across  the  whole  of  Cypriot  society.    However,  for  correct 
implementation,  each  action  needs  to  be  analysed  and  expanded  in  detail,  so  that  all  associated 
activities  can  be  identified.    A  detailed  analysis  of  each  of  the  actions  in  the  strategic  response  will 
follow,  as  well  as  the  identification  of  the  resources  and  processes  that  will  be  needed  for  the 
implementation. 

4.2  Cost of Implementation 

In the context of detailed assessment and analysis of the individual actions, to the point to which it is 
feasible, the cost of implementing each action, as well as the time periods where specific budget items 
will  be  required,  will  be  identified.    This  costing  process  will  be  undertaken  in  cooperation  with  the 
competent  authorities,  and  always  bearing  in  mind  the  importance  of  each  action  and  range  of  its 
application, so that the costing can be as realistic as possible. 

 

  29 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
In parallel with this costing, the actions described in this document will be prioritised (independently of 
their  estimated  cost),  as  to  their  importance  and  criticality  in  relation  to  the  results  that  they  are 
expected to provide towards a safer electronic environment in the Republic of Cyprus.  It is noted that 
this  activity  will  be  undertaken  independently  of  the  costing  process  for  the  actions  that  is  described 
above. 

4.3  Planning of Actions 2012 - 2015 

The  activities  mentioned  in  sections  4.1  and  4.2  are  important  so  that  the  correct  planning  of  the 
strategic response actions can move forward, based on the resources that the State will make available 
for the  implementation of this Strategy.  This planning will be  undertaken based on the results of the 
detailed  assessment,  costing  and  prioritisation  of  the  actions,  so  that  the  implementation  of  the 
Strategic  Response  as  a  whole  can  be  achieved  in  the  best  and  most  effective  way  possible,  given 
available resources.  The result of this process will be a detailed timeline which will allow the monitoring 
of the implementation status of all of the current Strategy’s actions. 

4.4  Results Assessment and Strategy Review 

To  achieve  an  effective  strategic  response,  its  implementation  progress  must  be  regularly  and  strictly 
reviewed.  Towards this end, the results of the implementation of the measures and provisions included 
in  the  strategy  actions  will  be  analysed  quantitatively  and  qualitatively  accordingly.    A  proper 
cybersecurity  strategy  cannot  be  considered  to  be  a  ‘final  plan’;  on  the  contrary,  its  implementation 
must  be  observed  and  updated  at  regular  intervals.    This  review  process  needs  to  take  into 
consideration the assessment results, as well as new threats that appear (and will continue to appear) in 
cyberspace and any other new conditions that manifest in this area. 

The detailed expansion of the  strategy actions, as described in section  4.1, will include  indicators and 
criteria for assessing the performance of each action, where feasible, and the results of this assessment 
will allow the proper review of the Strategy in the future, with substantial benefits to Cypriot society. 

 

 

  30 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
APPENDIX I -   OVERVIEW OF STRATEGY ACTIONS 
 

  Phase A 

o  Phase A includes all of the actions that OCECPR is in a position to start in the immediate 

future with the resources that are currently available to it. 

  Phase B 

o  Phase B includes the actions that OCECPR will be in a position to coordinate once a new 
organisational structure has been developed, with the necessary resources to carry out 
the implementation of this Strategy in its entirety. 

 

Action 1  - Phase A  – Formulation of the framework  for collaboration and information exchange with OCECPR, 
and  between  public  authorities,  so  that  OCECPR  will  be  in  a  position  to  effectively  coordinate  the  nation’s 
strategic response in the area of cybersecurity and the protection of critical information infrastructures, as well 
as  coordinating  the  actions  that  relate  to  other  stakeholders  in  the  priority  areas  that  can  be  addressed 
immediately. ....................................................................................................................................................... 17 
 
Action  2  -  Phase  A  –  OCECPR  will,  at  the  appropriate  time  and  in  cooperation  with  the  other  competent 
authorities, develop a report regarding new policy for  its reorganisation, so that it will be in a position to fully 
coordinate the efforts of the Republic of Cyprus for optimum implementation, application and supervision of all 
of  the  actions  and  the  effective  response  to  threats  that  are  prevalent  in  cyberspace  today,  as  well  as  rising 
threats that will appear in the future. .................................................................................................................. 17 
 
Action 3 - Phase A/B – Formation of working groups, with representatives from the public and private sectors (as 
necessary), to implement the Strategy Actions. ................................................................................................... 18 
 
Action  4  -  Phase  B  –  Creation  of  an  appropriate  legal  framework  to  fully  support  the  provisions  of  the 
Cybersecurity Strategy.  All relevant laws of the competent authorities must be assessed for any updated needs.
 ............................................................................................................................................................................ 18 
 
Action  5  -  Phase  A/B  –  Comprehensive  survey  of  the  private  sector,  for  the  identification  of  groups  and 
stakeholders that can contribute in a positive way to the improvement of the levels of electronic security in the 
Republic  of  Cyprus,  while  simultaneously  creating  the  conditions  for  developing  close  collaborative 
relationships. ....................................................................................................................................................... 19 
 
Action 6 - Phase B – Investigate the possibility of creating a dynamic PPP (Public-Private Partnership) in the area 
of critical information infrastructure protection in the Republic of Cyprus and promote active cooperation with 
international entities through participation in international fora.  The use of the PPP to foster trust between the 
State and private sector will be of primary importance. ...................................................................................... 20 
 
Action 7 - Phase A  – Identification and assessment of the critical information infrastructures in the republic of 
Cyprus, to better target activities and actions for their protection, with the contribution of both the public and 
private sectors. .................................................................................................................................................... 21 

 

  31 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
 
Action 8 - Phase B – Comprehensive survey to record current threats and attacks in cyberspace  that have been 
published in Cyprus, as well as monitoring new threats that appear in the European and international space. .. 21 
 
Action 9 - Phase B – Development of a National Cybersecurity Framework which will promote the protection of 
critical information infrastructures in the Republic of Cyprus, as well as governmental departments and services.
 ............................................................................................................................................................................ 22 
 
Action 10 - Phase A – Ensure the full functionality of Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs/CSIRTs), with 
immediate  priority  for  the  operation  of  the  Governments  CERT/CSIRT. 
  Necessary  certifications  and 
memberships will be obtained to allow their participation in relevant European working groups. ..................... 23 
 
Action 11 - Phase B – Assessment by OCECPR, in cooperation with the CERTs/CSIRTs, of expanding their activities 
or creating new CERTs/CSIRTs to cover the needs of the private sector and the business community................. 23 
 
Action  12  -  Phase  A  –  Planning  and  organisation  of  regular  national  cybersecurity  exercises,  with  increasingly 
realistic scenarios, as well as active participation in pan-European and other international cyber exercises. ...... 24 
 
Action 13  -  Phase B  –  Development  of suitable human resources that  will have the  necessary technical know-
how and certifications to implement the provisions of this Strategy to a high level, in the mid- and long-term, 
and inclusion of these skills and certifications into the job descriptions for related positions. ............................ 24 
 
Action  14  -  Phase  B  –  Development  of  a  comprehensive  National  Awareness  Programme  for  cybersecurity 
matters, covering all users of electronic systems, from governmental workers to citizens of the State. .............. 25 
 
Action 15 - Phase A – The Republic of Cyprus will continue to build upon its constructive cooperation with the 
rest  of  the  European  Union  member  states,  through  its  representation  and  active  contributions  to  relevant 
working groups and fora.  This cooperation will support the actions and activities on a  Union level to improve 
the level of cybersecurity in the whole of Europe. ............................................................................................... 26 
 
Action 16 - Phase A – Development of a National Contingency Plan, which will contain detailed processes and 
measures that will be taken when a large scale crisis affects the operations of critical information infrastructures 
in the Republic of Cyprus to a significant degree, with the aim of maintaining their operation at an acceptable 
minimum level until full restoration. ................................................................................................................... 28 
 
Action 17 - Phase A/B – Identification and study of the interdependencies that exist for the implementation of 
this  Strategy.    These  interdependencies  will  initially  be  identified  as  existing  in  the  relationships  between  the 
actions  themselves,  the  relationships  between  the  competent  authorities  of  the  State,  and  the  relationships 
between the critical infrastructure operators with their suppliers, customers and staff.  These interdependencies 
must be recognised and accepted by all relevant stakeholders. .......................................................................... 28 
 

 

  32 

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS  2012 

 
APPENDIX II -   ACTION INTERDEPENDENCIES 
The  diagram  below  shows  the  indicative  interdependencies  between  the  Strategy  actions.    The 
significance of the formation of the working groups, for the correct implementation of the Strategy, is 
evident. 

 

 

  33 

