III. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC IN THE FIELD OF CYBERNETIC SECURITY FOR 

STRATEGY  

2012 - 2015 

Content 

II. 

Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 2 
I.  Foundations ......................................................................................................................... 3 
ICT and societies dependent on them are vulnerable ............................................................. 3 
Basic principles of strategy of cybernetic security .......................................................... 4 
Individual responsibility ......................................................................................................... 4 
International Cooperation ....................................................................................................... 5 
Strategic goals and measures ........................................................................................... 5 
Establishing National Centre for Cybernetic Security and Governmental CERT ................. 6 
Strengthening of cybernetic security of information and communication systems of public 
governance ............................................................................................................................. 6 
Using of reliable IT ................................................................................................................ 7 
Response to cybernetic attacks ............................................................................................... 8 

III. 

 

 

1 

Introduction 

 

 

Strategy  of  the  Czech  Republic  in  the  field  of  cybernetic  security  for  2012  – 
2015 (hereinafter referred to as “Strategy”) is one of the steps of the Government of 
the Czech Republic  in reaction to worldwide rise of  cybernetic threats. The Strategy 
stems  from  efforts  of  governmental  and  non-governmental  entities  to  raise  level  of 
cybernetic  security.  It  brings  initiatives  to  enhance  cybernetic  security  for  state 
bodies, critical infrastructure and commercial sphere as well as for citizens. 

The Strategy defines aims and interests of the Czech Republic in the field of 
cybernetic  security  for  building  of  reliable  information  society  and  is  in  line  with  the 
Security Strategy of the Czech Republic. 

This  Strategy  is  the  basic  document  for  the  creation  of  legal  acts,  security 
policies  of  information  and  communication  systems,  standards,  rules,  operation 
measures,  maintenance  plans,  recommendations  and  other  tools  for  cybernetic 
security. 

The  Strategy  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first  one  describes  foundations 
determining necessity to deal with this problem. The second one brings analysis and 
basic principles of cybernetic security. The third states goals and describes activities 
crucial for enhancing cybernetic security – activities implemented by the Government 
of the Czech Republic and activities in cooperation with partners.   

 

2 

I. 

Foundations 

 

Attacks on critical information infrastructure have become more often, complex 
and  sophisticated  as  the  perpetrators  are  more  professional  in  the  recent  years. 
Possibilities  for  timely  reaction  and  arrests  of  perpetrators  are  very  limited  and 
demanding. The trend of the development of ISs for industrial use connected to the 
internet  brings  new  vulnerabilities  of  those  systems.  Experience  with  Stuxnet  virus 
shows that important industrial facilities are not immune to cybernetic attacks. Cyber 
security shall remain crucial for maintaining functioning state in the future.     

 

Information  and  communication  technologies  and  their  impact  on  modern 
society and economics  

Safe  and  sound  functioning  if  information  and  communication  technologies 
(hereinafter “ICT”) is necessary for operations of state and public entities and is one 
of the basic preconditions of prosperity and sustainable economic growth. The share 
of  human  activity  dependent  directly  or  indirectly  on  ICT  is  steadily  growing.  The 
Czech  Republic  has  ambitions  to  belong  among  developed  countries  in  this  field. 
Networks and online services have to be not only secure but also reliable. The whole 
society has to enhance its activities towards the security and reliability of ICT.   

 

ICT and societies dependent on them are vulnerable 

Constant and rapid progress in the field of ICT brings new opportunities for the 
society but also new security challenges. Combination of increased dependence on 
ICT which is not flawless with human failure or intentional damage makes mitigation 
of  damages  more  complicated.  The  emergence  of  new  technologies  brings  new 
opportunities for the development of the society but also new vulnerabilities and new 
demands for the security of ICT and whole society.   

Increased  dependence  on  ICT  enhances  vulnerability  of  the  state  and  its 
citizens  to  the  cybernetic  attacks.  These  attacks  may  be  motivated  by  crime, 
economic  profit  or  terrorism  and  may  be  used  to  destabilise  society.  Leaks  of 
strategic  information,  infringements  into  ICT  of  state  institutions  or  strategic 
companies may endanger interests of the Czech Republic. Examples show rapid and 
diverse development in the field of cybernetic security. Attacks against ICT are more 
complex  and  sophisticated.  These  attacks  are  aimed  against  various  targets  and 
waged  by  various  means.  Also  the  nature  of  attackers  and  their  motives  are 
changing.  Parts  of  the  critical  infrastructure,  crucial  for  functioning  of  the  state,  are 
becoming target of attacks more and more often.    

Considering the fact that digital society is globalised and cybernetic attack are 
crossing  state,  cultural  and  legislative  boundaries,  it  is  often  not  obvious  which 
jurisdiction  should  be  applied  to  them.  Close  international  cooperation  is  therefore 
needed also in the area of legislation. 

 

3 

 

II.  Basic principles of strategy of cybernetic security 

Investment  into  cybernetic  security  means  investing  into  our  future  and  our 
economic growth. The level of cybernetic security comprises from all measures, both 
national  and  international,  adopted  to  protect  availability  of  ICT  and  integrity, 
authenticity  and  confidentiality  of  data  in  the  cyberspace.  Cyber  security  has  to  be 
based  on  complex  approach  demanding  information  sharing  and  coordination  of 
activities.  The  cooperation  between  military  and  civilian,  public  and  private  and 
international  and  national  spheres  is  to  be  ensured  while  building  the  system  of 
cybernetic  security.  Only  such  approach  ensures  sound  operation  of 
ICT 
infrastructure  in  critical  areas,  rapid  and  effective  reaction  to  cybernetic  attacks  and 
legal protection in the digital world. The issue of  cybernetic security cannot be seen 
as an isolated problem of the Czech Republic or several parts of our society. It’s not 
only  international,  inter-ministerial  public  or  private  sphere  issue  but  the  problem  of 
whole  society.  Therefore,  ensuring  of  cybernetic  security  deserves  the  highest 
priority.    

Interconnection and strengthening cooperation of all parts of society   

It  is  desirable  to  coordinate  all  initiatives  of  state  (civilian,  police,  military), 
commercial and academic entities, those which have done a lot of good work in their 
areas of  responsibility  and  those  which  weren’t  very  active  so far.  Only  coordinated 
effort leads towards enhancing of cybernetic security without dispersion and useless 
doubling  of  efforts  and  growth  of  costs.  ICT  infrastructure,  goods  and  services  are 
from largest part provided by the private sector. Mutual trust and information sharing 
are  thus  basic  precondition  for  successful  cooperation  between  public  and  private 
sector. 

Individual responsibility 

It is the basic interest of the state to establish the ICT security rules in a way to 
be  accepted  by  all  users  of  cyberspace  (state  bodies,  critical  infrastructure  entities, 
public entities, commercial companies and citizens) and service providers in order to 
adopt  in  their  ICT  systems  appropriate  measures  to  protect  the  system  against 
internal and external attacks and not to pose a threat for other systems.  

 

4 

Inter-ministerial cooperation  

According  to  the  decision  of  the  Government  of  the  Czech  Republic  no.  781 
from 19th October 2011 the body responsible for the field of cybernetic security is the 
national  Security  Authority  (hereinafter  “NSA”).  The  Council  for  Cybernetic  Security 
(hereinafter  “Council”)  plays  a  key  role  in  the  inter-ministerial  coordination.  It  will, 
among  other  tasks,  initiate  cooperation  of  state  bodies.  In  line  with  its  statute,  the 
Council  will  establish  working  groups  comprised  of  relevant  experts.  The  working 
groups will draft documents dealing with specific issues of cybernetic security for the 
Council. 

International Cooperation 

Bearing  in  mind  that  a  measure  could  be  effective  only  if  implemented  or 
coordinated on an international level the Czech Republic will actively support through 
common  bodies  and  working  groups  the  efforts  of  the  European  Union  (hereinafter 
“EU”)  and  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation  (hereinafter  “NATO”)  to  create 
international policies, standards and norms and adequately implement those policies, 
standards and norms into national legislation dealing with cybernetic security. 

Adequacy of adopted measures  

There  is  no  way  how  to  achieve  absolute  cybernetic  security.  The  Czech 
Republic  will  adopt  measures  based  on  realistic  evaluation  of  risks  and  shall  be 
appropriate to such risks. They will respect protection of privacy and basic rights as 
free  access  to  information,  freedom  of  speech  and  others.  The  measures  shall  be 
appropriate  to  the  necessity  to  ensure  security  on  one  side  and  to  respect  basic 
rights and freedoms on the other side.   

 

III. 

Strategic goals and measures 

Strategy adopts measures against current threats and is a basis for the Action 
Plan  which  defines  particular  steps  and  identifies  those  responsible  for  their 
achievement. The following areas shall be prioritised:   

Creation of legislative framework  

The  NSA  shall  draft  a  specialised  law  on  cybernetic  security  which  will 
determine  responsibilities  of the  national  Centre  for  Cybernetic  Security  (hereinafter 
“NCCS”). The law shall define obligations of entities offering and/or using services in 
the  cyberspace.  It  shall  further  determine  means  and  scope  of  cooperation  with 
private sector, public and international institutions.  

 
International  laws,  agreements,  trends  and  recommendation  in  the  field  of 
cybernetic  security  e-commerce  and  electronic  transactions  shall  be  regularly 
evaluated  and 
from  such 
evaluation  shall  be  implemented.  The  Czech  Republic  shall  actively  participate  in 

the  conclusions  and  recommendations  stemming 

 

5 

drafting of laws, norms and other cooperation associated with  cybernetic security in 
the framework of EU, NATO and other international organisations.  

Establishing  National  Centre  for  Cybernetic  Security  and  Governmental 
CERT 

The  NCCS  shall  be  established  within  NSA  to  optimize  cooperation  between 
state  bodies  and  improve  coordination  of  protection  and  implementation  of  counter-
measures. Governmental CERT (Computer Emergency Response Team) will be part 
of the NCCS. The NCCS shall actively cooperate with other state bodies, academic 
institutions  and  commercial  entities  on  the  basis  of  cooperation  agreements.  Quick 
and effective  sharing  of  information  about  vulnerabilities of  ICT, forms  of  cybernetic 
attacks  profiles  and  motivation  of  the  perpetrators  will  enable  NCCS  to  analyse 
security  incidents  and  draft  recommendations  of  counter-measures.  It  is  in  the  best 
interest of the private sphere to cooperate with NCCS in protection of their own ICT 
systems against attack through cybernetic attacks. Bearing in mind that the best way 
to  ensure  security  is  through  proper  preparation  and  prevention,  the  NCCS  shall 
establish  a  system  of  early  warning  and  shall  provide  recommendations  how  to 
protect against cybernetic attacks.  

NCCS  shall  push  for  the  system  of  testing  of  handling  security  risks  and 
proposed counter-measures as a part of risk management system. Such capabilities 
shall  be  subject  to  regular  testing  through  cybernetic  defence  exercises  (also  on 
international level). 

 

Protection of critical information infrastructure  

Protection  of  critical  information  infrastructure  is  one  of  the  main  priorities  in 
cybernetic  security.  This  infrastructure  poses  main part  of almost  all  parts  of  critical 
infrastructure  and  is  becoming  more  and  more  important.  Both  private  and  public 
spheres  have  to  create  conditions  for  closer  cooperation  based  on  information 
sharing.  It  will  be  properly  evaluated  where  the  security  measures  will  be  fully 
implemented  and  where  shall  be  additional  powers  in  case  of  specific  attacks  and 
threats. 

 

Strengthening  of  cybernetic  security  of  information  and  communication 
systems of public governance 

Users  of  ICT  need  to  be  provided  with  relevant  and  consistent  information 
about  risks  and  safe  ways  how  to  utilize  the  cyberspace.  NCCS  shall  provide  such 
information on GovCERT.cz portal. Also information about available security products 
and services will be provided on the portal.  

Implementation of security rules and standards in information systems whose 
secure operation is crucial for the functioning of the state is one of the preconditions 
for  enhancing  cybernetic  security  of  those  systems.  Effective  cybernetic  security 

 

6 

demands  obligatory  implementation  and  proper  adherence  to  those  rules  and 
standards  and  regular  inspections  of  their  implementation  in  the  public  governance 
bodies. 

Methodical  documents  (regulations  and  recommended  practices)  shall  be 
through 

prepared.  Enhancing  of 
implementation of the ISMS (Information Security Management System). 

level  of 

information  security  will  be  done 

 

Effectiveness of fighting crime in the cyberspace  

NCCS  shall  contribute  to  fight  against  cybernetic  criminality  by  cooperating 
with  law  enforcement  bodies  and  shall  use  their  experience  during  development  of 
means and measures against cybernetic attacks.  

 

Coordination of activities to ensure cybernetic security in Europe  

Global  cyberspace  security  may  be  achieved  only  through  coordination  on 

national and international level. 

The NSA shall support appropriate measures based on European Action Plan 
for  Protection  of  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  in  the  framework  of  the  EU. 
Further, the cooperation with the European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA) shall commence in the field of training and information sharing. The ideas for 
future  activities  may  be  found  in  „EU  Internal  Security  Strategy“  and  in  „Digital 
Agenda  for  Europe“  as  well  as  in  the  new  „NATO  Policy  on  Cyber  Defence“.  The 
cooperation in the areas under NSA responsibility shall be also established with the 
newly established European Agency for Management of Large-Scale IT Systems and 
with the EU Centre for Cybernetic Criminality. 

 

Using of reliable IT 

Availability  of  reliable  ICT  systems  to  public  governance  users  has  to  be 
ensured.  Research  and  development  of  means  for  protection  of  ICT  systems  of 
public governance and critical infrastructure facilities shall be supported. The aim will 
be  to  use  technical  and  software  means  accredited  according  to  international 
standards in areas critical for the security of the state. 

 

7 

 

Raising awareness about cybernetic security  

Establishing  cybernetic  security  cannot  rely  on  technical  means  only.  Proper 
care  has  to  be  given  also  to  end-users  and  administrators  of  ICT  systems, 
development  workers,  public  contract awarders,  auditors and managers.  Insufficient 
information  about  security  of  ICT  systems  brings  serious  risks.  Lack  of  trained  and 
informed personnel and further education raise vulnerability and damages. 

Awareness  of  citizens  about  cybernetic  security  shall  be  risen  through 
spreading of relevant information in cooperation with media. Cybernetic security shall 
part  of  training  of  public  employees  and  will  be  supported  in  the  private  sphere  as 
well. The aim is to reach sufficient level of knowledge for each position in the area of 
cybernetic security. 

Cooperation  aimed  at  creating  training  programmes  focusing  on  cybernetic 
security  shall  be  started  with  the  academic  and  private  spheres.  Needs  for 
qualification in cybernetic security, opportunities of school and other education  shall 
be evaluated on a regular basis. The issue of cybernetic security will be implemented 
into all levels of education.  

 

Response to cybernetic attacks 

Bearing  in  mind  that  the  cybernetic  attacks  against  the  systems  of  public 
governance and critical infrastructure cannot be avoided the state has to prepared for 
such attacks. Complex set of measures to be implemented in the event of cybernetic 
attack  has  to  be  created  in  cooperation  with  all  competent  state  bodies.  Necessity 
and adequacy of such measures has to be taken in mind.  

Strategy in the Field of Cybernetic Security for 2012  – 2015 follows up to the 
Security  Strategy  of  The  Czech  Republic  and  reflects  the  challenges  of  modern 
information society. The Strategy provides institutional framework contributing to the 
security  system  of  the  Czech  Republic.  This  framework  constitutes  beginning  of 
active  policy  of  cybernetic  protection  of  the  state  which  is  to  be  permanently 
evaluated  and  amended.  Awareness  of  every  individual,  operator,  administrator, 
university  or  company  about  security  challenges  of  ICT  is  a  basic  precondition  to 
ensure reliability and security of the cyberspace.  The Czech Republic considers the 
issue  of  cybernetic  security  to  be  an  important  part  of  daily  use  of  ICT  and  shall 
further work to ensure it.   

 

8 

