A STRONGER AND  
MORE SECURE
DIGITAL DENMARK

Digital Strategy 
2016-2020

The Government /
Locat Government Denmark /
Danish Regions /

www.fm.dk / www.kl.dk / www.regioner.dk

May 2016

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK
The Digital strategy 2016-2020
May 2016

Enquiries about this publication should be addressed to:
Agency for Digitisation
Landgreven 4
Post box 2193
1017 Copenhagen K, Denmark
Telephone: +45 33 92 80 00
www.digst.dk
E-mail: digst@digst.dk

Graphic design: GeelmuydenKiese
Front page photo: Shutterstock
Printed by: GP Tryk & Zeuner Grafisk A/S
Copies printed: 3,000

ISBN: 978-87-87353-88-5

Electronic publication:
ISBN: 978-87-87353-89-2

Download the publication from:
Danish Ministry of Finance, Local Government Denmark and Danish Regions
www.fm.dk, www.kl.dk, www.regioner.dk

CONTENTS

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK 
We must seize the digital opportunities 
Denmark on the way 

THE DIGITAL STRATEGY  
15 years of digital strategies  

VISION AND GOALS 

CHART OF INITIATIVES  

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY 
1. A user-friendly and simple digital public sector 
2. Better use of data and quicker case processing 
3. Better and more cohesive welfare services 

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH 
4. Better framework for the business community 
5. Public sector data as a growth driver  
6. An efficient utilities sector 

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMES 
7. The public sector protects data 
8. Robust digital infrastructure 
9. Digitisation for everyone 

PROGRESS, MANAGEMENT AND ONGOING ADAPTATION 

4
6
10

12 
13

14

16

19
21
25
28

33
35
38
41

45
47
51
55

59

A STRONGER AND MORE  
SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK

Denmark  and  the  world  are  facing  funda-
mental  changes.  Rapid  ongoing  digital  de-
velopments  are  already  changing  the  way 
in which we live, the way we run our busi-
nesses and the way our public services and 
welfare services are delivered. 

Technological  developments  have  always 
played a role in altering the way in which we 
live, and new technologies have given us op-
portunities that not many of us would want 
to do without. The invention of the automo-
bile gave us far more mobility and flexibility. 
Automation  of  processing  and  packaging 
processes within the food industry improved 
opportunities within supply and flexible con-
sumption.  Old  job  functions  have  become 
defunct and new ones have appeared in their 
place. We have seen it all before. 
 
However, the rate and evolutionary power of 
technological developments will accelerate 
in  the  years  to  come.  Digital  development 
will be so fast, profound and unpredictable 
that it will challenge and change society in 
ways we cannot even begin to imagine. 

What the future will bring is now more un-
certain than ever. Artificial intelligence, nano 
and  biotechnologies,  and  the  widespread 
use of Big Data are already at our doorstep. 
So, the future is now, not tomorrow! 

The  new  technologies  provide  a  multitude 
of  opportunities.  However,  this  develop-
ment also challenges society and demands 
change  and  transition.  It  is  not  whether  or 
not  the  changes  will  happen,  but  how,  as 
a  society,  we  are  prepared  to  adapt  and 
to  exploit  the  opportunities  offered  by  the 
new  technologies  to  produce  more  pros-
perity and welfare while still preserving the 
uniquely Danish sense of security and confi-
dence in each other and in society.

Digital Denmark 
Just  as  globalisation,  digitisation  raises 
many difficult questions. In a number of ar-
eas, Denmark is well prepared for what the 
future will bring. However, in other areas, we 
still have a lot to learn. Therefore, the pub-
lic sector must work closely with the Danish 
business community, stakeholder organisa-

4

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKtions, etc. to establish the basis for a flexible 
and adaptive society, ready for an ever more 
digitised world.  

The  Digital  Strategy  2016-2020  sets  the 
course  for  Danish  public  sector  digitisation 
efforts  and  their  interaction  with  business-
es and industry. Jointly with the businesses 
and public institutions at local, regional and 
central-government levels which on a daily 
basis  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities 
provided  by  digitisation,  this  strategy  will 
help build the basis for a strong and secure 
digital Denmark.

Some  initiatives  are  being  launched  now. 
Others  will  be  defined  or  adjusted  up  until 
2020  in  response  to  the  opportunities  and 
challenges  ahead.  Therefore,  this  strategy 
will  fully  equip  citizens,  public  employees 
and  businesses  for  the  digital  Denmark  of 
the future.

The Government, Local Government  
Denmark, and Danish Regions

WHO IS PARTICIPATING?

The government Digital Strategies concern the authorities at all levels of government, from 
state, to regions to municipalities - i.e. both the administrative institutions such as ministries, 
agencies and the municipal and regional administrations, and the executive institutions such 
as hospitals, public schools, universities, etc.

5

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKWe must seize the digital opportunities

Denmark  is  in  a  good  position  to  embrace 
the  digital  future.  We  are  a  small  country 
with a population that has great trust and 
confidence in each other and in the public 
sector.  People  generally  have  a  high  level 
of  education.  People  and  businesses  have 
good digital competences and have gener-
ally embraced digital technologies. There is 
a strong tradition of collaboration and find-
ing  new  and  practical  solutions  between 
public  authorities,  and  across  the  public 
and private sectors. 

Furthermore,  the  public  sector  began  in-
troducing IT solutions early on, and for this 
reason in particular it has high-quality data 
sets and registries which are quite unique 
in  an  international  perspective.  Denmark 
has  built  a  secure  and  robust  digital  in-
frastructure,  which  allows  individuals  and 
businesses  to  complete  efficiently  their 
business  with  the  public  sector  over  the  
internet.  All  of  this  has  enabled  a  huge  
digital transition in recent years.

Significant digital developments  
in the public sector
The internet is today the primary gateway 
to  public  administration  for  the  majority 
of  Danes.  Individuals  and  businesses  have 
their  own  digital  mailbox.  Online  self- 
service has been made mandatory for more 
than 100 administrative procedures. When 
the  Central  Customs  and  Tax  Administra-

tion  (SKAT)  opens  up  for  online  access  to 
tax  assessments,  digital  Danes  flood  onto 
the website.

Furthermore,  digital  solutions  are  an  in-
tegral  part  of  many  public  services.  Care 
workers  use  tablet  computers  to  moni-
tor  and  register  any  changes  in  the  health  
status of their elderly clients. Teachers use 
digital learning tools and materials to differ-
entiate their teaching to the individual stu-
dent, and health technologies make it possi-
ble for patients to monitor their condition in 
their own homes. 

Some individuals and businesses have wel-
comed  the  developments  and  can  easily 
cope, while others have taken some time to 
adjust  to  new  ways  of  dealing  with  things. 
Local  and  regional  governments  have 
played  and  are  still  playing  an  active  role 
in ensuring that citizens and businesses are 
guided through the many changes and that 
there is help available to those who stumble 
on the way. 

Focus on user centricity, sense of  
security and public trust 
The  Danish  welfare  system  builds  on  the 
public's  widespread  confidence  and  trust 
in the public sector. It is important that we 
safeguard this public trust now that digital 
communication  and  digital  services  from 
the  authorities  are  becoming  an  everyday 

6

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKfact. It is absolutely vital that we establish 
safe and secure frameworks for citizens and 
businesses to interact digitally with the pub-
lic sector. 

Digital safety and security of individuals and 
businesses are essential to being able to ex-
ploit the opportunities offered by digitisation 
to develop and improve the Danish welfare 
system; and digitisation does offer huge op-
portunities for individuals as well as for so-
ciety in general. 

The  Danish  public  sector  is  designed  to 
ensure that services for citizens and busi-
nesses are as far as possible organised at 
local  or  regional  levels  within  the  frame-
work  of  the  law.  This  approach  helps  en-
sure a greater sense of security and public 
trust,  as  well  as  a  greater  degree  of  user 
centricity in services. Therefore, digitisation 
must underpin local decision power and re-
sponsibility.  When  public  services  become 
digital,  people  should  not  feel  that  the 
public  sector  is  becoming  distant,  with  no 
anchoring in the local community. Instead, 
digitisation  should  promote  a  continued 
feeling of local anchorage.

For  example,  digitisation  can  enhance  the 
degree of user centricity and the empower-
ment of individuals because digital solutions 
allow  them  easy  access  from  home,  or  in 
their local area, to services and information 
of high quality, regardless of where in Den-
mark they live. Digital services are becoming 
increasingly more adaptable to the needs of 
the  individual,  i.e.  they  are  becoming  ever 
more  user-centric.  Furthermore,  with  digi-
tal  welfare  solutions,  citizens  can  become 
'co-players' in delivery of their welfare ser-
vices. With more efficient, digital solutions it 
is possible to improve the quality of services 
and enable local development.

Denmark  has  a  well-developed  infrastruc-
ture  for  mobile  and  broadband  coverage 
However,  if  we  are  to  continue  to  have  a 
society that works efficiently and with local 
anchoring, we need to ensure that this good 
mobile and broadband coverage is improved 
even more. 

Public-sector data must be  
shared and reused
We  can  establish  a  simpler  and  more  co-
hesive  public  sector  in  which  the  author-

7

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKities  can  collaborate  smoothly  to  provide 
good and efficient services to individuals or 
businesses  based  on  the  knowledge  that 
they  already  have  about  them.  For  this  to 
become  a  reality,  the  authorities  must  to 
a  greater  extent  be  able  to  exchange  and 
access  relevant  data  on  individuals  in  a  
secure  manner;  not  least  in  situations  in 
which many authorities are involved. 

Local,  regional  and  central  governments 
therefore have to work towards more shar-
ing of data wherever this is possible, rele-
vant and secure. Increased use of data can 
be  supported  by  common  data  standards, 
standardised data formats, common IT ar-
chitectures and a robust IT infrastructure.

Increased  sharing  of  data  will  enable  new 
generations  of  digital  solutions  which  can 
automatically  find  the  necessary  data.  In-
dividuals  and  businesses  will  save  time 
because  they  do  not  have  to  report  data 
unnecessarily.  Furthermore,  administrative 
processes  and  case  work  will  be  eased  if 
manual workflows, and in some situations 
decisions, can be automated.

More efficient sharing and exchange of data 
between  various  IT  systems  and  organisa-
tional units will provide individuals and busi-
nesses with more efficient case processing 
procedures and more tailored and coherent 
interventions.

In future, individuals and businesses should, 
as far as possible, only have to submit, infor- 
mation  to  the  authorities  once,  instead  of 
having to enter the same information in seve- 
ral places in public digital solutions. 

Greater use and reuse of data will also im-
prove  the  basis  for  the  public  services  de-
livered. This will also contribute to a more 
modern and efficient public sector and, thus, 
release  resources  which  can  be  applied  to 
other political priorities.

These  efforts  should  be  continued,  taking 
account  of  the  legislation  on  processing  of 
personal  data  and  the  individual's  right  to 
privacy.

New business opportunities
The business and growth policy of the 

8

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKGovernment  is  to  create  good  framework 
conditions  for  commerce  and  industry  and, 
thus,  contribute  to  growth 
in  Denmark 
through the promotion of digital solutions in 
Danish businesses, through promotion of en-
trepreneurship and through establishing the 
foundation for Danish businesses to be able 
to continue to compete in the global market. 
The goal is for Danish businesses to become 
better at exploiting new paths to growth. This  
requires  that  Denmark  and  Danish  busi-
nesses  become  better  at  exploiting  the 
potential  in,  for  example,  automation  and 
new  technologies,  and,  by  doing  so,  en-
hance  productivity  and  competitiveness.
This  applies,  in  particular,  to  the  many  
Danish small and medium-sized enterprises.

Efforts by the public sector must promote 
digitisation in the private sector. With more 
digitisation, businesses will become better 
at exploiting business potentials in a digital 
world; they will become more competitive 
and  they  will  improve  their  productivity. 
Creation  of  a  strong  digital  Denmark  with 
new  opportunities  and  improved  frame-
work  conditions  for  businesses  calls  for 
new public-private partnerships. 

Data is an all-important resource in a digital 
era; a resource which opens up for new busi-
ness opportunities and which can be used to 
optimise internal business procedures.

It  is  important  that,  within  the  framework 
of the law, more public-sector data is made 
available  to  businesses,  so  that  this  data 
can serve as a driver for innovation and new 
business opportunities in the private sector. 
This should provide the business community 
with good opportunities for finding, combin-
ing  and  reusing  data  to  develop  new  inno-
vative  products  and  services,  so  that  busi-
nesses will be well positioned in the future 
competition.

Digitisation  efforts  should  create  strong 
framework  conditions  for  businesses  and 
support their digital transition. For example, 
better  and  more  user-friendly  digital  solu-
tions  and  automated  data  collection  from 
businesses  should  contribute  to  the  goal 
of  reducing  significantly  the  administrative 
burden on businesses.

9

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKDenmark on the way

Although Denmark has already become far 
more digital, we have only just embarked on 
the very extensive process of transition.

With  digital  solutions  becoming  ever  more 
widespread,  citizens  and  businesses  have 
high expectations for digital public services 
that are up-to-date and add value to every-
day life.

However,  technological  developments  are 
happening  at  such  a  pace  that  we  are  not 
always able to predict the digital opportuni-
ties, users' needs and societal benefits that 
the  future  will  bring.  When  development 
of  the  eIdentification  solution  NemID  was 
planned in 2008, smartphones were not that 
widespread and the computer tablet had yet 
to be invented. Therefore, it could not have 
been predicted that, only a few years later, 
users  would  want  to  be  able  to  read  their 
digital  post  or  log  onto  public-service  web 
portals and onto self-service or online bank-
ing solutions from their mobile devices. 

Continuous modernisation necessary
Continuous improvement and adaptation of 
public sector digital solutions and systems 
are  therefore  necessary  in  step  with  the 
development  of  technologies  and  of  soci-
ety.  This  will  require  investment.  In  future 
years, it will also be necessary for a num-
ber  of  authorities  to  modernise  or  replace 

some  of  their  IT  systems,  either  because 
they  are  outdated  or  because  they  are  no 
longer working according to their intended 
purpose. 

Furthermore, the IT solutions and process-
es  of  a  number  of  authorities  are  today 
designed  to  match  the  internal  needs  and  
organisation of the authority rather than the 
needs  of  citizens  and  businesses  which,  in 
many cases, go across authorities and sec-
tors.

Much data is still stored differently and de-
fined  differently  from  one  public  authority 
to  another.  This  makes  exchange  of  data 
across  sectors  or  administrations  very  dif-
ficult.  This  in  turn  makes  it  unnecessarily 
complicated for different authorities to col-
laborate  to  deliver  the  best  and  most  effi-
cient services to individuals and businesses. 
This calls for solutions.

Therefore,  extensive  development  and 
clear-up  work  is  required  so  that  citizens 
and  businesses  can  rest  assured  the  ser-
vice  they  receive  is  coherent  and  that  the 
IT systems function optimally. However, the 
public  sector  has  a solid  foundation.  Many 
principles  and  methods  have  already  been 
developed  by  different  authorities  and  can 
be  reused  and  disseminated  to  more  au-
thorities. 

10

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKExpenditures and revenues will come 
under pressure
The public sector will be faced with a signifi-
cant strain on public expenditure in the years to 
come. This is due, in particular, to demands to 
deal with an aging population, climate change, 
housing  and  integrating  refugees,  as  well  as 
more expenditure on the health services. At the 
same time, impacts from the EU with regard to 
the application of data across national borders, 
legislation  as  well  as  language  and  accessi-
bility  requirements,  will  be  significant  for  our 
opportunities to develop Danish public services 
and administrations.

Financing the Danish welfare system is based 
on  the  taxes  and  charges  paid  by  individuals 
and businesses. However, digital development 
and new business models will also challenge 
the revenue models and regulatory models of 
the public sector. The global, digital economy 
is expected to grow and, in the long term, per-
haps require new solutions.

New, internet-based business models can pro-
vide new opportunities for growth, greater flex-
ibility and a wider range of services for users. 
However,  with  regard  to  taxation  and  market 
regulation,  etc.,  these  business  models  will 
also challenge the structure of society. 

11

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKTHE DIGITAL STRATEGY

This  Digital  Strategy  runs  up  to  2020,  and 
in it the central, regional and local govern-
ments  continue  a  series  of  initiatives  from 
the previous Strategy. Furthermore, a large 
number  of  new  initiatives  will  create  the 
foundation  for  the  Danish  public  sector  of 
the future. 

endeavours  for  closer  public  sector  colla- 
boration to deliver good, efficient and coher-
ent services to citizens and businesses. 

Strategic interaction
Digital strategies are not the sole answer to 
all the challenges facing Denmark. 

The  individual  authority  has  a  responsi-
bility  to  realise  the  digital  potential  within 
its  own  auspice  and,  thus,  to  ensure  that  
digitisation  leads  to  the  desired  change.  In 
parallel with joint public sector efforts, there 
are sector-specific digitisation projects and 
strategies,  for  example  joint  municipal  and 
regional digital strategies. This approach to 
public  sector  digitisation  efforts  provides  a 
good  balance  between  common  strategic 
targets and local adaptation and priorities. 

Furthermore,  interacting  with  the  public 
sector,  private  businesses,  trade  organisa-
tions and NGOs are also contributing to find-
ing common solutions for the digital transi-
tion and helping to secure the foundation for 
a strong and secure Digital Denmark.

About the Digital Strategy
Since 2001, digitisation of the public sector 
has been driven by close and binding collab-
oration between local, regional and central 
governments.  This  is  applies  especially  in  
areas  in  which  it  is  necessary  and  appro-
priate  to  develop  cross-cutting  solutions. 
The work has been embedded in multi-year 
strategies covering central, local and region-
al governments. 

The strategic digital initiatives make it pos-
sible  for  the  public  sector  to  make  joint  
investments  in  areas  which  are  particu-
larly complex and in which there are inter- 
dependencies  across  different  authorities 
and sectors. 

Digitisation has proven to be an effective and 
efficient tool to rethink processes and work-
flows  in  the  public  sector.  Furthermore,  in 
several  areas,  digitisation  has  given  rise  to 
a break with the compartmentalised think-
ing that is often applied by the public sector. 
The tradition of common public sector stra-
tegic work on digitisation entails continuous 

12

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK15 years of digital strategies

2001
DIGITAL 
COLLABORATION

• Digital signature 

•  Citizens can send emails  
to public authorities 

•  Digital communication  
by the authorities

2004
EFFICIENT 
PAYMENT AND 
INTERNAL 
DIGITISATION

•  NemKonto (mandatory 
default citizen's account 
for payments from the 
authorities) and eInvoicing

•  Virk.dk (digital public 
services web portal for 
businesses) and Sundhed.
dk (web portal providing 
personal access to all own 
health data)

2007
COMMON 
INFRASTRUCTURE

•  NemID (eID solution), 
NemLog-in (federated user 
management and log-in to 
online public services etc.), 
eIndkomst (digital reporting 
of income)

•  Digital Post (digital 
mailbox for messages and 
commications from public 
authorities), NemSMS (text 
message reminders from 
the authorities), Borger.dk 
(digital public services web 
portal for citizens)

•  Secure government email 
systems

•  Authorities must use  
common IT infrastructure

2011
DIGITAL 
COMMUNICATION 

•  Digital Post made 
mandatory for individuals 
and businesses

•  Online self-service 
solutions made 
mandatory for individuals 
and businesses

•  Dissemination of digital 
welfare services

•  The Basic Data 
Programme

DENMARK IN THE DIGITAL LEAD

Over the past 15 years, Denmark has undergone a unique transition to digital public admini-
stration, communication and services. A number of solutions originating from previous digi-
tal strategies have now become routine.

With  NemKonto  (a  mandatory  citizen's  account  for  payments  from  the  authorities),  the 
authorities  now  know  which  account  to  pay  benefits  into.  Furthermore,  with  the  secure 
eIdentification solution NemID everyone has a secure means of personal identification and 
authentication online. Digital registration of real property rights makes it easier to buy and 
sell property. Several common, cross-sectoral web portals have been established such as a 
web portal with access to personal health data (sundhed.dk), a single-point of access to all 
digital public services (borger.dk), and a public services web portal for businesses (virk.dk). 
Furthermore, a digital income registry has been established so that, in a number of areas, 
individuals are no longer burdened with reporting and documenting changes to their income 
in order to receive benefits. 

Some of the most recently introduced initiatives include mandatory Digital Post and man-
datory online self-service for individuals and businesses. Telemedicine solutions for people 
with  chronic  disorders  and  digital  learning  tools  and  materials  are  becoming  more  wide-
spread throughout Denmark. Furthermore, much public-sector basic data is now available 
online and free of charge for individuals, businesses and authorities alike. All of this makes 
up the solid foundation which the public sector will develop further up to 2020.

13

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKVISION AND GOALS

Vision:  Public  sector  digitisation  creates 
value  and  growth,  it  provides  efficiency  
improvements and it secures the confidence 
of Danish people in the digital society. 

Digitisation can provide better quality in pub-
lic services and it can lead to a more cohesive 
and efficient public sector that creates value 
for individuals and for businesses. 

Denmark has come a long way in the digital 
transition  of  the  public  sector,  but  a  lot  of 
work still lies ahead.  

This Digital Strategy 2016-2020 sets three 
ambitious, but realistic, goals for the devel-
opment of a more digital public sector in the 
years to come:

Digital solutions must be easy-to-use, quick and ensure high quality
The Danish public should see that public-sector digitisation adds real value to their lives. 
The  public  sector  must  offer  high-quality  digital  services  and  digital  welfare  solutions.  
Digitisation should make life easier, make it easier for people to help themselves, and im-
prove  the  quality  of  public  services.  The  authorities  will  share  relevant  information  and 
work together better for the individual person or business. Furthermore, digitisation will 
contribute to a more cohesive and efficient public sector.

Public sector digitisation must provide good conditions for growth
Digitisation will make it easier to run a business and will contribute to the Government’s 
goal to reduce the administrative burden on the business community by DKK 3 billion by 
2020. The ambition is that the administrative burden on businesses from reporting to  public 
authorities is to be removed through automatic business reporting. All solutions aimed at 
businesses will be integrated in the Virk.dk portal, and businesses will meet a public sector 
that fully supports their digital transition. The business community will have access to more 
public-sector data that can form the basis for new business opportunities and innovation.

Security and confidence must be in focus at all times
The great confidence Danes have in each other and in the public sector is the foundation of 
Danish welfare. We must safeguard this sense of security in an ever-more digital society. 
Therefore, we will improve information security in the public sector and enhance the digital 
competences of citizens and of businesses. A digital infrastructure for the public sector that 
is crucial for society must be robust and it must meet the needs of its users. Moreover, Den-
mark will be an inclusive society in which everyone can participate, both those who are ready 
to digitise, and those who cannot use the digital solutions or who do not have access to them.

14

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKThe Digital Strategy 2016-2020

The Digital Strategy sets three ambitious goals supported by focus areas. Each focus area 
includes a number of underlying, specific initiatives to contribute to realising the goals. 

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, 
QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY 

1

2

3

A USER-FRIENDLY AND 
SIMPLE DIGITAL PUBLIC 

SECTOR

BETTER USE OF DATA  
AND QUICKER CASE  

PROCESSING

BETTER AND MORE 
COHESIVE WELFARE 

SERVICES

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD 
CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH

4

BETTER FRAMEWORK FOR 

THE BUSINESS  
COMMUNITY

5

6

PUBLIC-SECTOR DATA 
AS A GROWTH DRIVER 

AN EFFICIENT  
UTILITIES SECTOR

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE  
MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMES

7

8

9

THE PUBLIC SECTOR  

PROTECTS DATA

ROBUST DIGITAL  
INFRASTRUCTURE

DIGITISATION FOR  

EVERYONE

15

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKCHART OF INITIATIVES

 DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE  EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY 

A user-friendly and 
simple digital public 
sector

Better use of data 
and quicker case 
processing

Better and more 
cohesive welfare 
services

1.1
More cohesive 
user journeys 

1.2
Better digital 
communication

2.1
Clear legal framework for 
eGovernment

2.2
Progress with good 
basic data

3.1
Cohesive welfare pathways 
for citizens

3.2
Better data about disabled 
and marginalised adults

EGOVERNMENT MUST PROVIDE  GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH

Better framework 
for the business 
community

Public-sector data 
as a growth driver

An efficient 
utilities sector

4.1
 Automatic business 
reporting

4.2
Digital tendering procedures 
and procurement

5.1
Open public-sector data

5.2
Smart City partnership

6.1
Common data on topography, 
climate and water

6.2
Open data on energy supply

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMES

The public sector 
protects data

Robust digital 
infrastructure

Digitisation for 
everyone

7.1
Well-managed information 
security in all authorities

7.2
Common standards for secure 
exchange of information

8.1
Good data and efficient 
data sharing

9.1
Digital skills for children 
and young people

8.2
Robust operation of the 
common infrastructure

9.2
Information and help for 
citizens and businesses

16

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK1.3
Overview of own 
interaction with 
authorities and benefits

1.4
Better technicalsupport 
for citizens and 
businesses

1.5
All communication from 
public authorities is digital

2.3
Correct payments and better 
data on the individual

3.3
Further deployment of 
digital welfare solutions

3.4
Digital learning 
and teaching

3.5
Digital competences for 
public employees

4.3
Cloud computing in the public 
sector

5.3
Infrastructure for positioning 
and navigation data

6.3
Exchange of data on 
underground infrastructure 

6.4
Overall IT architecture for 
data on waste

7.3
Digital identity and rights 
management

7.4
New generations of 
NemID, NemLog-in and 
Digital Post

7.5
Secure ID solutions for 
children and young people

9.3
High level of awareness of 
information security

17

A STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARKDIGITAL SOLUTIONS 
MUST BE EASY-TO-
USE, QUICK AND 
ENSURE HIGH  
QUALITY

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-
USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY

FOCUS AREAS

1.   A USER-FRIENDLY AND SIMPLE DIGITAL PUBLIC SECTOR

2.   BETTER USE OF DATA AND QUICKER CASE PROCESSING

3.   BETTER AND MORE COHESIVE WELFARE SERVICES

THE GOAL

Public-sector  self-service  solutions,  websites  and  portals  will  constantly  be  improved  so 
that it is easier to deal with administration and so that services are more targeted towards 
the individual user. If services are more intelligent and more efficient, and if users are already 
active on the internet, then users can serve themselves more easily and quickly at whatever 
time it suits them. 

The  authorities  will  share  relevant  information  with  each  other  and  they  will  automatise  
administrative procedures so that citizens and businesses experience shorter case-proces-
sing times for digital applications and notifications. Furthermore, users will be less likely to 
have to spend time submitting the same information to several places and finding documen-
tation for information that is already in public registries. 

Better information sharing between authorities will also provide citizens with more cohe-
sive pathways when a case crosses between authorities, for example a treatment pathway 
in which both a hospital and the municipal healthcare services are involved. Furthermore, 
the overall welfare of Danes will be improved through the dissemination of digital welfare 
solutions.

20

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY

Focus area 1
A user-friendly and simple  
digital public sector

Danes have to serve themselves on the in-
ternet  in  a  large  number  of  areas.  This  is 
practical and it saves time for the citizens, 
businesses  and  the  authorities.  Therefore, 
it is vital that public-sector digital solutions 
and services are user-friendly, intuitive and 
of  high  quality,  so  that  users  continue  to 
have confidence in using public-sector digi-
tal services.

Work  to  make  modern,  digital  solutions 
available  for  citizens  and  businesses  has 
only just begun. It has to be easy for citizens 
and  businesses  to  navigate  public  digital 
universes to ascertain whether a digital ap-
plication has been filled out and submitted 
correctly, for example, and to know what to 
do next in the process.

Therefore, in some areas there is a need to 
improve public digital services so that digital 
communication between the users and the 
public sector stays up-to-date. At the same 
time, digitisation can be used as a lever to 
improve authority communication and coor-
dination across sectors. 

Being digital should be easy
Denmark will have high-quality digital ser-
vices. Citizens and businesses will see that 
digitisation of public services adds real val-
ue to their lives.

Today, we are used to seeing easy and rap-
id digital services from private businesses 
make a positive difference in our lives. For 
example, when we can easily transfer mon-
ey to each other via our mobile phones, buy 
birthday presents on the internet, or check-
in  and  choose  our  seats  in  the  aeroplane 
from home before we travel.

It  will  be  equally  easy  and  quick  to  be  in 
digital contact and have dealings with the 
public  authorities.  This  means,  for  exam-
ple,  that  the  individual  self-service  solu-
tions and digital solutions (such as NemID 
and  Digital  Post)  have  to  be  user-friendly, 
up-to-date  and  of  high  quality.  The  plan 
is  that  increasingly  digital  services  from 
the  various  authorities  will  also  be  acces-
sible  from  those  places  on  the  internet 
where citizens and businesses are already  
active. The common public-sector portals,  
borger.dk and Virk, will also continue to play 
a central role as entrances to digital public- 
sector solutions.

Digital developments are so rapid that we 
cannot always predict what technical pos-
sibilities  and  user  requirements  there  will 
be in the future. Therefore, the user-friend-
liness of public digital solutions for citizens 
and  for  businesses  must  be  measured 
regularly. Knowledge about the effect and 

21

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYvalue of solutions for users and for the au-
thorities will be used to improve solutions 
and the information and service received by 
users. 

Cohesive digital services
Communication  to  citizens  and  businesses 
must  be  clear  and  coherent  so  that  users 
are  well-informed  and  feel  secure.  Users 
should meet a service-oriented public sector 
that  can  guide  them  rapidly  and  effective-
ly through the relevant authority areas and 
services.  Poor  language  or  complex  rules 
and  processes  must  not  obstruct  fast  and 
effective communication.

User journeys through the public digital solu-
tions will be easier and clearer from start to 
end,  so  that  users  know  what  to  do  when 
attending to matters with the public sector.  

A particular common public-sector respon-
sibility  is  to  ensure  that  users  receive  a  
cohesive service when they are to deal with 
different elements of the same case. This is 
especially relevant when a user is in contact 
with several different authorities and has to 
use  several  self-service  solutions,  perhaps 
on different authorities’ websites.

For example, the user journey for an entre-
preneur  to  set  up  a  company  will  be  made 
more  user-friendly  and  cohesive,  where  to-
day at least five or six self-service solutions 
are required. Firstly, the business has to be 
registered  on  the  business  portal  virk.dk  to 
get  a  central  business  registration  number, 
and a NemKonto bank account for the busi-

ness  has  to  be  set  up  with  a  bank.  Next,  a 
NemID  eID  and  digital  signature  has  to  be 
ordered  on  medarbejdersignatur.dk  and  a 
Digital Post mailbox needs setting up for the 
business.

There  could  also  be  improvements  in  digi-
tal  user  journeys  for  private  individuals,  for 
example in connection with moving home or 
filing for divorce. 

Better insight and overview
The  public  sector  must  be  more  transpar-
ent. Therefore citizens and businesses must 
have easier access to data about themselves 
held  by  a  specific  authority.  Furthermore, 
users should have a greater insight into their 
cases,  applications,  data  and  relationships 
with the public authorities.

The  public  digital  services  will  be  adapted 
to  the  current  situation  and  needs  of  the 
individual  citizen  or  business,  so  that  the 
user  meets  personalised,  relevant  content 
on  public-sector  websites  or  portals  which 
the  user  feels  competent  and  confident  in 
navigating.  For  new  parents,  it  is  relevant 
to know where and how to name their baby 
or  to  enrol  the  child  on  the  waiting  list  for 
a  daycare  institution.  People  approaching 
retirement  require  other  solutions  and  in-
formation, for example about pensions and 
health benefits.

Today,  the  authorities  can  choose  whet- 
her  they  will  send  communications  to  
users  digitally  or  by  surface  mail.  On  the 
other hand, individuals and businesses have 

22

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY

to check both their Digital Post mailbox and 
their physical mailbox.  In future, business-
es and the many individuals ready for digital 
solutions should be confident that they will  
receive  in  digital  format  all  relevant  post 
from the public sector that can be digitised. 

The right help
Digital  communication  with  the  authorities 
can be an advantage, for example for the el-
derly who do not live close to their families. 
Digital solutions mean that family members 
can help by notifying change of address or 
applying for housing benefits from their own 
home.  Using  a  digital  power  of  attorney, 
people will be able to let their families and 
others they trust take care of their interests 

and access the necessary data digitally. This 
means that families and others will not have 
to use solutions such as paper forms or let-
ter  post  to  help  someone  with  their  digital 
administration.

Improving digital communication will mean 
that  fewer  people  will  have  to  pick  up  the 
phone  or  turn  up  in  person  at  the  citizen 
service  centre  to  get  help,  and  it  means 
that businesses can save time. At the same 
time, people who still need help will get it. It 
will be easier for citizens and businesses to  
locate  and  receive  the  right  help,  irrespec-
tive of whether they are having trouble with 
NemID, Digital Post, borger.dk or Virk.

DIGITAL POST FOR PARENTS WITH JOINT CHILD CUSTODY 

The  authorities  are  increasingly  sending  correspondence  as  Digital  Post.  If  the  authori- 
ties send Digital Post to parents about their joint-custody child, there are circumstances in 
which just one parent receives the correspondence. This can happen even if, in some areas, 
the legislation states that both parents are to be informed about matters relating to their 
child.

The  regulations  in  sector  legislation  and  the  individual  administrative  area  determine 
whether both parents have to be informed about matters relating to their child. Therefore, 
a common set of guidelines will be drawn up for the authorities, outlining the situations in 
which information about a joint-custody child is to be sent to both parents.

The  guidelines  will  help  clarify  how  correspondence  is  to  be  sent  in  accordance  with  
relevant legislation. This will also secure equality between parents with regard to receiving 
information about a joint-custody child.

In the summer of 2016, it will be technically possible for authorities to send one Digital Post 
communication to several recipients. This means that it will be easier for the authorities, 
with few administrative procedures, to ensure that both parents of a child receive Digital 
Post about the child.

23

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYINITIATIVES

A USER-FRIENDLY AND 
SIMPLE DIGITAL 
PUBLIC SECTOR

1.3  
OVERVIEW OF OWN INTERACTIONS 
WITH AUTHORITIES, AND BENEFITS

Citizens  and  businesses  will  be  offered  insight  into 
relevant information about themselves held by pub-
lic authorities. This information will be presented in 
a context tailored to the individual user. The author-
ities  will  increasingly  actively  inform  citizens  and 
businesses about important events. For example, this 
may be a text reminder that it is time for children to 
be vaccinated. This means that users will be better 
able to react to important information in due time.

1.1  
MORE COHESIVE USER 
PATHWAYST

Citizens and businesses will experience a more 
user-friendly  and  coordinated  service  when 
their need for service goes across digital solu-
tions  and  authorities.  Work  on  selected  user 
journeys,  for  example  divorces  or  business 
start-ups, will secure easier and more straight-
forward  self-service  processes.  Users  will  be 
guided  through  the  process  and  thereby  they 
will be able to serve themselves easily and sim-
ply in a more cohesive administrative procedure.

1.4  
BETTER TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR 
CITIZENS AND BUSINESSES

It  will  be  easier  for  users  to  get  help  if  they  have 
problems with NemID, NemLog-in, Digital Post, etc. 
A  number  of  common  public-sector  support  pro-
grammes will be gathered together so that it is easier 
for citizens and businesses to get help or to be guided 
to the right authority. Information about operational 
problems and disruption in common solutions for de-
central authorities will be enhanced so that they can 
provide the best help for users. Knowledge about the 
problems  users  meet  will  be  collected  and  used  to 
improve the digital solutions.

1.2  
BETTER DIGITAL COMMUNICATION

In order to ensure user-friendly and up-to-date 
digital  solutions,  self-service  solutions,  infra-
structure  components  and  portals  must  meet 
a few agreed requirements when new solutions 
are  developed  or  further  developed.  The  re-
quirements are drawn up in collaboration with 
relevant  authorities.  For  example,  these  may 
include  that  solutions  are  to  work  on  mobile 
devices, be accessible for the disabled, and be 
tested  by  users.  Data  will  be  collected  about 
user experience and use of the solutions so that 
solutions can constantly be improved.

1.5  
ALL COMMUNICATION FROM THE 
PUBLIC SECTOR IS DIGITAL

In  future,  businesses  and  the  individuals  ready  for 
digital solutions will receive all their post from public 
authorities digitally. However, this will exclude specif-
ic types of correspondence, for example letters that 
can only be managed physically, for example sample 
letters  which  contain  vials,  health-insurance  cards, 
etc.  Similarly,  exchange  of  digital  notifications  be-
tween authorities will take place through efficient use 
of digital channels such as secure email and Digital 
Post, among other things through metadata mark-up 
of notifications.

24

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYFocus area 2
Better use of data and quicker  
case processing

Time is one of the important service parame-
ters in a digital society. The huge amounts of 
data already under the charge of the public 
administration will be used more extensively 
to benefit citizens and businesses wherever 
possible within the framework of legislation.

Simpler rules, better processes and reduc-
tions in the administrative burden will make 
the  public  sector  more  efficient  and  easier 
to use for the individual person and for bu-
sinesses.

Relevant knowledge to be used  
across authorities
Relevant information from self-service solu-
tions, public registries, etc. will be exchanged 
much more extensively between the autho-
rities’ specialist systems, it will support the 
work  of  case  officers  and  it  will  be  reused 
across authorities in order to simplify repor-
ting to authorities as far as is technically and 
legally possible.

In  the  long  term,  it  will  be  possible  for  far 
more case decisions to be made more rapid-
ly, and in some cases immediately, because 
the  necessary  information  is  correct  and 
available in the right place at the right time 
in the course of a case. This is already happe-
ning to some extent, for example with regard 
to payment of benefits such as child allow-

ance, maternity leave benefits and state reti-
rement pensions.

This  means  that  citizens  and  businesses 
are  seeing  shorter  case-processing  times, 
and more often receive an immediate reply, 
for example, as to whether they qualify for 
a specific benefit,  as well as the amount to 
which  they  are  entitled.  Furthermore,  the 
authorities can perform tasks more efficient-
ly, for example when it becomes possible to 
automate parts of case processing.

As  far  as  possible,  citizens  and  businesses 
will  not  have  to  spend  time  submitting  the 
same  information  to  several  places  or  pro-
viding  documentation  for  information  that 
is  already  in  public  registries.  For  example, 
when  people  have  submitted  information 
in one context to one authority, they should 
not have the inconvenience of submitting the 
same information to another authority. This 
could mean, for example, that digital appli-
cations, reportings and notifications already 
have  some  fields  completed  with  relevant 
information in advance. This means that ci-
tizens  and  businesses  can  have  their  cases 
processed faster, for example when applying 
for something or notifying any changes.

Reusing data from public registries also con-
tributes  to  preventing  incorrect  payments 

25

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYand fraud, among other things, because the 
individual  or  business  is  not  at  risk  of  for-
getting to notify changes in information. Or 
because the rules are so complex that users 
unintentionally submit incorrect information. 

Legal framework conditions  
for a digital age
However, data sharing not only poses a te-
chnical challenge. There is also a challenge 
in  safeguarding  a  regulatory  framework  to 
ensure  that  new  opportunities  offered  by 
digitisation  become  assets  for  Danish  so-
ciety.  The  legislative  framework  should  be 
up-to-date so that it does not restrict more 
than necessary data sharing across sectors 
and functions. If specific legislation does not 
allow  digitisation  of  processes,  this  will  be 
examined in more detail. This might lead to 
proposed legislative amendments.

Simpler rules can provide better opportunity 
for  smoother  administrative  processes  and 
can  make  the  public  sector  more  efficient 
and easier to use for citizens and businesses.

At the same time, the legislative framework 
should  continue  to  set  very  clear  limits  so 
that data on citizens and businesses is only 
collected  and  used  where  necessary  and 
where  it  produces  value  for  the  individual 
and for society.

Some Danish acts and regulations covering 
digitisation  originate  from  EU  regulations. 
This places requirements on the way we or-
ganise  the  Danish  digital  public  sector  and 
the way we design our digital solutions and 
infrastructure,  etc.  The  EU's  General  Data 
Protection Regulation will influence how we 
can work with data in the public sector and 
in society in general in the future.

THE GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION
The upcoming General Data Protection Regulation is expected to be adopted by the EU during 
2016. The objective of the Regulation is to provide better protection of citizens' rights in con-
nection with processing of personal data, to improve the possibilities for exchanging personal 
data in the European single market, as well as to reduce administrative burdens and moder- 
nise the regulations to reflect the realities of a digital world. 

Amongst others, the regulation continues and specifies a number of obligations under the 
current Data Protection Directive which has been implemented into Danish law through the 
Processing of Personal Data Act. The Regulation also introduces new requirements on public 
authorities, for example to appoint a data protection advisor and, in certain situations, prepare 
impact analyses. Important work lies ahead with regard to establishing clarity about the sig- 
nificance of the Regulation for digitisation work, including identifying the specific consequenc-
es for public authorities. This work will be performed collaboratively between the relevant 
public parties.

26

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYINITIATIVES

BETTER USE OF DATA AND 
QUICKER CASE PROCESSING

2.1  
CLEAR LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR 
EGOVERNMENT 
Legislation and regulations should be adapted to 
the digital age. To address the cross-sectoral legal 
challenges of more eGovernment and more use of 
digital data, a standing committee will be set up 
under the auspices of the Agency for Digitisation. 
This committee will collect, screen and prioritise 
cross-sectoral  legal  challenges  identified  by  the 
authorities. The committee will prepare solutions 
for how to deal with the challenges identified.

2.2  
PROGRESS WITH GOOD  
BASIC DATA
We  must  make  even  more  progress  in  creating 
good public sector basic data. Therefore, efforts 
will  be  set  in  motion  to  improve  the  quality  of, 
and reach the targets set for, existing basic data. 
The  opportunity  for  launching  potential  new  
basic data projects, including on pay and salaries 
data, as well as joint solutions and services such 
as tailored data extracts, will be examined. A per-
manent governance structure will be established, 
so that the authorities can continue their work to 
establish reliable and coherent basic data of high 
quality.

2.3  
CORRECT PAYMENTS AND BETTER 
DATA ON THE INDIVIDUAL 
Work  by  the  public  sector  to  prevent  incorrect 
payments  and  fraud  will  be  continued.  Simple 
and evidence-based control processes, harmoni-
sation of concepts, high data quality and smooth 
cross-government collaboration will contribute to 
continued  more  efficient  and  effective  efforts  to 
prevent incorrect payments and fraud.

WHAT IS BASIC DATA?
The public authorities register core information about individuals, businesses, real property, build-
ings, addresses, and more. This information is called basic data and is used throughout the public 
sector in day-to-day casework by the authorities. Basic data therefore has to be reliable, of high 
quality, coherent across registries and databases, and easy to access for authorities, businesses 
and citizens. All basic data will be retrievable from the Data Distributor.

ABOUT THE BASIC DATA PROGRAMME
Basic Data Programme has set the framework for joint, structured and coordinated work in 
a number of prioritised basic data areas. Public registries with central basic data have been 
improved and data has been made available free of charge to public authorities, businesses 
and citizens. Less double registration, fewer parallel registries and less expenditure on ad-
ministration can lead to considerable efficiency improvements in government. Furthermore, 
businesses and citizens can be spared from having to provide the same information to the au-
thorities again and again. In a number of areas, businesses can moreover retrieve basic data 
free of charge and use it to develop new, smart solutions and products. 

27

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYFocus area 3
Better and more cohesive welfare services

There is a need for a more holistic approach 
to the digital interface between citizens and 
the public sector. Citizens must find that digi- 
tisation leads to improved and better coor-
dinated welfare services. To realise this, the 
authorities  must  to  a  greater  extent  share 
relevant information with each other. 

Knowledge sharing for better  
welfare services
The  exchange  of  relevant  health  data  be-
tween  the  hospital  and  the  local  health 
service, for example, makes it easier to co-
ordinate cross-sectoral patient pathways. It 
means that patients do not have to serve as 
liaison and be responsible for the knowledge 
transfer  between  various  health  staff.  This 
will  provide  security  and  improve  patient 
treatment.

Furthermore, it is vital that a young person 
trying  to  build  a  life  after  prison  is  offered 
help to re-enter society. For this to become 
reality,  the  local  social  services  should  be 
able to get timely information from the pris-
on and probation services about the young 
person's  upcoming  release  from  prison. 
These two examples illustrate how sharing 
relevant data allows government officials to 
organise citizens' pathways more optimally 
and coordinate things better on the basis of 
the specific situation of the individual.

In the final analysis, intelligent sharing and 
use of relevant data offer many benefits for 

the individual as well as for society in gen-
eral. However, this also places demands on 
government authorities throughout the pub-
lic sector to develop and expand further on 
existing opportunities and arrive at a shared 
understanding of IT architecture, data, clas-
sification and data quality, so that data can 
be  exchanged  securely,  efficiently  and  ef-
fectively, and taking account of the privacy 
of the individual. Sharing data must always 
be  within  the  framework  of  the  law  -  and 
with the consent of the citizen, where this is  
relevant. It should also be easier and digital-
ly smoother to collect consent from individ-
uals, so that processes are simpler.

Further deployment of digital  
welfare solutions
The  majority  of  citizens  want  to  live  ac-
tive lives, be able to cope on their own and 
be  free  to  do  the  things  they  enjoy.  Digital 
welfare solutions play an important role in 
making this possible. As citizens in general 
become  increasingly  more  confident  with 
technology and digital solutions, and as new 
user-friendly solutions are developed, digital 
welfare solutions will become an ever more 
integrated part of modern public services.

Further  deployment  of  digital  solutions 
that provide freedom and empower individ-
uals  not  only  improves  the  quality  of  life 
of  individuals;  it  also  improves  the  econo-
my.  For  example,  telemedicine  for  citizens 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

28

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY(COPD) makes these patients feel more se-
cure in their everyday lives and gives them 
more  flexibility.  Furthermore,  telemedicine 
involves the patients in their own treatment. 
In  addition,  welfare  technologies  for  home 
care,  such  as  paperless  toilets,  make  citi-
zens with disabilities less dependent on care 
services. Digital welfare solutions also allow 
healthcare and care staff etc. to plan their 
work more intelligently and more efficiently. 
Therefore,  digital  welfare  solutions  with  a 
proven track record should be deployed fur-
ther, so that more citizens can benefit from 
them.

At the end of 2016, a total of 16 projects will 
have  been  launched  or  completed  to  test 
digital  welfare  solutions  on  a  large  scale.  
Experience  from  this  will  be  used  as  a 
launch-pad for taking things to the next lev-
el and for Denmark to decide, up to 2020, on 
the deployment of additional digital welfare 
solutions with a proven track record of pro-
viding value for citizens.

The  continued  development  and  testing  of 
digital  welfare  solutions  and  new  technol-
ogies for the public sector will in many sit-
uations take place in collaboration with the 
business  community.  This  means  that  the 
competences and experience of businesses 
can be brought into play in the development 
of public services. If digital welfare solutions 
are  deployed  on  a  large  scale  throughout 
Denmark, this will generate new opportuni-
ties for businesses and give them additional 
experience which, in turn, can lead to export 
opportunities in the global market. 

Digital learning materials and tools
In  a  digital  world,  IT  and  digital  tools  and 
learning materials should be a natural part 
of  didactic  practices  and  teaching  for  chil-
dren and young people. New digital tools and 
learning materials must challenge the digi-
tal generation at day-care facilities, schools 
and other educational institutions, and sup-
port good didactic practices and high-quality 
teaching.

Many child carers and teachers are already 
using digital tools and learning materials in 
day-care  facilities,  schools  and  youth  edu-
cational programmes, etc. Digital tools and 
learning materials can raise the didactic and 
academic  level,  motivate  children,  young 
people and college and university students, 
as  well  as  ensure  they  take  a  more  active 
role in their own learning, although at their 
own pace and at a level suited to the indi-
vidual.

Competencies 
As  welfare  services  are  increasingly  be-
ing  delivered  digitally,  public  employees 
must know how to use the digital solutions 
in  their  work  lives.  Furthermore,  public  
employees  at  the  frontline  of  the  welfare 
system  should  support  and  guide  citizens 
in the use of digital web portals, tools and 
welfare solutions, as well as assist them in 
their  digital  dealings  with  the  authorities. 
So, there is need for public employees with 
the right competences, and this applies not 
the least to those employees who are in di-
rect contact with citizens, such as teachers, 
child carers, and healthcare and care staff.

29

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYINITIATIVES

BETTER AND MORE COHESIVE 
WELFARE SERVICES

3.1  
COHESIVE WELFARE PATHWAYS 
FOR CITIZENS

3.2  
BETTER DATA ABOUT DISABLED 
AND MARGINALISED ADULTS

Welfare pathways will be analysed: 1) cross-sec-
toral, coordinating interventions for citizens with 
concurrent  substance  use  and  mental  health 
disorders;  2)  unemployed  young  people  on  edu-
cational programmes; and 3) incarceration at in-
stitutions under the prison and probation services 
and  subsequent  reintegration  into  society.  Pro-
posals will be prepared for how to make pathways 
more  coherent  for  citizens,  for  example  through 
data sharing and smoother workflows. Experience 
from this will be used to ensure more coordinat-
ed, efficient and effective welfare pathways in the  
future. At the same time, there will be pilot tests 
of  a  shared  approach  to  easy  and  uniform  data 
sharing across the various welfare areas.

Work  by  local  government  to  strengthen  the 
quality  of  social  services  work  will  be  contin-
ued.  By  supporting  digitally  a  more  uniform  and 
structured  practice  of  documentation  across  lo-
cal  governments  in  the  social  services  field,  citi-
zens will be ensured better pathways, systematic 
follow-up  on  the  effects  of  interventions,  and 
the  opportunity  for  greater  transparency  across  
target  groups  within  the  area.  Furthermore,  this 
will also establish the foundation for sharing data 
and collaborating across specialist fields and sec-
tors.

30

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITY3.3  
FURTHER DEPLOYMENT OF 
DIGITAL WELFARE SOLUTIONS

3.4  
DIGITAL LEARNING AND 
TEACHING

Experience gained from large-scale testing of digital 
welfare solutions should be documented and solu-
tions  with  a  proven  track  record  will  be  deployed 
further to benefit citizens.  The goal is that eight dig-
ital welfare solutions will have been analysed and 
a binding decision taken before 2020 on nationwide 
deployment of approximately four solutions. A suc-
cessful deployment requires that several authorities 
follow the same time schedule.

Children  and  young  people  should  benefit  from 
digital learning tools and materials that enhance 
teaching.  Before  the  end  of  2018,  the  effect  of  
efforts to apply ICT in teaching in municipal pri-
mary and lower-secondary schools will be meas-
ured. There will be efforts to support the imple-
mentation of the agreement that pupils, parents, 
teachers  and  child  carers  have  a  shared  user 
portal  as  their  digital  access  point  for  learning 
materials, communications and other information 
regarding the teaching in primary and lower-sec-
ondary  school.  In  2019,  all  relevant  upper-sec-
ondary written exams will be digital, and in 2020 
all relevant written primary and lower-secondary 
school leaving exams will be digital.

3.5  
DIGITAL COMPETENCES FOR 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 

Public employees should be qualified to deal with 
the  digital  requirements  of  the  future.  The  digi-
tisation  goals  of  Danish  university  colleges  will 
therefore  be  followed  through  and  there  will  be 
special  efforts  to  enhance  digital  teaching  skills 
for  school  teachers  and  child  carers.  Further-
more, every public employee will be continuously 
informed about the requirements for information 
security.

31

DIGITAL SOLUTIONS MUST BE EASY-TO-USE, QUICK AND ENSURE HIGH QUALITYDIGITISATION 
MUST PROVIDE 
GOOD CONDITIONS 
FOR GROWTH

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE  
GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH

FOCUS AREAS

4.   BETTER FRAMEWORK FOR THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY

5.   PUBLIC SECTOR DATA AS A GROWTH DRIVER

6.   AN EFFICIENT UTILITIES SECTOR

THE GOAL

Digital solutions have great significance for the framework conditions of businesses. Public 
sector digitisation should contribute to realising the Government's goal to reduce the admi-
nistrative burden on the business community by DKK 3 billion by 2020 and to make it easier 
to run a business in Denmark. Digitisation and new technologies are drastically changing 
the conditions for businesses. Also in the public sector, there is an untapped potential for 
exploiting the opportunities provided by digitisation to rethink public services. It is the am-
bition that a far greater part of reporting by businesses to the public authorities is to take 
place automatically.

The  public  sector  has  large  amounts  of  data  which  businesses  can  use  to  optimise  their 
procedures, and which can form the basis for new business opportunities and innovation. 
Therefore, the public sector should make more public sector data available to businesses 
and support exploitation of this data by businesses.

Data must to a greater extent be improved and made available in a number of specific areas 
in which there is deemed to be a great potential for a more efficient and effective public 
sector and new business opportunities for Danish businesses. This includes data on waste, 
underground infrastructure, energy, topography, climate and water.

34

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHFocus area 4
Better framework for the  
business community

Throughout the years, the public sector has 
played an important role in the digital transi-
tion of businesses, for example through man-
datory  digital  communication  and  e-invoi- 
cing in dealings with public institutions and 
authorities.

ing. This will require that reporting become 
more  automatised,  so  that  the  relevant 
data  is  retrieved  directly  from  businesses’ 
own systems. This saves time for the indi-
vidual business and means better and more 
timely data for public authorities.

Public  sector  digitisation  should  continue 
to contribute to raising the digitisation level 
of  businesses.  At  the  same  time,  digitisa-
tion must be targeted to make it easier and 
more attractive to run a business. The public 
sector must establish framework conditions 
which  strengthen  productivity,  business  
development and competitiveness for Dan-
ish businesses.

To achieve this, there is need for persistent 
and strong focus over the next many years 
on adapting IT systems, standardising data 
and changing workflows. At the same time, 
it  requires  addressing  barriers  relating  to 
administrative  law  and  data  law.  This  en-
tails extremely complex work, but it is the 
right way forward if digitisation is to make it 
easier to run a business in Denmark.

Less administrative burden
Digitisation  offers  an  opportunity  to  dras-
tically reduce the administrative burden of 
businesses. Businesses today spend a sub-
stantial  amount  of  resources  on  reporting 
data to the authorities. Therefore, we must 
continue work to reduce this administrative 
burden.

Businesses  should  not  have  the  nuisance 
of  submitting  information  to  one  authori-
ty  which  another  authority  already  holds. 
Furthermore, there is a vision to complete-
ly  eliminate  the  many  requirements  for 
manual reporting, and instead replace this 
reporting  with  automatic  business  report-

Digital tendering procedures 
As a consequence of the EU Public Procure-
ment  Directive,  from  October  2018  open 
procedures  must  be  digital,  from  announ- 
cing to submitting tenders. Denmark should 
aim even higher. The authorities are already 
receiving  invoices  electronically.  We  there-
fore  have  to  aim  at  an  even  more  digital 
tendering and procurement procedure up to 
and  including  payment,  and  we  should  ex-
ploit the opportunities for reusing data.

A digital tendering and procurement proce-
dure  can  make  communication  more  effi-
cient and reduce transaction costs for busi-
nesses and public authorities alike. A more 

35

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHefficient tendering procedure will also make 
it possible to stretch the taxpayers' money 
further. At the same time, a digital process 
can raise the visibility of relevant European 
tendering procedures for Danish businesses. 

Opportunity for cloud computing
In  upcoming  years,  there  will  be  focus  on 
creating more competition in the market for 
public IT solutions and reducing the IT oper-
ating costs of the authorities.  The authori-
ties should be allowed to exploit the entire 
spectrum  of  IT  solutions,  including  cloud 
computing, and clear framework conditions 
should be established for this.

For public authorities, improved possibilities 
to make use of cloud computing in relevant 
areas will mean that they can buy standard-
ised and flexible IT solutions which, in turn, 
will allow them to scale capacity up or down 
as  required.  This  can  reduce  queues  when 
many citizens want to log in to a given ser-
vice  at  the  same  time.  For  the  authorities, 
cloud  computing  used  in  the  right  ways, 
and taking the right security measures, can 
therefore  lead  to  increased  technical  and 
commercial  flexibility  as  well  as  cheaper 
and more efficient IT solutions.

WHAT IS CLOUD COMPUTING?
Cloud computing is a business model which entails buying standardised IT products (soft-
ware, hardware or services) as a service over the internet. This means customers do not have 
to install and maintain the IT products themselves in house.

Cloud computing can contribute to economic growth by reducing the costs of procuring and 
operating IT systems. Furthermore, both customers and suppliers can scale IT products up 
or down as required.

36

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHINITIATIVES

BETTER FRAMEWORK FOR THE 
BUSINESS COMMUNITY 

4.1  
AUTOMATIC BUSINESS 
REPORTING 

4.3  
CLOUD COMPUTING IN THE 
PUBLIC SECTOR

The  public  sector  should  to  a  greater  extent 
use automation and data reuse between autho-
rities  and  businesses.  A  trial  process  will  be 
carried out for a number of volunteer busines-
ses in the area of financial and economic repor-
ting to the public authorities. This process will 
involve automatic exchange of accounting data 
between the business and the authorities. This 
trial process will include relevant analyses as 
the basis for a decision on deploying automatic 
business reporting. 

The public sector should have opportunity to use 
cloud computing where this provides value and is 
appropriate from both a commercial and a securi-
ty perspective. Therefore, an updated legal guide-
line will be prepared on the basis of the upcoming 
General  Data  Protection  Regulation,  describing 
the possibilities available for the authorities with 
regard  to  cloud  computing,  and  which  also  ad-
dresses assessment and management of security 
risks.

4.2  
DIGITAL TENDERING PROCEDURES 
AND PROCUREMENT 

According to the EU Public Procurement Directi-
ve, digital tendering procedures must be in place 
by October 2018, so that businesses can submit 
tenders digitally in open procedures. An analy-
sis of the tendering and procurement procedure 
will be launched, which will identify opportuni-
ties  to  use  standards,  technical  requirements 
and common public sector components, such as 
interoperability  with  future  versions  of  NemID, 
NemLog-in, NemHandel, Virk.dk and encryption 
components, etc. The analysis will describe how 
a  coherent  digital  tendering  and  procurement 
procedure  can  be  completed  most  efficiently 
with a view to reducing transaction costs for the 
contracting  authority  as  well  as  for  suppliers. 

37

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHFocus area 5
Public sector data as a growth driver 

The quantities and quality of data, as well as 
our  possibilities  for  storing  and  processing 
these large quantities of data, are increasing 
dramatically  these  years.  The  authorities  at 
central, regional and local government levels 
today collect and produce large quantities of 
data in their daily performance of tasks. Both 
businesses and citizens report large quantiti-
es of data to the public authorities. One of the 
largest collections of data is therefore held by 
the public sector. 

Data as resource
In an international perspective, Danish pub-
lic  sector  data  is  of  high  quality  and  holds 
a large commercial productivity and growth 
potential. Businesses can use public sector 
data  to  optimise  their  business  processes 
and  to  develop  new  products  and  services 
which create value for citizens, public autho-
rities  and  fellow  businesses.  In  the  digital 
age, data is one of the most valuable resour-
ces for running a business. 

In recent years, the public sector has worked 
to improve the framework conditions for the 
accessibility of public sector data. With the 
establishment  of  the  Basic  Data  Program-
me,  businesses,  citizens  and  authorities  
gained access to an array of basic data such 
as address data, business data and property 
ownership data. The work to make reliable 

and coherent public sector data available for 
society will still be an essential focus area 
in the future to boost data-driven innovation.

Benefits must be showcased
Today, businesses and authorities often have 
difficulty  finding,  combining  and  exploiting 
public  sector  data.  Therefore,  there  is  a 
need  to  improve  the  access  of  businesses 
to public sector data which offers a grow-
th potential for the businesses, and at the 
same time promote increased use of data. 

Data will not automatically be utilised me-
rely  by  making  it  available.  When  data  is 
collected from a larger and more heteroge-
neous number of sources, IT systems and 
employees are challenged, not the least in 
small and medium-sized enterprises. Expe-
rience suggests that businesses should be 
made more aware of the value of data and 
that it should be easier for authorities and 
businesses  to  experiment  in  using  data. 
Opening up for free access to public sector 
data should take place wherever this is re-
levant for businesses and cost-effective for 
the  authorities,  and,  of  course,  within  the 
framework of the law.

It can also be advantageous for the autho-
rities  to  plan  access  to  data  from  the  be-
ginning  when  buying  new  IT  systems  or 

38

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHIn future, the use of more types of GPS data 
and  new  technology  will  accelerate.  It  will 
be easier to get dynamic localisation data in 
real time, for example data about the move-
ments of large crowds of people, road con-
gestion,  local  environmental  conditions  in 
connection  with  flooding  and  cloud  bursts, 
etc.  Furthermore,  the  launch  of  the  Euro- 
pean Galileo satellite navigation system will 
speed up the development of technological 
solutions with accurate and dynamic data.

This  new  GPS  data  must  be  freely  acces-
sible  and  sharable  across  administrative 
units and fields. Therefore, a common basis 
for sharing dynamic positioning data across 
public sector IT systems should be establis-
hed. With this common basis, central, regio-
nal and local governments can develop their 
own separate systems and solutions which 
can  interoperate  and  be  combined  across 
sectors and units.

carrying out substantial new development 
on existing systems. This must be with con-
sideration for IT security and the protection 
of data. 

Smart Cities
The use of new technologies such as solu-
tions related to the Internet of Things (IoT) 
and data used in the design of modern intel-
ligent cities are often referred to as the con-
cept of 'Smart City’. This could be waste bins 
that  automatically  report  when  they  need 
emptying,  intelligent  traffic  management 
systems, and the collection, display and use 
of public sector data.

Many Danish local and regional governments 
have  launched  projects  with  Smart  City  
solutions, and Denmark has come a long way 
in this area. Furthermore, Danish businesses 
have  a  number  of  stronghold  positions,  for 
example  with  regard  to  climate  adaptation 
and  energy-efficiency  improvement,  waste 
management,  and  user-friendly  design  and 
architecture.  Experience  from  these  pro- 
jects should be further developed and used 
to promote the deployment of good Smart 
City solutions.

39

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH5.3  
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR 
POSITIONING AND NAVIGATION 
DATA

New, more accurate and reliable GPS data holds 
the potential to alter the way authorities and pri-
vate businesses solve problems, and render their 
problem-solving  more  efficient  and  effective.  An 
analysis  will  be  carried  out  of  public  sector  and 
commercial  needs  for  establishing  a  common 
public infrastructure for positioning and navigati-
on data. The analysis will serve as the basis for 
deciding  on  implementation  of  one  or  two  pilot 
projects.

INITIATIVES

PUBLIC SECTOR DATA AS A 
GROWTH DRIVER

5.1  
OPEN PUBLIC SECTOR DATA  

In order to promote public sector data, including 
the commercial use of this type of data, a com-
mon public sector partnership will be set up com-
prising  Open  Data  DK,  Danish  Regions,  and  the 
Danish Business Authority. This partnership will 
consult with businesses and experts to establish 
a better overall picture of existing open data and 
promote  efforts  to  ensure  access  to  more  open 
data.  The  objective  of  the  partnership  is  also  to 
promote  the  use  of  open  data,  including  by  en-
suring clear framework conditions for use, as well 
as draw attention to the value of using data, for 
example  through  hackathons  and  the  establish-
ment of a public-private data space.

5.2  
SMART CITY PARTNERSHIP

A joint public sector partnership for Smart Cities 
will  promote  the  use  of  smart  digital  solutions 
and data in urban development efforts as well as 
support  the  commercial  potential  of  Smart  City 
solutions. The Partnership will select three to five 
action areas for focussed efforts to promote the 
deployment  of  good  Smart  City  solutions.  This 
could be in areas such as green and sustainable 
development, intelligent traffic management sy-
stems or use of sensor data.

40

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHFocus area 6
An efficient utilities sector

Danish society is dependent on good and ef-
ficient  utilities.  The  utilities  sector  supplies 
electricity,  gas,  district  heating,  water  and 
telecommunications  services  to  consumers 
and it collects and manages waste and wa-
stewater. In 2014, total costs of production 
in the electricity, gas, district heating, waste 
and  wastewater  sectors  amounted  to  bil-
lions of DKK, corresponding to 2.5 % of the 
overall Danish economy.

Data on the utilities sector is important for 
local government decisions about urban and 
business  development  projects  or  for  their 
efforts  to  build  future-proof  critical  infra-
structure  for  society  (to  prevent  flooding, 
for example). At the same time, data on the 
utilities sector can play a significant role in 
strategic work by the public sector to realise 
a cost-effective transition of Danish society 
to less energy consumption, increased pro-
duction, and more use of renewable energy. 

Therefore, we must be good at planning and 
managing  the  utilities  area  effectively  and 
efficiently. This will require better and more 
coherent  utilities  data,  which  businesses, 
authorities and citizens alike can rely on and 
exploit.

Need for shared utilities data
Utilities data includes topography and terra-

in data and water data, such as data about 
wastewater (sewer lines). Utilities data also  
includes  data  on  the  production  and  con-
sumption  of  electricity,  gas  and  heating,  as 
well as data about cables, for example tele-
vision, traffic-light and internet cables, etc.

Many such data sets already exist, but the-
se are often fragmented and difficult to find. 
The quality and relevance of the information 
is not homogenous, and it is often difficult to 
combine the types of data necessary to op- 
timise operations. This also makes it expen-
sive  and  difficult  for  public  authorities  and 
public  sector  companies  to  maintain  the 
many  different  systems  and  databases  in 
which the data is stored.

Open  and  quality-assured  data  is  therefore 
vital  for  efficient  production  and  manage-
ment  in  the  utilities  area.  There  is  a  great 
untapped  potential  in  the  using  data  as  a 
driver to improve the efficiency of workflows 
and procedures in the sector. This will ensure 
higher  returns  on  the  Danish  utilities  infra-
structure and, thus, lower prices for consu-
mers and businesses. 

At the same, an improved data basis will pro-
vide  new  business  opportunities  for  Danish 
businesses. This applies to the primary utility 
companies which can optimise their operati-

41

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHcoherent energy supply data, smart energy 
management tools and data-driven decision 
support systems, so that the transition can 
be as cost-effective as possible. Better data 
in the area can help produce an even more 
efficient  energy  supply  and  push  for  the  
development of new products in the energy 
supply sector.

It  should  also  be  easier  for  businesses, 
authorities  and  other  stakeholders  to  get 
information  about  underground  infrastruc-
ture,  for  example  electric  cables,  district- 
heating  pipes,  sewage  pipes,  natural-gas  
pipes  or  antenna  cables.  Consistent  infor-
mation  about  the  grid  system  will  make  it 
easier and cheaper to maintain and establish 
new underground infrastructure. Better sha-
ring  of  data  about  underground  infrastruc-
ture can also reduce damage during digging 
and excavation.

The waste area is facing serious challenges 
with regard to generating data of adequate 
quality  and  such  that  it  is  accessible  and 
useful for planning, inspection and develop-
ment by local governments. It is necessary 
to  modernise  existing  national  IT  systems 
used  to  collect  data  so  that  local  govern-
ments,  for  example,  can  use  data  about 
waste  to  optimise  waste  management  in 
Denmark.

ons, as well as to the businesses which, for 
example,  provide  solutions  for  data-driven 
decision support systems.

It  is  anticipated  that  increased  integration 
of different utilities systems will be vital for 
conversion of the energy system to renewab-
les  which  come  from  intermittent  energy 
sources, for example solar and wind energy. 

Easy access to good utilities data
Topography and terrain data as well as data 
on water and the climate are vital when lo-
cal  and  regional  governments  are  to  plan 
and  make  decisions  about,  for  example, 
expanding  water  and  wastewater  manage-
ment utilities to prevent sewers from over-
flowing and to ensure clean drinking water 
in connection with extreme weather events. 
At the same time, effective common public 
sector  combining  and  distribution  of  ter-
rain, climate and water data are important 
and  will  provide  positive  benefits  for  other 
sectors,  such  as  building  and  construc- 
tion,  insurance  and  agriculture.  Better  and 
more accessible data can also help promo-
te innovation in private businesses, just as it 
can  open  up  for  new  data-driven  products 
and services for both private and public se-
ctor clients.

Furthermore, the display and accessibility of 
existing data on energy supplies, for examp-
le production and consumption of electricity, 
gas  and  heating,  could  greatly  benefit  the 
Danish  transition  to  less  energy  consump-
tion  and  more  renewables.  This  transition 
has  meant  there  is  a  strong  demand  for 

42

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHINITIATIVES

AN EFFICIENT UTILITIES  
SECTOR

6.1  
COMMON DATA ON TOPOGRAPHY, 
CLIMATE AND WATER

6.3  
EXCHANGE OF DATA ON 
UNDERGROUND INFRASTRUCTURE 

Data on topography, climate and water is part of 
the  administrative  foundation  for  many  sectors 
and  authorities.  Consistent  provision  of  up-to- 
date  data  on  topography,  climate  and  water 
across  sectors  will  contribute  to  more  effective 
administration, it will support the frequent emer-
gency situations in connection with extreme we-
ather events and it will promote development of 
new products and technologies. 

Currently,  maintaining  and  constructing 
infra-
structure is costly for authorities and businesses. 
A  digital  platform  will  therefore  be  established 
to  exchange  data  on  underground  infrastructure 
to  streamline  workflows,  reduce  damage  from  
digging and excavation, and to enable coordination 
of  digging  activities  as  well  as  exploit  synergies  
between different supply infrastructures. The con-
sequences  of  this  initiative,  including  scope  and 
any phasing-in, will be discussed with the utilities 
sector and the telecommunications sector.

6.2  
OPEN DATA ON ENERGY SUPPLY

Conversion to more renewable energy has crea-
ted a substantial demand for data-driven decision 
support and tools for smart energy management. 
This  requires  the  relevant  data  to  be  accessible 
and of good quality. An analysis will be conduc-
ted of the potential for making available data on 
energy consumption in buildings. The analysis will 
also identify general possibilities arising from in-
tegrating  this  data  into  the  utilities  sector.  Data 
will  be  tested  through  a  pilot  project  for  ener-
gy-efficient buildings.

6.4  
OVERALL IT ARCHITECTURE FOR 
DATA ON WASTE

Better  data  on  waste  will  enable  local  govern-
ments to plan, enforce and evaluate local govern-
ment  waste  schemes  more  optimally  to  benefit 
the  public  and  businesses.  Currently,  waste  data 
is collected through a number of IT systems which 
have  been  established  separately  and  which  can 
only to a limited extent share data. An analysis will 
be initiated to result in an action plan for flexible 
registration, exchange and use of data between the 
IT systems in the waste area.

43

DIGITISATION MUST PROVIDE GOOD CONDITIONS FOR GROWTHSECURITY AND 
CONFIDENCE 
MUST BE IN FOCUS 
AT ALL TIMES

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST 
BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMES

FOCUS AREAS

7.   THE PUBLIC SECTOR PROTECTS DATA

8.   ROBUST DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

9.   DIGITISATION FOR EVERYONE

THE GOAL

The public sector is to use and manage data on citizens and businesses with care and with 
the appropriate level of security. Information security in the public sector must be improved. 
Therefore, all authorities will have to commit to the principles set out in the international  
information  security  standard  ISO27001.  This  also  means  that  public  employees  should 
have, and be familiar with, clear guidelines on how to store and manage personal data on 
citizens and confidential data on businesses.

The public sector should ensure robust and efficient operation of systems and IT infrastruc-
tures that are crucial for society. New secure and user-friendly generations of NemID, Nem-
Log-in and Digital Post must be able to meet future needs and allow citizens and businesses 
to communicate securely and with confidence, both with each other and with public autho-
rities.

Digitisation should be for everyone – also for individuals with special needs or challenges. 
Digital competences of citizens and businesses and their knowledge about secure digital 
behaviour must be improved. Assistance should be available to those who cannot use digital 
solutions or who do not have access to them. Developing the digital skills of children and 
young people already begins at preschool, and continues throughout school, further educa-
tion and the rest of their lives.

46

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESFocus area 7
The public sector protects data

Citizens  and  businesses  should  feel  confi-
dent and safe using digital public services. 
The  public  sector  must  protect  user  data, 
and therefore information security must be 
improved throughout the public sector. This 
should be done with emphasis on user-fri-
endliness in digital solutions and on financi-
al considerations.

New level of ambition
Digital  solutions  and  digital  technologies 
have  created  new  possibilities  for  dialogue 
and involvement, brand new businesses op-
portunities, etc. However, increased digitisa- 
tion has also brought with it a risk of new ty-
pes of crime. Cyber criminals, misuse of data 
and  breaches  of  security  are  more  serious 
than ever. They pose a real risk in the form 
of losses and costs for individuals, businesses 
and public authorities, and they can also lead 
to loss of confidence in IT solutions. 

We  must  therefore  aim  high  with  regard  to 
information  security  in  the  public  sector. 
Not  least  the  very  serious  cases  of  breach 
of security in recent years have made it im-
portant for all public authorities to be in full 
control of information security and to follow 
the international standards on managing and 
storing data.

Secure management of information 
about citizens and businesses
The need to improve security has developed 
in line with the increasing need for access to 
personal  data  on  citizens  and  confidential 
data on businesses as a consequence of digi-
tal  transformation.  Several  employees  deal 
with  sensitive  or  confidential  data  in  their 
work  and  case  processing.  Other  security 
procedures  are  required  when  manual  pa-
per-based  workflows  become  digital  and 
sharing information becomes easier.

Citizens  and  businesses  should  feel  confi-
dent and safe when submitting information 
to the public administration. They should be 
able to trust that data will be used for rele-
vant purposes and that it will not be lost or 
fall into the wrong hands. The public sector 
will use and manage sensitive and confiden-
tial data with care and with the appropriate 
level of security and privacy. 

Public employees should have, and be famili-
ar with, clear guidelines on how to collect, sto-
re and use data, and not least sensitive per-
sonal data and confidential data. Authorities 
will control who has access to sensitive data 
on the public and businesses. Management in 
the authorities will assume responsibility for  
information security, and the authorities will 
ensure establishment of secure procedures 

47

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESand  workflows  adapted  to  the  individual 
tasks. Among other things, this will be done 
through  consistently  differential  access  to 
data  so  that  only  relevant  employees  have 
access to data on citizens and businesses.

Data protection will, as far as possible, be in-
corporated into the design and development 
of  public  IT  solutions  from  the  very  outset. 
Investing in security comes at a price. How-
ever, in an ever-more digital world, data pro-
tection is an increasing necessity to ensure 
that people and businesses have confidence 
in digital public services.

The public sector will work to spread the use 
of common public security standards. More-
over,  the  Danish  public  sector  must  have  a 
full realistic overview of the current security 
situation and threat levels with regard to cy-
ber and information security in order to react 
and initiate preventive measures. 

Secure digital identities
In  a  globalised  world,  goods,  services  and 
people are increasingly crossing borders, not 
least between the EU Member States. At the 
same time, the current refugee crisis means 
that authorities and administrations in Den-
mark will have to deal with a large number 
of foreign citizens without a Danish or Euro-
pean  ID  number.  Correct  digital  identities 
are  required  for  citizens  and  employees  of  
businesses  to  communicate  securely  with 
the authorities and with each other.

Therefore,  there  is  an  increasing  need  for 
certainty about the identity of individuals and 

businesses  in  a  digital  world.  Among  other 
things, there is a need for a common method 
and  stricter  process  with  regard  to  issuing 
digital  identities  such  as  NemID  to  foreign 
individuals and businesses in Denmark. This 
will  ensure  that  individuals  can  receive  the 
correct benefits, that businesses can report 
correct  data  such  as  VAT  returns,  etc.  Mo-
reover, a better overview can prevent Danes 
and  foreigners  from  receiving  benefits  they 
are not entitled to after moving away from 
Denmark.

Similarly, there is a challenge with regard to 
ensuring the right level of security in ID solu-
tions targeted at children and young people 
who  are  not  old  enough  to  have  a  NemID. 
They  should  be  able  to  navigate  securely  
online  and  log  on  to  relevant  digital  solu- 
tions, for example in connection with school. 

As of 2018, digital identity (such as NemID) 
must  be  usable  in  all  public  sector  digital  
solutions  in  all  EU  Member  States.  For 
example, a Danish student will be able to use 
a NemID in connection with an application to 
study abroad. Moreover, a foreign employee 
in Denmark will be able to log on to a Danish 
self-service solution (to apply for a tax card, 
for example) with the digital identity solution 
of his/her own country.

Ongoing development of  
common solutions
The public sector has an important task in 
making  available  central  solutions  to  citi-
zens  and  businesses  that  enable  safe  and 
secure digital communication and interacti-

48

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESon. Individuals and businesses unable to use 
digital self-service solutions must be given 
the  opportunity  to  surrender  digital  power 
of attorney to another trusted party, and it 
should  also  be  possible  to  provide  digital 
consent.

The major common solutions, NemID, Nem-
Log-in and Digital Post, will all be put up for 
tender in the years to come. This will be a 
good  occasion  to  develop  and  rethink  the 
solutions in order to meet the future needs 
for security, digital identities, rights manage-
ment, communication, user-friendliness and 
accessibility.

49

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESINITIATIVES

THE PUBLIC SECTOR  
PROTECTS DATA

7.3  
DIGITAL IDENTITIES AND  
RIGHTS MANAGEMENT

Systems and data must only be accessed by the 
right people. This will be ensured through correct 
assignment  of  digital  identities  (e-identities)  and 
rights.  The  common  method  to  assign  correct  
digital identities to the public and businesses mo-
ving to Denmark, for example, will be improved. 
The  possibility  to  surrender  digital  power  of  at-
torney and consent will be made easier. Stricter 
requirements from the EU for mutual acceptance 
of e-identities across borders must also be met.

7.1  
WELL-MANAGED INFORMATION 
SECURITY IN ALL AUTHORITIES 

7.4  
NEW GENERATIONS OF NEMID, 
NEMLOG-IN AND DIGITAL POST

Information security must be managed better by 
central, regional and local governments. All pub-
lic  authorities  will  therefore  have  to  commit  to 
the principles set out in the international informa-
tion security standard ISO27001. Efforts against 
hacking incidents will be intensified. Information 
security should be an intrinsic part of design and 
development of public IT solutions on the basis of 
the  principles  of  'data  protection  by  design'  and 
'data protection by default'.

NemID, NemLog-in and Digital Post are necessary 
to ensure efficient and secure digital self-service 
for  citizens  and  businesses.  New  tendering  pro-
cedures will be held for the three infrastructure 
components in the strategy period. Among other 
things, the tendering procedures will ensure con-
tinuous development of the systems so that they 
are up-to-date, user-friendly, and secure, and so 
that they meet the needs of authorities, citizens  
and businesses.

7.2  
COMMON STANDARDS FOR 
SECURE EXCHANGE OF 
INFORMATION

Exchange  of  information  must  be  conducted 
securely  throughout  the  public  sector.  Therefo-
re, the current and future common public sector 
standards for secure exchange of information will 
be disseminated throughout the public sector.

7.5  
SECURE ID SOLUTIONS FOR 
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE

The  need  for  a  more  secure  identification  solu-
tion  for  children  and  young  people  has  arisen  in 
line  with  the  increasing  use  of  digital  solutions. 
This  need  applies  in  particular  to  the  group  of 
12-15-year-olds who do not yet have a NemID, but 
have an increasing need for digital confidentiality 
in  connection  with  login  to  school  intranets,  for 
example.  Methods  to  develop  an  ID  solution  for 
children and young people will be analysed.

50

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESFocus area 8
Robust digital infrastructure

Denmark  has  come  a  long  way  in  estab-
lishing  an  up-to-date  and  robust  basis  for 
eGovernment.  In  the  years  to  come,  the 
public sector will strive to consolidate the 
Danish  digital  foundation.  A  robust  digi-
tal  foundation  is  about  ensuring  common 
frameworks for IT architecture, and a con-
sistent IT infrastructure.

Common frameworks for IT architec-
ture in the public sector
Effective sharing of data across authorities 
and  with  citizens  and  businesses  requires 
possibilities  to  reuse  relevant  data.  For  IT 
systems in one public authority to be able to 
retrieve, understand and use data originating 
from a system in another authority requires 
a  common  framework  for  how  authorities 
describe  and  exchange  such  data.  While 
many  authorities,  within  their  respective  
areas, have developed architecture patterns 
for  their  IT  systems,  common  architecture 
principles and guidelines are necessary for 

systems to be able to exchange and use data 
easily and securely across authorities. Prin-
ciples  and  guidelines  are  based  in  part  on 
the common public sector work on the Basic 
Data Programme.

Consistent IT infrastructure
The common public sector digital infrastruc-
ture  and  digital  platforms  such  as  NemID, 
NemLogin, NemKonto bank account, virk.dk, 
Digital  Post,  The  Civil  Registration  System 
etc.  are  now  just  as  important  for  Danish 
society  as  the  physical  infrastructure  such 
as  roads,  railways,  the  electricity  grid  and 
the  telephone  network.  The  individual  in-
frastructure  components  and  systems  are 
now  so  closely  linked  that  a  breakdown  in 
one system will impact many other systems 
and solutions in the public sector as well as 
in the private sector. For instance, if NemID 
is down, users cannot read their digital post, 
use  a  self-service  solution,  log  on  to  their 
online bank account or on to borger.dk.

WHAT DOES A COMMON PUBLIC SECTOR IT ARCHITECTURE MEAN 
FOR DATA SHARING?
IT architecture to share data consists of common principles and guidelines to describe and 
exchange data, and it helps authorities retrieve and use data from each other's IT systems. The 
architecture makes it easier, simpler and more secure to integrate public IT systems with one 
another and it forms the basis for more efficient data sharing in the public sector.

51

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESTherefore,  more  than  ever,  there  is  a  need 
for  an  approach  in  which  authorities  colla-
borate across sectors in selected key areas 
to share information and ensure stable and 
robust  solutions;  an  approach  that  makes 
it  easy  to  gain  an  overview  of  the  current 
operating  status.  It  must  be  easy  for  the 
authorities to determine the system status 
if  the  systems  become  inaccessible  or  so 
overstretched  that  users  are  queueing  up 
for  access.  This  will  enable  the  authorities 
to inform citizens and businesses about the 
status of their IT solutions. 

The digital solutions made available by the 
public  sector  must  live  up  to  the  expecta-
tions  of  citizens  and  businesses  for  data 
protection,  information  security  and  stable 

operation. The public sector must continue 
to  deliver  professional  IT  operations  at  all 
levels, so that public sector solutions can be 
robust, stable and effective. The infrastruc-
ture will be checked regularly, and solutions 
and the common public sector components 
will be kept up-to-date.

Danes must have quick access to the inter-
net regardless of where they live or work in 
Denmark.  Denmark  generally  has  a  highly 
developed  broadband  infrastructure,  howe-
ver in some parts of the country citizens and 
businesses still do not have the broadband 
speeds  they  want.  Moreover,  an  increasing 
number  of  activities  in  the  digital  society  
require a good internet connection.

BETTER BROADBAND THROUGHOUT DENMARK
The Danish Government has a target that by 2020 all households and businesses must have  
access to a broadband connection with a download speed of at least 100 Mbit/s and upload 
speed  of  at  least  30  Mbit/s.  The  point  of  departure  of  the  Government  is  that  broadband  
development should be market-driven, and regulation should be technology-neutral. 

In order to promote this development and ensure good broadband coverage throughout 

Denmark, the Government has taken a number of initiatives that will be implemented in the 
years to come:

• Establishment of a test scheme with a government broadband funding pool of DKK 200 million
•  Better opportunities to utilise existing passive infrastructure for broadband such as empty  

underground pipes and conduits

• Ambitious requirements for coverage in future frequency auctions
•  The BoligJobordning (tax deduction scheme for domestic and home-improvement services)  

can be used for the deployment of broadband.
KNOWLEDGE OF CURRENT BROADBAND COVERAGE 
The Tjekditnet.dk website (check your internet) allows consumers, businesses, local govern-
ments and regions to check the current broadband coverage and search for suppliers for a given 
address. The website is planned to be updated for smartphone use in 2016. 

In  the  2013-2020  Strategy  for  Digital  Welfare  it  was  agreed  to  examine  the  requirements 
imposed by selected digital welfare services on local coverage. In 2016, a survey will be con-
ducted of the broadband coverage as well as of the requirements imposed by the digital welfare 
services. 

52

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESINITIATIVES

ROBUST DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

8.1  
GOOD DATA AND EFFICIENT  
DATA SHARING

8.2  
ROBUST OPERATION OF THE 
COMMON INFRASTRUCTURE

A  common  public  sector  IT  architecture  will  be 
developed to set the framework for sharing data 
between  authorities.  Among  other  things,  public 
authorities will be able to use this architecture in 
their  work  on  standardising  and  improving  data, 
and when they need to share data with, or use data 
from, other authorities in connection with case pro-
cessing, for example. The architecture consists of 
joint management of public architecture principles 
and guidelines as well as common frameworks for 
how to create and share good data.

The collaboration on operation of crucial common 
public  sector  IT  infrastructure  systems  will  be 
strengthened and their mutual dependencies will 
be mapped. A common public sector communica-
tion platform will be developed, on which author-
ities and other stakeholders can find information 
about the current operating status.

53

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESPROFESSIONAL MANAGEMENT OF IT SYSTEMS AND IT PROJECTS

The  Danish  welfare  model  requires  stable  and  efficient  IT  systems,  and  this  is  why  good  
management of IT is crucial. The coming years will see a massive professionalisation of IT man-
agement in the central government to ensure a robust IT portfolio and foundation for further 
work to digitise central government. Moreover, the central government will prioritise its IT costs 
to ensure efficient administration of taxpayers' money. Finally, genuine competition and profes-
sional collaboration with suppliers utilising market innovation forces need to be ensured.

THE COUNCIL FOR IT PROJECTS
For a number of years, the central government has been working consistently to improve man-
agement of major government IT projects, e.g. under the auspices of the Council for IT Projects. 
This has contributed to positive developments for IT projects. However there is a need for fur-
ther professionalisation, e.g. in connection with support of contract and supplier management 
as well as in agile development projects. 

An analysis of the overall government IT area, which will be completed in 2016, will identify 
central government management of IT and IT costs. This will contribute to even more profes-
sional management of government IT systems and projects

MUNICIPAL COLLABORATION ON EXPOSURE TO MARKET 
MECHANISMS AND PROFESSIONAL SUPPLIER MANAGEMENT
Through the joint municipal ordering organisation KOMBIT, local governments have exposed to 
market mechanisms a number of crucial business systems over which the former municipal-
ly-owned KMD had a monopoly. In the coming years, local governments will face a challeng-
ing task in implementing new, modernised IT solutions. By joining forces under KOMBIT, local  
governments  can  ensure  a  higher  level  of  professionalisation  with  regard  to  specification,  
tendering  procedures,  implementation  and  subsequent  administration  of  large  IT  projects. 
KOMBIT is also the hub of municipal knowledge, building on market dialogue, contract manage-
ment and efficient operation of IT solutions.

MODEL FOR MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF COMMON REGIONAL 
DIGITISATION PROJECTS

For  a  number  of  years,  Danish  regions  have  been  focusing  on  digitisation  and  have  made  
Denmark one of the world leaders with regard to IT support for hospitals. IT projects throughout 
the healthcare services are increasingly becoming more complex and this increases require-
ments for competences and management in projects. The regions have therefore developed a 
model for management and control of digitisation projects as a basis for the common regional 
projects under RSI (regional healthcare ICT). This model is in line with similar models in cen-
tral government and local governments, and thereby supports collaboration on common public  
sector IT projects between regions, local governments and central government.

54

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESFocus area 9
Digitisation for everyone

The use of digital technologies and soluti-
ons is increasing exponentially in society as 
a  whole.  Some  individuals  and  businesses 
have  welcomed  these  developments  and 
can  easily  adjust  to  the  changes.  Others 
have  taken  some  time  to  adjust  to  new 
ways  of  dealing  with  things,  e.g.  commu-
nication  with  public  authorities  which  has 
gradually  become  more  digital  in  recent 
years.

As a society, we are obligated to continual-
ly ensure that individuals are able to cope 
securely and competently in a digital world, 
and not least on the labour market, where 
requirements  for  digital  skills  continue  to 
increase. This applies to adults as well as 

new  to  generations  growing  up  as  digital 
natives. 

Competences for the digital generation
Children's  digital  learning  and  education 
begins as early as at preschool and conti-
nues  throughout  the  educational  system. 
Children and young people must therefore 
be  able  to  use  digital  technologies,  tools 
and  platforms.  They  must  possess  know-
ledge and skills to make qualified decisions 
and to navigate safely and securely on the 
internet. Children and young people of the 
digital  generation  must  have  the  digital 
skills and culture to cope in a digital world 
and to communicate digitally with authori-
ties.

WHAT ARE DIGITAL COMPETENCES AND DIGITAL CULTURE?

Digital competences and culture are generally important prerequisites for being able to cope in 
an evermore digital society. 

Digital competences include the ability to use digital solutions, tools and online platforms 
to search, collect and analyse information and knowledge. This includes being able to use a 
computer, tablet or smartphone to search information on the internet, use NemID, read Digital 
Post, use online banking etc.

Public employees must be able to use technical tools in their work. For example, home carers 
use PDAs (Personal Data Assistant devices) and primary school teachers use digital tools and 
platforms when teaching.

Digital culture is about preparing children and young people to cope socially and ethically in a 
digital world. Among other things, children and young people must obtain the necessary digital 
competences to enable them to use IT as a working tool and to acquire knowledge and solve 
problems. They must be aware of the possibilities and restrictions of the internet and know the 
consequences of their digital footprints on the internet. They must generally be able to show 
safe and responsible digital behaviour.

55

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESHelp is available 
The  Denmark  of  the  future  will  embrace 
those  who  are  ready  to  digitise  as  well  as 
those  who  cannot  use  the  digital  channels 
and solutions or who do not have access to 
them. Individuals and businesses must have 
adequate  knowledge  and  the  necessary 
competences  to  communicate  and  interact 
digitally  with  the  authorities.  Denmark  has 
unique  collaboration  between  local  govern-
ments, regions, the central government, vol-
untary  organisations,  and  increasingly  also 
the  business  community.  All  these  players 
are strongly committed to improving the IT 
competences of the population. This collab-
oration will be continued and expanded.

Many  citizens  have  needed,  and  still  need, 
help  to  become  digital  and  to  use  digital 
solutions.  Therefore,  it  is  still  necessary 
to  help  individuals  who  find  it  difficult  to 
use  the  new  technology  and  communicate 
digitally  with  the  authorities,  or  who  have  
special needs for help. They should be giv-
en the guidance and support they need. This 
could be help to learn basic digital skills such 
as  using  NemID  and  Digital  Post.  Others 
only need help now and again, for example, 
to  carry  out  a  transaction  in  a  self-service 
solution. Local governments will continue to 
play an important role in this context.

There should, of course, be good access to 
the  public  sector  and  help  should  be  avail-
able  for  individuals  who  cannot  use  digital 
portals to the public sector. Such individuals 
will  still  be  able  to  contact  and  communi-
cate with the public sector. This means that 
they can continue to receive printed letters 
and get help to deal with public authorities 
by  other  means  than  digitally.  Moreover, 
businesses, which, in contrast to individuals, 
cannot  be  exempted  from  digital  commu-
nication and are only rarely exempted from 
Digital Post, will be offered help to use these 
digital channels.

Security
The  public  sector  should  be  co-responsi-
ble  for  improving  information  security  in  
Denmark  and  for  helping  individuals  and 
businesses  to  navigate  securely  in  an  
increasingly  digital  world. 
Individuals 
in  Denmark  should  have  a  high  level  of 
knowledge about secure online behaviour. 
Protecting  business  secrets  etc.  is  a  pri-
mary  consideration  for  businesses.  Busi-
nesses  should  be  prepared  to  meet  the 
challenges  of  digital  security  in  order  to 
reduce the risk of losing data due to cyber 
attacks.

56

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESINITIATIVES

DIGITISATION FOR EVERYONE

9.1  
DIGITAL SKILLS FOR CHILDREN 
AND YOUNG PEOPLE

9.3  
HIGH LEVEL OF AWARENESS OF 
INFORMATION SECURITY

From  a  young  age,  children  and  young  people 
must  build  digital  competences  and  culture  to 
prepare  them  for  the  digital  reality.  Information 
campaigns about competent and safe navigation 
in the digital society will make children and young 
people aware of their use of technology so they 
can navigate safely online. Teaching programmes 
and material for pupils in primary and lower se-
condary school and in upper secondary education 
will provide them with digital skills to interact di-
gitally with society.

Technological  and  digital  development 
impo-
ses  increasing  requirements  for  the  knowledge 
and  competences  of  individuals  and  businesses.  
Therefore,  ongoing  information  campaigns  and 
initiatives about good digital behaviour will be lau-
nched  during  the  strategy  period.  The  campaign 
and  initiatives  will  generate  knowledge  about 
threats and prepare individuals and businesses for 
exploiting digital possibilities safely and securely.

9.2  
INFORMATION AND HELP FOR 
CITIZENS AND BUSINESSES

Individuals and businesses who find it difficult to 
use digital solutions and to communicate digital-
ly with the authorities must be given the neces- 
sary  help  and  support.  Initiatives  aimed  at  spe-
cial target groups will be launched on a regular 
basis to ensure that as many people as possible 
benefit  from  the  digital  opportunities.  These  in-
clude  young  people,  elderly  people,  people  from 
non-western  countries  and  businesses  that  are 
not quite ready for IT. The authorities will provide 
clear  and  consistent  information  adapted  to  the 
target group about the digital channels and por-
tals to the public sector. 

57

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESACCESSIBILITY IN IT SOLUTIONS

As more things can be carried out digitally, citizens are given new possibilities to gain easy and 
quick access to the public sector. This also applies to individuals with special challenges, e.g. 
disabilities. Their special needs should be taken into consideration as much as possible when 
developing digital solutions for the public sector. During 2016, a proposal for an EU directive on 
accessibility to public sector websites is expected to be implemented in Danish legislation. The 
directive is to ensure that public sector websites are developed such that as many people as 
possible can access the information on the websites and use self-service solutions.

It is important that authorities as well as suppliers incorporate technical accessibility as an in-
tegral part of digital solutions made available by the public sector. This applies to public sector 
websites and the digital self-service solutions, but also when developing infrastructure compo-
nents such as NemID, Digital Post, etc. Public authorities must listen to input from stakeholder 
organisations, such as the Disabled Peoples Organisations Denmark, which can identify special 
needs for adjusting and making available solutions, for example certain types of letters in Digital 
Post.

Where possible, public authorities will incorporate technical accessibility when deploying digital 
solutions in the individual sectors. For example, this could be in connection with digital welfare 
services in the healthcare and care sectors or the education area. For example, institutions, 
schools  and  local  governments  procuring  digital  teaching  tools  and  materials  may  impose  
requirements for accessibility to the suppliers of the teaching materials. 

58

SECURITY AND CONFIDENCE MUST BE IN FOCUS AT ALL TIMESA STRONGER AND MORE SECURE DIGITAL DENMARK

59

A STRONGER AND  
MORE SECURE
DIGITAL DENMARK

Digital Strategy 
2016-2020

The Government /
Locat Government Denmark /
Danish Regions /

www.fm.dk / www.kl.dk / www.regioner.dk

May 2016

