 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

February 2015 
 

The Danish Cyber and Information Security Strategy 
 

1.  Introduction 
In December 2014 the Government presented a National Cyber and Information Security Strategy 
containing 27 government initiatives for 2015-2016.  
 
Since  its  formation  in  2011  the  Danish  Government  has  aimed  to  strengthen  protection  against 
cyber-attacks  while  respecting  the  rule  of  law  and  personal  freedom.  In  Denmark,  citizens  and 
businesses must be able to trust that important functions in society are provided both efficiently 
and securely. 
 
Digitisation, i.e. the extensive integration of digital technologies into society and the public sector, 
is a key element in the ongoing development of prosperity and welfare in the Danish society. It is 
crucial  that  the  cyber  and  information  security  effort  is  professionalized  and  developed  on  a 
continuous  basis.  The  digital  infrastructure  must  be  protected.  This  requires  that  cyber  and 
information security is high on the agendas of management.  
 
New challenges and threats have emerged. Hackers have succeeded in disturbing functions vital to 
society, or they have been able to access sensitive and valuable information. It is the assessment 
of  the  Danish  Defence  Intelligence  Service  that  ICT-related  treats  to  private  citizens,  businesses 
and government institutions are growing. Cyber-attacks against digital systems have become more 
widespread and more advanced. At the same time, government institutions face challenges when 
outsourcing parts of the infrastructure which important functions in society rely upon. 
 
Denmark  needs  a  strong  protection  against  such  threats  as  well  as  a  strong  reactive  capacity. 
Extensive knowledge and understanding of the threats we face as a society is crucial. The present 
Cyber and Information Security Strategy therefore focuses on the need for more knowledge about 
security  and  the  need  for  a  professionalization  of  the  day-to-day  security  effort  of  government 
institutions as well as cyber and information security in the telecom sector and the energy sector. 
 
It  is  essential  that  the  effort  is  integrated  into  the  existing  organizational  structure  so  that  the 
professionalization of the cyber and information security effort takes advantage of the knowledge 
that the authorities have of the areas they are each responsible for. 
 
With  the  Cyber  and  Information  Security  Strategy  the  Government  makes  a  significant  step 
towards  maintaining  and  reinforcing  the  confidence  of  businesses  and  citizens,  ensuring  that 

 
 

1/7 

 
 
 
 
 

Denmark  is  a  safe  country  in  which  to  invest  and  use  digital  services.  Technological  change  will 
continue and we must likewise continually strengthen and adapt the security effort. The strategy 
will therefore be updated in late 2016 for a new period with the involvement of views and insights 
from interest groups, businesses and academia on how further efforts may most benefit society. 
 

2.  Strong and cohesive security  
Digitisation  is  a  global  phenomenon  that  is  rapidly  changing  Danish  society  at  all  levels.  It  has  a 
strong impact on communication between citizens, businesses and government, and it influences 
the ways in which we arrange and organize our society.  
 
Digitisation  is  no  longer  a  choice;  it  is  a  premise.  Danish  businesses  apply  digital  technology  in 
production and internal processes – and increasingly in their products. In recent years, the Danish 
Government  has  implemented  a  series  of  digitisation  strategies  focused  on  administration, 
productivity  and  cooperation,  services  and  welfare.  The  efficiency  and  innovation  potential  of 
digitisation is crucial to Denmark’s competitiveness and prosperity. 
 
With  digitisation  being  a  key  component  of  public  services  and  the  functioning  of  society,  the 
Government emphasizes the need for constant improvements in cyber and information security. 
With this strategy the Government aims to raise its cyber and information security effort through 
systematic  application  of  the  ISO27001  security  standard,  employing  threat  assessments  and 
reinforcing  ministries’  ICT  security  oversight.  Also,  since  much  public  ICT  has  been  outsourced, 
services  provided  by  external  suppliers  must  be  subject  to  a  strong  oversight.  Security  risk 
assessments  of  government  IT  projects  is  to  be  incorporated  in  the  Cross-Departmental 
Programme Model and IT Project Model.  
 
These measures are aimed at ensuring the professionalization of government institutions’ day-to-
day efforts regarding information security in order to improve resilience against cyber-attacks. The 
strategy  contains  several  initiatives  aimed  at  improving  the  understanding  of  threats  and  at 
systematically gathering experience from known cyber-attacks.  
 
The strategy is aimed at government institutions but it also contains initiatives aimed at owners of 
infrastructure  of  vital  importance  to  the  provision  of  energy  and  telecommunications  to  the 
Danish society.  
 

 

3.  The challenge 
The cyber and information security challenges are both technical and practical in nature. 
 
Failure  to  comply  with  security  routines.  Part  of  the  challenge  is  make  government  institutions 
ready  to  incorporate  a  systematic  approach  to  information  security  in  the  daily  routines.  If  the 
institutions  do  not  set  up  the  necessary  information  security  routines  and  making  concrete  risk 
assessments  regarding  key  systems  the 
institutions  risk  overlooking  security  flaws  and 
vulnerabilities.  
 

2/7 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Dynamic  development.  Cyber  and  information  security  threats  are  ever-changing  and  there  are 
constantly  emerging  new  threats  that  require  the  attention  of  the  authorities.  There  is  no 
indication that this will be less true in the years to come, quite the opposite. The efforts to address 
threats must therefore be continuously improved and renewed. 
 
Cyber  threats.  The  Danish  Defence  Intelligence  Service 
assesses  that  Danish  government  institutions,  businesses 
and private individuals are the targets of daily attempts of 
harmful  activity  from  various  agents  via  the  Internet. 
While public authorities are rarely seriously compromised, 
the threat from harmful activities is increasing. The Danish 
Defence Intelligence Service believes that the most severe 
cyber  threats  against  Denmark  come  from  foreign  state-
sponsored  agents  who  seek  to  conduct  espionage  and 
steal  Danish  intellectual  property  and  business  secrets 
such  as  business  plans,  research  results,  technical  know-
how, financial information and contracts.  
 
Insider  threats.  The  so-called  insider  threats  also  pose  a 
significant  challenge.  Insider  threats  include  staff  willfully 
or negligently breaching workplace security procedures. In 
this  context,  the  threat  of  negligence  poses  a  particular 
challenge – employees may inadvertently let unauthorized 
persons  into  the  workplace  by  holding  the  door  for 
strangers, or they may download programs with dubious contents. If the employees fail to observe 
security  procedures,  this  increases  the  risk  of  unauthorized  access  to  internal  networks  and 
therefore to sensitive information.   
 
Supplier  management.  The  Government  also  faces  a  number  of  threats  in  connection  with  the 
outsourcing  of  ICT  operations.  Government  institutions  must upgrade  procedures  to  ensure  that 
external  suppliers  observe  the  security  procedures.  The  importance  of  such  procedures  is 
illustrated by the severe attack against the IT service provider CSC in 2012. 
 

Balanced security 
Information security initiatives must 
be adjusted to suit the diverse 
needs of the different government 
institutions and must reflect a 
careful balancing of security, 
usability and economy.  The security 
effort should be proportional to the 
threat in question. Security must 
not be given precedence at all cost 
or unduly degrade the user 
experience and effectiveness of any 
given digital service. Security efforts 
must start with an assessment of 
the specific need for a given level of 
security. The individual authorities 
should therefore adopt a risk-based 
approach to security. 

4.  Stronger government effort  
The Government has already introduced a number of initiatives aimed at strengthening the cyber 
security of the state, and it is monitoring government institutions’ efforts. In particular, efforts of 
authorities with cyber security-related responsibilities have been stepped up.  
 
The  Government  has  established  the  Centre  for  Cyber  Security  under  the  Danish  Defence 
Intelligence Service. The main mission of the Centre is to support the reinforcement of IT systems 
and infrastructure which important functions in society rely upon against external cyber threats.   
 
 

3/7 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Furthermore,  the  Government  has  established  the  Agency  for  Digitisation  under  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  in  order  to  combine  activities  related  to  state  digitisation  efforts.  The  mission  of  the 
Agency for Digitisation is to ensure professional and cohesive IT governance in developing cross-
public  sector  digital  infrastructure.  The  Agency  also  advises  government  institutions  on  the 
mandatory principles of information security management according to ISO27001.  
 
The Danish police have set up the National Cyber Crime Center (NC3) whose mission is to prevent 
and investigate IT crime conducted online.  
 
Combined,  these  actions  enable  government  institutions  and  businesses  with  IT  systems  and 
infrastructure which important functions in society rely upon to further strengthen their cyber and 
information security. Therefore, the initiatives in the Cyber and Information Security Strategy build 
upon an already improved effort. 
 

5.  Strategic objectives 
Overall, the Government’s efforts to enhance cyber and information security efforts aim to: 
 

•  Maintain  citizens’  and  businesses’  trust  that  cyber  and  information  security  measures  of 
government  institutions  and  providers  of  IT  systems  and  infrastructure  which  important 
functions  in  society  rely  upon  are  professional  and  satisfactory.  Meanwhile,  efforts  to 
strengthen  cyber  and  information  security  must  permit  user-friendly  and  effective  use  of 
new technologies.    

 

•  Strengthen  the  protection  of  important  functions  in  society  and  national  security  against 

cyber-attacks.  

 
To support these objectives, the government has identified six strategic focus areas to be targeted 
with specific initiatives to raise the cyber and information security level of the Danish society.  
 

Professionalized and reinforced ICT oversight 
•  Ministries must manage information security systematically and professionally and initiate 

strong ICT oversight of subordinate authorities. 

 
Clear guidelines for suppliers 
•  Government institutions must set clear requirements regarding cyber and information  

security for suppliers providing IT services and infrastructure, perform regular risk 
assessments and follow up regularly on providers’ ICT security measures.   

 
Strengthened cyber security and more knowledge 
•  Public sector cyber security levels must be raised and government institutions and 

business must have access to threat assessments and to advanced knowledge about how 
to reduce vulnerabilities. 

 

 

 
 
 

4/7 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Robust infrastructure in the energy and telecommunications sectors 
•  There must be a high level of cyber and information security within the energy and tele-

communications sectors. 

 
Denmark as a strong international partner 
•  Danish authorities must work with international partners to strengthen cyber and 

information security through active participation in relevant forums.  

 
Strong investigation and high level of information 
•  Cyber-crime investigations must be strong and competent, and citizens and businesses 

must be given a better basis for adequately assuming responsibility for security in relation 
to their own equipment and online conduct.  

 
The  initiatives  aim  to  ensure  the  maintaining  of  adequate  security  levels  and  will  serve  to 
significantly  enhance  Danish  cyber  and  information  security  efforts.  It  is  however  important  to 
stress  that  complete protection  against  breakdowns,  compromise  and  other  security  incidents  is 
unattainable.  
 
Cyber  and  information  security  threats  are  ever-changing  and  efforts  to  ensure  a  high  level  of 
security  must  be  continuously  improved  and  renewed.  Government  institutions  and  suppliers 
must  adopt  a  risk-based  approach  to  security  and  embrace  a  focused  and  systematic  approach, 
giving  priority  to  the  efforts  that  provide  the  strongest  security  balanced  against  the  use  of 
resources and the requirements for user-friendliness of public ICT services.  
 

6.  Strategy limitations  
The  Cyber  and  Information  Security  Strategy  focuses  on  government  institutions’  cyber  and 
information  security  efforts  and  launches  a  coordinated  and  long-term  government  effort  which 
must  be  further  developed  and  supplemented  in  various  state  sectors.  Professionalizing  the 
government’s  cyber  and  information  security  effort  is  essential  to  the  protection  of  digital 
infrastructures which important functions in society rely upon.  
 
The  strategy  is  furthermore  focused  on  cyber  and  information  security  within  the  energy  and 
telecommunications  sectors  where  private  companies  own  and  support  a  large  part  of  the 
infrastructure. The motivation behind this particular focus is that the telecommunications sector 
forms the backbone of communication in modern society and that the energy sector provides the 
energy required to keep modern society running.  
 
In parallel with this strategy, the Government, regions and municipalities have agreed to further 
increase information security efforts to protect privacy and to ensure a high level of security in the 
digital  infrastructure  at  all  levels  of  national  and  local  government.  The  Government  expects  to 
extend  this  cooperative  effort  as  part  of  the  next  eGovernment  Strategy  in  which  information 
 

5/7 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

security will be a focus area. The strategy is jointly prepared by national and local authorities and 
slated to be  launched  in  2015. The  Agency  for  Digitisation,  regions  and municipalities  will  assess 
whether additional efforts are required with regard to the implementation of ISO27001 once the 
effects from the Cyber and Information Security Strategy may be assessed.  
 
The Government intends to update the Cyber and Information Security Strategy in late 2016. The 
update will be based on an assessment of the early effects of the present cyber and information 
security strategy, including follow-ups on each initiative, and identify areas where further action is 
relevant.  The  update  will  therefore  include  further  relevant  sectors  in  society,  e.g.  the  financial 
sector.  
 
An overview of the 27 initiatives in the strategy is given below. 

 

 

 
 
 

6/7 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Citizens and businesses must be able to trust that the cyber and information security measures of government institutions and providers of IT systems and infrastructure 

Strategic goals: Strong and cohesive security 

are professional and reassuring. 

•  The protection of key functions of society and of national security against cyber-attacks must be reinforced. 

Six focus areas 

Professionalized and reinforced 
ICT oversight 

Clear guidelines 
for suppliers 

Strengthened cyber security 
and more knowledge 

Robust infrastructure in 
the energy and tele-
communications 
sectors 

Denmark as a strong 
international partner  

Strong investigation and high 
level of information 

1. Increased information security 
effort in government institutions. 

2. Mandatory security risk 
assessment of public IT projects 

3. Increased coordination of 
information security efforts 
between national and local 
authorities 

7. Introduction 
of security 
requirements in 
IT tenders and 
contracts  

8. Continuous 
security 
oversight of 
suppliers 

4. Cooperation between 
education and research 
institutions regarding cyber and 
information security 

 

5. Intensified dialogue between 
private and public employers and 
education and research 
institutions regarding 
competence needs 

6. Sufficient capacity in the 
Agency for Governmental IT 
Services to handle cyber attacks 

 

 
 

Initiatives 

9. Mandatory inclusion of 
cyber threats in government 
institutions’ risk management  

10. Formation of a cyber-
threat assessment unit 

11. Study regarding the 
possible concentration of 
government  Internet 
connections 

16. Strengthening of 
network and 
information security in 
telecommunications  

17. Stronger 
requirements regarding 
cyber and information 
security in the energy 
sector 

18. Strengthening of 
Danish cyber 
diplomacy 

19. Promotion of 
Denmark’s stance in 
international cyber 
and information 
security cooperation 
forums  

 

12. Study regarding the 
development of secure 
communication among state 
institutions 

13. Formation of a unit to 
investigate major cyber 
security incidents 

14. Formation of a SCADA 
knowledge centre  

15. Setting up a business 
advisory board on ICT security 

20. Nordic 
cooperation on 
research and 
education in cyber and 
information security 

 

21. Raised security awareness 
among citizens and businesses 

22. Security self-check service 
for businesses 

23. Expansion of the National 
Cyber Crime Center (NC3) 

24. Increased capacity of the 
police regarding information 
security guidance 

25. Strengthening the cyber 
capacity and capability of the 
Danish Security and Intelligence 
Service (PET) 

26. Establishment of an online-
platform for reporting cyber 
crime 

27. Study regarding a service 
providing information on stolen 
identity documents 

 

7/7 

