 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2014–2017 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

 

  

Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communication  

2014 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................. 2 

1.  Analysis of current situation ........................................................................................................................... 2 

1.1. 

1.2. 

1.3. 

Sectoral progress .................................................................................................................................. 2 

Trends .................................................................................................................................................. 4 

Challenges ............................................................................................................................................ 6 

2. 

Principles of ensuring cyber security.............................................................................................................. 7 

3.  General objective of the strategy for 2017 ..................................................................................................... 7 

4. 

5. 

 

Subgoals ......................................................................................................................................................... 8 

Parties related to the strategy ........................................................................................................................ 13 

 

 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

The  Cyber  Security  Strategy  2014-2017  is  the  basic  document  for  planning  Estonia’s  cyber 

security  and  a  part  of  Estonia’s  broader  security  strategy.  The  strategy  highlights  important 

recent  developments,  assesses  threats  to  Estonia’s  cyber  security  and  presents  measures  to 

manage threats. This strategy continues the implementation of many of the goals found in the 

Cyber Security Strategy 2008-2013; however, new threats and needs which were not covered 

by the previous strategy have also been added. 

1. 

ANALYSIS OF CURRENT SITUATION 

1.1.  Sectoral progress 

In 2009, a Cyber Security Council was added to the Security Committee of the Government 

of the Republic, whose  main task is  to  support strategic level  inter-agency  co-operation and 

oversee the implementation of Cyber Security Strategy objectives.  

 

In  2010,  by  a  decision  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic,  the  Estonian  Informatics  Centre 

was  given  government  agency  status.  The  renamed  Estonian  Information  System  Authority 

(Riigi  Infosüsteemi  Amet  –  hereinafter  RIA)  received  additional  powers  and  resources  for 

organising  protection  of  the  state’s  information  and  communication  technology  (hereinafter 

ICT) infrastructure, and exercising supervision over the security of information systems.  For 

the  purposes  of  organising  the  protection  of  infrastructure,  the  Department  of  Critical 

Information Infrastructure Protection (hereinafter CIIP) was formed within the RIA. In early 

2010,  the  RIA  launched  the  critical  information  infrastructure  (hereinafter  CII)  mapping 

project,  which  identified  the  dependencies  of  vital  services  on  information  systems.  On  the 

basis  of  the  mapping,  security  requirements  for  vital  information  systems  necessary  for  the 

functioning of the state were developed. In 2011, a CIIP commission was formed to promote 

public-private  cooperation.  The  purpose  of  the  commission,  which  brings  together  cyber 

security and IT managers from vital services agencies, is to exchange operational information, 

identify  problems  and  make  suggestions  for  improving  the  cyber  security  of  the  country's 

critical infrastructure. 

 

 

2 

In  2012,  the  cybercrime  investigation  capabilities  of  the  Police  and  Border  Guard  Board 

(hereinafter PBGB) were consolidated into a single department. In addition, officials dealing 

with  cybercrime  and  digital  evidence  management  procedures  from  various  units  in  the 

prefectures  were  consolidated  into  cybercrime  and  digital  evidence  services  that  were 

established in prefectures in 2013. The PBGB is also engaged in raising awareness regarding 

cyber threats, which, among other things, has resulted in the creation of the positions for web-

constables.  A  web-constable  is  tasked  with  raising  people's  awareness  about  the  security  of 

the Internet and protecting children and young people online. The Estonian Internal Security 

Service  strengthened  its  investigative  capabilities  in  order  to  prevent  threats  to  national 

security, including  cyber attacks and espionage.  

 

The creation of the Estonian Defence League’s Cyber Unit (hereinafter EDL CU), which took 

place  as  a  result  of  collaboration  between  the  public,  private  and  third-sector,  has  been 

instrumental in ensuring national defence. The expertise of EDL CU volunteers is applied to 

improve the security of Estonian state agencies’ and companies’ information systems through 

coordinated exercises, testing of solutions, training, etc.. The EDL CU can also be engaged to 

support  civilian  institutions  and  protect  critical  infrastructure  in  a  crisis  situation.  Domestic 

and  international  cyber  security  training  exercises  have  also  played  an  important  role  in  the 

development and assessment of cyber security capabilities. The Government of the Republic’s 

cyber defence headquarters exercise “Cyber Fever" and NATO Crisis Management Exercise 

CMX 2012 took place in 2012. Each year, the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of 

Excellence (NATO CCD  COE) exercise  Locked Shields takes place in  Estonia.  Since 2013, 

the  NATO  cyber  defence  exercise  Cyber  Coalition  has  also  been  hosted  in  Estonia.  The 

Defence Forces has also created a Cyber Range to support cyber defence related training. The 

Range  is  used  to  carry  out  the  aforementioned  cyber  exercises,  organise  domestic  exercises 

and in the instruction provided by universities. 

 

In  the  field  of  cyber  security,  the  main  provider  of  training  and  awareness-raising  is  the 

Information  Technology  Foundation  for  Education  (hereinafter  HITSA),  formerly  known  as 

the Tiger Leap Foundation. HITSA training is offered to pre-schoolers well as older children, 

while  also  involving  parents  and  teachers  in  the  process.  A  state-private  partnership  project 

was  launched  in  2013  to  raise  the  skills  and  security  awareness  of  smart  device  users, 

developers and vendors. In cooperation between Tallinn University of Technology (TUT) and 

 

3 

the University of Tartu, the international Master’s programme in Cyber Security was opened 

in  2009,  with  50  students  accepted  into  the  programme  each  year.  In  2014,  TUT,  in 

cooperation  with  the  Estonian  Centre  2CENTRE,  opened  a  Master’s  programme  in  Digital 

Forensics.  Estonia’s  2CENTRE  Cybercrime  Centre  of  Excellence  is  part  of  the  European 

Union’s  network  of  2CENTRE  competency  centres,  where  professionals  are  trained  in  the 

fight against cybercrime, and continuation training is arranged for them.  

 

Estonia  has  successfully  cooperated  with  other  ICT-advanced  countries  and  international 

organizations in the field of cyber security. An active role in shaping cyber security policy led 

to  the  establishment  of  the  NATO  Cooperative  Cyber  Defence  Centre  of  Excellence  in 

Estonia.  Estonia  has  contributed  to  cyber  security  becoming  part  of  NATO  and  European 

Union policy, and other countries’ interest towards Estonia’s experience in cyber security has 

grown  significantly.  Cyber  security  related  cooperation  has  been  successful  on  the  regional 

level  between  the  Nordic  countries  and  the  Baltic  States,  as  well  as  with  other  strategic 

partners  and  like-minded  countries.  Estonia  is  also  participating  in  newer  forms  of 

cooperation  -  the  Freedom  Online  Coalition,  the  United  Nations  Group  of  Governmental 

Experts,  the  OSCE  informal  working  group  on  developing  confidence  building  measures  in 

cyberspace, Friends of the Presidency of the European Union, and others. 

1.2.  Trends 

The  continued  rapid  development  of 

information  and  communication 

technologies, 

globalization, the drastic increase in data volumes and the growing number of different types 

of equipment connected to data networks have an impact on daily life, the economy and the 

functioning of the state. On the one hand, this level of ICT development will contribute to the 

improved availability and usability of services, enhance transparency and citizen participation 

in governance, and cut public as well as private sector costs. On the other hand, the increasing 

importance of technology is accompanied by an increase in the state’s growing dependence on 

already  entrenched  e-solutions,  and  cements  the  expectation  of  technology  operating 

seamlessly. In addition, the Internet is becoming increasingly accessible, the number of users 

continues to grow, and with new technological solutions and services - such as the "Internet of 

things",  and  cloud  computing  -  the  number  of  potential  vectors  for  attacks,  along  with  the 

complexity of attacks, is growing.  

 

4 

Social  processes  are  also  becoming  increasingly  dependent  on  a  growing  number  of 

information  technology  resources,  and  in  the  future  attention  must  be  drawn  to  the  fact  that 

society  at  large,  and  each  individual  in  particular,  will  be  able  to  maintain  control  over  the 

corresponding processes. Otherwise, there is potential for information technologies to reduce 

the role of humans in the decision-making process, and processes may become self-regulatory 

(technological singularity). 

The  main  threat  is  cybercrime  and  its  growth  is  reflected  by  the  significant  development  of 

cyber  criminals’ skills  and their increased ability to  carry out  organized attacks. An integral 

part of the processing of crimes is the collection and handling of digital evidence, which poses 

new challenges to the procedural and digital forensics capabilities of the police. 

 

National  cyber  security  is  affected  by  the  actors  operating  in  cyberspace  with  their  various 

skills,  targets  and  motivations.  It  is  often  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the  actors  or 

determine  their  relationship  to  national  or  international  organizations.  The  number  of  state 

actors in cyberspace that are involved in cyber espionage targeted at computers connected to 

the  Internet  as  well  as  closed  networks  continues  to  grow,  with  their  aim  being  to  collect 

information  on  both  national  security  as  well  as  economic  interests.  The  amount  and 

activeness of states capable of cyber-attacks are increasing.  

 

In addition to the activation of state actors, the ability of politically motivated individuals and 

groups  with  limited  means  to  organize  their  activities  using  social  networks  and  carry  out 

denial of service and other types of attacks is growing as well. 

 

Meaningful  and  effective  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sector  in  the 

development  of  cyber  security  organisation  as  well  as  in  preventing  and  resolving  cyber 

incidents  is  becoming  increasingly  unavoidable.  National  defence  and  internal  security  are 

dependent on the private sector’s infrastructure and resources, while at the same time the state 

can assist vital service providers and guarantors of national critical information infrastructure 

as a coordinator and balancer of various interests. 

 

5 

1.3.  Challenges 

The  main  cyber  security  risks  arise  from  the  extensive  and  growing  dependence  on  ICT 

infrastructure  and  e-services  by  the  Estonian  state,  the  economy  and  the  population. 

Therefore,  the  key  fields  on  which  the  Cyber  Security  Strategy  focuses  are    ensuring  vital 

services, combating cybercrime more effectively and advancing national defence capabilities. 

Additional  supporting  activities  will  include:  shaping  the  legal  framework,  promoting 

international  cooperation  and  communication,  raising  awareness,    and  ensuring  specialist 

education as well as the development of technical solutions.. 

In  the  case  of  vital  services,  cross-border  information  technology  interdependencies  have 

emerged  and  securing  them  is  no  longer  dependent  solely  on  parties  based  in  Estonia.  The 

Estonian state has no option for effectively supervising services or parts of services which are 

provided outside of the Republic of Estonia . All vital services and their dependencies must be 

mapped, alternatives must be developed and operational readiness to implement them must be 

achieved.  The  preservation  of  data  and  information  systems  that  are  essential  to  the 

functioning  of  society  must  be  ensured  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  The  timely 

detection  of  and  response  to  cyber  threats  threatening  the  state,  society  and  the  individual 

must be ensured. 

Cybercrime  undermines  the  functioning  of  the  economic  space,  reduces  trust  in  digital 

services, and, in a worst-case scenario, could lead to incidents causing loss of life. Competent 

personnel and modern technical tools are needed in order  to ensure prevention, detection and 

prosecuting of cybercrime. Operational information exchange between countries is becoming 

increasingly important in the fight against cybercrime. 

To  ensure  the  ability  to  provide  national  defence  in  cyberspace,  the  state’s  civilian  and 

military resources must be able to be integrated into a functioning whole under the direction 

of  civilian  authorities  as  well  as  being  interoperable  with  the  capabilities  of  international 

partners.  In addition  to  conventional  military  environments, National  defence planning must 

increasingly take cyberspace into account. 

In  order  to  prevent  and  deter  future  security  threats,  it  is  necessary  to  constantly  develop 

cyber security related know-how and to invest in technology.  Implementing forward-looking 

procurement  procedures  is  necessary  to  ensure  production  of  reliable  and  competitive 

 

6 

technical solutions and will support their export as well, whereas the knowledge and resources 

obtained in that process must be re-invested into innovative solutions.    

As  a  supporting  activity,  a  modern  legal  framework  must  be  ensured  to  provide  complete 

solutions  to the above-listed challenges. At the international  level,  the preservation of a free 

and  secure  cyberspace  as  well  as  Estonia’s  central  role  in  guiding  and  developing 

international  cyber  security  policy  in  international  organizations  as  well  as  like-minded 

communities must be ensured.  

2. 

PRINCIPLES OF ENSURI NG CYBER SECURITY 

1.  Cyber  security  is  an  integral  part  of  national  security,  it  supports  the  functioning  of  the 

state and society, the competitiveness of the economy and innovation. 

2.  Cyber security is guaranteed by respecting fundamental rights and freedoms as well as by 

protecting individual liberties, personal information, and identity. 

3.  Cyber security is ensured on the basis of the principle of proportionality while taking into 

account existing and potential risks and resources. 

4.  Cyber  security  is  ensured  in  a  coordinated  manner  through  cooperation  between  the 
public-,  private-  and  third  sectors,  taking  into  account  the  interconnectedness  and 
interdependence of existing infrastructure and services in cyberspace. 

5.  Cyber security starts with individual responsibility for safe use of ICT tools. 

6.  A  top  priority  in  ensuring  cyber  security  is    anticipating  as  well  as  preventing  potential 

threats and responding effectively to threats that materialize. 

7.  Cyber  security  is  supported  by  intensive  and  internationally  competitive  research  and 

development. 

8.  Cyber  security is ensured via international cooperation with allies and partners. Through 

cooperation, Estonia promotes global cybersecurity and enhances its own competence. 

3. 

GENERAL OBJECTIVE OF THE STRATEGY FOR 2017 

Vision:  

Estonia  is  able  to  ensure  national  security  and  support  the  functioning  of  an  open,  inclusive 
and safe society.  

General objective:  

 

7 

The four-year  goal  of the cybersecurity strategy  is  to  increase  cybersecurity capabilities and 
raise  the  population’s  awareness  of  cyber  threats,  thereby  ensuring  continued  confidence  in 
cyberspace. 

4. 

SUBGOALS 

Subgoal  1:  Ensuring  the  protection  of  information  systems  underlying  important 

services  

The functioning of the Estonian state and society, the economic and social well-being of every 

person, their life and health, increasingly depend on the security of the systems and services. 

One  of  the  main  aims  of  the  strategy  is  to  describe  methods  for  ensuring  the  uninterrupted 

operation  and  resilience  of  vital  services,  and  the  protection  of  critical  information 

infrastructures against cyber threats. 

1.1. 

 Ensuring alternative solutions for important services 

National  dependencies  on  ICT  infrastructure  and  e-services  are  constantly  updated,  mapped 

and managed. This includes a system of alternate solutions that are to be used in cases where 

the normal functioning of ICT infrastructure and e-services is disrupted. 

1.2. 

 Managing cross-dependency between important services 

The  mapping  of  significant  cross-dependencies  between  services  is  kept  up  to  date,  the 

assessment of the extent of the impact of cross-dependencies on the functioning of services is 

conducted  in  a  timely  manner,  and  related  risks  are  systematically  grounded.  Information 

relating to dependencies on critical services provided from outside the Republic of Estonia is 

kept up to date, the extent of their impact on the functioning of services is promptly evaluated, 

and associated risks are systematically reduced. 

1.3. 

 Ensuring the security of ICT infrastructure and services 

Information  and  communication  technology  infrastructure  is  protected  from  modern  threats. 

Critical data is kept and processed in highly secure data centres, and, among other things, data 

may also be stored securely abroad. Information systems necessary for the operation of state 

and vital services will be developed and managed in a manner that accounts for security risks 

and provides the means and measures to manage risks. 

 

8 

1.4. 

 Managing cyber threats to the public and private sector 

Information technology risks will be assessed and measured, with the requisite qualified staff 

available, along with methodologies, training opportunities and other resources. Areas which 

have not  yet been sufficiently addressed are mapped and corresponding awareness programs 

are created. 

1.5. 

 Introduction of a national monitoring system for cyber security 

In order to identify and react in a timely manner to cyber threats endangering the state, society 

and  the  individual,  a  national  comprehensive  monitoring,  analysis  and  reporting  system  is 

adopted. 

1.6. 

 Ensuring digital continuity of the state 

E-services, processes, and information systems (including digital registers of evidential value) 

that are essential for the digital continuity of the state are constantly updated and mapped, and 

they have mirror and backup alternatives. Virtual embassies will ensure the functioning of the 

state, regardless of Estonia's territorial integrity. 

1.7. 

 Promotion of international cooperation in the protection of the infrastructure of 

critical information 

Protection  of  critical  information  infrastructure  is  enhanced  through  the  participation  in  the 

work  of  international  organizations,  being  represented  in  the  interest  groups  of  partners  and 

allies, and through contributing to the professional development of experts. 

Subgoal 2: Enhancing of the fight against cybercrime 

The  economic  damage  deriving  from  cybercrime  reduces  trust  in  digital  services,  and,  in  a 

worst-case  scenario,  could  lead  to  loss  of  life.  Greater  awareness  among  the  general  public 

about  cyber  security  risks  helps  to  prevent  cybercrimes.  Greater  awareness  is  achieved  by 

addressing  cyber-related  topics  at  all  levels  of  education  and  informing  people  based  on 

research and analysis of secure behaviours. 

2.1. 

 Enhancing detection of cybercrime 

In  order  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  cybercrime  detection  and  prosecution,  the  current 

structure of law enforcement and its organisation of work will be further clarified, the number 

 

9 

of  personnel  dealing  with  cybercrime  will  be  increased  and  the  capabilities  of  bodies 

conducting  proceedings  to  process  digital  data  carriers  will  be  raised.  In  order  to  develop 

capabilities, cooperation takes place with universities and international centres of excellence. 

2.2. 

 Raising public awareness of cyber risks 

In order to raise the level of awareness of actors operating in cyberspace, attention is paid to 

introducing  actions  preventing  cyber  threats,  providing  the  knowledge  needed  to  identify  as 

well  as  wisely  respond  to  incidents.  Users  of  e-services  are  directed  to  use  the  most  secure 

solutions and are informed about new technologies and how to securely use these solutions. 

2.3. 

 Promoting international cooperation against cybercrime 

In order to achieve more effective and timely prosecution of cybercrimes with an international 

dimension,  information  exchange  between  countries  is  improved.  Active  participation  in 

various initiatives and projects that are part of the international fight against cybercrime. 

Subgoal 3: Development of national cyber defence capabilities 

Civil, military, and international cooperation based on the resources at the disposal of the state 

must also function adequately in cyberspace – with regards to warning, deterrence and active 

defence.  

3.1. Synchronising military planning and preparation for civil emergencies 

Broad-based  national  defence  requires  that  the  continuous  operation  plans  of  vital  service 

providers are coordinated with national defence threat scenarios. 

3.2. Developing collective cyber defence and international collaboration 

To  ensure  collective  defence  in  an  international  environment,  information  exchange  and 

cooperation  are  enhanced  with  NATO,  European  Union  cyber  instances  and  other  partners. 

Efforts  are  made  concerning  the  creation  and  development  of  NATO  joint  cyber  security 

capabilities, standards, training and training opportunities. 

3.3. Developing military cyber defence capabilities 

The development of military cyber defence capabilities will result in  cyber defence being a 

part  of  broad-based  collective  defence.  The  latter  will  be  ensured  by  involving  specialists  

 

10 

from the Defence Forces and the Estonian Defence League, as well as other public and private 

sector professionals. 

3.4. Ensuring a high level of awareness concerning the role of cyber security in national 

defence 

In order to raise the level of awareness concerning cyber security risks in the field of national 

defence  and  to  link  it  with  other  military  domains,  additional  training  is  organised  for 

personnel in the field.  

Subgoal 4: Estonia manages evolving cyber security threats 

To maintain and improve its cyber security capability, Estonia will adopt independent cyber 

security  solutions,  which  are  backed  by  cyber  security  training  and  training  opportunities, 

research  and  development  and  entrepreneurship.  In  order  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of 

solutions,  the  state  acts  as  a  smart  contractor,  and  supports  the  export  of  cyber  security 

solutions. 

4.1. Ensuring the next generation cyber security professionals 

To  ensure  the  next  generation  of  cyber  security  professionals,  opportunities  for  additional 

education  will  be  established,  both  in  the  form  of  higher  education  as  well  as  forms  of  in-

service  training.  Support  will  be  given  to  raise  the  number  of  students  having  completed  a 

Master’s  Degree  in  cyber  security  and  increase  the  number  of  doctoral  theses  on  cyber 

security. Instruction will involve more foreign lecturers and professionals. 

4.2. Developing smart contracting for cyber security solutions 

In order to create secure solutions, the state will contribute to cyber security-related research 

and  development.  A  supervisory  board  shall  be  set  up  to  coordinate  the  corresponding 

activities and to consolidate the domains of national defence, security, economic development 

and academia. 

4.3. Supporting development of enterprises providing cyber security and national cyber 

security solutions 

To  support  the  sustainability  of  secure  solutions,  the  state  will  contribute  to  the  export  of 

cyber security solutions, and to increasing their use at the international level. 

 

11 

4.4. Preventing security risks in new solutions 

In  order  to  avoid  large-scale  cyber  incidents,  the  technological  risks  pertaining  to  the 

development and introduction of new technologies are investigated and assessed in depth.  A 

high level of knowledge and risk-awareness facilitate achieving advantages in developing the 

state, society and economy. 

Subgoal 5: Estonia develops cross-sectoral activities 

To improve the capabilities  necessary for combating cyber threats,  a number of  overarching 

objectives are addressed. Adjusting the legal framework and developing cyber foreign policy 

are vital for protecting critical services, the fight against cybercrime, as well as for designing 

national defence in cyberspace. 

5.1. Development of a legal framework to support cyber security 

In order to implement cyber security measures ensuring a more secure cyberspace, the legal 

framework related to cyber security will be updated. 

5.2. Promoting international cyber security policy 

In international  organisations,  an emphasis  is  placed on introducing and  protecting Estonia's 

foreign  cyber  security  policy  positions  and  vision,  along  with  developing  a  common 

understanding  on  the  application  of  international  legal  norms  and  confidence  building 

measures in cyber space. Special attention is paid to the protection of fundamental rights and 

freedoms and the topic of Internet governance. In addition, development assistance and secure 

e-solutions support the emergence of free and secure cyberspace in countries where the non-

governmental sector lacks the freedom to act and the necessary technical base.  

5.3. Closer cooperation with allies and partners 

With  a  view  to  enhancing  relations  with  allies  and  partners,  cooperation  is  intensified  with 

close  neighbours  and  cooperation  formats  are  expanded  with  like-minded  countries.  A 

significant effort is made to share cyber security related know-how and experience. 

5.4. Enhancing the capability of the European Union 

With  the  goal  of  promoting  the  European  Union's  common  cyber  security  and  its  policies, 

joint efforts will be made to raise the cyber capability of Member States and to improve their 

 

12 

readiness and ability to deal with new threats. 

5. 

PARTIES RELATED TO THE STRATEGY 

The  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Communications  directs  cyber  security  policy  and 

coordinates  the  implementation  of  the  strategy.  The  strategy  will  be  implemented  by 

involving  all  ministries  and  government  agencies,  especially  the  Ministry  of  Defence,  the 

Information  System  Authority,  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  Police  and  Border  Guard  Board,  the 

Government  Office,  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  and  the 

Ministry  of  Education  and  Research.  NGOs,  business  organizations,  governments,  and 

educational institutions will cooperate in the implementation and assessment of the strategy. 

 

At the request of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications, agencies involved 

in  executing  the  strategy  will    submit  a  written  overview  of  the  implementation  of  the 

measures  and  activities  each  year  by  31  January,  at  the  latest.  Based  on  the  reviews,  the 

Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Communication  will  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the 

measures  and  activities  and  will  compile  a  report  on  the  implementation    of  the  strategy 

annually by 31 May, at the latest. A brief report on the execution of the strategy, consisting of 

an overview of the activities, difficulties with and the cost of the application, will be presented 

annually to the Government of the Republic by 30 June, at the latest. The final report on the 

execution  of  the  strategy  shall  be  presented  by  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and 

Communication to the Government of the Republic by 31 May 2018, at the latest. 

 

The action plan will lay out the activities and budget of the strategy as well as the individuals 

responsible  for  each  part.  The  four-year  cost  of  the  strategy  will  be  nearly  EUR  16  million. 

The report of the action  plan that will be submitted to  the Government  of the Republic will 

also include propositions on improving the action plan. The activities of the action plan will 

be reflected in the work plans of the various ministries and other government institutions. 

 

The strategy will not redefine the competencies of the different offices responsible for cyber 

security.  

 

 

13 

The list of the persons who participated in compiling this strategy or provided their advice is 

available in Annex 1 to the strategy, “The list of the participants in the compilation of the 

Cyber Security Strategy for 2014-2017.” 1 

 

 

 

 

 

Annexes: 

Annex 1. Parties involved in the preparation of the Cyber Security Strategy for 2014–2017 

Annex 2. Sectoral methodology 

 

                                                                 

The strategy was compiled by Sander Retel, national cyber security coordinator of the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Communication 

 

14 

