Finland´s 
Cyber security 
Strategy

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

1

Government Resolution 24.1.2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... 1

2.  VISION FOR CYBER SECURITY .............................................................................. 3

3.  CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND THE NATIONAL APPROACH ....................... 4

4.  STRATEGIC GUIDELINES FOR CYBER SECURITY ..................................................... 6

APPENDIX 1: TERMS AND DEFINITIONS .................................................................... 12

THE BACKGROUND DOSSIER OF THE SECURITY COMMITTEE ..................................... 15

Secretariat of the Security Committee
Eteläinen Makasiinikatu 8
PO BOX 31
FIN-00131 HELSINKI, FINLAND

www.yhteiskunnanturvallisuus.fi/en

Layout: Tiina Takala/Ministry of Defence
Print: Forssa print, 2013

ISBN: 978-951-25-2437-2 nid.
ISBN: 978-951-25-2438-9 pdf

2

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

1. 

INTRODUCTION

Cyber security means the desired 

end state in which the cyber 

domain is reliable and in which its 

functioning is ensured.  

Ensuring the security of society is a key task of the government authorities and the vital 
functions of our society must be secured in all situations. As an information society Finland 
relies on information networks and systems and, consequently, is extremely vulnerable to 
disturbances which affect their functioning. An international term for this interdependent, 
multipurpose electronic data processing environment is the cyber domain. 

Society’s growing information intensity, the increase of foreign ownership and out-
sourcing, integration between information and communications technologies, the use of 
open networks as well as the growing reliance on electricity have set totally new require-
ments for securing society’s vital functions in normal conditions, during serious distur-
bances in normal conditions and in emergency conditions.  

Threats against the cyber domain have increasingly serious repercussions for individ-
uals, businesses and society in general.  The perpetrators are more professional than be-
fore and today the threats even include state actors. Cyber attacks can be used as a means 
of political and economic pressure; in a serious crisis pressure can be exerted as an instru-
ment of influence alongside traditional means of military force.

The cyber domain should also be seen as a possibility and a resource. A safe cyber do-
main makes it easier for both individuals and businesses to plan their activities, which in 
turn boosts economic activity. A properly working environment also improves Finland’s 
appeal for international investors. In addition to these, cyber security itself is a new and 
strengthening business area. In addition to the increasing job opportunities and tax rev-
enue, society accrues benefits from this strengthening business sector in many ways. Na-
tional cyber security is interconnected with the success of Finnish companies.

This Strategy defines the key goals and guidelines which are used in responding to 
the threats against the cyber domain and which ensure its functioning.  By following 
the Cyber Security Strategy’s guidelines and the measures required, Finland can man-
age deliberate or inadvertent disturbances in the cyber domain as well as respond to 
and recover from them.

The arrangements of comprehensive security are defined in the Government resolu-
tion of 5 December 2012 on comprehensive security while the Security Strategy for Soci-
ety (2010) defines the principles of ensuring the functions vital to society. Vital functions 
include the management of Government affairs, international activity, Finland’s defence 
capability, internal security, functioning of the economy and infrastructure, the popula-

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

1

tion’s income security and capacity to function, and psychological resilience to crisis. The 
Cyber Security Strategy process is an element in the implementation of the Security Strat-
egy for Society. The process of cyber security strategy is a part of the implementation of 
the Security Strategy for Society; the Cyber Security Strategy complies with the principles 
and definitions in the Security Strategy for Society and the Government Resolution on 
Security of Supply. The Government Resolution (2013) defines the focus areas and goals 
for the security of supply. The Strategy takes into account the forthcoming Government 
resolution on the arrangements of comprehensive security.

Cyber security is not meant to be a legal concept the adoption of which would lead 
to granting new competences to authorities or other official bodies. In this respect no 
changes are proposed to the bases of contingency arrangements or to regulations con-
cerning the competences of authorities.

The Strategy presents the vision, approach and strategic guidelines of cyber security. 
The action plan which is being prepared will cover the practical measures tasked to ad-
ministrative branches and actors. This creates the conditions for the materialisation of the 
strategic guidelines as well as the vision for achieving the desired end state, including the 
jointly agreed cross-cutting measures in society.

2

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

2.  VISION FOR CYBER SECURITY

As a small, capable and collaborative country Finland has excellent chances of rising to 
the vanguard in cyber security. We have an extensive knowledge base and strong exper-
tise, a long tradition of close public-private cooperation, built on trust, as well as inter-
sectoral collaboration.

The vision of Finland’s cyber security is that:
• 
Finland can secure its vital functions against cyber threats in all situations. 
•  Citizens, the authorities and businesses can effectively utilise a safe cyber 
domain and the competence arising from cyber security measures, both 
nationally and internationally.
By 2016, Finland will be a global forerunner in cyber threat preparedness and 
in managing the disturbances caused by these threats.

• 

FIGURE 1 

Vision for cyber security  

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

3

3.  CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND THE 

NATIONAL APPROACH 

 The changes that take place in the cyber domain are fast and their effects are difficult to 
predict. The Software Development Life Cycle for information technology is short and 
the same trend applies to different forms of cyber attacks and malware. Cyber threat pre-
paredness and cyber defence require increasingly swift, transparent and better coordinat-
ed action from all parties in society, both individually and collectively. 

The  Government  represents  the  highest  level  of  cyber  security  management.  The 
Government is responsible for providing political guidance and strategic guidelines for 
cyber security as well as for taking the required decisions regarding the resources and 
prerequisites to be allocated to it.

Cyber security management and disturbance management require that the Govern-
ment and different actors have a reliable, real-time cyber security situation picture of the 
condition of society’s vital functions as well as disturbances which affect their function-
ing. Each ministry and administrative branch is responsible for cyber security and dis-
turbance management within their mandate. The cyber domain and the nature of threats 
highlight the importance of cooperation as well as efficient and flexible coordination. The 
strategic cyber security tasks of ministries and the related development requirements are 
based on the analysis of identified cyber threats as well as the disturbance management 
requirements established on the basis of said analysis. Each ministry, within its sphere of 
responsibility, must see to it that the strategic tasks determined on the basis of the desired 
end states are carried out. 

National cyber resilience will be tailored so as to ensure the preparedness and predic-
tive capabilities required by the goals of comprehensive security, and to facilitate its oper-
ating capability during cyber disturbances as well as post-disturbance recovery.

4

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

The national approach for Finland’s cyber security management is built on the 
following principles.

1. 

In line with the Government decree on the tasks assigned to ministries, matters which re-
late to cyber security as a rule fall within the remit of the Government. Each ministry is in 
its sector responsible for preparing cyber security related matters and appropriate arrange-
ment of administrative matters.

2.  As cyber security is an essential part of the comprehensive security of society the approach 
for its implementation follows the principles and procedures established in the Security 
Strategy for Society.

3.  Cyber security relies on the information security arrangements of the whole society. Cyber 
security depends on appropriate and sufficient ICT and telecommunication network secu-
rity solutions established by every actor operating in the cyber world. Various collaborative 
arrangements and exercises advance and support their implementation.

4.  The approach for the implementation of cyber security is based on efficient and wide-rang-
ing information-collection, an analysis and gathering system as well as common and shared 
situation awareness, national and international cooperation in preparedness. This requires 
the establishment of a Cyber Security Centre as well as the development of 24/7 informa-
tion security arrangements for the entire society.

5.  Cyber security arrangements follow the division of duties between the authorities, busi-
nesses and organisations, in accordance with statutes and agreed cooperation. Rapid adapt-
ability as well as the ability to seize new opportunities and react to unexpected situations 
demand strategic agility awareness and compliance from the actors as they keep developing 
and managing the measures which are aimed at achieving cyber security. 

6.  Cyber security is being constructed to meet its functional and technical requirements. In 
addition to national action, inputs are being made into international cooperation as well 
as participation in international R&D and exercises. The implementation of cyber security 
R&D and education at different levels does not only strengthen national expertise, it also 
bolsters Finland as an information society.

7.  Cyber security development will heavily invest in cyber research and development as well 
as in education, employment and product development so that Finland can become one of 
the leading countries in cyber security. 

8. 

In order to ensure cyber security development, Finland will see to it that appropriate legis-
lation and incentives exist to support the business activities and their development in this 
field. Basic know-how in the field is gained through business activity.

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

5

4.  STRATEGIC GUIDELINES FOR CYBER SECURITY

A national cyber strategy will be developed in accordance with the strategic guidelines. 
They create the conditions for the materialisation of the national cyber security vision. 
A separately prepared action plan will outline the measures which ensure the materiali-
sation of national cyber security goals. The implementation programme will include the 
plans of different actors and administrative branches as well as the intersectoral measures 
that result from the plans.

The implementation of the strategic guidelines will strengthen public‐private cooper-
ation, which is regarded as a forte of the Finnish security community. Such collaboration 
can best serve the entire society and support the actors who provide its vital functions. 
The objective is to maintain the uninterrupted and safe flow of different functions in eve-
ryday life and during disturbances.

Cyber security is built on sufficient capabilities development over the long term, their 
well-timed and flexible use and the resilience of society’s vital functions against distur-
bances in cyber security. Competent ministries will develop the cyber security capacities 
of authorities within their respective administrative branches and, for example, by out-
lining the strategic cyber security tasks of the ministries. Most strategic cyber security 
duties and the development of associated capabilities also require action and resources 
from the other ministries, regional and local administrations as well as the business com-
munity and organisations. Ministries must always take into account the different levels of 
administration as well as the role of the business community and organisations when it 
comes to developing and using the capabilities. A Security Committee which will be set 
up to play an active role in the field of comprehensive security will act as a permanent co-
operation body for contingency planning. Separate provisions regarding the tasks of the 
Security Committee will be issued.

6

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

STRATEGIC GUIDELINES:

1

2

Create an efficient collaborative model between the authorities and 
other actors for the purpose of advancing national cyber security and 
cyber defence.
The strategic guidelines of the Cyber Security Strategy are advanced by intensify-
ing active collaboration between actors whose aim is to achieve a shared situation 
awareness and effective defence against the threats. Different sectors’ preparedness 
in securing the vital functions in disturbed conditions will be improved by organis-
ing regular exercises. Each actor will develop its national and international partici-
pation in exercises. The actors will improve the utilisation of best practices and les-
sons-learned accrued through international exercises by improving the exchange 
of information and mutual coordination. The goal of exercises is to enhance the 
participants’ chances of exposing the vulnerabilities of their own actions and sys-
tems, in developing their capabilities and training their personnel. Cyber defence 
will be advanced by promoting the exchange of information and regulations as well 
as through cooperation between the authorities and the business community.
Improve comprehensive cyber security situation awareness among the 
key actors that participate in securing the vital functions of society.
The goal is to improve the situation awareness of different actors by furnishing 
them with real-time, shared and analysed information regarding vulnerabilities, 
disturbances and their effects. The situation picture will include threat assessments 
arising from the cyber world. Cyber threat prediction requires the analysis of the 
political, military, social, cultural, technical and technological as well as economic 
situation. In order to compile and maintain a combined cyber security situation 
picture, a Cyber Security Centre will be established under the Finnish Communi-
cations Regulatory Authority (FICORA).
The Cyber Security Centre will collect information on cyber incidents and dis-
seminate it to different actors. The actors will then estimate the effects of the dis-
turbance on the activity they are responsible for. Their analyses are relayed back 
to the Cyber Security Centre to be included in a combined cyber security situa-
tion picture. The combined situation picture will be replicated among different 
actors to support decision-making.
The Government situation centre must have a reliable, comprehensive and re-
al-time total assessment of the cyber security situation at its disposal. The as-
sessment encompasses the combined situation picture compiled by the Cyber 
Security Centre as well as the different administrative branches’ estimates of 
the consequences of cyber incidents to society’s vital functions. The state lead-
ership has access to the total situation assessment as well as the estimate of the 
developments in the operating environment.

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

7

3

4

5

Maintain and improve the abilities of businesses and organisations 
critical to the vital functions of society as regards detecting and 
repelling cyber threats and disturbances that jeopardise any vital 
function and their recovery capabilities as part of the continuity 
management of the business community.
In their security and contingency plans as well as related service structures the busi-
nesses and organisations critical to the vital functions of society will comprehensively 
take into account the cyber threat factors related to the vital functions, and maintain 
the required cyber defence capabilities. The goal is to detect and identify any distur-
bances to the vital functions appearing in risk assessments and to respond to them 
in a manner which minimises their detrimental effects. The key actors will improve 
their tolerance, including contingency planning and exercises, so as to be able to op-
erate under cyber attacks. The security of supply-organisation will support this activ-
ity through reports, instructions and training.
Make certain that the police have sufficient capabilities to prevent, 
expose and solve cybercrime.
The police are the competent authority for carrying out investigations related to cyber-
crime. The police will generate an analysed, high-quality cybercrime situation picture 
and disseminate it as part of the combined situation picture detailed in guideline 2. The 
police will closely cooperate with the Cyber Security Centre.
It must be ensured that the police have sufficient powers, resources and motivated 
personnel for cybercrime prevention, tactical police investigations as well as for 
processing and analysing the digital evidence.
International  operational  cooperation  and  the  exchange  of  information  will  be 
continued and intensified with the EU and with other countries’ corresponding 
law enforcement officials, such as the Europol.
The Finnish Defence Forces will create a comprehensive cyber defence 
capability for their statutory tasks.
A military cyber defence capacity encompasses intelligence as well as cyber attack 
and cyber defence capabilities. The Defence Forces will protect their systems in 
such a manner that they are able to carry out their statutory tasks irrespective of 
the threats in the cyber world. Guaranteeing capabilities, intelligence and proactive 
measures in the cyber world will be developed as elements of other military force.
Under the leadership of the Ministry of Defence the required provisions on pow-
ers will be prepared for the Defence Forces to facilitate the implementation of the 
aforementioned tasks. Any identified short-comings in the provisions will be cor-
rected through legislation.
Cyber defence will be exercised and developed together with the key authorities, 
organisations  and  actors  in  the  business  community,  both  nationally  and  inter-
nationally. The Defence Forces will provide executive assistance within the con-
straints of legislation.

8

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

6

7

Strengthen national cyber security through active and efficient 
participation in the activities of international organisations and 
collaborative fora that are critical to cyber security.
The  goal  of  international  cooperation  is  to  exchange  information  and  lessons-
learned as well as take in the best practices so as to raise the national quality of cy-
ber security. The implementation of preparedness and other cyber security meas-
ures  will  fall  short  of  the  goal  without  effective  and  systematically  coordinated 
international cooperation. All authorities, within their field of competence, will 
cooperate, especially with those states and organisations that are global forerun-
ners in the field of cyber security. Active collaboration takes place through R&D, 
pre-agreement consultations and the teamwork efforts of organisations as well as 
through participation in international exercises.
In the development of cyber security, the European Union as well as many interna-
tional organisations, such as the UN, the OSCE, NATO and the OECD are impor-
tant venues for Finland. The EU is increasingly active in the field of cyber security 
and it also engages in cooperation with third countries. Finland is actively partici-
pating in this development. 
Improve the cyber expertise and awareness of all societal actors.
In support of continuously improving the competence and awareness of the actors 
of society, inputs will be made to developing, utilising and training common cyber 
security and information security instructions. In order to develop the compre-
hensive preparedness of society the exercises will also incorporate businesses and 
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) critical to the vital functions of society.
A strategic cyber security centre of excellence will be established under the exist-
ing ICT-SHOK (TIVIT). It will provide an opportunity for top research teams and 
companies who utilise the results to engage in effective mutual cooperation over 
the long term. The centre of excellence will facilitate the conditions for the estab-
lishment of a robust national cyber security cluster. Inputs into R&D and educa-
tion will be increased as well as action to improve cyber security know-how in the 
whole of society.

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

9

8

9

Secure the preconditions for the implementation of effective cyber 
security measures through national legislation.
Working together, the administrative branches and the business community will 
chart the legislation, including any needs to review the provisions relevant to the 
cyber domain and cyber security. The results of this action will comprise the pro-
posals for legislative review which will advance the achievement of the goals of the 
Cyber Security Strategy.
The charting will take into account the rapidly changing phenomena in the cyber do-
main. One of the purposes is to provide the competent authorities and other actors 
with the sufficient means and powers through legislation to implement cyber defenc-
es for the functions vital to society and, especially, the security of the state. Any pos-
sible legislative hurdles, restrictions and obligations related to data protection, as well 
as those arising from international obligations, that impede the obtainability, disclo-
sure and exchange of information useful for effective cyber defence purposes, will 
be taken under review. When it comes to the assessment of information-gathering 
and other data processing one should also estimate whether the competent authori-
ties should have improved possibilities for gathering information, data processing, or 
being informed of cyber threats and their sources, while simultaneously paying at-
tention to ensuring the basic rights of privacy and confidentiality in electronic com-
munications.
Most  of  the  critical  infrastructure  in  society  is  in  private  business  ownership. 
Cyber know-how and expertise as well as services and defences are for the most 
part provided by companies. National cyber security legislation must provide a 
favourable environment for the development of business activities. This would, 
for its part, enable the creation of an internationally recognised, competitive and 
export-capable cyber security cluster. At the same time Finland would become 
an appealing and cyber secure environment worthy of business investments and 
companies’ operations.
Assign cyber security related tasks, service models and common cyber 
security management standards to the authorities and actors in the 
business community.
The development of cyber security requires the clear allocation of responsibilities 
and tasks in accordance with the strategic guidelines. In practice this presuppos-
es that each administrative branch make its risk assessment and maturity analysis, 
which help identify any significant vulnerabilities and risks from the standpoint of 
cyber security, and the level of their management. The results will be used in pre-
paring action plans for each administrative sector and, together with the security 
of supply-organisation, support the drafting of action plans for the business com-
munity.

10

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

10 The implementation of the Strategy and its completion will be 

monitored.
Ministries and agencies are responsible for implementing the Strategy within their 
respective administrative branches, carrying out the tasks related to cyber secu-
rity, and implementing and developing the security of supply. The future Securi-
ty Committee monitors and coordinates the implementation of the Strategy. The 
goals of cyber security coordination include the avoidance of unnecessary duplica-
tion, identification of possible shortcomings and determining the competent enti-
ties. The competent authorities will make the actual decisions subject to the pro-
visions. The Government Information Security Management Board (VAHTI) will 
process and coordinate the central government’s key information security and cy-
ber security guidelines. Ministries, agencies and establishments are to include the 
resources for the implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy in their operating 
and financial plans.

www.yhteiskunnan turvallisuus.fi/en

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

11

APPENDIX  

Term
Information 
infrastructure

Critical information 
infrastructure

Critical 
infrastructure

Cyber

Cyber risk

Cyber domain, 
cyber environment

Definition
Information infrastructure means the structures and functions behind 
information systems that electronically transmit, transfer, receive, store 
or otherwise process information (data).
Critical information infrastructure refers to the structures and func-
tions behind the information systems of the vital functions of socie-
ty which electronically transmit, transfer, receive, store or otherwise 
process information (data).
Critical infrastructure refers to the structures and functions which are 
indispensable for the vital functions of society. They comprise physi-
cal facilities and structures as well as electronic functions and services.
The word ‘cyber’ is almost invariably the prefix for a term or the modi-
fier of a compound word, rather than a stand-alone word. Its inference 
usually  relates  to  electronic  information  (data)  processing,  informa-
tion technology, electronic communications (data transfer) or infor-
mation and computer systems. Only the complete term of the com-
pound word (modifier+head) itself can be considered to possess actual 
meaning.  The word cyber is generally believed to originate from the 
Ancient Greek verb κυβερεω (kybereo) ”to steer, to guide, to control”.
Cyber risk means the possibility of an accident or vulnerability in the 
cyber domain which, if it materialises or is being utilised, can damage, 
harm or disturb an operation that depends on the functioning of the 
cyber domain.
Cyber domain means an electronic information (data) processing do-
main comprising of one or several information technology infrastruc-
tures.
Note 1
Representative to the environment is the utilisation of electronics and 
the electromagnetic spectrum for the purpose of storing, processing 
and  transferring  data  and  information  via  telecommunications  net-
works.
Note 2
Information  (data)  processing  means  collecting,  saving,  organising, 
using,  transferring,  disclosing,  storing,  modifying,  combining,  pro-
tecting, removing, destroying and other similar actions on informa-
tion (data). 

12

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

Term
Cyber security

Cyber threat

Information system

Protection of 
privacy

Information (data) 
security

UTVA

VAHTI

YTS 

Definition
Cyber security means the desired end state in which the cyber domain 
is reliable and in which its functioning is ensured.. 
Note 1
In the desired end state the cyber domain will not jeopardise, harm or 
disturb the operation of functions dependent on electronic informa-
tion (data) processing.
Note 2
Reliance on the cyber domain depends on its actors implementing ap-
propriate and sufficient information security procedures (‘communal 
data security’). These procedures can prevent the materialisation of cy-
ber threats and, should they still materialise, prevent, mitigate or help 
tolerate their consequences.
Note 3
Cyber security encompasses the measures on the functions vital to so-
ciety and the critical infrastructure which aim to achieve the capability 
of predictive management and, if necessary, tolerance of cyber threats 
and their effects, which can cause significant harm or danger to Fin-
land or its population.
Cyber threat means the possibility of action or an incident in the cy-
ber domain which, when materialised, jeopardises some operation de-
pendent on the cyber world. 
Note
Cyber threats are information threats which, when materialised, jeop-
ardise the correct or intended functioning of the information system. 
Information system means the system comprising the personnel, in-
formation  processing  equipment,  data  transfer  equipment  and  soft-
ware programs intended to make some operation more efficient, easier 
or even possible by means of information (data) processing. 
Protection  of  privacy  means  the  protection  against  the  unlawful  or 
hurtful invasion of personal privacy. Protection of privacy includes the 
right to privacy and other associated rights in the processing of per-
sonal data. Personal data means any information on a private individu-
al and any information on his/her personal characteristics or personal 
circumstances, where these are identifiable as concerning him/her or 
the members of his/her family or household.
Information security means the administrative and technical measures 
taken to ensure the availability, integrity and confidentiality of data.
Cabinet Committee on Foreign and Security Policy.
Government Information Security Management Board.
The Security Strategy for Society, Government Resolution 16 Decem-
ber 2010.

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

13

www.yhteiskunnanturvallisuus.fi/en

14

FINLAND´S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY:  

BACKGROUND DOSSIER

The Background Dossier of the Security Committee

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

15

  TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR THE BACKGROUND DOSSIER

1. 

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 17

2.  CYBER DOMAIN AND CYBER THREAT ............................................................................ 17

3.  PRINCIPLES OF CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND THE MANAGEMENT  

OF DISRUPTIONS ......................................................................................................... 19

 

 

3.1  Basic principles of cyber security management .................................................. 19

3.2  Management of disturbances endangering society ............................................ 22

4.  SECURING THE VITAL FUNCTIONS OF SOCIETY AGAINST CYBER THREATS ........................ 23

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.1  Cyber situation awareness and setting up the Cyber Security Centre ................. 23

4.2  Guaranteeing the preconditions of the business community;  
  

security of supply. ............................................................................................. 25

4.3  Cybercrime prevention ....................................................................................... 27

4.4  Cyber defence capability ................................................................................... 28

4.5 

International cooperation .................................................................................. 29

4.6 

Improving research and competence; exercises .................................................. 31

5.  CYBER SECURITY REGULATION ...................................................................................... 33

 

	

5.1 

International and national cyber security regulation ........................................... 33

5.2	

Improving legislation ......................................................................................... 34

6. 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY ................................................... 36

 

 

 

 

6.1 

Principles of implementing the Strategy ............................................................. 36

6.2  Required measures ........................................................................................... 37

6.3  Resource allocation ........................................................................................... 38

6.4  Action Plan and assessing effectiveness ............................................................ 38

APPENDIX   ........................................................................................................................ 39

1.	

INTRODUCTION

This background dossier is a part of the process for adopting Finland’s Cyber Security 
Strategy. The key purpose of this document is to increase the understanding of cyber se-
curity actors of the cyber domain and, consequently, help them improve their cyber se-
curity. The background dossier expands the Strategy and explains in further detail the 
national cyber security approach, the cyber domain and the threat scenario that deter-
mines our preparedness. The document elaborates on the measures required by the stra-
tegic guidelines as well as national and international cyber security regulation. The prin-
ciples for drafting the action plans for different administrative branches and other actors 
are presented at the end of this document.

2.	 CYBER DOMAIN AND CYBER THREAT

The global cyber domain consist of an elaborate and multi-layered worldwide informa-
tion network which comprises ICT networks that are operated by national security au-
thorities, other public authorities, the business community, monitoring and control sys-
tems of the industry and critical infrastructure. The increasingly high-speed global cyber 
domain is bringing states, businesses and citizens ever closer together. While this devel-
opment has significantly fostered well-being, it has also introduced an entirely new set of 
risks. When IT equipment and systems are down, the ICT infrastructure crashes or seri-
ous cyber attacks occur, these can result in extremely negative impacts on public servic-
es, business life and administration and, consequently, the viability of society as a whole.
Cyber attacks can seriously disrupt or even paralyse segments of critical infrastruc-
ture and society’s vital functions. The state or an organisation can be forced to make po-
litical, military or financial concessions. The great powers equate cyber attacks with mili-
tary action which can be met with any available means. 

Thus far cyber operations have been interpreted as ‘soft measures’, for which reason 
the threshold for using them is estimated to be below that of traditional military oper-
ations. The increasing cyber activism, cybercrime and cyber espionage denote growing 
activity among states and non-state actors. Consequently, the cyber domain has trans-
formed the traditional power structure, providing even small states and non-state actors 
with an opportunity to have effectual action. In cyberspace, it is no longer size and mass 
that matter, rather, it is expertise.

The previously described developments in the cyber domain also impact Finland. 
Finland is one of the most developed information societies whose functioning relies on 
various electronic networks and services. Finland has already been the target of cyber 
operations where the focus was on cyber activism, cybercrime and cyber espionage. The 
international development in cyberspace increases the possibilities of new threats being 

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

17

used against us. The public administration and the business community are continually 
being targeted by crackers and hackers attempting to exploit system vulnerabilities. That 
the targets are carefully selected and studied only serves as an indication of the profes-
sionalism of the attacks. Sophisticated malware and techniques are increasingly used in 
these attacks. 

By exploiting system vulnerabilities, the openness of the cyber domain makes it pos-
sible to carry out attacks from all over the world. Such vulnerabilities exist in human ac-
tion, organisational processes and the ICT technology being used. It is very difficult to 
protect oneself against complex and sophisticated malware, and to identify or locate the 
perpetrators. The increasing proliferation of information technology in industrial pro-
duction and control systems has created new vulnerabilities and possible targets for cy-
ber attacks.

Cyber security entered a new era in 2010 when the Stuxnet worm was discovered. It 
was used to carry out an attack against Iran’s nuclear plants: Stuxnet damaged Iran’s ura-
nium enrichment centrifuges, holding back its enrichment project for years. Expert skills 
and considerable resources were needed to write the Stuxnet code. This malware demon-
strated that cyber tools can also inflict physical damage on electronic equipment and sys-
tems. In this new phase, industrial automation and programmable logic controllers are 
ever more often the first targets of cyber attacks, when, in fact, the ultimate objective is to 
impact society’s vital functions.

The cyber threat scenario means a description of disruptions caused by cyber threats 
and their mechanism, source, target and impacts on the target. The threats can directly 
or indirectly impact society’s vital functions, critical infrastructure and/or citizens from 
within or outside national borders.

Cyber threats included in the cyber threat scenario are:
•  Cyber activism (cyber vandalism, hactivism)
•  Cybercrime
•  Cyber espionage
•  Cyberterrorism
•  Cyber operations: pressure, Low Intensity Conflict (LIC) or cyber warfare

18

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

FIGURE 1 Finland’s cyber threat scenario

Threats to society’s vital functions and critical infrastructure can emerge independently, 
concurrently or as a sequential continuum. Whereas their escalation varies in speed and 
endurance, more often than not they make their impact in a short period of time. Due to 
the nature of the cyber domain, it is difficult to predict the causes of threats, the actors be-
hind them, their exact targets, goals and scope or the consequences of their effects. Oth-
er risks can also be associated with cyber threats. For example, terrorist strikes causing 
physical destruction can also incorporate various cyber operations. 

3.	 PRINCIPLES OF CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND THE 

MANAGEMENT OF DISRUPTIONS

3.1  Basic principles of cyber security management

The Government comprises the highest level of cyber security management. The Prime 
Minister leads the Government and is responsible for preparing and coordinating the han-
dling of the matters that are the purview of the Government. Preliminary deliberation and 
coordination occurs in ministerial working groups led by the Prime Minister and, as re-
quired, the Government’s evening session and negotiations. The Government is responsible 
for providing political guidance and strategic guidelines for cyber security as well as for tak-
ing the required decisions regarding the prerequisites and resources allocated to it.

In line with the basic principles of the Security Strategy for Society, the competent 
authorities  are  responsible  for  disturbance  management  and  associated  contingency 
planning. Each ministry sees to the legislative process within its administrative domain, 
guides the action within its branch and, when necessary, participates in intersectoral co-

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

19

operation. The Cyber Security Strategy does not change the tasks defined in the Security 
Strategy for Society, pursuant to which the Ministry of Transport and Communications is 
responsible for safeguarding the functioning of electronic ICT systems, and the Ministry 
of Finance is responsible for safeguarding the state administration’s IT functions and in-
formation security, and the service systems common to the central government.

The future Security Committee coordinates cyber security preparedness, monitors 
the implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy and issues recommendations on its 
further development. The Security Committee closely cooperates with other collabora-
tive bodies that coordinate cyber security-related issues as part of their duties. The future 
Cyber Security Centre supports and assists cyber security actors within the scope of its 
tasking.  The Government Information Security Management Board (VAHTI) supports 
the Government and the Ministry of Finance in administrative data security-related de-
cision-making. VAHTI processes and coordinates all of the central government’s impor-
tant matters that relate to data security and cyber security. 

The effectiveness of disturbance management will be measured by the successfulness 
of  the  pre-emptive  measures.  Cyber  security  arrangements  in  normal  conditions  will 
make or break the outcome of cyber incidents in emergency conditions. All administra-
tive branches as well as organisations and companies critical to security of supply are re-
quired to make contingency plans against cyber threats. Companies are to include cyber 
preparedness in their normal continuity management planning.

FIGURE 2. Principles of cyber security management

20

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

The prevention of cyber threats calls for proper planning and forecasting. This being the 
case, our new operating environment demands strong expertise as well as swift, appropri-
ate and consistent reaction from all parties, in other words, strategic agility. Cyber securi-
ty management embodies all three factors of strategic agility: strategic sensitivity, collec-
tive commitment and resource fluidity.

Strategic sensitivity entails the capability to rapidly compile a situation picture and es-
tablish  situation  awareness.  The  commitment  of  the  leadership  requires  integrated  situa-
tion awareness, coordinated and networked management and the optimisation of collec-
tive benefits. The flexible use of resources demands sufficient cyber expertise and the ability 
to rapidly implement countermeasures and allocate financial resources. The cyber domain 
must get rid of partial optimisation and rigidity caused by silo structures in management. 
The conclusion is that the speed with which the cyber domain is changing, including 
its complexity (FIG 3), requires a new kind of networked approach that relies on strong 
coordination and common rules. The action must be able to combine the benefits of cen-
tralisation and decentralisation, i.e. strong coordination and quick reaction that emerges 
from local ownership.

Finland, generally speaking, has excellent chances of becoming a global forerunner 
of cyber security and the novel approach it entails. Our undisputed fortes include strong 
competence, a tradition of both intersectoral and public-private cooperation as well as 
well-defined processes and division of duties between different actors (see the Security 
Strategy for Society).

FIGURE 3. Strategic agility

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

21

3.2  Management of disturbances endangering society

As the vulnerability of society increases it is necessary to be able to rapidly start managing 
sudden disturbances in the cyber domain, aka cyber incidents.  Cyber incidents typical-
ly have wide-ranging impacts. Therefore, it is necessary to provide the broadest possible 
intersectoral support to the competent authorities, when required. Concurrently, in spite 
of the disturbances, the viability of society must be secured in an appropriate manner.

Cyber incident management will follow the rule of law and the existing division of 
duties. The same cyber incident management principles that are used in normal condi-
tions will be applied in emergency conditions.  The authorities’ division of duties and the 
modi operandi of the cooperation bodies will remain as they are in normal conditions. 
Situation management will be proactive and the needed resources will be brought on-
line at once. The competent authority is in charge of operations, supported by intersecto-
ral cooperation bodies. The competent authority is also responsible for communications. 
The other authorities, businesses and organisations will participate in the management of 
the situation as required. Along with operational activity in situation management, it is 
essential to ensure the flow of communication and provide sufficient information to the 
state leadership.

Disturbance management will be organised and implemented in accordance with the 
Security Strategy for Society. In line with the Strategy, the competent authority launches 
the action needed in managing the disturbance, informs the other authorities and actors 
as appropriate, and brings in the other actors needed for situation management. Cyber 
incident management encompasses four elements: contingency planning, compilation of 
a situation picture, countermeasures and recovery.

22

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

4.	 SECURING THE VITAL FUNCTIONS OF SOCIETY AGAINST  

CYBER THREATS

4.1  Cyber situation awareness and setting up the  

Cyber Security Centre

Improve comprehensive cyber security situation awareness among the key actors 
that participate in securing the vital functions of society. Establish a Cyber 
Security Centre, supported by a cooperative network of actors. 

The decision-making process of the state leadership and the authorities requires suffi-
cient situation awareness. The various actors need to have a reliable, real-time cyber se-
curity situation picture on the state of society’s vital functions and the disturbances that 
are affecting them. The real-time cyber security situation picture does not only com-
prise information from technical monitoring and control, it also includes an analysis that 
amalgamates observations, intelligence, other information gathering and previous les-
sons-learned.

The national Cyber Security Centre will be set up to serve the authorities, the business 
community and other actors in maintaining and developing cyber security. The Centre’s 
arrangements and services will be implemented as part of the integrated cyber security 
strategy action plan. The primary service of the Centre will entail the compilation, main-
tenance and dissemination of the situation picture in close cooperation with its support 
network. The Cyber Security Centre will be founded by merging the functions of the 
present CERT-FI and the planned GOV-CERT, and by earmarking the needed addition-
al resources for its operation. The Centre will be supported by a functional network that 
encompasses all pertinent authorities, businesses and other separately designated actors 
tasked to prepare and respond to cyber security violations.

As the Cyber Security Centre is being established, other parallel projects will be tak-
en into consideration in order to streamline and improve situation picture arrangements. 
The Government Resolution on Enhancing Information Security in Central Government 
provides guidelines for 24/7 ICT security arrangements in the central government. The 
planning and implementation of this function will be coordinated with the operations of 
the Cyber Security Centre. Furthermore, when it comes to the compilation of the situ-
ation picture, the central government’s joint ICT projects, such as the security network 
(TUVE) venture, will be taken into consideration.

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

23

The Cyber Security Centre will:
1.  Compile and disseminate the cyber security situation picture
2.  Compile and maintain a cyber threat risk analysis, in conjunction with 

different administrative branches and actors

3.  Support the competent authorities and actors in the private sector in the 

management of widespread cyber incidents
Intensify cooperation and support the development of expertise.

4. 

The most important service of the Cyber Security Centre is to compile, maintain and 
distribute the cyber security situation picture to those who need it. The compilation of 
the situation picture requires the ability to collect and analyse relevant information and 
to meet the information requirements of different actors. The integrated situation pic-
ture, compiled by the Cyber Security Centre and its support network, comprises a tech-
nical situation picture and an evaluation of the total consequences of the cyber security 
violations to the vital functions of society. The Cyber Security Centre and different ac-
tors will determine their respective information requirements. The information on vul-
nerabilities provided to network administrators will become more automatic; whereas, 
the content of the situation picture intended for the authorities and decision-makers 
will be developed more towards being an analysis of the consequences of the effects on 
society’s vital functions. 

Cyber incident damage control is the responsibility of the authorities and businesses 
that the disturbance concerns. The Cyber Security Centre can support the lead author-
ity in managing widespread cyber incidents that concurrently impact many authorities 
or businesses. The Cyber Security Centre generates an overall cyber security situation as-
sessment built on its integrated cyber security situation picture. The purpose of such a 
briefing is to support the administrative branches in their cyber preparedness arrange-
ments and contingency planning. 

The Cyber Security Centre monitors and analyses cyber threats and, together with its 
international partners, generates forecasts on their consequences to Finland. In accord-
ance with its monitoring activities, the threat scenarios of the Security Strategy for Soci-
ety, the cyber threat scenario and real-time national intelligence information, the Cyber 
Security Centre alerts businesses and authorities critical to the vital functions of society 
concerning new cyber threats to Finland and increased cyber threat levels and, upon re-
quest, assists them in contingency planning.

The Government Situation Centre (GOVSITCEN) compiles the situation picture for 
the state leadership. Close cooperation between the GOVSITCEN and the Cyber Securi-
ty Centre improves intersectoral monitoring and analysis capabilities, on which the inte-
grated situation picture relies. Integrated situation awareness makes it possible to appro-
priately respond to threats at political and operational levels. 

24

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

The Ministry of Transport and Communications is responsible for the performance 
guidance of the Cyber Security Centre. In order to guarantee the performance guidance 
a separate cyber security working group will be established. The participants of the group 
will include all service providers, users and facilitators of the Cyber Security Centre. The 
members of the working group must be experts in their respective fields, with extensive 
knowledge of their organisation’s preparedness, and of the state and requirements of their 
cyber security situation.

4.2  Guaranteeing the preconditions of the business community;  

security of supply

Maintain and improve the abilities of businesses and organisations critical to 
the vital functions of society as regards detecting and repelling cyber threats and 
disturbances that jeopardise any vital function, and their recovery capabilities as 
part of the business community’s continuity management.

The goal is to guarantee, also during ongoing cyber incidents, the continued operations 
of businesses that are vital to society. Continuity management planning in the business 
community will be supported when it can have impact on vital functions and the creation 
of a safe cyber domain. The security of supply organisation plays a central role in securing 
the conditions of the business community. Contingency planning will ensure the func-
tioning of infrastructure crucial to the viability of society, and the continuation of critical 
production capabilities in all situations. 

Society’s critical production processes are increasingly dependent on automation. The 
development cycles of automation systems are long, and they are associated with rapidly 
developing IT solutions. When it comes to continuity management in critical infrastruc-
ture, data protection arrangements in automation systems must also be addressed. The 
connections between equipment in the physical world and networks must be designed in 
such a manner that no simple cyber attack can bring a plant or unit down. Regarding so-
ciety’s vital functions it is imperative to minimise the vulnerabilities of automation sys-
tems, such as building automation, remote operations and remote reading.

Most of the modern critical infrastructure, including services, is owned and gener-
ated by the private sector. The prerequisites companies need to see to the continuation 
of their business operations during cyber threat situations is being improved, thereby in-
creasing confidence in the continued supply of their products .

The security of supply organisation is a network which maintains and develops the 
security of supply in Finland as a public-private partnership. Security of supply is built 
on a well-functioning market and a competitive economy. Society’s economic and tech-
nological basic functions are being prepared so that they can be sustained by various se-

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

25

curity of supply-measures that supplement free enterprise during different disturbances 
and emergency conditions.

Measures that support the continuity of businesses critical to Finland’s security of 
supply will be outlined and carried out as part of the Government Decision on Safe-
guarding the Security of Supply, including its implementation. An individual organisa-
tion normally implements cyber preparedness through the traditional means, methods 
and structures of information security. Companies should be better prepared to evalu-
ate the risks and consequences of cyber attacks as well as the required action. The capa-
bility for conducting analyses and assessments of various functional chains and networks 
will be improved, and awareness of network operations and security of supply will be in-
creased. Cyber defence requires that actors operate under identical or compatible protec-
tion practices. The security of supply organisation provides instruments to critical busi-
nesses which make it easier for them to carry out risk assessments and develop their 
continuity management. 

By virtue of its good cyber security situation Finland can also be a lucrative target for 
investment. Whereas the public sector is tasked with the creation of a safe and efficient 
operating environment, it is the responsibility of the private sector to develop business 
models, products and services. The aim is to establish an internationally renowned cyber 
security cluster. Close international contacts guarantee a sound knowledge base and fa-
cilitate internationally networked business operations. 

Various national development projects run by Tekes (Finnish Funding Agency for 
Technology and Innovation) or Tivit (Strategic Centre for Science, Technology and Inno-
vation in the Field of ICT), among others, must clearly shift their focus towards new busi-
ness and research supporting cyber defence. For example, one focus area of the Cloud 
Software program laboratory, commencing its operation in 2013, must be aimed at the 
development of new cyber defence services.

Business security is implemented by countering illicit economic intelligence and cy-
ber espionage and by reducing intellectual capital risks. In order to bolster the domestic 
information security sector the central government will increase investment in R&D and 
education, and intensify the internal development of its administrative agencies. The Na-
tional Communications Security Authority will become a renowned authority in provid-
ing international information security certifications.

26

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

4.3  Cybercrime prevention

Make certain that the police have sufficient capabilities to prevent,  
expose and solve cybercrime.

The police must be able to identify and prevent the planning, financing and directing of 
terrorist crime and other crime in networks that endanger society, and be able to solve 
the suspected crimes. 

IT crime has become an extremely noteworthy sector of crime with its consequences 
extending to states, individuals and businesses alike. IT networks provide an increasingly 
lucrative and, regarding the risk-benefit and damage ratio, ever more attractive environ-
ment for committing crimes that have financial or terrorist goals. Traditional organised 
crime, too, takes advantage of the vulnerabilities of networks and ICT systems. Cyber at-
tacks can be employed to endanger society’s critical infrastructure and carry out terrorist 
strikes. In addition to terrorism, traditional crime, such as fraud, sexual exploitation of 
children and industrial espionage, is increasing its presence in the cyber domain. 

In general the police, being the competent authority in preventing and investigat-
ing crime and in taking cases to the prosecutors, cooperate with the other law enforce-
ment authorities. Cybercrime is time and again transboundary in nature and its investi-
gation often demands international police and judicial cooperation. Judicial cooperation 
is needed, among other things, to obtain evidence or for the extradition of suspects.

It must be ensured that the police have sufficient powers, competences and rights to 
information  when  it  comes  to  exposing  and  preventing  cybercrime  as  well  as  identify-
ing criminals operating in cyberspace, and solving these crimes. Likewise, it must be en-
sured that the police have sufficient powers, competences and rights to information when it 
comes to identifying and preventing the planning, financing and directing of terrorist crime 
in networks and other crimes that endangers society, including associated propaganda and 
preparing the ground for criminal activity, and the capability to solve the suspected crimes.
The police will establish the competence, capacity and appropriate legal powers to ex-
change information and cooperate with other law enforcement authorities in preventing, 
identifying and solving crimes. As part of organised crime prevention the police shall in-
vest in cybercrime prevention. The police will develop and bolster national IT crime pre-
vention techniques by increasing cooperation between different police forces, including 
their rapid response capabilities.

In accordance with the order of the National Police Board, the National Bureau of Inves-
tigation maintains a situation picture of international and organised crime. Moreover, the Na-
tional Bureau of Investigation, together with the local police, maintains an integrated crime 
situation picture. The joint PCB (Police, Customs and the Border Guard) authorities’ crimi-
nal intelligence and investigation centre is utilised in the compilation of the situation picture. 
The Finnish Security Intelligence Service maintains a situation picture of its field of activities. 

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

27

It must be ensured that the police have sufficient and motivated personnel and that 
they are capable of tactical police investigations of demanding IT crime and for process-
ing and analysing digital evidence in a legally certain manner. The competence of the au-
thorities, prosecutors and judges involved in the prevention and investigation of cyber-
crime is improved by developing the pertinent education of the field. 

4.4  Cyber defence capability

The Finnish Defence Forces will create a comprehensive cyber defence  
capability for their statutory tasks.

Cyber intelligence, cyber warfare and protection capabilities create the cyber defence ca-
pability. The goal is to customise the capability so that it will best support the Defence 
Forces’ activities in protecting the territorial integrity and in national defence. Cyber de-
fence will be implemented as an entity which comprises the capabilities of the Defence 
Forces, other authorities and the rest of society.

A credible capability is achieved by cooperating with the other authorities, business-
es and universities. In normal conditions the capability will be improved by networking, 
exchanging information and participating in joint projects, national and international 
working groups and exercises. The basic approach will remain unchanged in emergen-
cy conditions and during disturbances. Cyber preparedness and threat management is 
achieved by maintaining and developing various defence and counterattack techniques. 
Furthermore, an appropriate recovery capability from cyber attacks will be established.

Cyber warfare can be used as an instrument of political and economic influence, and in 
a serious crisis it can be used along with traditional means of military force. The Defence 
Forces will protect their own systems and networks; they will also create and maintain cy-
ber intelligence and cyber warfare capabilities. The development of these capabilities will be 
determined by the associated performance requirements and available resources.

Emerging cyber threats must be identified early on, and it must be possible to moni-
tor the phenomena and events in cyberspace in real time. This requires the compilation of 
a cyber situation picture so as to enable early warning and allow for preparations and the 
implementation of measures. The Defence Forces and the future Cyber Security Centre 
will cooperate with each other in the compilation of the cyber situation picture.

Intelligence capabilities yield information on networks, including their vulnerabili-
ties, and cyberspace actors, and provide assessments of their ability to carry out cyber op-
erations. The goal of cyber intelligence is to establish the kind of situation awareness and 
intelligence information that protection and cyber warfare require. 

The national cyber defence capability will be developed by cooperating with the other 
authorities, the business community, the scientific community and other actors. Nation-
al coordination, the compilation of an integrated situation picture and the provision of 

28

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

the requisites of cooperation demand regularly exchanged information between the dif-
ferent actors. 

International cyber defence cooperation will be further intensified between the key 
actors. Such cooperation is built on bilateral agreements and multilateral collaboration. 
The purpose of international cooperation is to facilitate the regular exchange of informa-
tion between different actors and, in particular, to develop domestic capacities and har-
monise procedures.

The Defence Forces will provide executive assistance to the other authorities with re-
gard to disturbances caused by cyber incidents. If required, the other authorities will sup-
port the Defence Forces in the implementation of cyber defence. The Defence Forces’ ca-
pacity to support the other authorities during cyber incidents will be improved.

The options and powers related to cyber warfare capabilities require a thorough further 
review. This review must incorporate the applicability and adequacy of existing internation-
al law and national regulation, and the requirements of cyber defence capabilities, if any.

Sufficient powers, competence and the right to information will be given to the De-
fence Forces for the implementation of national defence, executive assistance, territorial 
surveillance and crisis management tasks. 

4.5 

International cooperation

Strengthen national cyber security through active and efficient participation in 
the activities of international organisations and collaborative fora that are critical 
to cyber security.

The goal of national cyber security – integrated situation awareness, effective disturbance 
management and threat prevention – is nationally achieved through active cooperation 
between the different actors. Due to the wide-ranging nature of cyber security the impor-
tance of international cooperation is ever more emphasised. The goal of international co-
operation is to exchange information and experiences, and to learn from best practices so 
as to raise the level of national cyber security. 

International cyber security cooperation occurs at several levels and fora: in the Nordic 
context, the European Council, the European Union, and in international organisations such 
as NATO, the OSCE and the UN. Cyber threats are transboundary threats and, therefore, they 
require international cooperation in various international fora. Such cooperation provides an 
opportunity for exchanging information and learning from best practices. Furthermore, it 
provides benchmarks for the development of national cyber security as part of global cyber 
security and also increases the interoperability and compatibility of cyber defence.

Cooperation is implemented between different organisations and at the international 
level. When it comes to organisations, the EU and NATO are the key cyber security ac-

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

29

tors. Cooperation with them primarily entails the exchange of situational information, 
cooperation in the development of capabilities and in training and exercises. 

Traditional Nordic cooperation also provides an opportunity for the advancement 
of cyber security. Closer Nordic cyber security cooperation was agreed on at the Nor-
dic foreign ministers’ meeting in 2009. As per the recommendations of the expert work-
ing group a Nordic authorities’ cooperative network, which includes an associated secure 
network, is being planned.

The 2001 Convention on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe (aka the Budapest Con-
vention) lays the groundwork for the prevention of all cybercrime. The European Union 
is also a very important venue as regards Finland’s cyber security development. The EU is 
presently planning its very own cyber security strategy. At the moment the EU’s guidelines 
and directives focus on cybercrime prevention, protection of critical IT infrastructure as 
well as legislative work on electronic communications, data security and data protection. 

Finland  continues  its  close  cooperation  with  European  cooperative  organisations  such 
as the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA); the European law en-
forcement agency Europol; the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications 
(BEREC); the European Forum for Member States (EFMS), which is an intergovernmental 
cooperative forum for the protection of Europe’s critical infrastructure; and the European Pub-
lic-Private Partnership for resilience (EP3R,) which deals with the robustness of ICT systems. 
As cyber defence is being developed, cooperation with the EU Military Staff (EUMS), 
the European Defence Agency (EDA) and NATO will continue. NATO continues to co-
operate with its partner countries in responding to new security challenges, supporting 
NATO-led operations and improving situation awareness.

The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) aims to improve con-
fidence-building measures for the prevention of cyber conflicts by increasing transparency, 
cooperation and stability. The goal of this cooperation, built on the OSCE’s comprehensive 
concept of security, is to complement the efforts of other international organisations.

UN Member States commit to increasing confidence and security in the use of ICTs in 
the outcome documents of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). Finland 
participates in the cyber security debate which is being conducted in UN bodies and, in 
accordance with its WSIS obligations, supports the strengthening of cooperation between 
all actors as regards security-related topics. The International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) also promotes this objective through its Global Cybersecurity Agenda initiative.

The work carried out within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De-
velopment (OECD) aims to develop or harmonise the policies of its Member States in 
various sectors of the economy or society. Finland participates in the OECD’s data se-
curity and protection-of-privacy roundtables. The OECD is an expert organisation that 
supports its Member States’ decision-making in economic and social policy. The OECD 
has issued recommendations on the security principles of IT systems and networks, and 
carried out comparative studies on its Member States’ national cyber security strategies.

30

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

4.6 

Improving research and competence; exercises

Improve cyber expertise and awareness of all societal actors.

Regarding the importance of cyber security to society, the goal is to improve understand-
ing, competence and skills among the authorities, the business community and citizens 
and create a strong national cluster of cyber know-how. Cyber security research will be 
developed as part of national top-level research and a strategic cyber security centre of 
excellence will be established at already existing structures. The purpose of exercises is to 
improve the participants’ ability to identify vulnerabilities in their activities and systems, 
and to improve their skills and train their personnel. Different sectors regularly test their 
preparedness when it comes to managing disturbances in vital functions.

The most cost-effective way to advance national cyber security is to improve com-
petence. Increasing cyber risk awareness among the authorities, the business commu-
nity and citizens will improve everybody’s skills in the implementation of cyber security 
measures. Top-level research in this field will lay the foundation for developing compe-
tence and cyber security systems. 

The Finnish education system will see to the preservation and development of such 
top-level competence which can be utilised in ensuring and improving the security of so-
ciety’s vital functions in the cyber domain. The study of basic cyber security skills must 
be included at all levels of education. The learning requirements of cyber security must be 
included on the curricula of basic education (comprehensive school), vocational upper 
secondary education, general upper secondary education and higher education.

Universities will bolster the requisites of basic research, applied research and inno-
vation in cyber security, while universities of applied science will improve the precondi-
tions of product development. The level of cyber security research will be raised and its 
research conditions will be guaranteed so that basic and applied research can continu-
ally generate cutting-edge innovation and scientific breakthroughs. The development of 
cryptology skills, among other things, will be supported so that Finland can supply relat-
ed products and services to national and international users.

An interdisciplinary, strategic cyber security centre of excellence will be established 
at the existing ICT-SHOK (TIVIT)1. It will provide an opportunity for top-level research 
teams and companies that utilise the results to engage in effective mutual cooperation 
over  the  long  term.  The  centre  of  excellence  will  employ  an  application-oriented  and 
interdisciplinary research strategy which companies, universities and research establish-
ments have together defined. The results of that strategy will serve the implementation of 
the national Cyber Security Strategy, and the development of international-level top-ex-

1 

 The Strategic Centre for Science, Technology and Innovation in the Field of ICT

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

31

pertise.  These measures will support the creation of new and successful international cy-
ber security business. 

From the standpoint of continuous business growth it is imperative to retain top-lev-
el competence in Finland. This will make it possible for us to take advantage of the cyber 
domain. Judging by the needs of the business community, one to two educational estab-
lishments, together, should retrain at least 100 persons in this sector in 2013. Transition 
training will continue at the same level for several years ahead. Additional cyber/infor-
mation security courses will be provided by universities and polytechnics as soon as pos-
sible. Educational establishments that provide training in the field will provide more IT 
security study places as well as secondary fields of study in cyber security. A professorship 
in cyber security will be established as soon as possible and, in the long run, the number 
of professors in cyber security will be increased.

Lessons-learned from cyber exercises provide concrete information on securing the 
vital functions of society, including required cooperation. In addition, they provide in-
formation on the development needs required by the strategic tasks of administrative 
branches and organisations, and the total situation of society’s preparedness and crisis 
management capabilities. Exercises help test the basic principles and modi operandi of the 
Cyber Security Strategy; they also measure the implementation of the Strategy.

Preparedness for emergency conditions and serious disturbances in normal conditions 
must be exercised on a regular basis. This makes it possible to analyse how well cyber secu-
rity is being achieved in Finland and to continually introduce improvements. Cyber threats 
have very short mutation cycles and, therefore, all national and international exercises must 
be frequent and well-organised so as to effectively support national cyber security.

Successful cyber exercises call for a systematic approach and clear lines of authority. 
The preparation and implementation of large national cyber exercises will be coordinat-
ed in accordance with the principles of the Security Strategy for Society. The implemen-
tation of national cyber security entails close public-private cooperation. Businesses and 
NGOs that are important to society’s vital functions will be included in exercises so as to 
improve society’s comprehensive preparedness. 

Public and private sector preparedness for cyber incident management will be trained 
in national cyber exercises which test the preparedness required by cyber incidents in-
cluded in the Cyber Security Strategy’ threat scenarios, and the functioning of manage-
ment and cooperation arrangements. Exercise themes will incorporate topical challenges 
caused by changes in the cyber domain.

Participation in international multi-level exercises significantly supports the develop-
ment of national cyber security, know-how in the field, practices, the creation of transna-
tional inter-authority cooperation and a network of experts. Already during the planning 
stages Finland must actively try to influence the structures and running of exercises so 
that they advance the development of our national competence, and so that we can test 
the strengths and weaknesses of our national cyber domain.

32

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

5.	 CYBER SECURITY REGULATION

Secure the preconditions for the implementation of effective cyber security 
measures through national legislation.

		

Cyber security is a new legal phenomenon. Cyber threats are transboundary by nature. 
The actors behind cyber attacks may vary and are difficult to identify. Cyber attack tech-
niques are versatile, rapidly changing and evolving. Cyber security concerns all walks of 
life, administrative branches and vital functions of society. Basic rights and human rights 
guarantee the right to privacy and confidentiality of communications. The origin and na-
ture of the cyber threat determines the body of law that will govern the cyber incident. 

5.1 

International and national cyber security regulation

In the 1990s the United Nations (UN) recognised the criminal misuse of information 
technology as a cross-border crime. The UN has issued resolutions in the fight against 
the misuse of information technology and for the protection of critical IT infrastructure. 
The European Union has drafted conventions, framework decisions, directives, pro-
posals and communications on IT crime and its prevention, cooperation in the defence 
of attacks against information systems, and the protection of critical infrastructure and 
IT infrastructure.

No uniform international treaty exists which covers all cyber threat situations and is 
binding on all states. International law handles cyber incidents in a fragmented manner 
and approaches them from different viewpoints. Likewise, no consensus exists on terms 
such as cyber attack, cyber defence or cyber conflict/skirmish. There has been more in-
ternational legal debate on this complex topic in recent years. This will probably result in 
new legal interpretations on the assessment of cyber incidents at the state level or in in-
ternational organisations. Presumably, these interpretations will not be legally binding on 
states, but, they will indicate the objectives which the states participating in the arrange-
ments are prepared to adopt.

The UN Charter regulates the use of force in state relations. Apart from self-defence 
in the event of an armed attack or participation in Security Council-mandated military 
action, the use of force is forbidden. At present, the international community is debating 
whether cyber attacks in some situations can rise above the threshold of armed attack, 
as defined in the UN Charter, justifying a military response by the affected state. Sover-
eignty also includes responsibility. A state must see to it that its area will not be used in 
an attack against another state. It must, therefore, also try to prevent attacks beyond its 
national borders perpetrated by private entities. No rules of engagement exist for cyber 
operations. 

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

33

No uniform cyber threat regulation exists in national legislation. Standards that ad-
dress operations in IT networks are fragmented, and they approach cyber threats from 
different angles. Even though cyber operations by their very nature cross the bounda-
ries of administrative branches, at the national level administrative branches define cy-
ber threats from their own perspective. Moreover, powers also tend to be branch-specific. 
Depending on its origin and scope, a cyber threat can be considered to be an individual 
criminal act, a wider terrorist offence or an issue affecting state relations and military de-
fence. This hampers the achievement of legal rulings and a consistent, national legal in-
terpretation of the situation. 

Pursuant to the Constitution of Finland the public authorities shall guarantee the 
observance of basic rights and liberties, and human rights. Basic rights must also be 
guaranteed in networks. Increased cyber security may improve, for instance, the pro-
tection of the privacy and property of network users. Well-functioning ICT networks 
can also be seen to promote the freedom of speech. More detailed cyber security-re-
lated regulation can be found in Chapter 34 of the Criminal Code, the Territorial Sur-
veillance Act, the Readiness Act, the State of Defence Act and the Act on the Defence 
Forces, the Communications Market Act and the Act on the Protection of Privacy in 
Electronic Communications. 

The obligation of the authorities to be prepared to discharge their duties well in all 
situations, as per the Readiness Act, also includes the development of cyber capabilities. 
The key requirement for invoking and using the powers of the Readiness Act is subject to 
the existence of emergency conditions, as provided by law. Pursuant to the justifications 
of the Act, an attack (according to the definition of emergency conditions) comparable to 
an armed attack may also mean an attack other than one implemented with traditional 
means of force.  For instance, it can entail an attack against IT systems. An attack can also 
mean one executed by non-state actors, if it is so organised and wide-ranging that it can 
be likened to an attack carried out by a state.

5.2	

Improving legislation

In its international action Finland supports and participates in interpretations of interna-
tional law aimed at harmonising to the greatest possible extent the legal doctrines of dif-
ferent states. At the same time, this means that it is not sufficient to only adapt Finland’s 
legislation to cover cyber threat situations. Finland actively participates in cooperation 
between different actors which aims for the transparent exchange of information, a com-
mon body of law and the division of duties between different actors. This can, among oth-
er things, limit situations in which discrepancies in national laws provide an opportunity 
for cybercriminals to carry out their activity in suitable states.

National law should be considered from the perspective of international cyber se-
curity-related legislation and EU legislation. This work must ascertain the different ad-

34

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

ministrative branches’ cyber security regulation, how modern and sufficient it is, and 
the need for legislative review, if any. The point of departure is that the powers required 
for managing cyber incidents which endanger and harm society must be included in 
the authorities’ normal powers. The Constitution lays down that the exercise of public 
powers shall be based on an Act.

Legislation must be developed in such a manner that it adapts to rapidly changing 
phenomena in cyberspace, and makes it possible for the competent authorities in the 
different sectors to discharge their duties in protecting the sovereignty of the state and 
the livelihood of the population, and in defending society’s vital functions against cy-
ber threats. Cyber security must be regarded as an integral element of security. When it 
comes to the viability of society it is imperative to find a suitable balance between legis-
lation and situation awareness, the responsibilities and practices of the authorities and 
the business community. This analysis must also take into account Finland’s internation-
al competitiveness. A stable cyber security situation, for its part, creates a lucrative busi-
ness environment. 

In order to repel cyber threats that endanger the security of the state, possible legisla-
tive restrictions and hurdles, as well as those arising from international obligations, will 
be reviewed. Such restrictions and hurdles also include obligations related to data pro-
tection and those found to be useful for effective cyber defence purposes that impede 
the obtainability, disclosure and exchange of information between the different authori-
ties and other actors. When it comes to assessing information-gathering and other data 
processing one should also estimate whether the competent authorities should be given 
better possibilities for gathering information, data processing or being informed of cyber 
threats and their sources, while simultaneously paying attention to the basic rights of pri-
vacy and confidentiality in electronic communications.

With regard to police activities, it is especially important to obtain the powers for in-
telligence gathering and investigation in order to prevent, identify and fend off cyber-
crime. The rules on jurisdiction related to cyber warfare and cyber intelligence should 
be clarified and improved in the review of legislation on the Defence Forces. Should the 
rules on jurisdiction be expanded, special consideration must be paid to human and ba-
sic rights, and to their impact on the rules on jurisdiction, for instance, when intelligence-
gathering powers are being expanded. 

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

35

6.	

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY

6.1  Principles of implementing the Strategy

Assign cyber security related tasks, service models and common cyber security 
management standards to the authorities and actors in the business community.

The cyber security of society and the securing of its vital functions rely on the strategic 
tasks of the ministries and a well-functioning security of supply in all situations. Each ad-
ministrative branch is responsible for the preparation of its cyber risk analysis. The analy-
sis process makes it possible to identify vulnerabilities and complete a maturity analysis. 
The process culminates in the completion of action plans for each administrative branch 
which meet their designated requirements.

The  metrics  and  actions  needed  for  improving  cyber  security  will  be  determined 
through  a  more  detailed  analysis.  Contingency  plans  and  preparedness  arrangements 
must regularly be reviewed, especially when major changes occur in society or in the se-
curity environment. The future Security Committee will monitor and coordinate the im-
plementation and development of the Strategy.

In	addition,	each	actor	or	sector	in	society	has	distinct	cyber	security	tasks.	These	
specific	tasks	expand	the	strategic	tasks	defined	in	the	Security	Strategy	for	Society,	
those	related	to	security	of	supply	and	sector-specific	tasks	from	the	perspective	of	cy-
ber	security.

Maintaining	 society’s	 cyber	 security	 demands	 accurate	 information	 on	 the	 pre-
paredness	and	capacity	of	the	administrative	branches	and	the	business	community,	as	
well	as	the	crisis	resilience	and	preparedness	of	society	in	general.	The	monitoring	of	
the	Strategy	must	enable	timely	and	correct	maintenance	and	development	measures.	
Such	monitoring	provides	the	state	leadership	with	up-to-date	information	regarding	
the	correct	allocation	of	resources	in	line	with	the	goals	of	the	Cyber	Security	Strategy.
The	implementation	of	cyber	security	also	requires	the	consistent	application	of	the	
Strategy’s	principles	at	the	regional	and	local	levels.	This	calls	for	adequate	cooperation	
between	the	different	actors	and	the	utilisation	of	best	practices.

The	future	Security	Committee	will	coordinate	the	joint	monitoring	and	develop-
ment	of	the	implementation	of	the	Strategy.	The	Committee	will	prepare	annual	reports	
on	the	state	of	the	Strategy’s implementation.

36

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

6.2  Required measures

Ministries will monitor the implementation and development of cyber security-
related tasks and the security of supply-measures. The administrative branches 
will carry out the monitoring as part of their routine practices.

The Cyber Security Centre, together with its network, will regularly prepare cyber inci-
dent reports for the different authorities. The Centre and its support network will prepare 
annual reports on, at least, the following topics: 
•  How the cyber incidents were managed, including the lessons-learned, 

• 

• 

analyses and the economic impacts on society’s vital functions,
Estimates on the viability and further requirements of contingency 
arrangements,  
Lessons-learned from the administrative branches’, the Government’s and 
national cyber readiness exercises, and

•  The improvement of action and competence-building and resource 

allocation.

When  it  comes  to  cyber  incident  management,  it  is  important  that  all  action 
launched for the purpose of situation management be carefully recorded and analysed. 
In addition, the analysis of ‘close calls’ must also be included in this tracking, especial-
ly for the purpose of preventing threats and risks.  Lessons-learned and the measures 
they spawned will be discussed in different cooperative bodies so as to ensure the util-
isation of best practices. 

The observations and experiences from cyber exercises provide tangible information 
as regards securing the vital functions of society, including the necessary cooperation. 
Furthermore, they provide information on the development needs required by the stra-
tegic tasks of the administrative branches and organisations, and on the overall situation 
of society’s preparedness and crisis management capabilities. Exercises test the princi-
ples and approaches of the Cyber Security Strategy, and help assess the implementation 
of the Strategy.

Monitoring the implementation of the Strategy also provides criteria and require-
ments for cyber security research, including national R&D cooperation. National and 
international security research will be implemented and its cooperative arrangements 
will be developed in line with the guidelines of the National Security Research Strategy 
(2009). Research that supports the Cyber Security Strategy is conducted at various re-
search units and establishments, and through the research programmes of universities 
and other institutes of higher education.

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

37

The maintenance and development of the Cyber Security Strategy rely on a continu-
ous improvement process. The Cyber Security Strategy will be annually reviewed by the 
future Security Committee. This will ensure the relevance and the continued progress of 
the Strategy. Any possible updates to the Strategy and the Action Plan will be carried out 
on the basis of an analysis generated by the process. The salient points of the Cyber Se-
curity Strategy will be incorporated into the Security Strategy for Society the next time 
it is updated.

6.3  Resource allocation

Ministries, government agencies and establishments are to include the resources for the 
implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy in their operating and financial plans. Par-
liament will assign spending limits to the ministries, in which the resources required by 
cyber security measures will be included. Ministries will incorporate resource require-
ments in their normal operating plans. Businesses will take cyber security requirements 
into account as they make decisions on their budgets and resource allocation.

A separate supplementary appropriation will be earmarked for setting up the Cyber 
Security Centre, including its operation. The sum total of the appropriation will be deter-
mined in the joint implementation plan. The Centre will be able to operate on a 24/7 ba-
sis which, according to preliminary plans will require the additional resources of approx-
imately ten person-years and at least one million Euros.

6.4  Action Plan and assessing effectiveness

The implementation of the Strategy and its completion will be monitored. 

Phase 1 of the Cyber Security Strategy will be put into practice during 2013-2015. De-
tailed contingency and development plans for cyber security will be prepared in that pe-
riod so as to achieve by 2016 the Government Programme’s target that Finland become 
a leading country in the development of cyber security. From 2016 on the Cyber Securi-
ty Strategy will be implemented in line with the principles of continuous improvement. 
Administrative branches will implement the budgeting required by cyber security in ac-
cordance with existing guidelines.

The key features of the Action Plan include the establishment of the Cyber Security 
Centre, the ministries’ measures for the purpose of achieving their strategic goals, and the 
required legislative review. A cyber security maturity model will be developed as part of 
the Action Plan with which the level and development of the actions can be benchmarked.

38

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

APPENDIX  

THE CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY’S CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT PROCESS

 

The goal of the national cyber strategy process is to achieve a continuous improvement approach 
which will make it possible to more efficiently and effectively implement cyber security measures. 
The strategy process manifests itself at several levels and it includes different phases. The goal is to 
create a continuous strategy process with parts that regularly repeat and generate continuous im-
provement. 

The cyber security process encompasses five phases: 

Analysis
The Strategy’s analysis phase defines our own position, i.e. our state in relation to the operating environ-
ment and its various elements. In the cyber strategy this translates into an analysis of the cyber threat 
environment and identification of vulnerabilities in society’s vital functions, along with a risk assess-
ment of the ensuing entirety. Moreover, one’s own capabilities and shortcomings will be assessed.

The operating environment analysis will identify phenomena in cyberspace, assign the neces-
sary definitions for the Strategy and catalogue the existing national cyber security projects, includ-
ing related and ancillary projects.

Information from other countries’ cyber security strategies and the best practices most suitable 

for us will be obtained through benchmarking.

The analysis will result in awareness of our standing in both the national and international cy-

ber domain; it will also provide further grounds for definitions and reports.

Planning
The cyber security vision, national standards and the cyber security concept will be determined in the 
planning phase. This phase will take into account performance requirements, available economic re-
sources and competence. Several options will be prepared as regards achieving the desired end state.

Decision
In the decision-making phase several options will be compared and the option leading to the de-
sired end state will be selected as will be the national operating concept and the measures it requires. 
In addition, the desired cyber capabilities and the measures required to create them will be defined. 

Production
The production phase will determine the structure of the Cyber Security Strategy, the manner in 
which things are presented, and the concrete goals and responsibilities of cyber security. The pro-
duction phase includes several iterations; mid-reviews will ensure that the strategic decisions ap-
pear in the text. The drafting of the Strategy is completed when it is presented to the commission-
ing body and is approved.

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

39

Implementation
The previous phases of the strategy process will have produced an approved strategy document 
which also includes an action plan as well as a plan for continuously keeping the strategy process 
relevant. In its implementation phase the strategy will be put into practice by delegating the pro-
posed action of the strategy at the different levels of administration and organisations. A bench-
marking and monitoring system for cyber security maturity will be created for the purpose of 
change management, which can then be used to monitor the success of the process. The future Se-
curity Committee will monitor the implementation of the Strategy. It will also prepare an annual 
report for the Government.

Developments in the cyber domain will be monitored in the implementation phase and, if nec-
essary, administrative branches will be supported in putting the Strategy’s principles into practice. 
The goal is to maintain a comprehensive cyber security situation picture, and to track the develop-
ment of countermeasure capabilities. 

Resource allocation is an important part of the implementation of the Strategy. Efficiency and 
effectiveness  are  directly  attributable  to  the  available  economic  and  intellectual  resources.  The 
Government creates the framework for cyber security resource allocation through budget steer-
ing. Accountable departments, within the constraints of their budgetary power, will allocate re-
sources for the practical implementation of cyber security, such as the compilation of a situation 
picture, contingency planning, research and development, and education. 

The cyber security process is a process of continuous improvement and it is used to track 
changing conditions and the effectiveness of action. Consequently, the process will incorporate 
analyses and, when necessary, updates of the Strategy.

FIGURE 1 The continuous improvement process of cyber security.

40

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

www.yhteiskunnanturvallisuus.fi/en

42

FINLAND’S CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY  —  BACKGROUND DOSSIER

