 

Information systems defence and security
France’s strategy

Foreword

In the French White Paper on Defence and National Security presented by the President in June 
2008, information systems security emerged, alongside deterrence, as an area in which the 
sovereignty of France should be fully expressed. More collective work remains to be done in 
order to fully achieve this.

Yet  cyberspace  may  seem  only  remotely  related  to  defence  and  national  security.  In  twenty 
years, digital technologies have eroded the boundaries between our personal and professional 
lives, raised corporate competitiveness to unprecedented levels, made public services more 
accessible to users and promoted a transparency drive in our country’s institutions.

Cyberspace,  the  new  Tower  of  Babel,  is  a  place  where  the  cultures  of  the  world  can  be 
shared, ideas and information circulated in real-time, and topics discussed among individuals. 
Exclusion from the digital world condemns individuals to isolation, companies to decline and 
nations to dependency.

In the material world, the violent acts of criminals and the destruction caused by wars and 
terrorism are highly visible and usually subject to wide media coverage. In cyberspace, the 
consequences  of  computer  attacks  on  government,  companies  or  individuals’  information 
systems are most of the time visible only to specialists and remain unknown to the general 
public.

Cyberspace, like a virtual battleground, has become a place for confrontation: appropriation 
of personal data, espionage of the scientific, economic and commercial assets of companies 
which  fall  victim  to  competitors  or  foreign  powers,  disruption  of  services  necessary  for  the 
proper functioning of the economy and daily life, compromise of information related to our 
sovereignty and even, in certain circumstances, loss of human lives are nowadays the potential 
or actual consequences of the overlap between the digital world and human activity.

Given the sudden emergence of cyberspace in the field of national security and the extent of 
the  challenges  ahead,  the  French  government  decided  to  provide  France  with  a  structured 
defence and security capability. In 2009, therefore, it set up the French Network and Information 
Security Agency (Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information or ANSSI), to meet 
the needs of public institutions, companies and individuals. In July 2010, the President decided 
to make the Agency responsible for the defence of information systems in addition to its security 
role.

The  purpose  of  this  document  is  to  outline  the  strategy  undertaken  by  France  since  the 
publication of the French White Paper on Defence and National Security in order to safeguard 
the security of our citizens, our companies and our nation in cyberspace.

Francis Delon

Secretary General for Defence and 

National Security

Words followed by an asterisk are defined in the glossary.

Photo credits :
 
cover 
page 11 
 
page 12 
 
page 13 
 
 
page 14 

 
 
 
 
 

Jean Mottershead (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0), or free of copyright
Ruby MV (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Simon BISSON (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
MrFenwick (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
Runran (CC BY-SA 2.0)

Contents

 

Foreword

Summary

Four strategic objectives

   Become a cyberdefence world power in cyberdefence
   Safeguard  France’s  ability  to  make  decisions  through  the  protection  of 
information related to its sovereignty
   Strengthen the cybersecurity of critical national infrastructures
   Ensure security in cyberspace

Seven areas of action

   Anticipate and analyse
   Detect, alert and respond
   Enhance  and  perpetuate  our  scientific,  technical,  industrial  and  human 
capabilities
   Protect  the  information  systems  of  the  State  and  the  operators  of  critical 
infrastructures 
   Adapt French legislation
   Develop our international collaborations
   Communicate to inform and convince 

Glossary

Information systems defence and security strategy

5

Summary

Among  the  major  threats  that  France  will  have  to  face  over  the  next  fifteen  years, 
the  2008  French  White  Paper  on  Defence  and  National  Security  cited  large-scale 
cyberattacks on national infrastructures.

This observation led to the French Government’s decision to significantly strengthen 
national cyberdefence capabilities. The creation of the French Network and Information 
Security Agency (ANSSI) in 2009 was the first step of this process.

This  description  of  the  national  strategy  on  information  systems  defence  and 
security presented in this document reflects the ambitions set out in the White Paper.  
This strategy is based on four objectives.
1.  Become a world power in cyberdefence
While  maintaining  its  strategic  independence,  France  must  work  to  ensure  that  it 
belongs to the inner circle of leading nations in the area of cyberdefence. We will thus 
benefit from the knock-on effect of cooperation both at an operational level and in the 
implementation of a unified strategy to face common threats.
2.  Safeguard  France’s  ability  to  make  decisions  through  the  protection  of 
information related to its sovereignty
Governmental authorities and crisis management actors must have the resources to 
communicate in any situation and in total confidentiality. The networks that meet this 
need must be expanded, particularly at the local level.

Ensuring the confidentiality of the information circulating over these networks requires 
mastered security products. We must keep the necessary expertise to design them and 
optimise their development and production methods.
3.  Strengthen the cybersecurity of critical national infrastructures
To function correctly, our society is increasingly dependent on information systems and 
networks, particularly the Internet. A successful attack on a French critical information 
system or the Internet could have serious human or economic consequences. In close 
collaboration with the relevant equipment manufacturers and operators, the State must 
work to guarantee and improve the security of these critical systems.

Information systems defence and security strategy

7

Summary

4.  Ensure security in cyberspace 
The  threats  to  information  systems  simultaneously  affect  public  services,  private 
companies and citizens.

Public services must operate in an exemplary fashion and improve the protection of 
their information systems and the data entrusted to them.

Simultaneously, campaigns to raise information and awareness among companies and 
citizens must be undertaken.

In terms of the fight against cybercrime, France will promote the strengthening of the 
current legislation and international judicial cooperation.

In order to meet these objectives, seven areas of action have been identified:

1.   Effectively anticipate and analyse the environment in order to make appropriate 

decisions.

2.   Detect and block attacks, alert and support potential victims.

3.   Enhance  and  perpetuate  our  scientific,  technical,  industrial  and  human 

capabilities in order to maintain our independence.

4.   Protect  the  information  systems  of  the  State  and  the  operators  of  critical 

infrastructures to ensure better national resilience.

5.   Adapt French legislation to incorporate technological developments and new 

practices.

6.   Develop  international  collaboration  initiatives  in  the  areas  of  information 
systems security, cyberdefence and fight against cybercrime in order to better 
protect national information systems.

7.   Communicate,  inform  and  convince  to  increase  the  understanding  by  the 
French population of the extent of the challenges related to information systems 
security.

This  document  summarises  the  public  part  of  the  guidelines  and  actions  approved 
by  the  strategic  committee  on  information  systems  security  instituted  under  Decree 
No. 2009-834 of 7 July 2009 creating the French Network and Information Security 
Agency* (ANSSI)

.

8

Information systems defence and security strategy

«  France  must  retain  its  areas  of  sovereignty,  concentrated  on 
the capability necessary for the maintenance of the strategic and 
political  autonomy  of  the  nation:  nuclear  deterrence;  ballistic 
missiles;  SSBNs and SSNs;  and  cyber-security  are  amongst  the 
priorities. » 

« French White Paper on Defence and National Security », p.306

Information systems defence and security strategy

9

Four strategic objectives

in 

by 

1.  Become  a  world  power 
cyberdefence
The  development  of  an  information  society, 
supported 
communication 
networks,  is  a  tremendous  driver  of  French 
growth as it creates value and employment. It 
significantly contributes to the competitiveness 
of  our  economy  and  therefore  to  France’s 
international standing.

electronic 

Yet electronic communication networks are subject to illicit activities 
carried out either directly or indirectly by foreign States. Some conduct wide-scale 
espionage operations through these networks in order to access information relating 
to  our  sovereignty  such  as  classified  national  defence  material,  or  to  the  scientific, 
technological, commercial or financial assets of companies operating in our nation’s 
strategic sectors.

Terrorist groups also use these same communication networks to spread their ideas, 
disseminate operational information to their organisations and conduct propaganda 
activities.

In the near future, foreign States or terrorist groups could attack the critical infrastructures 
of States that they consider as ideologically hostile.

It is therefore essential for France to acquire a cyberdefence capability.

Yet, unlike in the material world, confrontations in cyberspace know no boundaries. 
Thus credible cyberdefence cannot be limited to national level. It must rely upon a 
network of allies with whom real-time information can be exchanged on vulnerabilities, 
protection mechanisms, attacks and countermeasures that can be implemented against 
cyberattacks led directly or indirectly by States or terrorist groups. France will strengthen 
its operational partnerships with its closest allies and will build on its expertise to actively 
contribute to formulating cyberdefence policies within international organisations, in 
particular the European Union.

Information systems defence and security strategy

11

Four strategic objectives

2.  Safeguard  France’s  ability 

to 

in  multiple 

formats 

related 

to  make  decisions 
the  protection  of 
its 

through 
information 
sovereignty
The  need  to  instantly  access  and  share 
information 
is 
increasingly  becoming  a  trend  in  today’s 
society.  Nevertheless,  part  of  the  world’s 
stability still lies in the ability to conceal the 
«information  related  to  our  sovereignty”, 
i.e. the fragments of diplomatic, military, 
scientific, technical and economic information that allow 

freedom of action and determine the prosperity of nations.

Just as in the past, intelligence services around the world, among others, attempt to 
obtain information related to our sovereignty. Communications networks, particularly 
the  Internet,  the  information  they  contain  and  the  data  available  on  the  terminals 
connected to them have become both sources of information and a means of collecting 
it. 

The  most  effective  way  to  protect  information  related  to  our  sovereignty  is  the  use 
of  cryptography*  techniques  which  prevent,  or  at  least  delay,  the  understanding  of 
information  should  it  be  disclosed  or  intercepted.  Developments  in  cryptanalysis*, 
which mirror those in computer processing power, require the conception and use of 
methods and techniques that are more difficult to analyse and regularly renewed.

Preserving our strategic independence depends on our ability to master cryptographic 
techniques and key technologies needed to design our security products*; therefore 
we need to ensure that the field of information systems security remains attractive for 
young graduates in order to prevent the gradual erosion of our expertise.

In addition to the need to communicate in a safe and confidential way, both decision-
makers and organisations involved in crisis management must have at their disposal 
means  of  communication  which  can  be  used  in  all  circumstances.  These  secured 
resources for electronic data exchange, telephony and videoconferencing have already 
been designed and developed. We will keep on deploying them over the coming years, 
in particularly for operators of critical infrastructures*.

12

Information systems defence and security strategy

Four strategic objectives

3.  Strengthen  the  cybersecurity  of  critical 
national infrastructures
Through the convergence of multiple technologies, the real and 
virtual  worlds  are  increasingly  becoming  overlapped.  Many 
real world objects - from supermarket labels to refineries, from 
photocopiers  to  combat  drones  -  have  built-in  information 
systems  and  are  connected  to  others.  Remotely,  through 
networks,  it  becomes  possible  to  collect  the  information 
transmitted by these objects, to keep them operating and to 
control them.

In  its  Defence  Code,  France  defined  critical  sectors  in  which 
operators meet needs essential to the life of the population, the exercise of State 
authority, the running of the economy, the maintaining of defence capabilities and the 
nation’s security, as these activities are difficult to substitute or replace.

Most  operators  of  critical  infrastructures  make  widespread  use  of  communication 
networks, especially the Internet, both for the management of their activities and their 
work. However, in the long-standing relationship between the industrial world and the 
IT world,  revolutionised by the interconnection of systems, the industrial world lacks 
training and awareness of information systems security, while the IT world often has a 
poor understanding of the constraints and functioning of industrial systems.

The dependence of all stakeholders on the Internet is increased due to the major trends 
of our economic and social organisation: outsourcing and cloud computing, pooling 
of support services, real-time and just-in-time management, roaming, task transfer to 
customers and citizens, creation or re-engineering of numerous processes. 

Should communications networks or the Internet be interrupted, the resources available 
to replace them may prove to be highly insufficient, especially because of the lack of 
qualified personnel capable of reinstating processes prior to the advent of the digital 
era. In the case of processes resulting directly from new practices linked to information 
technology, the resources to replace them do not yet exist.

As world news regularly demonstrates, the possible consequences of malicious actions 
against  the  automated  control  systems  of  industrial  processes  used  by  operators  of 
critical  infrastructures  have  not  yet  been  properly  assessed.  As  a  result,  protecting 
electronic  communication  networks  -  and  in  particular  the  Internet  -  together  with 
securing the core systems of critical infrastructures’ operators have become national 
priorities.

Information systems defence and security strategy

13

Four strategic objectives

4. Ensure security in cyberspace
For an increasing number of our citizens, the use of 
electronic communication networks like the Internet 
is  permeating  the  most  common  activities  of  daily 
life  such  as  shopping,  administrative  procedures 
and interpersonal communications.

Simultaneously, the techniques used in cyberspace 
by malicious individuals or groups of individuals 
are  more  and  more  efficient  and  aim  to  steal 
identities,  obtain  the  information  needed  to 
access  bank  accounts  or  collect  and  resell 
personal  data.  Cases  of  malicious  remote 
takeovers of computers, in order to incorporate 
them into networks of compromised machines 
(«botnets*») to carry out illegal activities such 
as cyberattacks or sending malicious e-mails, 
have also been dramatically increasing.

Given  these  developments,  public  authorities  must  set  an  example  by 
protecting public cyberspace. Users must be able to trust the electronic services offered 
by the administration, particularly in regard to protection of their personal data. The 
General  Security  Framework*  (RGS)  published  in  early  2010  provides  a  regulatory 
context  for  strengthening  this  security.  Compliance  and  implementation  by  public 
authorities are priorities.

Securing cyberspace systematically involves providing companies and individuals with 
the relevant information on the risks and the ways to limit them. The long-term objective 
is to raise citizens’ awareness of cybersecurity issues during the education process. This 
initiative  will  require  the  implementation  of  an  active  governmental  communication 
policy.

Last but not least, laws must govern the Internet. France must support the strengthening 
or  enactment  of  legal  rules  in  cyberspace  when  existing  legislation  proves  to  be 
insufficient, and promote international judicial cooperation on repression of offences 
committed on or through electronic communication networks.

In order to achieve our four strategic objectives, 
7 areas of action have been identified.

14

Information systems defence and security strategy

Seven areas of action

1. Anticipate and analyse
Risks and threats evolve rapidly in cyberspace. The release of a new product or a new 
version of software, the disclosure of an uncorrected flaw in a widely used software 
product, the development of new technologies or practices, or even a political statement 
can threaten the security of information systems within a very short period of time.

•  In  light  of  this,  the  first  step  to  ensure  our  information  systems’  security  and 
defence  is  to  monitor  the  latest  technology  developments  and  analyse,  fully 
understand and even anticipate the actions of public or private actors.

2. Detect, alert and respond
Given the increasing dependence of companies, infrastructures and services on the 
Internet, and because of the systemic risks related to some weaknesses, it is essential to 
be able to detect flaws and attacks as soon as possible, alert potential and known victims 
and offer them rapid assistance with the analysis and development of countermeasures. 

•  As  planned  in  the  French  White  Paper  on  Defence  and  National  Security, 
France is developing a detection capability for attacks on information systems. 
Deployed  in  particular  within  ministry  networks,  these  systems  enable  the 
relevant personnel to be alerted, help assess the nature of attacks and create 
appropriate countermeasures.

•  In order to manage all the information either gathered by these detection tools, 
by monitoring mechanisms or provided by our partners, so as to obtain a real-
time picture of the national network situation, and if necessary manage a crisis 
situation, the ANSSI has been equipped with an «operations room» adapted to 
the challenges.

•  In  order  to  respond  to  major  crises  affecting  or  threatening  the  security  of 
the  information  systems  of  the  administration  or  the  operators  of  critical 
infrastructures, the State must be able to take the necessary measures rapidly. 
To this end, the ANSSI is the national Authority in charge of information systems 
defence. 

Information systems defence and security strategy

15

Seven areas of action

3.  Enhance  and  perpetuate  our  scientific,  technical, 
industrial and human capabilities
The  security  of  information  systems  is  based  on  mastery  of  technology  and  know-
how that is also accessible to organisations and individuals intending on damaging 
them. State actors responsible for information systems security must not only be familiar 
with  state-of-the-art  technology,  they  must  also  be  able  to  foresee  or  even  spur  on 
technological developments by maintaining their research capabilities, as this is the 
only way of limiting the tactical advantage of the attacker over the defender.

France has world-class research teams in the areas of cryptology and formal methods. 
In other areas, such as security architecture of information systems, it is rapidly catching 
up with the most advanced nations. 

•  In order to drive this research forward, the possibility of creating a cyberdefence 
research  centre  in  collaboration  with  industrial  partners  is  currently  being 
examined. This centre would carry out scientific research activities (cryptology 
studies, analysis of attacking groups and their methods, expertise on malware 
and software flaws, development of secure open source software, drafting of 
cyberdefence concepts,...), as well as expertise and training activities.

The  development  of  the  information  society  offers  companies  a  worldwide  market, 
currently dominated by actors located outside of Europe. As far as information systems 
security is concerned, this situation is neither desirable nor tenable. Yet France does 
have a state-of-the-art industrial base unique in Europe, with the potential to master 
a large part of the technologies needed for the design of security products, including 
components. This base is made up of a large number of innovative SMEs. However, 
these companies have not yet reached the required critical size and are not in sufficient 
demand. 

•  Industrial  strengthening  will  be  promoted  using  the  various  resources  of  the 

State, in particular through strategic investment funds.

In order to ensure better efficiency, the designers of IT products and information systems 
must  take  security  issues  into  account  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  development 
process. The presence of information systems security experts in our industrial base must 
therefore be increased. Orienting young people towards such jobs will be encouraged 
in order to expand the pool of expertise available in the country.

As  a  general  rule,  scientific  and  technical  training  on  information  technology  must 
incorporate courses on information systems security.

16

Information systems defence and security strategy

Seven areas of action

4. Protect the information systems of the State and the 
operators of critical infrastructures 
As stated in the French White Paper on National Defence and Security, France must 
«master and develop very high-security products to protect State secrets, as well as a 
range of guaranteed ‘trusted products and services’ for use by government agencies 
and  services  which  will  be  made  widely  available  to  the  business  sector».  Resilient 
secure networks* for «the entire decision-making and command chain in Metropolitan 
France» must be used.

•  With regard to classified information*, the French strategy on security products 
and components has been redefined. In particular, it takes full account of France 
rejoining NATO integrated command.

•  Within  ministerial  networks,  the  introduction  of  robust  authentication  systems 
based, for example, on the use of smart card technology, an area of French 
excellence, will have a very significant impact on the level of security.

•  Government authorities now have a secure interdepartmental intranet, a high-
availability telephone network that will be fully equipped with new encryption 
terminals by 2012, and a secure videoconferencing system mainly for use in 
ministerial decision-making centres. Deployment of these various networks will 
continue, especially in local administrations.

•  With regard to the security of the information systems of operators of critical 
infrastructures, a public-private partnership will be set up, firstly so that these 
operators can benefit from the information gathered by the State on threat analysis; 
and secondly, to allow the State to ensure the appropriate level of protection of 
the infrastructures that are crucial to keep the country running properly. Such 
assessments will also be undertaken with equipment manufacturers.

5. Adapt French legislation
New practices introduced through the development of cyberspace can, if not enough 
attention is paid, threaten individual freedoms, the functioning of critical infrastructures 
and the stability of our companies. 

Information systems defence and security strategy

17

Seven areas of action

Our  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  must  reflect  recent  developments  in 
technology.  Laws  will  be  reviewed  as  new  technologies  and  new  practices  emerge 
in  order  to  strengthen  the  security of  individuals while  at  the  same  time  ensuring a 
balance  between  the  desire  to  minimise  the  impact  on  companies’  competitiveness 
and the need for the State to be able to intervene in the nation’s best interest.

•  Regarding operators of electronic communications, transposition of European 
directives  into  French  law  will  enable  the  enactment  of  new  rules  to  protect 
information systems and alert government authorities in case of incidents.

•  The enforcement of the «General Security Framework» (RGS) and its development 
will allow public authorities to significantly raise the protection levels of their 
information systems, particularly in their relations with users.

6. Develop our international collaborations 
The security of information systems is partly based on the quality of the data exchange 
between relevant services of various States. France will seek to establish a wide network 
of foreign partners in order to promote the sharing of essential data – e.g. information 
on vulnerabilities or flaws of products and services.

France will also strengthen its relationships with its partners to fight cybercrime.

Similarly, strong relations between allies form the basis of an effective cyberdefence 
policy. France is building a highly select circle of trustworthy partners with whom in-
depth operational exchanges will be held.

7. Communicate to inform and convince 
The  security  of  information  systems  relies  as  much  on  personal  vigilance  as  on  the 
organisation, the choices and technical measures introduced by companies and the 
action of governments.

Given the potential consequences of a major attack on information systems on the 
country and its citizens, we must ensure the awareness and motivation of individuals 
and organisations.

18

Information systems defence and security strategy

Seven areas of action

In  France,  information  and  public  debate  on  the  threats  posed  by  damage  to  the 
security  of  information  systems  and  its  impact  on  defence  and  national  security,  or 
simply on our daily lives, remain largely underdeveloped. 

•  ANSSI will provide targeted support to decision-makers in order to help them 
draw up measures and make the necessary decisions regarding the security of 
information systems that are critical to the running of their organisations and the 
protection of their technical, scientific, commercial and financial assets.

•  In  a  more  general  sense,  appropriate  communication  campaigns  will  be 

conducted by ANSSI targeting the general public and companies.

Information systems defence and security strategy

19

Glossary

Botnet

Cyberdefence

A  botnet,  or  robot  network,  is  a  network  of 
compromised  machines  controlled  by  a 
malicious individual (the master). The network 
is structured in a way that allows its master to 
transmit orders to some or all of the machines 
in the network and operate freely.

Comment: some networks consist of a huge 
number  of  machines  (several  million).  They 
may  be  illegally  traded  or  used  to  carry  out 
malicious activities against other machines.

Classified information

Article 413-9 of the French Penal Code states 
that «processes, objects, documents, pieces of 
information, computer networks, computerised 
data or files whose disclosure or access would 
be  prejudicial  to  national  defence  or  would 
lead  to  the  disclosure  of  a  national  defence 
secret» are subject to classification measures 
to restrict their distribution or access. 

Cryptanalysis

The  process  of  decrypting  encrypted  data, 
without the encryption keys.

Cryptography

The  discipline  that  includes  the  principles, 
means, and methods for data transformation 
with the aim of hiding data content, preventing 
data modifications from remaining undetected 
and/or  preventing  unauthorised  use  of  data 
(ISO 7498-2).

Cryptology

The  science  of  both  cryptography  and 
cryptanalysis.

Cybercrime

international 

contravening 

Acts 
treaties 
and  national  laws,  targeting  networks  or 
information systems, or using them to commit 
an offence or crime.

The  set  of  all  technical  and  non-technical 
measures  allowing  a  State  to  defend  in 
cyberspace 
it 
considers to be critical.

information 

systems 

that 

Cybersecurity

The  desired  state  of  an  information  system 
in which it can resist events from cyberspace 
likely to compromise the availability, integrity 
or confidentiality of the data stored, processed 
or transmitted and of the related services that 
these systems offer or make accessible.

Cybersecurity  makes  use  of 
information 
systems  security  techniques  and  is  based 
on 
fighting  cybercrime  and  establishing 
cyberdefence.

Cyberspace

The  communication  space  created  by  the 
worldwide 
interconnection  of  automated 
digital data processing equipment.

Flaw

Vulnerability  in  a  computer  system  allowing 
an  attacker  to  negatively  affect  its  normal 
functioning,  or  the  confidentiality  or  integrity 
of the data it contains. 

General  Security  Mechanism  (RGS  - 
Référentiel général de sécurité)

Set of rules drawn up by ANSSI and stipulated 
in Ordinance No. 2005-1516 of  8 December 
2005 «on electronic exchanges between users 
and  the  public  administration  and  between 
public  administrations»  that  certain  functions 
contributing  to  the  security  of  information 
must  comply  with.  This  includes,  among 
others,  electronic  signatures,  authentication, 
confidentiality  and  timestamps.  The  rules 
set  out  in  the  RGS  are  mandatory  and  are 
adjusted to reflect the level of security defined 
by  the  administrative  authority  concerning 
the  security  of  the  online  services  for  which 

Information systems defence and security strategy

21

of the nation or seriously threaten the lives of 
its population.

Resilience

In  the  field  of  computing,  the  ability  of  an 
information system to withstand a breakdown 
or cyberattack and return to its initial operating 
state after the incident.

Security product

Hardware or software designed to protect the 
availability,  integrity  or  confidentiality  of  the 
data stored, processed or transmitted and of 
the  related  services  that  information  systems 
offer or make accessible.

Glossaire

it is responsible. The conditions under which 
they are drawn up, approved, modified and 
published  are  set  out  in  Decree  No.  2010-
112  of  2  February  2010  related  to  the 
application  of  Articles  9,  10  and  12  of  the 
ordinance cited on the security of information 
exchanged through electronic networks.  (See 
http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/rgs).

Information system

(hardware, 
Organised  set  of 
software,  personnel,  data  and  procedures) 
used to process and circulate information.

resources 

Information systems security  

All  technical  and  non-technical  protective 
measures  enabling  an  information  system 
to  withstand  events  likely  to  compromise 
the  availability,  integrity  or  confidentiality  of 
stored, processed or transmitted data and of 
the related services that these systems offer or 
make accessible. 

Netiquette

Charter  drawn  up  in  1995  by  the  Internet 
Engineering  Task  Force  (IETF)  introducing 
recommended  network  etiquette  rules  for 
exchanges  taking  place  in  cyberspace  (see 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1855).

Operator  of  critical  importance  (OIV  - 
Opérateur d’importance vitale)

Article R. 1332-1 of the French Defence Code 
states that operators of critcal infrastructures 
are  designated  among  the  public  or  private 
operators  cited  in  Article  L.  1332-1  of  the 
same  code,  or  among  managers  of  the 
organisations cited in Article L. 1332-2.

An operator of critical infrastructure: 

- exercises activities cited in Article R. 1332-2 
and included in a critical sector;

-  manages  or  uses  for  this  activity  one  or 
more  organisations  or  works,  one  or  more 
facilities,  whose  damage,  unavailability  or 
destruction due to malicious action, sabotage 
or 
indirectly 
seriously compromise the military or economic 
capabilities, the security or the survival ability 

terrorism  would  directly  or 

22

Information systems defence and security strategy

About ANSSI

The French Network and Information Security Agency (ANSSI) was created on 7 July 2009 in the form of 
a nationwide administrative service.

Pursuant to Decree No. 2009-834 of 7 July 2009 amended by Decree No. 2011-170 of 11 February 
2011, the agency is the information systems defence and security national authority. It is directly attached 
to the Head of Secretary General for Defence and National Security, under the authority of the Prime 
Minister.

To find out more about ANSSI and its missions, please visit www.ssi.gouv.fr/en/.

February  2011

« Freely reusable public information » licence (LIP V1 2010.04.02)

French Network and Information Security Agency
ANSSI - 51 boulevard de la Tour-Maubourg - 75700 PARIS 07 SP - France 

Websites : www.ssi.gouv.fr and www.securite-informatique.gouv.fr 

E-mail : communication [at] ssi.gouv.fr

