Cyber Security Strategy 
for Germany

Contents

Introduction 

IT threat assessment 

Framework conditions 

Basic principles of the Cyber Security Strategy 

Strategic objectives and measures 

Sustainable implementation 

Abbreviations 

Definitions 

2

3

4

4

6

13

14

14

11

Introduction 

Cyberspace includes all information infrastructures accessible via the Internet 

beyond all territorial boundaries. In Germany all players of social and economic 

life use the possibilities provided by cyberspace. As part of an increasingly inter-

connected world, the state, critical infrastructures, businesses and citizens in 

Germany depend on the reliable functioning of information and communication 

technology and the Internet.

Malfunctioning IT products and components, the break-down of information 

infrastructures or serious cyber attacks may have a considerable negative impact on 

the performance of technology, businesses and the administration and hence on 

Germany’s social lifelines. The availability of cyberspace and the integrity, authen-

ticity and confidentiality of data in cyberspace have become vital questions of the 

21st century. Ensuring cyber security has thus turned into a central challenge for 

the state, business and society both at national and international level. The Cyber 

Security Strategy is intended to improve the framework conditions in this area.

22

IT threat assessment

In recent years attacks against information infrastructures have become ever 

more frequent and complex, while at the same time perpetrators have become 

more professional. Cyber attacks are launched both from Germany and abroad. 

Given the openness and extent of cyberspace it is possible to conduct covert attacks 

and misuse vulnerable systems as tools for an attack. In view of technologically 

sophisticated malware the possibilities of responding to and retracing an attack 

are rather limited. Often attacks give no clue as to the identity and the background 

of the attacker. Criminals, terrorists and spies use cyberspace as a place for their 

activities and do not stop at state borders. Military operations can also be behind 

such attacks.

The trend to develop information systems for industry on the basis of standard 

components and connect them to cyberspace, which is motivated mainly by 

economic concerns, entails new vulnerabilities. Experience with the Stuxnet virus 

shows that important industrial infrastructures are no longer exempted from 

targeted IT attacks.

Given the increasing complexity and vulnerability of information infrastructures 

the cyber security situation will remain critical also in the future. In Germany, the 

public and the private sector as well as society at large are all equally affected by 

targeted or coincidental IT failures.

33

Framework conditions

Ensuring cyber security, enforcing rights and protecting critical information 

infrastructures require major efforts by the state both at national level and in 

cooperation with international partners. Given the shared responsibilities of the 

state, the industry and the society a cyber security strategy will only be successful 

if all players act as partners and fulfil their tasks together. The same applies to the 

international context.

Since IT systems are interconnected in global networks, incidents in other coun-

tries’ information infrastructures may also indirectly affect Germany. For this rea-

son, strengthening cyber security also requires the enforcement of international 

rules of conduct, standards and norms. Only a mix of domestic and external policy 

measures will be appropriate for the dimension of the problem. Cyber security 

can be improved by enhancing the framework conditions for drawing up com-

mon minimum standards (code of conduct) with allies and partners. Fighting the 

rapid growth of cybercrime requires close cooperation between law enforcement 

authorities worldwide.

Basic principles of the 
Cyber Security Strategy

The Federal Government aims at making a substantial contribution to a secure 

cyberspace, thus maintaining and promoting economic and social prosperity in 

Germany. Cyber security in Germany must be ensured at a level commensurate 

with the importance and protection required by interlinked information infra-

structures, without hampering the opportunities and the utilization of the cyber-

space. In this context the level of cyber security reached is the sum of all national 

and international measures taken to protect the availability of information and 

communications technology and the integrity, authenticity and confidentiality 

of data in cyberspace.

44

Cyber security must be based on a comprehensive approach. This requires even 

more intensive information sharing and coordination. The Cyber Security Strat-

egy mainly focuses on civilian approaches and measures. They are complemented 

by measures taken by the Bundeswehr1 to protect its capabilities and measures 

based on mandates to make cyber security a part of Germany’s preventive security 

strategy. Given the global nature of information and communications technology, 

international coordination and appropriate networks focusing on foreign and 

security policy aspects are indispensable. This includes cooperation not only in the 

United Nations, but also in the EU, the Council of Europe, NATO, the G8, the OSCE 

and other multinational organizations. The aim is to ensure the coherence and 

capabilities of the international community to protect cyberspace.

1  

Armed Forces (Bundeswehr)

55

Strategic objectives 
and measures

With the present Cyber Security Strategy the Federal Government adapts meas-

ures to the current threats on the basis of the structures established by the CIP 

implementation plan and the implementation plan for the federal administration. 

The Federal Government will specifically focus on ten strategic areas:

1. Protection of critical information infrastructures

The protection of critical information infrastructures is the main priority of 

cyber security. They are a central component of nearly all critical infrastructures 

and become increasingly important. The public and the private sector must cre-

ate an enhanced strategic and organizational basis for closer coordination based 

on intensified information sharing. To this end, cooperation established by the 

CIP implementation plan is systematically extended, and legal commitments to 

66

enhance the binding nature of the CIP implementation plan are examined. With 

the participation of the National Cyber Security Council (cf. objective 5), the in-

tegration of additional sectors is examined and the introduction of new relevant 

technologies is considered to a greater extent. Whether and where protective 

measures have to be made mandatory and whether and where additional powers 

are required in case of specific threats have to be clarified, too. Furthermore we will 

examine the necessity of harmonizing rules to maintain critical infrastructures 

during IT crises.

2. Secure IT systems in Germany

Infrastructure protection requires more security with regard to IT systems used 

by citizens and small and medium-sized businesses. Users need appropriate and 

consistent information on risks related to the use of IT systems and on security 

measures they can take to use cyberspace in a secure manner. We will organize 

joint initiatives with groups from society to pool information and advice con-

sistently. Furthermore we will examine whether providers may have to assume 

greater responsibility and make sure that a basic collection of appropriate security 

products and services are made available to users by providers. We want to provide 

specific incentives and funds for basic security functions certified by the state (e. g. 

electronic proof of identity or De-mail) to be used by the vast majority of citizens.

To support small and medium-sized businesses in the secure use of IT systems, 

the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology has set up a task force on 

“IT security in industry” with the participation of industry.

 

3. Strengthening IT security in the public administration

The public administration will further enhance the protection of its IT systems. 

State authorities have to serve as role models for data security. We will create a 

common, uniform and secure network infrastructure in the federal administra-

tion (“federal networks”) as a basis for electronic audio and data communication. 

We will continue to press ahead with the implementation plan for the federal 

administration. Should the IT security situation get worse, this plan may be 

77

aligned accordingly. Effective IT security requires powerful structures in all 

federal authorities. For this reason resources must be deployed appropriately at 

central and local level. To facilitate implementation through uniform action 

by authorities, joint investments into the Federal Government’s IT security will 

be made regularly in line with budgetary possibilities. Operational cooperation 

with the federal Länder, particularly with regard to CERTs (computer emergency 

response teams), will be further intensified by the IT planning council.

4. National Cyber Response Centre

To optimize operational cooperation between all state authorities and improve 

the coordination of protection and response measures for IT incidents we will 

set up a National Cyber Response Centre. It will report to the Federal Office for 

Information Security (BSI) and cooperate directly with the Federal Office for the 

Protection of the Constitution (BfV) and the Federal Office of Civil Protection and 

Disaster Assistance (BBK). Cooperation in the National Cyber Response Centre 

will strictly observe the statutory tasks and powers of all authorities involved on 

the basis of cooperation agreements. The Federal Criminal Police Office (BKA), 

the Federal Police (BPOL), the Customs Criminological Office (ZKA), the Federal 

Intelligence Service (BND), the Bundeswehr and authorities supervising critical 

infrastructure operators all participate in this centre within the framework of 

their statutory tasks and powers.

Quick and close information sharing on weaknesses of IT products, vulnerabilities, 

forms of attacks and profiles of perpetrators enables the National Cyber Response 

Centre to analyse IT incidents and give consolidated recommendations for action. 

The interests of the private sector to protect itself against crime and espionage in 

cyberspace should also be adequately taken into account. At the same time 

respective responsibilities must be observed. Every stakeholder takes the necessary 

measures in its remit on the basis of the jointly developed national cyber security 

assessment and coordinates them with the competent authorities as well as 

partners from industry and academia.

Since security preparedness is best achieved by early warning and prevention, the 

Cyber Response Centre will submit recommendations to the National Cyber Secu-

rity Council both on a regular basis and for specific incidents. If the cyber security 

situation reaches the level of an imminent or already occurred crisis, the National 

Cyber Response Centre will directly inform the crisis management staff headed by 

the responsible State Secretary at the Federal Ministry of the Interior.

88

5. National Cyber Security Council

The identification and removal of structural causes for crises are considered an 

important preventive tool for cyber security. For this reason we want to establish 

and maintain cooperation within the Federal Government and between the public 

and the private sector within the responsibility of the Federal Government Com-

missioner for Information Technology more visible and set up a National Cyber 

Security Council. The Federal Chancellery and a State Secretary from each the 

Federal Foreign Office, the Federal Ministry of the Interior, the Federal Ministry of 

Defence, the Federal Ministry for Economics and Technology, the Federal Ministry 

of Justice, the Federal Ministry of Finance, the Federal Ministry of Education and 

Resarch and representatives of the federal Länder will participate. On specific 

occasions additional ministries will be included.

Business representatives will be invited as associated members. Representatives 

from academia will be involved, if required. The National Cyber Security Council is 

intended to coordinate preventive tools and the interdisciplinary cyber security 

99

approaches of the public and the private sector. The National Cyber Security Council 

will complement and interlink IT management at federal level and the work of the IT 

Planning Council in the area of cyber security at a political and strategic level.

6. Effective crime control also in cyberspace

The capabilities of law enforcement agencies, the Federal Office for Information 

Security and the private sector in combating cyber crime, also with regard to 

protection against espionage and sabotage, must be strengthened. To improve the 

exchange of know how in this area we intend to set up joint institutions with indus-

try with the participation of the competent law enforcement agencies, which will 

act in an advisory capacity. Projects to support partner countries with structural 

weaknesses will also serve the aim of combating cyber crime. To face up to the 

growing challenges of global cyber crime activities we will make a major effort to 

achieve global harmonization in criminal law based on the Council of Europe 

Cyber Crime Convention. Furthermore, we will examine whether additional 

conventions in this area may be necessary at UN level. 

1010

7.  Effective coordinated action to ensure cyber security in Europe 

and worldwide

In global cyberspace security can be achieved only through coordinated tools at 

national and international level. 

At EU level we support appropriate measures based on the action plan for the 

protection of critical information infrastructures, the extension and moderate 

enlargement of the mandate of the European Network and Information Security 

Agency (ENISA) in view of the changed threat situation in ICT and the pooling 

of IT competences in EU institutions. The EU Internal Security Strategy and the 

Digital Agenda provide guidance for further activities.

We will shape our external cyber policy in such a way that German interests and 

ideas concerning cyber security are coordinated and pursued in international 

organizations, such as the United Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe, the 

OECD and NATO. An increasingly multilateral approach must be brought in line 

with the necessity of sovereign evaluation and decision-making powers. In this 

context, a code for state conduct in cyberspace (cyber code) should be estab-

lished, which is signed by as many countries as possible and includes confidence-

building security measures. In the G8 framework we are currently working on 

intensifying anti-botnet activities.

NATO serves as the basis of transatlantic security. Hence, NATO must take cyber 

security appropriately into account in its entire range of responsibilities. We are 

in favour of the alliance’s commitment to establishing uniform security stand-

ards, which Member States may also use for civilian critical infrastructures on a 

voluntary basis, as foreseen in NATO’s new Strategic Concept.

8. Use of reliable and trustworthy information technology

The availability of reliable IT systems and components must be ensured on a 

permanent basis. The development of innovative protection plans for improved 

security which take into account social and economic aspects is strongly sup-

ported. To this end, we will continue and intensify research on IT security and 

on critical infrastructure protection. Furthermore we will strengthen Germany’s 

technological sovereignty and economic capacity in the entire range of core 

strategic IT competences, include them in our political strategies and develop 

them further. Wherever it makes sense, we will pool our resources with those 

1111

of our partners and allies, particularly in Europe. We are in favour of diversity 

in technology. Our aim is to use components in critical security areas which are 

certified against an international recognized certification standard.

9. Personnel development in federal authorities

Given the strategic importance of cyber security, it must be examined as a priority 

whether additional staff is necessary in authorities in the interest of cyber security. 

Furthermore, intensified personnel exchange between federal authorities and ap-

propriate further training measures will enhance interministerial cooperation.

10. Tools to respond to cyber attacks

If the state wants to be fully prepared for cyber attacks, a coordinated and com-

prehensive set of tools to respond to cyber attacks must be created in coopera-

tion with the competent state authorities. We will continue to assess the threat 

situation regularly and take appropriate protection measures. If necessary, we 

have to examine whether additional statutory powers must be created at federal 

or Länder level. Above all, the aims, mechanisms and institutions mentioned 

above must be internalized through a permanent exercise process with the 

relevant federal and Länder authorities as well as businesses.

1212

Sustainable 
implementation

With the implementation of the strategic objectives and measures the Federal 

Government contributes to ensuring cyber security and thus to freedom and 

prosperity in Germany. A lot will depend on whether we succeed at international 

level in taking effective measures to protect cyberspace.

The information technologies used are subject to short innovation cycles. This 

means that the technical and social aspects of cyberspace will continue to 

change and bear not only new opportunities, but also new risks. For this reason 

the Federal Government will regularly review whether the aims of the Cyber 

Security Strategy have been achieved under the overall control of the National 

Cyber Security Council and will adapt the strategies and measures to the given 

requirements and framework conditions.

 

1313

Abbreviations

BBK 

BfV 

BKA 

BMI 

BND 

BPOL 

BSI  

CERT 

CIP 

ENISA 

EU  

G8  

IT   

NATO 

OSZE 

ZKA 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Federal Office of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance

Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution

Federal Criminal Police Office

Federal Ministry of the Interior

Federal Intelligence Service

Federal Police

Federal Office for Information Security

Computer Emergency Response Team

Critical infrastructure protection

European Network and Information Security Agency

European Union

 Group of leading industrialized nations in the world (Germany, 

USA, Japan, United Kingdom, Canada, France, Italy and the Rus-

sian Federation)

Information technology

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

Customs Criminological Office

Definitions

(Explanations and terminology used in this document)

Cyberspace
Cyberspace is the virtual space of all IT systems linked at data level on a global scale. 

The basis for cyberspace is the Internet as a universal and publicly accessible connec-

tion and transport network which can be complemented and further expanded by 

any number of additional data networks. IT systems in an isolated virtual space are 

not part of cyberspace.

Cyber attack, cyber espionage and cyber sabotage
A cyber attack is an IT attack in cyberspace directed against one or several other 

IT systems and aimed at damaging IT security. The aims of IT security, confiden-

tiality, integrity and availability may all or individually be compromised. Cyber 

attacks directed against the confidentiality of an IT system, which are launched 

1414

or managed by foreign intelligence services, are called cyber espionage. Cyber 

attacks against the integrity and availability of IT systems are termed cyber 

sabotage. 

Cyber security and civilian and military cyber security
(Global) cyber security is the desired objective of the IT security situation, 

in which the risks of global cyberspace have been reduced to an acceptable 

minimum. 

Hence, cyber security in Germany is the desired objective of the IT security 

situation, in which the risks of the German cyberspace have been reduced to an 

acceptable minimum. Cyber security (in Germany) is the sum of suitable and 

appropriate measures. 

Civilian cyber security focuses on all IT systems for civilian use in German cyber-

space. Military cyber security focuses on all IT systems for military use in German 

cyberspace.

Critical infrastructures
Critical infrastructures are organizations or institutions with major importance 

for the public good, whose failure or damage would lead to sustainable supply 

bottlenecks, considerable disturbance of public security or other dramatic 

consequences. 

At federal level, the following areas have been identified:

•  Energy

• 

Information technology and telecommunication

•  Transport

•  Health

•  Water

•  Food

•  Finance and insurance sector

•  State and administration

•  Media and culture

1515

This brochure has been published free of charge as part of the public information efforts of the Federal 
Ministry of the Interior. It may not be used by any political party, candidate or campaign workers during 
an election campaign for purposes of campaign advertising. This applies to elections at the European, 
federal, state and local levels. In particular, distributing this publication at campaign events or at informa-
tion stands of political parties, or inserting, stamping or attaching to it any political information or adver-
tising constitutes misuse. Nor may it be passed on to third parties for purposes of campaign advertising. 
Regardless of when, by what means and in what quantities this publication was delivered to the recipient, 
even without reference to any upcoming election it may not be used in a manner that could be construed 
as bias by the Federal Government on behalf of any individual political group.

Imprint

Published by:

Federal Ministry of the Interior

Alt-Moabit 101 D

10559 Berlin

Edited by:

Department IT 3

Design and production:

MEDIA CONSULTA Deutschland GmbH

Photo credits:

iStockphoto, shutterstock

English translation:

Federal Ministry of the Interior

Translation Service

Edition:

February 2011

www.bmi.bund.de

