 

Government Decision No. 1139/2013 (21 March) on the National Cyber 
Security Strategy of Hungary 

1.  The Government hereby approves the National Cyber Security Strategy of 
Hungary laid down in Annex No. 1. 

2.  The Government instructs the state secretary heading the Prime Minister’s Office 
to take the necessary action to establish the National Cyber Security Coordination 
Council. 

Person in charge: State secretary heading the Prime Minister’s Office, supported by 
the ministers with the relevant responsibilities and powers 
Deadline: 30 June 2013 

3.  The Government instructs the state secretary heading the Prime Minister’s Office 
to prepare a work and action plan for implementing the tasks defined in the National 
Cyber Security Strategy of Hungary. 

Person in charge: State secretary heading the Prime Minister’s Office, supported by 
the ministers with the relevant responsibilities and powers 
Deadline: 30 June 2013 

4.  This decision shall come into force on the day after its publication. 

Viktor Orbán 
Prime Minister 
(signed) 

 

 

Annex 1 to Government Decision No. 1139/2013 (21 March)  

 

National Cyber Security Strategy of Hungary 

1.  In  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  Fundamental  Law  and  based  on  the 
review  of  the  relevant  values  and  interests  and  on  the  analysis  of  the  security 
environment  of  the  cyberspace,  the  purpose  of  this  Strategy  is  to  determine 
national  objectives  and  strategic directions,  tasks  and  comprehensive  government 
tools  which  enable  Hungary  to  enforce  its  national  interests  in  the  Hungarian 
cyberspace,  within  the  context  of  the  global  cyberspace.  The  strategy  aims  at 
developing a free and secure cyberspace and protecting national sovereignty in the 
national  and  international  context,  which  has  undergone  a  significant  change  due 
to the emergence of the cyberspace, a new medium which has become a key factor 
in  the  21st  century.  Furthermore,  it  aims  at  protecting  the  activities  and 
guaranteeing  the  security  of  national  economy  and  society,  securely  adapting 
technological 
to  facilitate  economic  growth,  and  establishing 
international  cooperation  in  this  regard  in  line  with  Hungary’s  national  interests. 
This Strategy indicates that Hungary is ready to perform and take responsibility for 
cyberspace protection tasks and intends to develop the Hungarian cyberspace as a 
key  element  of  Hungarian  economic  and  social  life  into  a  free,  secure  and 
innovative  environment.  By  way  of  efficient  protective  measures  based  on 
prevention,  the  primary  objective  is  to  manage  the  threats  and  risks  emerging  in 
and coming from the cyberspace, as well as to reinforce government coordination 
and measures. 

innovations 

2.  This  Strategy  reflects  the  basic  values  enshrined  in  the  Fundamental  Law  of 
Hungary,  specifically  freedom,  security,  rule  of  law,  international  and  European 
cooperation,  in  a  separate  field  within  security  and  economic  policy;  it  is  a 
document  of  cyber  security  for  national  data  assets  as  part  of  national  assets, 
derived from Section 38 of the Fundamental Law, as well as for the related critical 
infrastructures.  In  accordance  with  the  Hungarian  National  Security  Strategy, 
accepted  by  Government  Decision  No.  1035/2012  (21  February),  and  based 
thereupon,  the  Strategy  elaborates  the  government  efforts  and  responsibility  laid 
down  in  Section  31  thereof.  Its  roots  date  back  to  the  Budapest  Convention 
adopted  in  2001  (“Convention  on  Cybercrime”);  an  international  agreement 
defining  internationally  recognised  principles  used  as  a  reference.  At  the  same 
time,  the  Strategy  is  in  conformity  with  the  recommendations  of  the  European 
Parliament  for  the  Member  States  included  in  Decision  No.  2012/2096(INI)  on 
cyber  security  and  defence,  adopted  on  22  November  2012,  and  with  the  joint 
communication  published  by 
the  High 
Representative of the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union 
on 7 February 2013 under the title “Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: 
An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace”. Furthermore, the Strategy is in line with 
the  Strategic  Concept  of  the  NATO  accepted  in  November  2010,  the  Cyber 
Security  Policy of  the  Organisation  adopted  in  June 2011  and  its  implementation 
plan, as well as with the cyber protection principles and objectives set forth in the 
documents of the NATO summits held on 19-20 November 2010 in Lisbon and on 
20-21 May 2012 in Chicago. 

the  European  Commission  and 

I. The cyber security environment in Hungary 

 

 

 

3.  Cyberspace  means  the  combined  phenomenon  of  globally  interconnected, 
decentralised  and  ever-growing  electronic  information  systems  as  well  as  the 
societal  and  economic  processes  appearing  in  and  through  these  systems  in  the 
form of data and information. The Hungarian cyberspace includes the parts of the 
electronic  information  systems  of  the  global  cyberspace  which  are  located  in 
Hungary, as well as the societal and economic processes appearing in and through 
the electronic systems of the global cyberspace in the form of data and information 
that take place in, are directed to, or affect Hungary. 

4. The increasing number and various sources of threats emerging in cyberspace as 
well  as  the  increasing  order  of  magnitude  of  their  consequences  indicate  that  the 
number  and  efficiency  of  public  and  non-public  users  has  grown  rapidly  for  the 
past decade who use cyberspace to illegally acquire critical data or information and 
disrupt  communication  and  information  systems.  Our  vital  electronic  information 
systems  and  consequently,  the  functioning  of  our  critical  infrastructures  are 
threatened by a new form of warfare, information warfare, making cyberspace one 
of the most important theatres in modern warfare. In addition to the damage caused 
by  external  factors,  the  inadequate  regulation  of  the  operational  security  of  the 
information  and  communication  systems  constituting  cyberspace  poses  a  further 
risk.  Dynamic  emerging  new  technologies,  such  as  cloud  computing  or  mobile 
Internet,  lead  to  the  continuous  evolution  of  new  security  risks.  One  of  the  key 
objectives of this Strategy is to  create awareness and capacity at the political and 
professional  decision  making  level  which  can  manage  the  new  cyber  security 
challenges arising from technological progress by flexibly adapting to them in the 
foreseeable future. 

5. Cyber security is the continuous and planned taking of political, legal, economic, 
educational,  awareness-raising  and  technical  measures  to  manage  risks  in 
cyberspace  that  transforms  the  cyberspace  into  a  reliable  environment  for  the 
smooth functioning and operation of societal and economic processes by ensuring 
an acceptable level of risks in cyberspace. 

II.  Hungary’s set of values, vision and objectives relating to cybersecurity 

6.  The  protection  of  Hungary’s  sovereignty  in  the  Hungarian  cyberspace  is  a 
national  interest,  too;  a  free,  democratic  and  secure  functioning  of  the  Hungarian 
cyberspace  based  on  the  rule  of  law  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  value  and 
interest. In Hungary, the freedom and security of cyberspace is ensured through the 
close  cooperation  and  coordinated  activities  between  Government,  academia, 
business sector and civil society based on their shared responsibility. 

7.  Hungary  aims  at  establishing  and  maintaining  trust-based  cooperation  with  all 
public  and  private  actors  of  the  global  cyberspace  sharing  the  same  set  of  values 
with  Hungary,  and  endevours  to  guarantee  free  and  secure  use  of  the  global 
cyberspace through its allies and international relations, particularly the EU and the 
NATO,  the  Organization  on  Security  and  Cooperation  in  Europe  (OSCE),  the 
United  Nations,  the  Council  of  Europe  and  other  international  organisations  in 
which  the  country  is  a  member.  Being  aware  of  the  fact  that  threats  and  attacks 
emerging  in  cyberspace  may  escalate  to  the  level  requiring  allied  cooperation, 
Hungary considers it highly important that cybersecurity has  become an issue for 
collective  defence  under  Article  5  of  the  founding  treaty  of  NATO.  Hungary  is 

 

 

interested  in  this  allied  international  cooperation  for  the  sake  of  its  own  security, 
too.  Hungary  regards  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  region  with  special 
attention,  where  cybersecurity  can  be  further  improved  within  the  framework  of 
regional cooperations. 

 

8.  To  address  present  and  future  challenges,  Hungary  lays  down  the  requirement 
that the Hungarian cyberspace shall provide a secure and reliable environment: 
for  individuals  and  communities  to  ensure  social  development  and 
a) 
integration  through  communication  based  on  liberty,  freedom  from  fear,  and 
guaranteeing the protection of personal data, 
b) 
solutions, 
c) 
collection of experiences resulting in a sound mental development, 
d) 
development of public services. 

for  future  generations    to  ensure  value-based  learning  and  unharmed 

for electronic public administration, to promote innovative and cutting-edge 

for  the  business  sector  to  develop  efficient  and  innovative  business 

9. In the interest of  a free and secure use of cyberspace, Hungary  lays downs  the 
following  objectives  to  be  met  by  aligning  the  interests  of  national  security, 
efficient crisis management and user protection: 
to  have  efficient  capabilities  to  prevent,  detect,  manage  (react),  respond  to 
a) 
and  recover  any  malicious  cyber  activity,  threat,  attack  or  emergency,  as  well  as 
accidental information leakage, 
to  provide  adequate  protection  for  its  national  data  assets,  to  ensure  the 
b) 
operational  safety  of  the  parts  of  its  critical  infrastructures  linked  to  cyberspace, 
and  to  have  a  rapid,  efficient  mitigating  and  recovery  capability  in  case  of  a 
compromise, deployable also during a state of emergency, 
to  ensure  that  the  quality  of  IT  and  communication  products  and  services 
c) 
necessary  for  the  secure  operation  of  the  Hungarian  cyberspace  meet  the 
requirements  of  international best  practices,  with  special  emphasis  on  compliance 
with international security certification standards, 
d) 
development  meets 
contributing to the establishment of a world-class national knowledge pool, 
e) 
future generations meets the requirements of international best practices. 

to ensure that the   quality  of  education,  training  as  well  as  research  and 
thus 

to  ensure  that  the  establishment  of  a  secure  cyberspace  for  children  and 

international  best  practices, 

the  requirements  of 

III. Tasks necessary to meet the objectives 

10. The cybersecurity situation of Hungary is fundamentally solid. Arising from the 
special  structure  of  cyberspace,  however,  a  number  of  security  risks  and  threats 
constituting  a  strategic  challenge  to  the  nation  need  to  be  considered.  The  tools 
available for maintaining and improving the level of cybersecurity and to meet the 
objectives, as well as the areas affected by fulfilling the tasks are the following: 
Government  coordination.  Primarily,  each  government  institution  assumes 
a) 
its  own  responsibility  for  the  free  and  secure use of  cyberspace. However, due  to 
the complexity of this area, these responsibilities can only  meet the Government’s 
objective  regarding  a  free  and  secure  use  of  cyberspace  through  a  clear  and 
efficient government coordination. Therefore, the central government coordination 
through the Prime Minister’s Office shall be strengthened, a mandatory step for the 
coordinated and concentrated use of government and sectoral resources. 

 

 

the  members  of 

these  fora 

 

law  enforcement,  disaster  management  and  critical 

Cooperation.  Improved  cooperation  and  efficient  information  sharing  are 
b) 
needed  to  meet  our  objectives  and  cybersecurity  interests.  To  this  end,  it  is 
necessary  to  create  operational  cooperation  fora  ensuring  the  participation  of 
representatives  of  business  sector  and  academia  in  preparing  governmental 
decision  making,  enabling 
to  put  forward 
recommendations or opinions on the development and continuous improvement of 
cybersecurity activities. 
c)  Specialised institutions. Cybersecurity tasks should be assigned to organisations 
with specific skills and powers, cooperating not only with each other but also with 
other  authorities  responsible  for  data  protection  and  classified  information 
protection.  These  tasks  affect  organisations  responsible  for  national  security, 
defence, 
infrastructure 
protection,  as  well  as  authorities  responsible  for  electronic  information  security. 
Cybersecurity incidents are handled by the Government Incident Response Centre 
as an accredited member of the European Governmental CERT Group, as well as 
the Sectoral Incident Response Centres in various sectors. 
d)  Regulation.  In  addition  to  a  complex  legislation,  it  is  necessary  to  conclude 
cooperation agreements with  actors of civil society, business sector and academia 
to  provide  an  adequate  basis  and  regulation  for  the  efficient  operation  of 
cybersecurity based on shared responsibility. 
a)  International  cooperation  projects.  Hungary  wishes  to  enhance  its  role  in 
cyberdefence initiatives and cooperation projects within the EU and the NATO, as 
well  as  in  the  cybersecurity  cooperation  projects  of  the  UN  and  the  OSCE.  It 
strives  to  carry  on  and  expand  cooperation  regarding  cyberdefence  exercise  and 
planning within the EU and the NATO, and maintain its leading role in developing 
and  running  operational  government  cooperations,  as  well  as  in  the  Central  and 
Eastern  European  region.  Hungary  lays  special  emphasis  on  implementing 
activities that are, on the one hand specified by the Digital Agenda of the European 
Union  for  the  Member  States  and,  on  the  other  hand,  prescribed  by  the  NATO 
Cyber  Security  Policy  and  its  implementation  plan  for  allies.  Hungary  deems  the 
North  Atlantic  cooperation  very  important  in  respect  of  cyber  security.  Hungary 
continues to play an active role in the European, Atlantic and global organisations 
of national/governmental and Sectoral Incident Handling Centres, in the European 
Network  and  Information  Security  Agency,  and  in  the  Board  of  European 
Electronic Communications Authorities. 
e)  Awareness.  Hungary  maintains  its  leadership  in  organising  Hungarian  and 
international  cybersecurity  forums.  Through  its  specialised  institutions  and  via 
cooperation with actors of  civil society, business sector  and academia, it supports 
activities  for  the  secure  use  of  cyberspace  and  raising  awareness,  as  well  as 
initiatives  promoting  practical  cybersecurity  skills,  with  special  focus  on 
awareness-raising among individual users and small and medium-sized enterprises. 
f)  Education,  research  &  development.  Hungary  pays  particular  attention  to 
integrating  cyber  security  as  a  field  in  the  information  technology  syllabus  of 
primary,  secondary  and  higher  education,  in  training  courses  for  government 
officials  and  in  professional  training  courses.  Hungary  strives  for  strategic 
cooperation  with  university  and  scientific  research  centres  which  have  achieved 
outstanding  and  internationally  recognised  results  in  cybersecurity  research  and 
development and help to establish cybersecurity centres of excellence. 
Child  protection.  Hungary  regards  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  an 
b) 
environment  allowing  the  healthy  development  of  children  as  a  basic  element  of 
cybersecurity, and treats it as a priority in all affected areas, achieving, at the same 

 

 

 

time,  the  objectives  of  the  European  Strategy  for  a  Better  Internet  for  Children. 
Particular emphasis is laid on encouraging the creation of quality online content for 
young  people,  supporting  awareness-raising  and  preparatory  measures,  the 
prevention of the harassment and exploitation of children, and the establishment of 
a  secure  online  environment.  For  this  purpose,  Hungarian  non-governmental 
organisations  with  a  proven  record  in  online  child  protection  are  regarded  as  key 
partners. 
g)  Motivation  of  business  actors.  In  determining  cyber  security  requirements 
for  public  procurement  tenders  in  information  technology  and  communications, 
Hungary  intends  to  encourage  equipment  manufacturers  and  service  providers 
submitting  bids  to  create  the  highest  possible  level  of  cybersecurity,  with  special 
emphasis  on  compliance  with  international  certification  standards.  Furthermore, 
Hungary  wishes  to  cooperate  with  business  actors  to  develop  incentive  measures 
for cybersecurity improvement. 

 

IV.  Government  tools  that  are  available  or  in  need  of  reinforcement  for 
implementing the National CyberSecurity Strategy 

the  security  of 

stocktaking of critical information infrastructures and critical assets, as well 

stocktaking  and  coordination  of  the  government  organisations  responsible 
the  Hungarian  cyberspace,  establishment  of  efficient 

11. Hungary is already in the possession of most tools required to meet its strategic 
objectives as regards capabilities and potential resources, including: 
a) 
for 
cooperation; 
review of the civil society, business and academic organisations responsible 
b) 
for  the  security  of  the  Hungarian  cyberspace,  establishment  of  institutional 
cooperation; 
c) 
as national data assets, in addition, ensuring their protection; 
d) 
e) 
f) 
operational and regulatory levels; 
g) 
education and awareness-raising; 
establishment of business motivation systems; 
h) 
integrating  cybersecurity  aspects  in  technical  developments  under  state 
i) 
control and in tasks related to the development and operation of the Government’s 
information systems. 

operation of specialised Government institutions; 
provision of a regulatory environment; 
participation 

in 

international  and  regional  cooperation  at  political, 

establishment  of  a  support  framework  for  research  &  development, 

12. The reinforcement and more efficient use of the available tools and their more 
effective  practical  application 
the 
establishment  and  operation  of  a  system  for  intra-governmental  and  non-
governmental cooperation. 
 

terms  of  national  security  require 

in 

 

