 
 
 

National Cyber Security Policy -2013 

 
 
 
Preamble 
 
1.  Cyberspace1  is  a  complex  environment  consisting  of  interactions  between  people,  software  and 

services,  supported  by  worldwide  distribution  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT) 

devices and networks.  

 

2.  Owing  to  the  numerous  benefits  brought  about  by  technological  advancements, the  cyberspace 

today is a common pool used by citizens, businesses, critical information infrastructure, military and 

governments  in  a  manner  that  makes  it  difficult  to  draw  clear  boundaries  among  these  different 

groups. The cyberspace is expected to be more complex in the foreseeable future, with many fold 

increase in networks and devices connected to it.  

 

3. Information Technology (IT) is one of the critical sectors that rides on and resides in cyberspace. 

It has emerged as one of the most significant growth catalysts for the Indian economy. In addition to 

fuelling India’s economy, this sector is also positively influencing the lives of its people through direct 

and  indirect  contribution  to the  various  socio-economic  parameters such  as  employment, standard 

of living and diversity among others. The sector has played a significant role in transforming India’s 

image  to  that  of  a  global  player  in  providing  world-class  technology  solutions  and  IT  business 

services. The government has been a key driver for increased adoption of IT-based products and IT 

enabled  services  in  Public  services  (Government  to  citizen  services,  citizen  identification,  public 

distribution  systems),  Healthcare  (telemedicine,  remote  consultation,  mobile  clinics),  Education  (e-

Learning, virtual classrooms, etc) and Financial services (mobile banking / payment gateways), etc. 

Such  initiatives  have  enabled  increased  IT  adoption  in  the  country  through  sectoral  reforms  and 

National  programmes  which  have  led  to  creation  of  large  scale  IT  infrastructure  with  corporate  / 

private participation. 

 

4. In the light of the growth of IT sector in the country, ambitious plans for rapid social transformation 

& inclusive growth and India’s prominent role in the IT global market, providing right kind of focus for 

creating secure computing environment and adequate trust & confidence in electronic transactions, 

software,  services,  devices  and  networks,  has  become  one  of  the  compelling  priorities  for  the 

country.    Such  a  focus  enables  creation  of  a  suitable  cyber  security  eco-system  in  the  country,  in 

tune with globally networked environment. 

 

                                                           
1
ISO / IEC 27032-2012 

 

Page 1 of 9 
 

5.  Cyberspace  is  vulnerable  to  a  wide  variety  of  incidents,  whether  intentional  or  accidental, 

manmade  or  natural,  and  the  data  exchanged  in  the  cyberspace  can  be  exploited  for  nefarious 

purposes by both nation- states and non-state actors. Cyber attacks that target the infrastructure or 

underlying  economic  well-being  of  a  nation  state  can  effectively  reduce  available  state  resources 

and  undermine  confidence  in  their  supporting  structures.    A  cyber  related  incident  of  national 

significance  may  take  any  form;  an  organized  cyber  attack,  an  uncontrolled  exploit  such  as 

computer virus or worms or any malicious software code,  a national disaster with significant cyber 

consequences  or  other  related  incidents  capable  of  causing  extensive  damage  to  the  information 

infrastructure  or  key  assets.    Large-scale  cyber  incidents  may  overwhelm  the  government,  public 

and  private  sector  resources  and  services  by  disrupting functioning  of  critical  information  systems.  

Complications  from  disruptions  of  such  a  magnitude  may  threaten  lives,  economy  and  national 

security.    Rapid  identification,  information  exchange,  investigation  and  coordinated  response  and 

remediation  can  mitigate  the  damage  caused  by  malicious  cyberspace  activity.  Some  of  the 

examples  of  cyber  threats  to  individuals,  businesses  and  government  are  identity  theft,  phishing, 

social engineering, hactivism, cyber terrorism, compound threats targeting mobile devices and smart 

phone,  compromised  digital  certificates,  advanced  persistent  threats,  denial  of  service,  bot  nets, 

supply chain attacks, data leakage, etc. The protection of information infrastructure and preservation 

of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information in cyberspace is the essence of a secure 

cyber space. 

 

6.  There  are  various  ongoing  activities  and  programs  of  the  Government  to  address  the  cyber 

security  challenges  which  have  significantly  contributed  to  the  creation  of  a  platform  that  is  now 

capable  of  supporting  and  sustaining  the  efforts  in  securing  the  cyber  space.  Due  to  the  dynamic 

nature of cyberspace, there is now a need for these actions to be unified under a National Cyber 

Security  Policy,  with  an  integrated  vision  and  a  set  of  sustained  &  coordinated  strategies  for 

implementation.   

 

7.  The cyber security policy is an evolving task and it caters to the whole spectrum of ICT users and 

providers  including  home  users  and small, medium  and  large  enterprises  and  Government  &  non-

Government entities. It serves as an umbrella framework for defining and guiding the actions related 

to  security  of  cyberspace.  It  also  enables  the  individual  sectors  and  organizations  in  designing 

appropriate  cyber  security  policies  to  suit  their  needs.  The  policy  provides  an  overview  of  what  it 

takes  to  effectively  protect  information,  information  systems  &  networks  and  also  gives  an  insight 

into  the  Government’s  approach  and  strategy  for  protection  of  cyber  space  in  the  country.    It  also 

outlines  some  pointers  to  enable  collaborative  working  of  all  key  players  in  public  &  private  to 

safeguard  country’s  information  and  information  systems.    This  policy,  therefore,  aims  to  create  a 

cyber security framework, which leads to specific actions and programmes to enhance the security 

posture of country’s cyber space. 

 

 

Page 2 of 9 
 

 

 

I.  Vision 

To build a secure and resilient cyberspace for citizens, businesses and 

Government 

II.  Mission 

To  protect  information  and  information  infrastructure  in  cyberspace,  build  capabilities  to 

prevent and respond to cyber threats, reduce vulnerabilities and minimize damage from 

cyber  incidents  through  a  combination  of  institutional  structures,  people,  processes, 

technology and cooperation. 

III. Objectives 

1)  To  create  a  secure  cyber  ecosystem  in  the  country,  generate  adequate  trust  & 

confidence in IT systems and transactions in cyberspace and thereby enhance adoption 

of IT in all sectors of the economy.   

2)  To create an assurance framework for design of security policies and for promotion and 

enabling actions for compliance to global security standards and best practices by way of 

conformity assessment (product, process, technology & people). 

3)  To strengthen the Regulatory framework for ensuring a Secure Cyberspace ecosystem. 

4)  To  enhance  and  create  National  and  Sectoral  level  24  x  7  mechanisms  for  obtaining 

strategic  information  regarding  threats  to  ICT  infrastructure,  creating  scenarios  for 

response,  resolution  and  crisis  management  through  effective  predictive,  preventive, 

protective, response and recovery actions. 

5)  To enhance the protection and resilience of Nation’s critical information infrastructure by 

operating  a  24x7  National  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  Centre  (NCIIPC) 

and  mandating  security  practices  related  to  the  design,  acquisition,  development,  use 

and operation of information resources. 

6)  To  develop  suitable  indigenous  security  technologies  through  frontier  technology 

research,  solution  oriented  research,  proof  of  concept,  pilot  development,  transition, 

diffusion  and  commercialisation  leading  to  widespread  deployment  of  secure  ICT 

products  /  processes  in  general  and  specifically  for  addressing  National  Security 

requirements.  

7)  To  improve  visibility  of  the  integrity  of  ICT  products  and  services  by  establishing 

infrastructure for testing & validation of security of such products.  

Page 3 of 9 
 

8)  To  create  a  workforce  of  500,000  professionals  skilled  in  cyber  security  in  the  next  5 

years through capacity building, skill development and training. 

9)  To  provide  fiscal  benefits  to  businesses  for  adoption  of  standard  security  practices  and 

processes. 

10) To enable protection of information while in process, handling, storage & transit so as to 

safeguard privacy of citizen's data and for reducing economic losses due to cyber crime 

or data theft. 

11) To  enable  effective  prevention,  investigation  and  prosecution  of  cyber  crime  and 

enhancement of law enforcement capabilities through appropriate legislative intervention. 

12) To create a culture of cyber security and privacy enabling responsible user behaviour & 

actions through an effective communication and promotion strategy.  

13) To develop effective public private partnerships and collaborative engagements through 

technical  and  operational  cooperation  and  contribution  for  enhancing  the  security  of 

cyberspace. 

14) To  enhance  global  cooperation  by  promoting  shared  understanding  and  leveraging 

relationships for furthering the cause of security of cyberspace. 

IV. Strategies 

A.  Creating a secure cyber ecosystem  

1) 

To  designate  a  National  nodal  agency  to  coordinate  all  matters  related  to  cyber 

security in the country, with clearly defined roles & responsibilities. 

2) 

To  encourage  all  organizations,  private  and  public  to  designate  a member  of senior 

management,  as  Chief  Information  Security  Officer  (CISO),  responsible  for  cyber 

security efforts and initiatives.  

3) 

To  encourage  all  organizations  to  develop  information  security  policies  duly 

integrated with their business plans and implement such policies as per international 

best practices. Such policies should include establishing standards and mechanisms 

for  secure  information  flow  (while  in  process,  handling,  storage  &  transit),  crisis 

management  plan,  proactive  security  posture  assessment  and  forensically  enabled 

information infrastructure. 

4) 

To  ensure  that  all  organizations  earmark  a  specific  budget  for  implementing  cyber 

security initiatives and for meeting emergency response arising out of cyber incidents.  

5) 

To provide fiscal schemes and incentives to encourage entities to install, strengthen 

and upgrade information infrastructure with respect to cyber security. 

Page 4 of 9 
 

6) 

To  prevent  occurrence  and  recurrence  of  cyber  incidents  by  way  of  incentives  for 

technology development, cyber security compliance and proactive actions. 

7) 

To establish a mechanism for sharing information and for identifying and responding 

to cyber security incidents and for cooperation in restoration efforts. 

8) 

To encourage entities to adopt guidelines for procurement of trustworthy ICT products 

and  provide  for  procurement  of  indigenously  manufactured  ICT  products  that  have 

security implications. 

B.  Creating an assurance framework 

1) 

To promote adoption of global best practices in information security and compliance 

and thereby enhance cyber security posture. 

2) 

To create infrastructure for conformity  assessment and certification of compliance to 

cyber  security  best  practices,  standards  and  guidelines  (Eg.  ISO  27001  ISMS 

certification,  IS  system  audits,  Penetration  testing  /  Vulnerability  assessment, 

application security testing, web security testing). 

3) 

To enable implementation of global security best practices in formal risk assessment 

and  risk  management  processes,  business  continuity  management  and  cyber  crisis 

management plan by all entities within Government and in critical sectors, to reduce 

the risk of disruption and improve the security posture. 

4) 

To  identify  and  classify  information  infrastructure  facilities  and  assets  at  entity  level 

with  respect  to  risk  perception  for  undertaking  commensurate  security  protection 

measures. 

5) 

To encourage secure application / software development processes based on global 

best practices. 

6) 

To create conformity assessment framework for periodic verification of compliance to 

best practices, standards and guidelines on cyber security. 

7) 

To  encourage  all  entities  to  periodically  test  and  evaluate  the  adequacy  and 

effectiveness of technical and operational security control measures implemented in 

IT systems and in networks. 

C.  Encouraging Open Standards 

1) 

To encourage use of open standards to facilitate interoperability and data exchange 

among different products or services. 

2) 

To promote a consortium of Government and private sector to enhance the 

availability of tested and certified IT products based on open standards. 

 

Page 5 of 9 
 

D.  Strengthening the Regulatory framework 

1) 

To develop  a  dynamic  legal  framework  and  its periodic  review  to  address  the  cyber 

security challenges arising out of technological developments in cyber space (such as 

cloud  computing,  mobile  computing,  encrypted  services  and  social  media)  and  its 

harmonization  with  international  frameworks  including  those  related  to  Internet 

governance. 

2) 

To  mandate  periodic  audit  and  evaluation  of  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of 

security of information infrastructure as may be appropriate, with respect to regulatory 

framework. 

3) 

To enable, educate and facilitate awareness of the regulatory framework.  

E.  Creating mechanisms for security threat early warning, vulnerability management and 

response to security threats 

1) 

To create National level systems, processes, structures and mechanisms to generate 

necessary  situational  scenario  of  existing  and  potential  cyber  security  threats  and 

enable  timely  information  sharing for  proactive,  preventive  and  protective  actions  by 

individual entities.  

2) 

To operate a 24x7 National Level Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) 

to  function  as  a  Nodal  Agency  for  coordination  of  all  efforts  for  cyber  security 

emergency  response  and  crisis  management.  CERT-In  will  function  as  an  umbrella 

organization in enabling creation and operationalization of sectoral CERTs as well as 

facilitating  communication  and  coordination  actions  in  dealing  with  cyber  crisis 

situations.  

3)       To operationalise 24x7 sectoral CERTs for all coordination and communication actions 

within the respective sectors for effective incidence response & resolution and cyber 

crisis   management. 

4) 

To implement Cyber Crisis Management Plan for dealing with cyber related incidents 

impacting critical national processes or endangering public safety and security of the 

Nation,  by  way  of  well  coordinated,  multi  disciplinary  approach  at  the  National, 

Sectoral as well as entity levels. 

5) 

To conduct and facilitate regular cyber security drills & exercises at National, sectoral 

and entity levels to enable assessment of the security posture and level of emergency 

preparedness in resisting and dealing with cyber security incidents. 

F.  Securing E-Governance services 

1) 

To  mandate  implementation  of  global  security  best  practices,  business  continuity 

management and cyber crisis management plan for all e-Governance initiatives in the 

country, to reduce the risk of disruption and improve the security posture. 

Page 6 of 9 
 

2) 

To  encourage  wider  usage  of  Public  Key  Infrastructure  (PKI)  within  Government for 

trusted communication and transactions. 

3) 

To engage information security professionals / organisations to assist e-Governance 

initiatives and ensure conformance to security best practices. 

G.  Protection and resilience of Critical Information Infrastructure 

1) 

To  develop  a  plan  for  protection  of  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  and  its 

integration with business plan at the entity level and implement such plan. The plans 

shall include establishing mechanisms for secure information flow (while in process, 

handling,  storage  &  transit),  guidelines  and  standards,  crisis  management  plan, 

proactive  security  posture  assessment  and 

forensically  enabled 

information 

infrastructure. 

2) 

To  Operate  a  24x7  National  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  Centre 

(NCIIPC)  to  function  as  the  nodal  agency  for  critical  information  infrastructure 

protection in the country. 

3) 

To  facilitate  identification,  prioritisation,  assessment,  remediation  and  protection  of 

critical  infrastructure  and  key  resources  based  on  the  plan  for  protection  of  critical 

information infrastructure.  

4) 

To  mandate  implementation  of  global  security  best  practices,  business  continuity 

management  and  cyber  crisis  management  plan  by  all  critical  sector  entities,  to 

reduce the risk of disruption and improve the security posture. 

5) 

To  encourage  and  mandate  as  appropriate,  the  use  of  validated  and  certified  IT 

products. 

6) 

7) 

To mandate security audit of critical information infrastructure on a periodic basis. 

To mandate certification for all security roles right from CISO / CSO to those involved 

in operation of critical information infrastructure.  

8) 

To mandate secure application / software development process (from design through 

retirement) based on global best practices. 

H.  Promotion of Research & Development in cyber security 

1) 

To  undertake  Research  &  Development  programs  for  addressing  all  aspects  of 

development aimed at short term, medium term and long term goals.  The Research 

&  Development  programs  shall  address  all  aspects  including  development  of 

trustworthy  systems,  their  testing,  deployment  and  maintenance  throughout  the  life 

cycle and include R&D on cutting edge security technologies. 

Page 7 of 9 
 

2) 

To  encourage  Research  &  Development  to  produce  cost-effective,  tailor-made 

indigenous security solutions meeting a wider range of cyber security challenges and 

target for export markets. 

3) 

To facilitate transition, diffusion and commercialisation of the outputs  of Research & 

Development  into  commercial  products  and  services  for  use  in  public  and  private 

sectors. 

4) 

 

5) 

 

To  set  up  Centres  of  Excellence  in  areas  of  strategic  importance  for  the  point  of 

security of cyber space. 

To  collaborate  in  joint  Research  &  Development  projects  with  industry  and 

academia in frontline technologies and solution oriented research. 

I.  Reducing supply chain risks 

1) 

To  create  and  maintain  testing  infrastructure  and  facilities  for  IT  security  product 

evaluation and compliance verification as per global standards and practices. 

2) 

To build trusted relationships with product / system vendors and service providers for 

improving end-to-end supply chain security visibility. 

3) 

To  create  awareness  of  the  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  consequences  of  breach  of 

security  among  entities  for  managing  supply  chain  risks  related  to  IT  (products, 

systems or services) procurement. 

J.  Human Resource Development 

1) 

To  foster  education  and  training  programs  both  in  formal  and  informal  sectors  to 

support the Nation’s cyber security needs and build capacity.  

2) 

To establish cyber security training infrastructure across the country by way of public 

private partnership arrangements. 

3) 

To establish cyber security concept labs for awareness and skill development in key 

areas. 

4) 

To  establish  institutional  mechanisms  for  capacity  building  for  Law  Enforcement 

Agencies.  

K.  Creating Cyber Security Awareness 

1) 

To promote and launch a comprehensive national awareness program on security of 

cyberspace. 

2) 

To  sustain  security  literacy  awareness  and  publicity  campaign  through  electronic 

media to help citizens to be aware of the challenges of cyber security.  

3) 

To  conduct,  support  and  enable  cyber  security  workshops  /  seminars  and 

certifications. 

Page 8 of 9 
 

L.  Developing effective Public Private Partnerships  

1) 

To  facilitate  collaboration  and  cooperation  among  stakeholder  entities  including 

private  sector,  in  the  area  of  cyber  security  in  general  and  protection  of  critical 

information 

infrastructure 

in  particular 

for  actions  related 

to  cyber 

threats, 

vulnerabilities,  breaches,  potential  protective  measures,  and  adoption  of  best 

practices. 

2) 

3) 

To create models for collaborations and engagement with all relevant stakeholders. 

To create a think tank for cyber security policy inputs, discussion and deliberations. 

M.  Information sharing and cooperation 

1) 

To  develop  bilateral  and  multi-lateral  relationships  in  the  area  of  cyber  security  with 

other countries.  

2) 

To  enhance  National  and  global  cooperation  among  security  agencies,  CERTs, 

Defence agencies and forces, Law Enforcement Agencies and the judicial systems. 

3) 

To create mechanisms for dialogue related to technical and operational aspects with 

industry  in  order  to  facilitate  efforts  in  recovery  and  resilience  of  systems  including 

critical information infrastructure. 

N.  Prioritized approach for implementation 

To  adopt  a  prioritized  approach  to  implement  the  policy  so  as  to  address  the  most 

critical areas in the first instance. 

V.  Operationalisation of the Policy  

This  policy  shall  be  operationalised  by  way  of  detailed  guidelines  and  plans  of  action  at 

various levels such as national, sectoral, state, ministry, department and enterprise, as may 

be appropriate, to address the challenging requirements of security of the cyberspace. 

 

 

Page 9 of 9 
 

