 

National Cyber 

Security Strategy 

2015-2017 

 

 

 

Table of Contents 

Table of Contents ..................................................................................................................i 

Executive Summary .................................................................................................... 1 

1. Introduction ........................................................................................................... 2 

2. Context - People, Economy, and State ..................................................................... 4 

3. Guiding Principles.................................................................................................. 10 

4. Objectives ............................................................................................................. 11 

5. Measures .............................................................................................................. 12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- i - 

 

 

Executive Summary 

The National Cyber Security Strategy (2015-2017) sets out how Ireland will engage with a 

dynamic  and  challenging  aspect  of  developments  in  digital  technology,  setting  out  the 

Government's  approach  to  facilitating  the  resilient,  safe  and  secure  operation  of 

computer networks  and associated infrastructure used by Irish citizens and businesses. 

The  development  and  proliferation  of  Information  and  Communications  Technology 

(ICTs) has resulted in dramatic improvements in quality of life, the delivery of new and 

innovative  services,  and  sweeping  changes  in  the  way  in  which  businesses  operate. 

However  the  growing  use of  these  technologies  has resulted  in  society  becoming,  to  a 

degree, dependent on the ongoing operation and resilience of these systems. A range of 

threats have emerged to the safe and secure operation of ICT networks, emanating from 

a  diverse  set  of  sources.  These  threats  can  be  loosely  categorised  as  hacking,  cyber-

crime, hacktivism and cyber espionage. Equally, reliance on these networks and systems 

has led to risks engendered by human error, software and equipment failures and even 

extreme weather events. This document engages with these various threats and hazards, 

sets out the high level strategic goals that form the basis of national policy in this area 

and establishes the measures that will be taken in respect of each.  

 

In  particular,  the  Strategy  includes  the  establishment  of  the  National  Cyber  Security 

Centre  within  the  Department  of  Communications,  Energy  and  Natural  Resources,  and 

details  how  that  body  will  engage  with  its  three  primary  areas  of  responsibility; 

government  networks,  personal  and  business  systems,  and  the  protection  of  critical 

national  infrastructure.  This  will  build  on  the  existing  Computer  Security  Incident 

Response Team (CSIRT-IE), established in late 2011. 

 

 

 

 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 1 - 

 

 

1. Introduction  

1.1   Background 

The National Cyber Security Strategy (2015-2017) sets out how Ireland will engage with a 

dynamic  and  challenging  aspect  of  developments  in  digital  technology.  The  use  of 

internet  technologies  and  ICT  more  generally  to  enable  government,  business  and 

individuals  to  deliver,  participate  and  inform  themselves  has  been  transformative,  but 

has  also  opened  up  vectors  for  new  types  of  attack.  The  fact  that  the  digital  domain 

encompasses  all  information  infrastructures  accessible  via  the  Internet  (or  otherwise), 

and transcends territorial boundaries makes this arena far more complex and potentially 

dangerous than would otherwise be the case.  

 

In 2013 the World Economic Forum identified cyber-related threats as one of the highest 
of all global risks from both the perspective of impact and likelihood1, a finding mirrored 
in  the  2014  National  Risk  Assessment2.  The  State,  critical 

at  a  national 

level 

infrastructure,  businesses  and  citizens  depend  upon  the  reliable  functioning  of 

information  and  communication  technologies  and  of  the  Internet.  Disruption  to  these 

systems,  regardless of the source,  poses  a direct threat to the  functioning  of the  State 

and the economy, and can have profound effects on the daily life of millions of citizens. 

The  Internet  is  already  critical  to  the  economic  and  social  well-being  of  the  State. 

Moreover,  it  possesses  enormous  potential  to  make  an  even  greater  contribution  to 

economic  and  social  development.  Any  threat  to  its  resilience  and  security  therefore 

requires a robust and coherent response, both nationally and at an EU and international 

level.  

 

This Strategy presents a cross-government framework for ensuring cyberspace remains 

safe,  secure  and  reliable,  with  an  emphasis  on  task-sharing  and  building  trust 

relationships between the State, public and private partners, academia and civil society. 

                                                           

1Global Risks Report, 2013. 
2http://www.taoiseach.gov.ie/eng/Publications/Publications_2014/National_Risk_Assessment_report_2014.

pdf 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 2 - 

 

 

As  events  and  technology  continue  to  evolve,  flexibility  will  be  necessary  and  will  be 

reflected in an adaptive and flexible implementation of the Strategy.  

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 3 - 

 

 

2. Context - People, Economy, and State 

2.1  Citizens 

Cyber  security  is  not  limited  to  the  application  of  technical  solutions  to  improve  the 

security of networks, devices or data. Rather, the nature of the challenge is such that a 

diverse range of measures are required, including the delivery of timely and appropriate 

regulatory  responses  by  governments,  inducting  an  ongoing  process  of  technological 

adaptation and improvement  and fostering a cultural understanding of the importance 

of the issue. Ensuring that each of these tasks are delivered  is a  prerequisite  for open, 

free  and  safe  access  to  cyberspace,  and  confidence  that  their  personal  data  will  be 

processed  in  accordance  with  data  protection  principles  enshrined  in  law,  notably 

national  legislation,  the  European  Union  Treaties  and  the  European  Convention  on 

Human  Rights.  The  Internet  is  a  resource  to  which  all  citizens  can  and  should  have 

access.  As  an  information-led  society,  Irish  citizens  socialise,  entertain,  communicate, 

learn,  transact,  and  to  varying  degrees,  live,  online.  Protecting  this  lifestyle  and 

individuals’  personal  data  is  a  prerequisite  for  prosperity,  social  development  and  the 

protection of human rights. 

 

2.2  Economy 

Ireland’s economy depends on effective and secure digital infrastructures for sustained 

growth  and  development.  The  digital  economy  contributes  5%  of  national  GDP  and  is 

growing at approximately 20% annually. There are few sectors that do not rely on ICTs 

for  their  operations,  including  a  wide  range  of  critical  economic  infrastructure  such  as 

electricity,  gas,  financial  services  and  water  supply.    Nine  out  of  the  top  ten  global 

software companies, all of the top ten global ICT companies, and the top ten “born on 

the  Internet”  companies  possess  significant  operations  in  Ireland.  Protecting  and 

sustaining  this  investment,  which  provides  employment  for  over  100,000  people,  is  a 

vital  priority  for  Ireland.  Securing  the  long  term  future  of  this  sector  is  of  crucial 

importance  to  the  economy,  and  within  this  sector  information  security  represents  a 

particular growth opportunity for Ireland. There is a real potential for Ireland to become 

a  cyber-security  hub  on  the  basis  of  the  nascent  cloud  computing  and  big  data  sector 

developing in the State. 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 4 - 

 

 

2.3  Risks 

The diverse ways in which network connected technologies are used, together with the 

extremely  widespread  proliferation  of  devices,  means  that  a  very  wide  range  of  risks 

have already arisen, both in terms of the type of threat and in terms of origin. The type 

of  threat  ranges  from  relatively  low  level  attempts  to  generate  publicity,  to  extract 

banking or other information, through to large scale data exfiltration and even sabotage 

of  ICT  systems.  In  some  cases,  attacks  have  resulted  in  physical  damage  to  equipment 

and  infrastructure.  The  origins  of  such  attacks  range  from  lone  individuals  to  criminal 

groups, and in some cases likely include Nation States seeking to gather intelligence or to 

damage  or  degrade  infrastructure.  Incidents  arising  through  extreme  weather,  human 

error  and  hardware  or  software  failure  also  pose  significant  risks  to  individuals, 

businesses and public administration.  

 

In a great number of cases, the risks to individuals, companies and the State are similar, 

and can be mitigated by the application of the same responses, including good practice 

such  as  business  continuity  planning,  keeping  software  up  to  date  or  ensuring  that 

individuals are aware of risks that arise online, and trained to deal with them. In some 

cases  however,  more  specific  and  complex  threats  arise,  such  as  in  those  cases  where 

businesses  control  large  amounts  of  data  or  operate  critical  infrastructure;  in  these 

instances more severe risks arise and a more involved set of responses is required. On a 

national level, Ireland faces a more complex set of risks than many other countries. The 

presence  of  a  large  number  of  data  centric  international  companies  here,  and  the 

growing  number  of  data  centres  present  in  the  State  mean  that  the  potential  for 

reputational damage is an important consideration.  

 

2.4  Government 

A  number  of  initiatives  have  been  introduced  by  the  Irish  Government  which optimise 

and promote use of information systems for economic and social growth. 

  The Government’s National Broadband Plan aims to ensure that all citizens 

and  businesses  have  access  to  reliable  high  speed  broadband,  opening  up 

new business, economic and social opportunities.  

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 5 - 

 

 

 

Ireland’s  National  Digital  Strategy  “Doing  More  with  Digital”,  published  in 

June  2013,  is  focused  on  increasing  the  extent  and  quality  of  online 

engagement. 

  The  eGovernment  Strategy  2012-2015  report  (April  2012),  describes  a 

reformed public administration which is moving towards online channels for 

public engagement and service delivery. 

  The  national  “Action  Plan  for  Jobs”  (2013),  aims  to  provide  sustainable 

employment and seeks to improve economic infrastructures, encompassing 

secure ICT, to make Ireland a more environmentally-friendly, safer and more 

pleasant place in which to live and work. 

  The  Public  Service  ICT  Strategy  published  in  January  2015  focuses  on 

leveraging  improved  efficiencies  from  innovative  use  of  new  and  emerging 

digital technologies for citizens and businesses.  

The  developing  national  and  EU  research  agenda  has  also  placed  an  emphasis  on 

research,  both  through  the  Digital  Agenda  and  the  Horizon  2020  Programme  (which 

includes a specific strand on Digital Security). 

 

The majority of the services provided by the State rely, to some extent or other, on ICT 

systems. These include basic but essential email and telephony services and a wide range 

of databases containing the personal data of millions of citizens and the business data of 

companies  operating  in  the  State.  These  systems  also  include  a  wide  range  of  online 

platform  services,  including  those  run  by  the  likes  of  the  Revenue  Commissioners  and 

the  Department  of  Agriculture,  which  are  central  to  the  business  operations  of  these 

bodies and of customers.  

 

2.5  Critical National Infrastructure 

Critical  National  Infrastructure  (CNI)  comprises  essential  services  such  as  electricity, 

water, transportation, telecommunications, commerce and health.  The convergence of 

networks  and  information  systems  now  means  that  the  provisioning  of  these  services 

substantially  relies  on  the  seamless  operation  of  Information  and  Communication 

Technologies.  The  systems,  services,  networks  and  infrastructures  that  underpin  other 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 6 - 

 

 

Critical  Infrastructure,  or  provide  essential  services  themselves,  are  called  Critical 

Information  Infrastructure  (or  CII)  and  include  telecommunications  networks,  the 

Internet, terrestrial and satellite wireless networks.  

 

While  all  infrastructure  is  at  risk  from  damage  or  destruction  by  natural  or  manmade 

events,  damage  to  either  CNI  and  CII  could  have  negative  consequences  for  national 

security,  the  economy,  or  the  well-being of  citizens of  the  State.  While  measures  have 

long  been  in  place  to  ensure  the  security  of  such  infrastructure  against  damage  from 

conventional sources, there is a growing awareness of the risks posed to infrastructure 

by  cyber  attack.  However,  there  is  a  substantive  difference  between  the  traditional 

realm, where kinetic attacks require a physical proximity and which are generally easily 

attributed, and cyber attacks, where neither of these factors are necessarily present. The 

growing  sophistication  and  apparent  proliferation  of  cyber  attacks  on  infrastructure 

means  that  this  cannot  be  ignored.  This  Strategy  contains  a  series  of  measures  to 

strengthen capacity in this area.  

 

The  extant  Computer  Security  and  Incident  Response  Team  (CSIRT-IE)  within  the 

Department  of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources  have  been engaged in 

general emergency planning processes in the State with the Principal Response Agencies 

(including  An  Garda  Síochána,  the  Health  Service  Executive  and  the  Local  Authorities), 

Government  Departments  and  other  agencies  overseen  by  the  Office  of  Emergency 

Planning  (OEP)  within  the  Department  of  Defence  and  the  Government  Task  Force  on 

Emergency Planning, chaired by the Minister for Defence. This includes contributing to 

the  development  of  a  National  Framework  for  Emergency  and  Crisis  Management  in 

Ireland, which aims to foster national resilience in the face of emergencies/crises, thus 

minimising  or  mitigating  the  disruption  of  national  life  and  achieving  the  optimum 

outcome  when  an  emergency  occurs.    The  Government’s  Cyber  Security  Strategy  sets 

out  how  Ireland  will  protect  and  improve  the  cybersecurity  of  Critical  National 

Infrastructure in the context of national emergency planning. 

 

2.6  European and International Developments 

Since  2001  there  have  been  a  number  of  EU  and  international  measures  aimed  at 

improving Network and Information Security. These have included the establishment of 

the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) in 2005, the facilitation 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 7 - 

 

 

of  awareness  raising  events,  training,  cyber  security  exercises  and  the  development  of 

policy proposals and platforms such as the 2009 Communication on Critical Information 

Infrastructure  Protection3.  The  2010  Digital  Agenda  for  Europe4  included  a  range  of 

actions  designed  to  ensure  greater  trust  and  security  online,  including  that  Member 

States would establish “… a well-functioning network of CERTs at national level covering 

all  of  Europe”  by  the  end  of  2012.  The  EU  Telecommunications  Framework  Directive 

(2009/140/EC)  already  provides  for  mandatory  and  security  requirements 

for 

telecommunications  operators.  In  2013,  the  EU  published  a  Cyber  Security  Strategy 

focusing  on  5  key  pillars;  namely  improving  cyber  resilience,  addressing  cyber-crime, 

facilitating  improved  cyber  defence  capabilities,  research  and  industrial  development 

initiatives  for  industry  and  diplomatic  initiatives  focused  on  developing  the  rule  of  law 

and norms of behaviour for States. 

 

However,  the  increased  threat  level  has  led  to  a  persistent  concern  that  the  EU  was 

losing ground in this area, and as such the Commission published a proposed Directive in 

2013. This draft Directive, termed the Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive 

has been the  subject  of intensive  discussions at European Council and Parliament, and 

will  likely  be  agreed  later  in  2015.  It  sets  out  obligations  for  all  Member  States 

concerning  the  prevention,  handling  of  and  response  to  cyber  incidents  and  attacks 

affecting  information  communications  technology  systems  in  some  online  businesses, 

energy, transport, banking and financial services and health sectors.  The draft Directive 

also has a number of specific requirements, including: 

 

 

the development of a strategy at national level;  

 

the designation of a national competent authority or authorities;  

 

the establishment and resourcing of one or more national computer security 

incident response teams (CSIRTs); 

 

the development of co-operation arrangements between Member States at 

strategic and operational levels; and 

                                                           

3http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0149:FIN:EN:PDF 
4http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52010DC0245R(01)&from=EN 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 8 - 

 

 

 

the  reporting  of  network  and 

information  security 

incidents  and 

conformance  with  risk  management  and  security  requirements  for  specific 

undertakings  providing  information  society  services  or  operating  critical 

infrastructure  in  the  energy,  transport,  banking  and  financial  services  and 

health sectors. 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 9 - 

 

 

3. Guiding Principles  

The role of the State is to create a robust, stable and coherent regulatory framework for 

protecting  networks  and  infrastructure enterprises  and  private  persons  and to  support 

self-regulation in the private sphere. The principles that will be followed in this are  set 

out below. 

 

3.1  Rule of Law 

We  will  focus  on  applying  the  rule  of  law,  and  will  work  to  ensure  that  Irish  citizens’  

rights under the Constitution and under the European Convention on Human Rights are 

preserved at all times. 

 

3.2  Subsidiarity 

Because of the diverse ownership and operation of various ICT systems, the State cannot 

assume sole responsibility for protecting cyberspace and the rights of citizens online. The 

owners  and  operators  of  information  and  communication  technology  are  primarily 

responsible for protecting their systems and the information of their customers.  

 

3.3  Risk Based Approach & Proportionality 

Measures to increase the level of protection need to be informed by an assessment of 

the  risks  and  threats  facing  us,  as  individuals,  businesses,  public  sector  bodies and  the 

State as a collective whole.  Furthermore such measures will need to be proportionate to 

the respective risks and threats that we face. 

 

 

 

 

 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 10 - 

 

 

4. Objectives 

  To improve the resilience and robustness of critical information infrastructure in 

crucial economic sectors, and particularly in the public sector. 

  To  continue 

to  engage  with 

international  partners  and 

international 

organisations to ensure that cyber space remains open, secure, unitary and free 

and able to facilitate economic and social development. 

  To raise awareness of the responsibilities of businesses and of private individuals 

around securing their networks, devices and information and to support them in 

this by means of information, training and voluntary codes of practice. 

  To ensure that the State has a comprehensive and flexible legal and regulatory 

framework  to  combat  cyber  crime  by  An  Garda  Síochána  that  is  robust, 

proportionate  and  fair,  and  that  accords  due  regard  to  the  protection  of 

sensitive or personal data. 

  To  ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  that  applies  to  the  holders  of  data, 

personal or otherwise, is robust, proportionate and fair.  

  To build capacity across public administration and the private sector to engage 

fully in the emergency management of cyber incidents. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 11 - 

 

 

5. Measures 

5.1   Establish the National Cyber Security Centre 

We  will  formally  establish  the  National  Cyber  Security  Centre  (NCSC)  within  the 

Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources. The NCSC will engage in 

a  comprehensive  set  of  tasks  around  cyber  security,  with  primary  focus  on  securing 

government networks, assisting industry and individuals in protecting their own systems, 

and securing critical national infrastructure.  

 

The  process  of  developing  a  Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Team  (CSIRT-IE) 

commenced  in  the  Department  of  Communications,  Energy  and  Natural  Resources  in 

late 2011, on foot of a Government Decision.  To date, CSIRT-IE has focussed on assisting 

public  sector  organisations  in  their  response  to  computer  security  incidents  and 

providing advice to reduce threat exposure. Some initial work has also been completed 

on the two other core future aspects of the work of NCSC. 

 

Over  the  life  of  this  Strategy,  the  skillset  and  constituency  base  of  the  NCSC  will  be 

developed as follows: 

 

 

 

  The  NCSC  will  seek  formal  accreditation  for  the  Government  CSIRT  (g/CSIRT), 

which  is  critical  in  terms  of  peer  recognition.  This  accreditation  is  expected  in 

early 2016;  

  Accreditation  will  be  sought  for  a  formal  National  CSIRT  (n/CSIRT),  while  also 

developing  a  limited  capacity  in  the  area  of  Industrial  Control  and  SCADA 

systems.  

The mandate for the NCSC will include: 

  activities to reduce the vulnerability of critical systems and networks within the 

State to incidents and cyber-attacks; 

  effective response when such attacks occur; 

 

responsibility for the protection of critical information infrastructure (CIIP); 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 12 - 

 

 

 

 

  establishing  and  maintaining  cooperative  relationships  with  national  and 

international partners. 

5.2   Network and Information Security for Public Bodies 

We will introduce a series of measures to improve the network and information security 

used  by  Government  Departments  and  Agencies,  including  a  comprehensive  incident 

reporting and escalation policy.  

 

This  will  build  on  work  already  in  progress  involving  an  improved  ability  to  detect  and 

respond to threats and attacks. The evolution of attack vectors and threats has resulted 

in previous network security technologies becoming less effective and the adoption of a 

defence  in  depth  approach.  This  involves  the  use  of  a  wider  range  of  devices  and 

infrastructure in the service of network security. The NCSC's projects will ultimately yield 

such a system: a constituency wide, federated, Security Incident and Event Management 

(SIEM) system.   

 

5.3   Fully implement the NISD by means of primary legislation 

We  will  introduce  primary  legislation  to  give  effect  to  the  national  cyber  security 

arrangements and to transpose the proposed European Union Directive on network and 

information security.  This process will be undertaken in a transparent and consultative 

manner, involving regulatory impact analysis and legislative scrutiny by the Oireachtas. 

 

5.4   Coherent international engagement  

We  will  continue  to  engage  in  European  and  global  discussions  on  network  and 

information  security,  including  in  the  context  of  the  global  debate  on  the  future  of 

internet governance. We continue to emphasise the ongoing need for a secure, resilient 

internet architecture that fully encompasses the protection of fundamental rights online 

and which continues to facilitate economic and social development. 

 

We will also engage at European and international levels with key partners in delivering 

policy measures to improve cyber security. 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 13 - 

 

 

 

5.5   National Security and Policing 

In  recognition  of  its  responsibilities  for  providing  policing  and  security  services  to  the 

State,  it  is  envisaged  that An  Garda  Síochána  will  be  in  a  position  to offer  appropriate 

advice and guidance concerning preventative and investigative strategies. It will also be 

in a position to draw on its liaison relationships with other security services in identifying 

emerging threats, vulnerabilities and best practice preventative measures.  

 

5.6    Cybercrime 

The Minister for Justice and Equality will shortly bring forward legislation to give effect to 

the provisions of the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime and Directive 2013/40/EU on 

attacks  against  information  systems.  We  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  that 

Department  and  the  recognised  legal  and  regulatory  agencies  including  An  Garda 

Síochána on the implementation of that legislation. This association will be formalised by 

means of a Memorandum of Understanding, setting out the respective roles and duties 

of each body. 

 

5.7   Civil-Military Cooperation 

The Defence Forces maintains a capability in the area of cyber security for the purpose of 

protecting its own networks and users. There is already a strong culture of cooperation 

between the NCSC and DF in areas such as development of technical skill sets, technical 

information sharing and exercise participation. These arrangements will be formalised by 

means  of  a  Service  Level  Agreement  with  the  Department  of  Defence,  which  will  also 

include  a  mechanism  for  sharing  technical  expertise  in  the  event  of  a  national  cyber 

incident or emergency.       

 

5.8   Critical Infrastructure 

We will continue to play a central role in the protection of critical national infrastructure, 

including  through  the  national  emergency  management  system  overseen  by  the 

Government Taskforce on Emergency Planning and the Office of Emergency Planning in 

the  Department  of  Defence.  As  such,  the  Department  of  Communications,  Energy  and 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 14 - 

 

 

Natural  Resources  will  operate  as  Lead  Government  Department  for  emergency 

situations relating to failures of, or attacks on, ICTs, and will operate in a secondary role 

to other Departments in cases where incidents may have a cyber-security dimension. 

 

5.9    Information Sharing 

The dynamic nature of the threat environment means that clear, open and rapid access 

and sharing of information across the full range of stakeholders is critical. CSIRT-IE has 

been  developing  strong  bilateral  relationships  with  similar  organisations  in  other 

countries,  and  with  ENISA,  the  European  Network  and  Information  Security  Agency. 

Equally, the unit has a formal and active information sharing role with other public sector 

bodies, and with industry (including IRISS-CERT, a voluntary CERT). 

 

The  NCSC  will  expand 

its 

information  sharing  arrangements  with  national  and 

international  stakeholders,  and  will  focus  particularly  on  making  information  on 

developing  issues  public  in  a  timely  and  relevant  manner.  In  particular,  the  NCSC  will 

engage  with  Internet  Service  Providers  on  a  protocol  that  might  be  implemented  to 

identify threats to the data and devices of their customers. 

 

5.10  Education and training for Industry/SMEs 

We will develop a programme of education and training, beginning with a revised Make 

IT Secure website to help citizens and Small to Medium Enterprises (SME) better protect 

themselves online. We will also develop a programme of structured exercises for critical 

national  infrastructure  owners  and  for  public  sector  bodies,  in  partnership  with 

international peers and the academic sector.  

 

5.11  Public Awareness 

We  will  work  to  foster  a  culture  of  cyber  security  across  society,  including  through 

cooperation  with  the  education  system,  with  industry  and  through  the  promotion  of 

events like European Cyber Security Month.  

 

 

 

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 15 - 

 

 

5.12  Relationships with Third Level Institutions 

The Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has a long standing 

relationship  with  the  Centre  for  Cyber-crime  Investigation  in  University  College  Dublin. 

We will continue to develop and deepen such partnerships with third level institutions 

through  the  use  of  Memoranda  of  Understanding  to  aid  the  sharing  of  knowledge, 

experience  and  best  practice,  and  to  support  the  developing  research  agenda  in  this 

sector.  

National Cyber Security Strategy: Securing our Digital Future 

 

- 16 - 

