- Non Official - 

Advancing National Cyberspace Capabilities  

Resolution No. 3611 of the Government of August 7, 2011 

 

 
HEREBY RESOLVED: 
 
Definitions: 
 

A.  “Cyberspace” – the physical and non-physical domain that is created or 
composed of part or all of the following components: mechanized and 
computerized systems, computer and communications networks, 
programs, computerized information, content conveyed by computer, 
traffic and supervisory data and those who use such data. 
 

B.  “Cybersecurity” – policies, security arrangements, actions, guidelines, risk 

management protocols and technological tools designated to protect 
cyberspace and allow action to be taken therein. 

C.  “Civilian Space” – cyberspace that includes all the governmental and 

private bodies in the State of Israel, excluding special bodies. 

 

D.  “Special Bodies” – the Israel Defense Forces, the Israeli Police, Israel 
Security Agency ("Shabak"), the Institute for Intelligence and Special 
Operations ("Mossad") and the defense establishment  by means of  the 
Head of Security of the Defense Establishment (DSDE). 

 

 

E.  “Defense Establishment” – the bodies guided by the DSDE as determined 

in the Law for Organizing Security in Public Bodies of 1998, as well as 
suppliers and operators developing or manufacturing security equipment 
for them. 

 
To work towards advancing national capabilities in cyberspace and improving 
management of current and future challenges in cyberspace. 
 
To improve the defense of national infrastructures which are essential for 
maintaining a stable and productive life in the State of Israel and to strengthen 
those infrastructures, as much as possible, against cyber attack, by advancing 
Israel’s status as a center for the development of information technologies; while 
encouraging cooperation among academia, industry and the private sector, 
government ministries and special bodies. 
 
In light of this, and further to National Security Ministerial Committee Resolution 
No. 84/B of December 11, 2002 (hereafter: Resolution 84/B), and without 
detracting from the authorities granted any other body by law or Government 
Resolutions, it was decided: 
 

- Non Official - 

Page 1 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

1.  To establish a National Cyber Bureau (hereafter: the Bureau) in the Prime 
Minister’s Office, as detailed in Addendum A.   
 
2.  To regulate responsibility for dealing with the cyber field, as detailed in 
Addendum B. 
 
3.  To advance defensive cyber capabilities in Israel and advance research and 
development in cyberspace and supercomputing, as detailed in Addendum A. 
 
4.  The budget to implement this Resolution will by determined by the Prime 
Minister in consultation with the Minister of Finance, and will be submitted to the 
government for approval within two months of this Resolution being passed. 
 
5.  Despite the aforementioned matters in this Resolution, and in order to remove 
any doubt, it is hereby clarified that this Resolution does not apply to special 
bodies.  Special arrangements will apply to them, as agreed upon between them 
and the Bureau within 120 days of its establishment. 

- Non Official - 

Page 2 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

 
Addendum A 
 

1.  Bureau Mission: 

 
The Bureau functions as an advising body for the Prime Minister, the 
government and its committees, which recommends national policy in the 
cyber field and promotes its implementation, in accordance with all law 
and Government Resolutions 
 

2.  Bureau Goals: 

 

1)  To advise the Prime Minister, the government and its committees 

regarding cyberspace.  In matters of foreign affairs and security, the 
advice provided to the government, to its committees and to the 
ministers, will be provided on behalf of the Bureau by means of the 
National Security Council. 
 

2)  To consolidate the government’s administrative work and that of its 

committees related to cyberspace; to prepare them for their 
discussions and follow-up on implementation of their decisions.  In 
matters of foreign affairs and security, the consolidation of 
administrative work, preparation for discussions and follow-up on 
implementation of decisions will be carried out by on behalf of the 
Bureau by means of the National Security Council. 

 

3)  To make recommendations to the Prime Minister and government 

regarding national cyber policy; to guide the relevant bodies 
regarding the policies decided upon by the government and/or the 
Prime Minister; to implement the policy and follow-up on the 
implementation. 

4)  To inform all the relevant bodies, as needed, about the 

complementary cyberspace-related policy guidelines resulting from 
Government Resolutions and committee decisions. 

5)  To determine and reaffirm, once a year, the national threat of 

reference in defending cyberspace. 

 

 

6)  To promote research and development in cyberspace and 

supercomputing in the professional bodies. 

 

 

7)  To work to encourage the cyber industry in Israel. 

 
8)  To formulate a national concept for dealing with emergency 

situations in cyberspace. 

 

- Non Official - 

Page 3 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

9)  To conduct national and international exercises to improve the 

State of Israel’s preparedness in cyberspace. 

10) To assemble intelligence picture from all parties in the intelligence 

community regarding cyber security. 

11) To assemble the national situation status regarding cyber security 

from all relevant parties. 

 

 

12) To advance and increase public awareness to threats in cyberspace 

and the means of coping with them. 

 

 

13) To formulate and publish warnings and information for the public 

regarding cyber threats, as well as practices for preventative 
behavior. 

14) To advance the formulation of national education plans and the 

wise use of cyberspace. 

15) To advance cooperation in the cyber field with parallel bodies 

abroad. 

 

 

16) To advance coordination and cooperation between governmental 

bodies, defense community, academia, industrial bodies, businesses 
and other bodies relevant to the cyber field. 

 

17) To advance legislation and regulation in the cyber field. 

 

 

18) To serve as a regulating body regulating body in fields related to 

cybersecurity, as detailed in Article I of Addendum B. 

19) To carry out any other role in the cyber field determined by the 

Prime Minister, in accordance with all laws and Government 
Resolutions. 

 

 

3.  The Goals of the Bureau 

 
The Head of the Bureau will submit to the Prime Minister, within 90 days 
of his appointment, a detailed work plan based on the working principles 
outlined by the Chairman of the National Council for Research and 
Development (NCRD), Prof. Maj.-Gen. (Ret.) Isaac Ben Israel, including: 
 

1)  To approach the Council for Higher Education (CHE) and the 
Planning & Budgeting Committee (PBC) and request that they 
examine the possibility of establishing an academic cyberspace 
research center. 
 

- Non Official - 

Page 4 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

2)  To promote the establishment of a national center of knowledge for 

high performance computing.  If the center is academic, the CHE 
and PBC should be approached and asked to examine the matter. 

3)  To establish infrastructure to develop cyber technology, such as 
developing simulation capabilities and national accreditation of 
cyber technology. 

4)  To improve exportation procedures relevant to cyberspace and 

proper oversight of exports in this field. 

 

 

5)  To develop tools for coping with cyberspace emergencies. 

6)  To develop a national cyber defense shell. 

7)  To develop solutions for local cyber defense. 

8)  To develop domestic cyber solutions and technologies. 

 

 

 

 

 

4.  Organizational Structure 

 

1)  Head of the National Cyber Bureau (hereafter: the Head) 

 

i.  The Head will be a specialist with a background and 

experience in the fields related to cyber matters in the State 
of Israel. 
 

ii.  It is encouraged to adopt the recommendation of the Service 

Committee of July 26, 2011, and waive the requirement for 
public tender, on a one-time basis, for the appointment to 
the position of Head, in accordance with Article 21 of the 
Civil Service Law (Appointments) of 1959. 

 

iii.  The Head will be appointed by the Prime Minister for a 

period of three years, with the possibility of extending his 
term for an additional three years. 

iv.  The Head’s salary and conditions of employment will be 

equal to those of a Director-General in a government 
ministry. 

 

v.  Prior to appointment, the Head will undergo a process of 
security clearance as defined in Article 15 of Israel Security 
Service (“Shabak”) Law of 2002. 

 

 

- Non Official - 

Page 5 of 9 

 

 

- Non Official - 

vi.  The Head will be directly subordinate to the Prime Minister.  
This subordination will be reexamined by the Prime Minister 
within two years of the appointment. 

2)  The preliminary organizational structure of the Bureau and the 

method of manning the positions will be coordinated by the Prime 
Minister’s Office and the Civil Service Commission, in accordance 
with the law and as is acceptable in civil service.  The Establishing 
Administration will, within 14 days of this Resolution’s approval, 
coordinate the Bureau’ structure as stated, and will include the 
positions essential to commence the Bureau’ work.  Within 90 days 
of filling the Head’s position, the Head will coordinate with the 
Civil Service Commission and the Ministry of Finance regarding the 
necessary expansion of job positions in the Bureau. 
 

3)  The Deputy Director General of the Prime Minister’s Office will be 

charged with resolving the question of the high salaries needed to 
staff the Bureau.  The solution will be brought to the Prime 
Minister within two weeks.  The Prime Minister will then make a 
decision. 

 

4)  Bureau’ Location 

 
The Prime Minister will decide the location of the Bureau, in 
accordance with the authorities granted him in Government 
Resolution No. 1661 of May 13, 2007 (Article A). 

 

5)  Bureau’ Budget 

 
The budget for establishing and operating the Bureau will not 
exceed NIS 4.5 million in 2011, and will be allocated to the Prime 
Minister’s Office budget from sources in the Ministry of Finance. 
 

6)  The Bureau Establishing Administration (hereafter: the Establishing 

Administration) 
 

i.  The Establishing Administration will work to establish the 

Bureau. 
 

ii.  The Establishing Administration will be established in the 
Prime Minister’s Office by the Deputy Director General of 
the Prime Minister’s Office.  Three job positions will be 
added to the human resources department in the Prime 
Minister’s Office and will become positions in the Bureau 
later on.  The job positions in the Establishing 
Administration will be manned temporarily in accordance 
with the instructions in the Civil Service Regulations. 

- Non Official - 

Page 6 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

iii.  The Establishing Administration’s future activities will be 

determined by the Head upon his appointment. 

 

 

 

- Non Official - 

Page 7 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

 
Addendum B 
 
Regulating Responsibilities for Dealing with the Cyber Field 
 

A.  The Bureau will commence its work once the position of the Head is filled. 

 

B.  The steering committee to protect computerized systems in the State of 

Israel, which operates in the framework of the National Security Council in 
accordance with Resolution 84/B, will continue to operate pending the 
approval of the Government Resolution mentioned in Article E below. 

 

C.  The NCRD will continue its work to advance the work recommendations 
introduced by the NCRD Chairman as detailed in Article 3 of Addendum 
A until the Bureau commences working and in coordination with the head 
of the Establishing Administration. 

 
D.  Upon commencement of the Bureau’ work, Resolution 84/B will be 

amended as follows: in Article 3(A)(1), “National Security Advisor” will be 
replaced by “Head of the National Cyber Bureau”. 

 

E.  The Head will submit a proposal to the government outlining the 

comprehensive defensive concept regarding cyberspace, in coordination 
with the special bodies, which will replace the concept presented in 
Resolution 84/B, including a position on the continued activity of the 
steering committee which operates in accordance with guidelines in 
Resolution 84/B, as well as on the decisions made by the committee 
regarding the need for amended legislation, within 120 days of the 
commencement of work by the Bureau. 

 

F.  The responsibilities, authorities and functions in the civilian field by the 

governmental division responsible for protecting computerized 
information systems, which operates in the framework of Israel Security 
Agency as outlined in Resolution 84/B (hereafter: the governmental 
division), will be updated in coordination with and based on the 
recommendation of the head of Israel Security Agency, in the framework 
of the proposal by the Head to the government, as detailed in Article E of 
this Addendum.  After updating the function, authority and responsibility 
of the governmental division, the Bureau and the governmental division 
will jointly determine a procedure for regulating their shared work within 
120 days of the commencement of work by the Bureau. 

G.  The Bureau and the National Security Council will jointly determine a 

procedure for regulating their shared work.  The procedure will be 
submitted to the Prime Minister for his approval within 120 days of the 
commencement of work by the Bureau. 

 

 

- Non Official - 

Page 8 of 9 

 

- Non Official - 

H.  The Bureau and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will determine a procedure 

for regulating their shared work with regard to international cooperation 
within 120 days of commencement of work by the Bureau. 

I.   Regulating Body  

 

 

1.  Definition: the “regulating body” – a body that has the authority to 

determine, in accordance with all laws and Government 
Resolutions, which of the relevant bodies is responsible for any 
given subject in the cyber field, the scope of their responsibilities 
and the reciprocal relationships between the various bodies.  The 
cyber Bureau will function as a regulating body only in those cases 
where it is clear that there is no party responsible for a given area or 
where there is a lack of coordination due to the multiplicity of 
parties operating in a particular area. 
 

2.  Further to Article 2(r) in Addendum A to this Resolution: 

 

a.  According to this Article, the Bureau’s decision, which will 
be made in accordance with this Resolution, will take effect 
within 30 days of publication, unless a later date is 
determined therein. 
 

b. The head of any relevant body may object to the Bureau's 
decision, in writing, to the Prime Minister, the minister in 
charge and the Bureau. 

 
c.  If the head of a relevant body objects to the Bureau’s 

decision regarding an area under his responsibility, the 
matter in dispute will be brought to the Prime Minister for 
a ruling, and he will make a decision on the matter or bring 
it to the government or the national security ministerial 
committee for discussion within 120 days.  All other 
undisputed areas regularized in the Bureau’s decision in 
accordance with this Article will remain valid. 

d.  If the head of a relevant body objects to the Bureau’s 

decision in accordance with this Article, or part of it, the 
decision, or the part under dispute, will not take effect until 
the ruling in accordance with Article I(2)(C) of this 
Addendum. 

 

  

- Non Official - 

Page 9 of 9 

 

