NATIONAL CYBER
SECURITY STRATEGY

GOVERNMENT OF JAMAICA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Establishment of a robust Governance 
framework to support the cyber security 
landscape | 23

Maintenance of an effective legal framework  
and enforcement capabilities to investigate  
and prosecute cybercrimes | 23

Legal protection in cyberspace | 24

Public education and awareness | 24

Jamaicans are knowledgeable and aware  of 
the cyber risks, as well as, the actions to be 
taken regarding cyber security | 24

Measures are implemented to protect  
vulnerable groups in cyberspace | 24

 

Jamaica has a culture of cyber security | 24

IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW | 26

CONCLUSION | 28

GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 30

ACTIVITIES | 33

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT | 03

LIST OF ACRONYMS | 04

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY | 05

INTRODUCTION | 07
National development and the role of ICT | 09

The Threat of Cybercrime and its impact    
on National Security | 10

Cyber Incidents in Jamaica | 11

Facing the challenge | 11

Existing Cyber Security related efforts | 13

Links with other Policies and Programmes | 14

GUIDING PRINCIPLES | 16

STRATEGY OBJECTIVES | 19
Technical measures | 20

Critical infrastructure systems are resilient in 
the face of current and future cyber threats | 20

National capability for ensuring timely  
and effective response to cyber incidents  
is established and maintained | 21

A risk based approach is applied in establishing 
IT and information security standards, policies 
and guidelines for ICT infrastructure and cyber 
security governance | 21

Leveraging regional and international 
partnerships | 22

Human resource and capacity building | 22

An available pool of skilled and knowledgeable 
professionals in the field of Information 
Security is maintained | 22

Jamaica has an active and dynamic culture  
of research and development | 22

Legal and regulatory | 23

Jamaica is a safe place to do business | 23

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The Jamaican National Cyber Security Strategy was developed with the 
technical support of the Cyber Security Program of the Organization 
of American States (OAS).  This eff ort was made possible thanks to 
the fi nancial contributions of the Governments of Canada, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States of America. Several other organizations 
provided their input and guidance into this project including, among 
others, the Commonwealth Cybercrime Initiative, the Commonwealth 
Telecommunication Organization, and the Global Cyber Security Capacity 
Centre of University of Oxford.

LIST OF ACRONYMS

Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)

Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)

Communication Forensics and Cybercrime Unit (CFCU)

Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT)

Government of Jamaica (GOJ)

Industrial Control Systems (ICS)

Information and Communications Technology (ICT)

Information Technology (IT)

International Telecommunications Union (ITU)

Internet of Things (IoT)

Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF)

Jamaica Information Service (JIS)

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)

Ministry of Education (MOE) 

Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP)

Ministry of Foreign Aff airs and Foreign Trade (MFAFT)

Ministry of Health (MOH) 

Ministry of Justice (MOJ)

Ministry of Labour and Social Security (MLSS)

Ministry of National Security (MNS)

National Cyber Security Task Force (NCSTF)

Offi  ce of Director of Public Prosecution (ODPP)

United Nations Offi  ce of Drugs and Crime (UNODC)

Universal Service Fund (USF)

4

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Strategy recognizes that Information and Communications Technology 
is a necessary tool for national development but with it comes inherent 
risks which must be mitigated against. Cybercrimes have the potential 
to erode confi dence and trust in the economy thereby impairing national 
development.

This Strategy seeks to establish a framework built around  the following 
key areas: i) Technical Measures; ii) Human Resource and Capacity Building; 
iii) Legal and Regulatory; and (iv) Public Education and Awareness.

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY FRAMEWORK

Technical measures

Human resource
and capacity building

Legal and regulatory

Public education
and awareness

Figure 1. National Cyber Security Strategy Objectives 

Technical Measures will seek to ensure that network infrastructure 
and in particular critical infrastructure systems are resilient to cyber 
threats. These eff orts will include the establishment of a Cyber Incident 
Response Team (CIRT). A risk based approach will be adopted whereby 
risk assessments will be undertaken and the necessary preventative 
measures (including the application of best practices and standards) will 
be promoted and adopted by both the private and public sector. 

Human Resource and Capacity Building recognises that establishing and 
sustaining a pool of trained professionals in Information Security will 
assist in ensuring there is national capacity to detect, respond and recover 
from cyber incidents as well as promote local research and development 
in Information Security in Jamaica.

5

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Legal and Regulatory efforts will be focused on examining and undertaking 
reform in the legislative landscape to promote a healthy and safe business 
environment where businesses can thrive and all stakeholders can be 
assured that should they fall victim to cybercrimes there is recourse.

Public Education and Awareness seeks to develop targeted campaigns 
to facilitate each stakeholder group’s understanding the potential threats 
and risks they would likely face and appropriate action they can take to 
protect themselves. The vulnerable in the society are specifically identified 
as requiring special attention.

This Strategy therefore represents a high-level approach to cyber security 
that establishes a range of national objectives and priorities that will be 
achieved within a specified timeframe1. The Strategy seeks to:

 ¡ a and awareness regarding cyber security; and

 ¡ develop a culture of cybersecurity. 

Ultimately the Strategy, will seek to engender confidence in cyber space 
such that Jamaicans can continue to achieve their full potential.

1.  ENISA National Cyber Security Strategies Practical Guide on Development  
Execution-December 2012

a n d 

6

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

Since the liberalization of the Telecommunications sector in 1999, 
phenomenal strides have been made in the area of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT). Jamaica now boasts tele-density in 
excess of 108%; a 100% digital telecommunications network; subma-
rine fibre optic transmission ring around the island; international sub-
marine cable links from Jamaica to Cayman, the Dominican Republic, 
Cuba and Florida; and a competitive ICT sector. 

An additional outcome of liberalization has been the growth of the Business 
Process Outsourcing (BPO) sector. Jamaica has become a highly competitive 
and attractive business destination and a leading contact centre location 
in the English-speaking Caribbean. As at March 2014, the local ICT/BPO 
industry is estimated to be valued at US$230 million, accounting for six per 
cent of the Caribbean and Latin American market. Additionally, there are 
36 ICT/BPO operations employing over 14,000 individuals in the industry 
and is poised to double in size by 20162.

While Jamaica’s tele-density indicates universal access to voice telephony, 
internet penetration and more specifically fixed broadband penetration 
remains low at 4.4% in 2013. Through the Universal Service Fund (USF) 
the Government has and is utilizing various strategies to encourage 
access including the: 

 ¡ establishment of Community Access Points (a total of 181 to date); 

 ¡ establishment of an island-wide broadband wide area network connecting 
secondary schools, libraries and select post offices and health facilities; and

 ¡ deployment of technology in schools through the eLearning and the 
Tablets in School Projects. 

Additionally, it is expected that more consumers will have access to 
broadband with the grant of a licence for the use of the 700 MHz spectrum 
for mobile broadband deployment.

LOCAL ICT/BPO INDUSTRY
IS ESTIMATED TO BE VALUED AT

US$230
MILLION

AND LATIN AMERICAN

MARKET

06%OF THE CARIBBEAN
36 

ICT/BPO
OPERATIONS
BY 2016 IS POISED TO
DOUBLE IN SIZE

2.  Doing Business in Jamaica’s Knowledge Services Sector, JAMPRO, March 2014

8

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

50INTERNET HAS

 BILLION
CONNECTIONS
  [APPROXIMATELY]

 BY 2020
 IT IS PREDICTED TO
 INCREASE TO

13 QUADRILLION

Children with 
Internet access 
at home perform 
better in school 
and are better-
protected against 
online dangers.

Figure 2. www.istock.com

The result of the foregoing is that Jamaicans are and will continue to be 
more connected to each other and to the world. However, with increased 
connectivity and the growing phenomenon of the Internet of Things (IoT) 
come increased threats to the daily operations of individuals and businesses 
alike. In light of estimates indicating that the Internet has approximately 50 
billion “things” connected to it, with the number of connections predicted 
to increase to 13 Quadrillion by the year 20203; Jamaica must be prepared 
to address these threats if it is to continue to utilize ICTs for economic 
and social development.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE ROLE OF ICT
The Government’s vision with respect to ICT is to create a knowledge-
based and educated society which is globally competitive and productive; 
giving rise to the strategic placement of Jamaica as the key ICT hub 
within the region’.4

Additionally, the National Development Plan (Vision 2030)5 has as one of 
its national outcomes a technology enabled society where ICT, as a sector 
and an enabler of other sectors, is utilized to, among other things, drive 
productivity and efficiency and unleash the creative potential of Jamaicans. 

At the centre of Jamaica’s focus on increased use and application of ICT 
is broadband. Several authoritative and global research studies have 
clearly established the link between ICT use and GDP growth6. More 
recently, with broadband being considered critical to economic and social 
development, more and more studies have focused on elaborating this 
link.  Research  undertaken  by  the World  Bank  has  shown  that  the 
development impact of broadband on emerging economies is greater 
than for high-income countries and that broadband has a potentially 
higher growth effect than other ICTs, including wireline telephony and 
mobile telephony7.Additionally, research also suggests that broadband 
access and broadband speed positively affect household incomes8 and 
that children with Internet access at home perform better in school and 
are better-protected against online dangers as they are usually under 
parental guidance9.Jamaica is positioning itself to benefit from the increased 
use of ICTs and broadband and therefore notwithstanding potential security 
threats and the myriad of possible cyber-attacks, it cannot become 
complacent if it is to reap the derivative economic benefit inherent in 
utilizing ICTs. Tangible and workable solutions must be found to create 
a safe environment which engenders confidence in the use of ICTs by 
both citizens and businesses while enabling creativity and innovation.

3.  CISCO 2013 Annual Security Report
4.  Government of Jamaica, Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Policy, prepared 
by the Information and Telecommunications Department, Office of the Prime Minister, March 
2011
5.  Vision 2030-National Developmental Plan Accessed at http://www.vision2030.gov.jm/
6.  David Dean et al., The Digital Manifesto: How Companies and Countries Can Win in the 
Digital Economy, Boston Consulting Group, perspective 27 (January 2012).
7.  Building Broadband: Strategies and Policies for the Developing World, International Bank 
for reconstruction and Development/. World Bank, 2010
8.  Socioeconomic Effects of Broadband Speed– Ericsson, Arthur D. Little and Chalmers 
University of Technology, 2013
9.  The Broadband Challenge, Broadband Commission for Digital Development, Geneva 2011

9

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

 

 

 

THE THREAT OF CYBERCRIME 
AND ITS IMPACT ON NATIONAL SECURITY
The National Security Policy10, states that ‘a fight against crime is therefore 
a fight for development; measures to reduce the social and economic 
damage caused by pervasive crime have to be integral to the developmental 
activities of the state.’ It is also a globally recognized fact that cybercrime 
is a real and present threat to the stability of any society and Jamaica 
is no exception. The scale and sophistication of cybercrime has caused 
many Governments to rethink their strategy in protecting their citizens 
in an increasingly technology driven and dependent global economy.

Cybercriminals usually have clear objectives when launching their exploits. 
They know what information they are seeking or what outcomes they want 
to achieve, and they know the path they need to take to reach these goals. 
These criminals will spend significant time researching their targets, often 
through publicly available information on social networks, and plan their 
objectives strategically. Many of these malicious attacks have sought to 
expose and/or exploit sensitive and confidential information which can have 
detrimental effects for government and critical infrastructure operators. 

There is a thinking that users of the Internet should assume that nothing 
in the cyber world can or should be trusted. Yet organizations in the public 
and private sectors as well as individuals still desire the assurance that 
the technologies they rely on every day can be trusted11.

In recent years increasing amounts of personal and sensitive data, such 
as names, addresses and credit card information, are being harvested by 
businesses. Additionally, increasing amounts of businesses store personal 
and sensitive data on online platforms or other electronic media. As 
massive amounts of data become readily accessible; they have become 
high commodity items to cyber criminals as they can be sold to other 
malicious actors. Consequently individuals, businesses and government 
alike must take adequate precautions to protect their data.

Global trends in cybercrimes demonstrate that the financial sector is the 
sector most targeted by cyber criminals. Their activities include phishing, 
identity theft and the creation of fake banking apps12. The United Nations 
Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) estimate that identity theft is the most 
profitable form of cybercrime, generating perhaps US$1 billion per year in 
revenue on a global basis. The same UNODC report estimated that the cost 
of identity theft using cyber techniques in the United States was US$780 
million13. Additionally, Interpol has stated that more criminals are exploiting 
the speed, convenience and anonymity that modern technologies offer 
in order to commit a diverse range of criminal activities. These include 
attacks against computer data and systems, identity theft, the distribution 
of child sexual abuse images, internet auction fraud, the penetration of 

10.  A New Approach: National Security Policy for Jamaica, 2014
11.  2014 CISCO Annual Security Report
12.  Blurring Boundaries-Trend Micro Predictions for 2014 and Beyond, Accessed at http://
www.trendmicro.com/cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelligence/reports/rpt-trend-micro-
security-predictions-for-2014-and-beyond.pdf
13.  The Economic impact of Cybercrime and Cyber Espionage – Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, July 2013 (McAfee)

Cybercrime 
is a real and 
present threat 
to the stability 
of any society 
and Jamaica 
is no exception.

10

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

-
INTRODUCTION

online financial services, as well as the deployment of viruses, botnets, 
and various email scams such as phishing14.

It is becoming increasingly evident that organized international gangs 
are behind most Internet scams and that cybercrimes’ estimated cost is 
more than that of cocaine, heroin and marijuana trafficking put together15. 
Criminal gangs have recognized that their exposure is less when they 
perpetrate cybercrimes with high profits as opposed to other traditional 
forms of organized crimes. Jamaica’s National Security Policy therefore 
identifies cybercrimes as Tier 1- Clear and present danger, with a high 
impact and high probability of occurrence.16.

Another area often targeted by cybercriminals is critical infrastructure. 
The critical infrastructure national landscape is the bed rock of daily 
operations. The disruption of same has the potential to reduce the flow of 
essential goods and services, impede or impair important economic and 
financial operations, and fundamentally shut down the country. Therefore, 
limiting the vulnerability of critical infrastructure by applying relevant 
security standards, while at the same time assessing the risks, will reduce 
the options available to criminals to attack these systems.

CYBER INCIDENTS IN JAMAICA
In Jamaica the emerging trend indicates an increase in cyber incidents. 
Figure I below shows cybercrimes for the years 2011 and 2012, while 
 Figure II shows cybercrimes for the period January – August 2014. Figure 
III reflects cyber activities reported to the police for the years 2011 and 
2012 but are not offences under the Cybercrimes Act.

In examining our cyber security approach, national security issues cannot 
be ignored. Therefore the necessary support needed for the police, 
intelligence and other national security services to, among other things, 
ensure the maintenance of law and order, to deter, mitigate and protect 
against significant external or internal threats, is critical. It will involve 
ensuring that vital infrastructure is bolstered and resilience is built into 
our social and economic systems so that they can withstand threats17.

FACING THE CHALLENGE
The Government is aware that facing the challenge will be difficult. 
The inherent nature of cybercrime makes it a new paradigm for law 
enforcement agencies. It is recognized that there are existing deficiencies 
in our capacity, processes and technology to properly investigate and 
prosecute these crimes. Additionally, it is recognized that the trans-border 
nature of cybercrime requires international cooperation to assist in the 
prosecution, mitigation and recovery efforts. In this vein, it is recognized 
that the academic community and private sector are critical stakeholders 
in securing our cyberspace and must play a significant role in advancing 
these efforts.

14.  http://www.interpol.int/Crime-areas/Cybercrime/Cybercrime
15.  Norton Cybercrime Report 2011
16.  A New Approach: National Security Policy for Jamaica, 2014, Pg. 10
17.  Ibid. 7

11

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

CYBERCRIMES FOR 2011 AND 2012

25

20

15

10

5

0

s
t
n
e
d
i
c
n

i
 

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
R

25

2011
2012

7

Unauthorized access
Cybercrimes

10

7

8

5

Unauthorized modiﬁcation

Denial of service

Figure 1. Source: Communication Forensics and Cybercrime Unit

CYBERCRIMES FOR JANUARY - AUGUST 2014

4% Access with Intent
9% Aiding and Abetting
1% Denial of Access
7%  Facilitating Commission of an Off ence
1%  Ilegal Possession of Device
15% Making Available Device / Data
63% Unauthorized Access
0% Unlawful Possession Computer Off ence

Figure 2. Source: Communication Forensics and Cybercrime Unit

CYBER INCIDENTS FOR 2011 & 2012

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

Mobile 
Related
(Cell phone) 

Other
digital media 
related

Electronic  
Fraud

Web site 
defacement  

Obscene 
Publication

Cyber-
Defamation 

Cyber-
Impersonation

Cyber-
Threat

Email Fraud

2011

1028

2012

1509

256

564

111

108

0

299

4

10

18

30

11

25

3

0

1

1

Figure 2. Source: Communication Forensics and Cybercrime Unit

12

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

CYBERCRIMES’ ESTIMATED COST 
IS MORE THAN THAT OF COCAINE, 
HEROIN AND MARIJUANA
TRAFFICKING PUT TOGETHER.

EXISTING CYBER SECURITY RELATED EFFORTS 
A lack of understanding of the mandates of the various players within this 
sphere can lead to stove-piped approaches resulting in conflicting legal 
requirements and friction between various organizations and their cyber 
security functions and capabilities18. This Strategy therefore recognizes 
that delineating and correlating the roles and activities of the various 
players is of utmost importance.

Our current reality regarding cyber security activities include:

 ¡ Revision of the Cybercrimes Act, 2010 
Jamaica’s Cybercrimes Act (‘the Act’) was promulgated on March 17, 
2010 to address computer specific offences such as unauthorized 
interception, unauthorized modification of computer program or data 
and unauthorized access to any program or data held in a computer. The 
Act requires that its provisions be reviewed by a Joint Select Committee 
(JSC) of the Houses of Parliament after the expiration of two years from 
the date of its commencement19. An eleven member JSC was established 
in January 2013 to consider and report on the operation of the Act. The 
recommendations made by the Committee for amendments to the Act 
have been adopted by the Houses of Parliament and include increasing the 
penalties for the offences under the Act, as well as, the criminalization of 
actions prejudicing investigations and activities such as computer related 
fraud, forgery and malicious communication. Additionally, provision will be 
made for the forfeiture of computer material which is the subject matter 
of an offence in the event that the person is convicted of the said offence. 

13

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

 ¡ Establishment of a Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT)
The ICT Policy, in addressing the matter of the utilization of ICT for enhanced 
national security, identified as a strategy, the establishment of a CIRT 
to address matters regarding cyber threats and appropriate responses 
thereto. With the assistance of the International Telecommunication Union 
work has commenced on the establishment of a national CIRT and the 
building and deployment of related technical capabilities. The CIRT will 
be domiciled in the Ministry with responsibility for ICT.

 ¡ Establishment of the National Cybersecurity Task Force 
The Government has established a National Cyber Security Task Force 
(NCSTF) comprising a wide cross-section of stakeholders from the public 
and private sector, as well as, academia. The NCSTF will, among other 
things,
 ¡ formulate a strategy to develop, grow and retain high quality cyber talent 
for the national workforce;
 ¡ assist in creating a framework to facilitate the building and enhancement 
of confidence in the use of cyberspace and the protection and security of 
related assets through collaboration amongst all stakeholders; and 
 ¡ establish a public education and awareness programme.

 ¡ Strengthening the capacity of law enforcement officers and prosecutors 
The Communication Forensics and Cybercrime Unit (CFCU) within the 
Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF) was established in December 2010 
with the merger of three (3) Units, namely the Cybercrimes Unit, Digital 
Forensics Unit and Communication Intelligence Unit. The CFCU which has a 
staff complement of 22 provides support for the investigation of all crimes.

 ¡ The Digital Evidence and Cybercrimes Unit in the Office of the Director 
of Public Prosecution (ODPP) was established in 2009 with a view to: 
i.  conducting in-depth research, preparation and prosecution of cybercrimes 
and cases involving digital evidence; and
ii. providing advice to the police and clerk of courts with regards to the 
preparation and prosecution of cybercrimes, as well as cases, involving 
digital evidence.
Since its establishment the Unit has grown to twelve (12) members.

LINKS WITH OTHER POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES
The Cyber Security Strategy will complement the following Government 
of Jamaica (GOJ) policies and programmes:

 ¡ The National Information and Communications Technology Strategy 
2007-2012;

 ¡ The National Development Plan 2030 (Vision 2030 Jamaica); 

 ¡ The Information and Communications Technology Policy 2011; and

 ¡ The National Security Policy 2014.

14

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Identity theft 
is the most 
profitable form 
of cybercrime.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES

GUIDING  
PRINCIPLES

This Strategy is built on the following guiding principles:

 ¡ Leadership: Recognizing that the Government is responsible for policy 
development with respect to the ICT Sector and is one of the largest 
consumers of information technology services, it commits, to driving the 
objectives of this Strategy by adopting best practices in its operations;

 ¡ Shared responsibilities: All users, in enjoying the benefits of ICTs, should 
take reasonable steps to secure their own Information Technology (IT) 
systems, exercise care in the communication and storage of personal 
and sensitive data and respect the data and IT systems of other users. 
This Strategy through its development and implementation supports a 
multi-stakeholder approach with shared responsibility for a secure cyber 
framework; 

 ¡ Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedom: This Strategy will not 
impair citizens’ rights under Chapter 3 of the Constitution;

 ¡ Risk management: In a globalized world where all internet-connected 
systems are potentially vulnerable and where cyber-attacks are difficult 
to detect, absolute cyber security is elusive. A risk-based approach to 
assessing, prioritizing, mitigating and resourcing cyber security activities 
will be applied;

 ¡ Innovation and Business Development: Recognizing the importance 
of innovation and business development to our national economy, a 
cyber-environment that is safe and conducive to such development will 
be fostered; and

 ¡ Sustainable  Resources:  A  sustainable  framework  to  ensure  the 
availability of human capital to meet the growing and changing needs in 
the area of information and cyber security will be fostered.

17

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

A sustainable 
framework to ensure 
the availability 
of human capital (...)
will be fostered

STRATEGY OBJECTIVES

STRATEGY 
OBJECTIVES

This Strategy will pursue four (4) key areas to ensure that Jamaica has 
a robust cyber security framework:

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY FRAMEWORK

Technical measures

Human resource
and capacity building

Legal and regulatory

Public education
and awareness

Figure 2: National Cyber Security Strategy objectives

TECHNICAL MEASURES 

It is important to establish an eff ective technical platform which includes 
both physical infrastructure and human capacity. The key objectives 
identifi ed for this area are:

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS ARE RESILIENT    
IN THE FACE OF CURRENT AND FUTURE CYBER THREATS
The protection of the nation’s critical infrastructure is a priority and 
will of necessity require collaboration of all relevant stakeholders. The 
critical infrastructure community includes public and private entities 
which provide information and services which underpin the social and 
economic well-being of a nation. Today almost all infrastructures are 
becoming increasingly dependent on IT or industrial control systems 
(ICS) and, in many cases, both IT and ICS that guarantee their smooth 
and reliable operations. This Strategy will ensure that action is taken to 
adequately secure these systems from attacks and if penetrated there 
are measures in place for minimal downtime.

20

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

NATIONAL CAPABILITY FOR ENSURING TIMELY  
 
AND EFFECTIVE RESPONSE TO CYBER INCIDENTS  
IS ESTABLISHED AND MAINTAINED 
The timely reporting of cyber security incidents plays an important role in 
enhancing national cyber security. Incident reporting and analysis helps 
authorities to determine what should be the focus of its security measures 
to inform national preparedness, response and recovery efforts. 

 

A national CIRT, with a direct reporting line to the Ministry with portfolio 
responsibility for ICT, will be established. The CIRT’s services will include 
incident response, handling and coordination, vulnerability response and 
coordination, alerts and warnings, threat analysis, security audits and 
assessments, forensics and risk analysis and education and training. In its 
initial stages the CIRT constituents will include all government agencies 
and critical national infrastructure operators. Additionally, the CIRT will 
seek to issue timely alerts on emerging threats to ensure the integrity of 
systems that may be at risk, as well as, build collaborative relationships 
with all sectors to, among other things, foster trust.

The Strategy recognizes that cyber incidents may be as a result of criminal 
activities (cybercrimes) and as such interagency cooperation between 
the national CIRT and law enforcement will be encouraged to ensure 
information sharing is facilitated. A framework will be established to 
exchange information with its constituents regarding cyber breaches and 
possible counter and/or mitigation measures to be deployed.

The CIRT, given its crucial role, will adopt policies for continuous training of its 
staff and upgrading of its software and hardware, in order to remain current.

A RISK BASED APPROACH IS APPLIED IN ESTABLISHING 
IT AND INFORMATION SECURITY STANDARDS, POLICIES 
AND GUIDELINES FOR ICT INFRASTRUCTURE AND CYBER 
SECURITY GOVERNANCE
Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing, and responding 
to risk and then determining an acceptable level of risk for the assets. This 
approach is applicable to both private and public sector assets. All relevant 
public and private organizations must take the necessary measures to 
protect their ICT infrastructure from threats, risks and vulnerabilities. As 
such the establishment of sector specific and general baseline security 
requirements will be established outlining the minimum security standards 
that all organizations in that sector should comply with.

The Strategy will seek to ensure that mechanisms are developed to assess 
existing international best practices in the area of Information Security 
and adapt accordingly to suit local conditions. The adoption of minimum 
standards for sector specific industries should result in the reduction of 
the number of successful attacks.

21

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

LEVERAGING REGIONAL 
AND INTERNATIONAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Many cyber security threats and vulnerabilities are international in nature. 
Cooperation with regional and international partners for purposes of 
information sharing as well as incident response is therefore critical.

 

 

 

 

HUMAN RESOURCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING

In support of the vision of creating a knowledge based society, this Strategy 
will seek to ensure that there exists an available cadre of knowledgeable 
and highly skilled professionals in the area of Information Security. The 
key objectives identifi ed for this area are:

 

 

AN AVAILABLE POOL OF SKILLED    
AND KNOWLEDGEABLE PROFESSIONALS IN THE FIELD   
OF INFORMATION SECURITY IS MAINTAINED
While it is laudable that some of Jamaica’s tertiary institutions off er 
Computer  Science  and/or  Computing  Degrees  which  encapsulate 
Information Security and Network Security programmes, more needs to 
be done. The challenge therefore is to increase the number and availability 
of professionals with a specialization in the discipline of network/cyber 
security. The continuously changing nature of the fi eld requires constant 
training and education. The Strategy will seek to ensure that academia 
supports the growth and development of this fi eld.

Sustainability in the information security ecosystem is crucial and as such 
accreditation and certifi cation of skilled personnel in key positions will be 
pursued. A catalogue of roles, and the relevant educational background 
needed for key positions in Information Security will be developed.
Additionally, a national register with accredited cyber-security professionals 
will be created and maintained.

JAMAICA HAS AN ACTIVE AND DYNAMIC CULTURE  
OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Research and Development among stakeholders in academia, private and 
public sectors will be encouraged. The Government will partner with local, 
regional and international bodies to promote and incentivize innovation 
and creativity in ICT and cyber security solutions. The Strategy will seek 
to explore the possibility of the establishment of a fund for cyber security 
research and development projects. 

 

This knowledge base will be supplemented by an exchange of information on 
experiences and evolving trends which will ensure not only the development 
of innovative products but that ICT security professionals will have timely 
and relevant information at their fi ngertips in order to perform optimally.

22

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

LEGAL AND REGULATORY

In the context of the Government’s thrust to have ICT being an enabler for 
all sectors, there is need to improve the legislative framework to create 
an environment conducive to the effi  cient operation of the public and 
private sectors and provide adequate protection for all. 

JAMAICA IS A SAFE PLACE TO DO BUSINESS
Recognizing that all businesses are aff ected by cyber related issues; it 
is the aim of this Strategy to ensure both online and oﬄ  ine transactions 
are taken into account.  The legislative landscape will be periodically 
reviewed to ensure it is adept to treat with subject areas, such as data 
protection and electronic transaction and authentication and therefore 
support a robust business environment, while remaining compatible with 
international best practices.

ESTABLISHMENT OF A ROBUST GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK 
TO SUPPORT THE CYBER SECURITY LANDSCAPE 
Jamaica, in this increasingly connected, global landscape must be able to 
eff ectively address threats that arise. Recognizing that all stakeholders 
play a role in this, a governance framework that supports a lead entity 
with responsibility for cyber security coordination must be established.

Experience has shown that where there are cross cutting themes between 
multiple agencies with similar responsibilities confusion emerges. It is 
imperative that the roles and responsibilities of both the private and public 
sector in the area of cyber security are clearly outlined. The development 
of a communication mechanism that delineates roles and responsibilities 
of key actors is crucial to the success of this Strategy. 

 

MAINTENANCE OF AN EFFECTIVE LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
AND ENFORCEMENT CAPABILITIES TO INVESTIGATE  
AND PROSECUTE CYBERCRIMES 
It is an act in futility to implement all the measures necessary for 
cyber security and cybercrimes legislation if the capacities of those 
who are required to enforce and prosecute those laws are not taken 
into consideration. The JCF currently has some degree of capacity in 
the area of cybercrimes investigation including computer and mobile 
forensics. Additionally, the ODPP’s Digital Evidence & Cybercrimes Unit 
has training in the prosecution of cybercrimes. However, there is need 
for greater sensitization of and/or training for other arms such as the 
Jamaica Defence Force, prosecutors in the Resident Magistrate Courts, 
as well as, the judiciary. Therefore, there will be targeted sensitization 
and training in cyber security and cybercrimes for these stakeholders.

The legislative framework should support regional and international 
collaboration for example, investigations across borders and successful 
prosecution of trans-border crimes. Additionally, consideration will be 
given to being party to international conventions and mechanisms that 
support Jamaica’s vision and is in line with the Constitution.

23

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

LEGAL PROTECTION IN CYBERSPACE 
There will be dedicated eff orts to ensure that the legislative framework 
for cybercrime adequately addresses emerging threats and trends while 
preserving the right to privacy and other fundamental rights and freedoms. 
There will be no discrimination in the application of the law; as once a 
person falls victim to a cybercrime within the jurisdiction there will be 
legal recourse.

PUBLIC EDUCATION AND AWARENESS

Increasing awareness about cyber-security threats and vulnerabilities and 
their impact on society has become vital. While there has been increased 
adoption of ICT solutions in everyday life, there has not been the same level 
of appreciation of the associated risks involved. Through public education and 
awareness programmes individuals and corporate users can be informed 
of appropriate online behaviour and thus better protect themselves.

 
 

JAMAICANS ARE KNOWLEDGEABLE AND AWARE  
OF THE CYBER RISKS, AS WELL AS, THE ACTIONS  
TO BE TAKEN REGARDING CYBER SECURITY
It is a priority that all Jamaicans should feel confi dent while using various 
online platforms. As the Internet becomes more accessible through various 
devices such as tablets, mobile phones, game consoles, and with the 
advent of the IoT, more personal and fi nancial information will be exposed 
online. In this unregulated space of the Internet, mechanisms must be 
implemented to educate users on the risks and the steps that can be 
taken to mitigate their chances of becoming a victim, as well as, equip 
them with the necessary tools to protect themselves.

Therefore, the national level of awareness about cyber security and the risks 
inherent in the use of the Internet will be assessed and appropriately tailored 
sensitization programmes developed to inform the Jamaican population. 

MEASURES ARE IMPLEMENTED TO PROTECT VULNERABLE 
GROUPS IN CYBERSPACE 
It is the Government’s responsibility to establish measures which protect 
the vulnerable in our society, such as, the elderly, youth and persons 
with disabilities, as they often lack the wherewithal to do so themselves. 
As the guardian of their interests it is the Government’s responsibility 
to ensure that they are not overlooked but are informed and aware of 
the risks. Programmes that will encourage the adoption of safe online 
practices will be developed and the assistance of service providers will 
be sought to provide built in tools to protect this group where possible.

JAMAICA HAS A CULTURE OF CYBER SECURITY 
While, it is important to empower Jamaicans with the information and 
practical tools needed to protect themselves online. It is equally, important 
for individuals to take the security of their own personal data seriously and 

24

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

The development
of a communication 
mechanism that delineates 
roles and responsibilities
of key actors is crucial 
to the success 
of this Strategy.

practice good habits while navigating the Internet, downloading applications 
or sharing information for both business and personal reasons.

 In a similar vein businesses will have to implement measures to ensure 
the protection not only of their data but that of their customers. This 
should extend to employee security awareness and training programs 
especially with the wide adoption of bring your own device (BYOD) policies. 
Employee awareness is critical to the success of any security program. 
It has been noted that adversaries often target employees using social 
engineering schemes and thus businesses should implement effective 
employee training programmes to ensure the integrity of their systems 
is not compromised.

The Strategy will seek to improve the level of awareness of information 
security, monitor and develop information skillsets though a proactive plan 
for communications for all sectors of society. Additionally, businesses will 
be encouraged to adopt self-regulation in the various sectors to ensure 
the security not only of their data but that of their customers.

25

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

IMPLEMENTATION 
AND REVIEW

IMPLEMENTATION  
AND REVIEW

The implementation of the Strategy will be led by the Ministry with 
responsibility for ICT. A detailed outline of the activities associated with 
the aforementioned strategic objectives is annexed. It is intended that 
the Ministry with responsibility for ICT and the NCSTF will develop an 
Implementation Plan to carry out the objectives and activities outlined in 
this Strategy within three (3) months of its adoption. This will involve the 
delineation of specific tasks associated with the objectives and activities 
identified and the allocation of responsibilities to specific entities for 
execution. It is envisioned that the preparation of the Implementation Plan 
will go hand in hand with a review of this Strategy, which will be revised 
and updated every three (3) years or as necessary.

27

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

CONCLUSION

CONCLUSION

As Jamaica embraces the benefits of ICT for socio-economic development 
and seeks to position itself as a regional leader it must adopt and implement 
best practices in cyber security in all facets of its economic and social 
life. Recognising this inextricable interplay between socio-economic 
development goals and national security strategies, this Strategy will play 
an implicit and explicit role in securing the networks needed to support 
the realisation of the nation’s development goals (Figure 3). Tackling the 
issue of cyber security from this holistic approach therefore will ultimately 
impact Jamaica’s vision of having a stable and prosperous economy.

VISION 2030 - 
NATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
PLAN

NATIONAL
ICT POLICY

NATIONAL
CYBER SECURITY
STRATEGY

NATIONAL
SECURITY
POLICY

 
Figure 3. Interplay between national strategies and cyber security

Decisively, this Strategy, following the outlined guiding principles, seeks 
to prepare Jamaica for existing and emerging cyber threats and risks by:

1. Promoting a secure and reliable environment for businesses to develop 
efficient and innovative business solutions;

2. Promoting the development of innovative and cutting-edge solutions 
through the implementation of research and development programmes 
in cyber security;

3. Developing and maintaining efficient capabilities to prevent, detect, 
respond and recover from, malicious attacks while implementing measures 
to provide adequate protection for critical infrastructure as well as the 
vulnerable in our society;

4. Ensuring  that  the  quality  of  education  and  training  meets  the 
developmental needs of the country in a dynamic discipline; and

5. Providing an enabling legal framework that promotes the utilization 
of ICT while penalizing perpetrators when they are caught.

29

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

GLOSSARY  
OF TERMS

In this document, where the context allows, the following terms will have 
the meanings specified below:

Botnet - is a group of Internet-connected personal computers that have 
been infected by a malicious application (malware) that allows a hacker 
to remotely control the infected computers or mobile devices without the 
knowledge of the device owners.

Critical Infrastructure - include systems and assets, whether physical or 
virtual, so critical that the incapacitation or destruction of such systems 
and assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic 
security, national public health or safety, or any combination thereof. This 
may include water and sewage networks, agriculture, health systems, 
emergency services, information technology and telecommunications, 
banking and finance, energy (electrical and wind generated), transportation 
(air, road, port), postal and shipping entities.

Cybercrime – is a crime in which a computer is the object of the crime 
or is used as a tool to commit an offence.

Cyber security - is the implementation of measures to protect ICT 
infrastructure including critical infrastructure from intrusion, unauthorized 
access and includes the adoption of policies, protocols and good practices 
to better govern the use of cyberspace.

Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT) - is a team of dedicated information 
security specialists that prepares for and responds to cyber security breaches.

Denial of Service – is a malicious attempt to make a server or a network 
resource unavailable to users, usually by temporarily interrupting or 
suspending the services of a host connected to the Internet usually by 
flooding the target resource with external communication requests.

Information Security - is the protection of information and information 
systems  from  unauthorized  access,  use,  disclosure,  disruption, 
modification, or destruction. The terms information security, computer 
security and information assurance are understood for these purposes 
as being interchangeable. 

National Cyber Security Task Force (NCSTF) - established in June 2013 
to create a framework to facilitate the building and enhancement of 
confidence in the use of cyberspace and protection and security of related 
assets the through collaboration amongst all the stakeholders; with view 

31

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

to advancing Jamaica’s economic and social interests and maintaining 
national security under all conditions.

Phishing - is the attempt to acquire sensitive information such as usernames, 
passwords, and credit card details (and sometimes, indirectly, money) by 
masquerading as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication.

Self-regulation - is the process whereby an organization is asked, or 
volunteers, to monitor its own adherence to legal, ethical, or safety 
standards, rather than have an outside, independent agency such as a 
governmental entity monitor and enforce those standards. 

Stove-piped – is a structure which largely or entirely restricts the flow of 
information within the organisation to up-down through lines of control, 
inhibiting or preventing cross- organisational communication.

Unauthorized Access – is to gain entry to, instruct, or communicate with 
the logical, arithmetical, or memory function resources of a computer, 
computer system, or computer network without authorization.

Unauthorized Modification –is the unlawful alteration, erasure or addition 
of any program or data to the contents of a computer or computer systems.

32

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

ACTIVITIES

ANNEX

Activities 
Key for Timeline:
Long Term - within 3 years
Medium Term - within 2 years
Short Term - within 1 year

TECHNICAL
MEASURES

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

Medium Term 

MSTEM, eGov Jamaica Ltd 
and owners and operators 
of Critical Infrastructure

Critical infrastructure 
systems are resilient in 
the face of current and 
future cyber threats

1.  Create a robust national response 
and recovery capability for IT systems 
critical infrastructure systems.

2.  Ensure that measures are in place 
to guarantee continuity of operations 
of all critical infrastructures after a 
system compromise.

3.  Promote and encourage 
adherence to international best 
practices among owners and 
operators of critical infrastructure.

4.  Encourage self-regulation by 
the owners and operators of critical 
infrastructure.

5.  Develop a system of reporting 
by owners and operators of critical 
infrastructure to the Government 
of any major security breaches 
detected.

National capability  
for ensuring timely 
and eff ective response 
to cyber incidents is 
established  
 
and maintained 

1.  Establishment of the CIRT with 
operational and administrative 
procedures inclusive of continuous 
monitoring of the national 
infrastructure and networks to 
ensure continuity and development.

Short –Medium 
Term

MSTEM, CIRT

2.  Establish fraternal links to 
international CIRTs with protocols for 
engagement.

3.  Conduct continuous risk 
assessment to determine current and 
future threats, as well as, develop and 
maintain a threat list. 

4.  Issue early warnings to 
stakeholders on a continuous basis to 
reduce exposure to risks.

34

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

5.  Provide future threats analysis 
to critical stakeholders and provide 
information to decision makers to 
guide the allocation of key assets.

6.  Establish a line of communication 
between the CIRT and law 
enforcement when cyber incidents 
are detected for their investigation 
and conversely to the CIRT 
whenever a threat is detected by law 
enforcement.

7.  Development of contingency 
planning methodologies for various 
sectors especially for critical and 
essential services.

8.  Conduct cyber incident  
response exercises.

1.  Assess and research existing IT 
and Information Security standards 
for the protection ICT infrastructure.

2.  Conduct a national vulnerability 
assessment and develop and publish 
standards and guidelines based on 
the results of the assessment.

3.  Implement Government wide IT 
and Information Security standards, 
policies and guidelines and monitor 
and enforce their implementation.

4.  Encourage the adoption and 
implementation of stipulated IT and 
Information security standards, 
policies and guidelines by all 
individuals and institutions. 

1.  Conduct a stakeholder mapping 
exercise and develop a strategic 
outreach programme for the 
engagement of regional and 
international partners.

2.  Utilize regional and international 
cooperation to improve the 
technical capacity of cyber security 
professionals within the government 
and private sector to enhance the 
capability to respond to cyber threats. 

3.  Establish mechanisms for secure 
information sharing with regional and 
international stakeholders. 

4.  Pursue areas of collaboration 
with other CIRTs (regionally and 
internationally).

A risk based approach  
is applied in establishing 
IT and information 
security standards, 
policies and guidelines 
for ICT infrastructure and 
cyber security governance 

Leveraging regional  
and international 
partnerships

35

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Medium-Long 
Term

MSTEM, CIRT, Private 
Sector

Medium Term

MSTEM, MNS, ODPP, 
MFAFT, MOJ, CIRT

HUMAN RESOURCE
AND CAPACITY BUILDING

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

An available 
pool of skilled  
and knowledgeable 
professionals in the ﬁ eld 
of Information Security  
is maintained

1.  Conduct on an ongoing basis 
an assessment of the existing and 
available pool of human resource in 
the area of Information Security. 

2.  Modify school curricula for 
secondary and tertiary students to 
expose and bring focus to information 
security. 

Medium Term

MSTEM, MOE, CIRT, 
MOJ, MNS, OPM, MOFP, 
Educational Institutions, 
Private Sector

3.  Specify minimum professional 
and academic standards for entry 
into employment in the fi eld of 
information security.

4.  Establish targeted training 
in cyber security for specifi c 
stakeholders such as MSMEs, 
members of the public sector, 
judiciary, law enforcement and 
military.

5.  Actively engage in talent 
recruitment initiatives in the cyber 
security fi eld.

6.  Promote careers   
in Information Security.

 

7.  Promote the adoption by all 
stakeholders of human resource 
training policies that will ensure 
continuity of cyber security 
operations and implementation of 
best practices. 

8.  Collaborate and facilitate 
exchanges with other institutions 
with capability and knowledge in 
cyber security.

Jamaica has an active 
and dynamic culture 
of research and 
development 

1.  Foster the development of cyber 
security products and services 
through research and development.

Short- Medium 
Term

MSTEM, CIRT , Private 
Sector and Multilateral and 
Bilateral donors

2.  Develop joint research and 
development projects between 
public and private sectors and 
academia (nationally, regionally and 
internationally) to build innovative 
cyber security solutions. 

3.  Develop a forum to facilitate 
the exchange of knowledge among 
stakeholders.  

36

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

4.  Identify and access available 
resources (national, regional and 
international) that provide capacity 
building for cyber security.

5.  Explore the opportunities for the 
establishment of a fund dedicated to 
capacity building in cyber security 
through public private partnership. 

6.  Promote scholarship programmes 
or funding for the development of 
cyber security innovations.

LEGAL
AND REGULATORY 

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

Short-Medium 
Term

MSTEM, MOJ, MNS

Medium – Long 
Term

MSTEM, MOJ, MNS, JCF 
ODPP, Private Sector

Jamaica is a safe place 
to do business

Establishment of a robust 
Governance framework 
to support cyber security 
landscape

1.  Assess the legislative framework 
that supports cyber security issues 
with a view of identifying gaps   
and recommend measures to fi ll 
these gaps.

2.  Establish a continuous review 
process to ensure that there is 
an updated and robust legislative 
framework that is appropriately 
aligned with international best 
practice and creates a safe 
environment for all activities within 
the cyber domain including:
a. Data Protection
b. Cybercrimes
c. Privacy
d.  Electronic  Transaction  including 
authentication
e. Electronic/digital evidence
f. Intellectual Property

1.  Defi ne and ensure that there is 
a proper governance framework for 
cybersecurity.

2.  Create an environment that 
supports the exchange of information 
in the area of cyber security both 
nationally and internationally.

37

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

Medium – Long 
term

MSTEM, MOJ, MNS, JCF 
ODPP, Civil Society

Short-Medium 
Term

MSTEM, MOJ, MFAFT, MNS

Maintenance of an 
effective legal framework 
and enforcement 
capabilities to investigate 
and prosecute 
cybercrimes

Legal protection  
in cyberspace

 

1.  Broaden and improve the 
capabilities of the bodies responsible 
for investigating and prosecuting 
cybercrimes (including judiciary, law 
enforcement and prosecutors).

2.  Promote the exchange of 
information, intelligence and 
expertise with respect to cybercrimes 
and encourage cooperation with 
national, regional and  
international entities.

3.  Ensure that legal and law 
enforcement professionals have 
access to training that provides 
them with the necessary level of 
knowledge to apply the associated 
legal and technical framework   
more effectively.

4.  Enhance cyber security 
awareness among legal and law 
enforcement professionals about  
the trends in cyber security  
and cybercrime. 

 

1.  Pursue cyber security policies and 
legislation that preserves the right 
to privacy and other fundamentals 
rights and freedoms.

2.  Review legislative landscape 
to ensure adequate protection of 
vulnerable groups within the society, 
such as children, disabled, elderly, 
from cyber threats.

3.  Actively pursue bilateral  
 
and multilateral agreements to 
support law enforcement activities 
in cross border attacks against 
Jamaican citizens. 

38

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

PUBLIC EDUCATION
AND AWARENESS

Objectives

Activities

Timeline

Lead Role

Jamaicans are 
knowledgeable and aware 
of cyber risks, as well as, 
the actions to be taken 
regarding cyber security

1.  Conduct a national assessment on 
the level of awareness and explore 
the various marketing strategies 
to inform the public awareness 
campaign.

Short Term

MSTEM, JIS, MNS, CIRT, 
Private Sector

Medium- Long 
Term

MSTEM, MLSS, MYC, MOH 
Civil Society Groups and 
Private Sector

Ongoing

Long Term

MSTEM, MNS, CIRT, JIS 
Private Sector

Measures are 
implemented to protect 
vulnerable groups    
in cyberspace

Jamaica has a culture  
of cyber security

2.  Launch Public Awareness 
campaign targeted at specifi c groups 
and the general public.

3.  Develop public private 
partnerships and collaborative 
relationships to build awareness in 
cyber security.

1.  Implement programmes that 
promote the adoption of safe 
practices online by vulnerable groups 
within the society including children, 
women, aged, mentally challenged 
and returning residents.

2.  Encourage stakeholders to 
incorporate protective tools and 
measures, targeted at protecting the 
vulnerable groups, into the products 
and services off ered.

1.  Establish a National Cyber 
Security Day, working in tandem with 
other initiatives such as Internet Day, 
with the aim of raising and promoting 
awareness in the key areas of cyber 
security.

2.  Identify and leverage, through 
Private and Public Partnerships at the 
national, regional and international 
levels, existing resources for 
increasing cyber security awareness. 

3.  Ensure that current and applicable 
information related to cyber security 
is easily accessible to the Jamaican 
population.

4.  Establish policies and guidelines 
across the public sector to engrain 
cyber security awareness and best 
practices in the implementation of all 
relevant initiatives and projects.

39

-
National Cyber Security Strategy
Government of Jamaica

