----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

  

                                            Provisional Translation as of September 4, 2015     

                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
CYBERSECURITY  STRATEGY  
                                                 
  
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                             September  4,  2015  
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
               THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  JAPAN  

  

                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 

  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

           

             

           

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

  

                                                                   Contents  

1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1  

2. Understanding on Cyberspace ...................................................................................... 3  

2.1. Benefits of Cyberspace ............................................................................................................... 3  

2.2. Increasing Threats in Cyberspace ......................................................................................... 3  

3. Visions and Objective ....................................................................................................... 5  

4. Basic Principles .................................................................................................................. 8  

4.1. Assurance of the Free Flow of Information ....................................................................... 8  

4.2. The Rule of Law ............................................................................................................................ 8  

4.3. Openness ......................................................................................................................................... 8  

4.4. Self-governance ............................................................................................................................ 9  

4.5. Collaboration among Multi-stakeholders ........................................................................... 9  

5. Policy Measures towards Achieving the Objective .............................................. 11  

5.1. Improvement of Socio-Economic Vitality and Sustainable Development .......... 12  
         5.1.1 Creation of Secured IoT Systems ............................................................................................ 13  
         5.1.2 Promotion of Enterprise Management with a Security Mindset ............................... 15  
         5.1.3 Improvement of Cybersecurity Business Environment ................................................ 18  
5.2. Building a Safe and Secure Society for the People ....................................................... 21  
         5.2.1 Measures for the Protection of the People and Society ................................................. 21  
         5.2.2 Measures for Critical Information Infrastructure Protection ..................................... 25  
         5.2.3 Measures for the Protection of Governmental Bodies ................................................... 29  
5.3. Peace and Stability of the International Community and Japan’s National  
        Security ......................................................................................................................................... 34  
         5.3.1 Ensuring Japan’s National Security........................................................................................ 35  
         5.3.2 Building Peace and Stability of the International Community ................................... 37  
         5.3.3 Cooperation and Collaboration with Countries around the World .......................... 40  
5.4. Cross-Cutting Approaches to Cybersecurity .................................................................. 44  
         5.4.1 Advancement of R&D ................................................................................................................... 44  
         5.4.2 Development and Assurance of Cybersecurity Workforce .......................................... 46  
6. Promotion and Implementation of Cybersecurity Strategy ........................................ 51  

7. Plan Process and Review .............................................................................................. 54  

                                                                                

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

  

                                    1. Introduction  

From  the  late   20th  Century  to  the  early  21st  Century,  the  world  experienced  
irreversible      and    revolutionary       transformations.        As   Gutenberg’s       invention      of  
letterpress  printing  induced  the  explosion  of  knowledge,  the  invention  and  spread  
of  computers  and  the  Internet  have  enabled  people  to  discuss  and  share  thoughts  
throughout  the  world  without   geographic   and  time   constraints.   Composed   of  
countless      computers,      sensors,     and    actuators      that   have    been     networked       by  
information  and  communications  technologies,  cyberspace  has  greatly  expanded  
the activities of people in physical space. The free and interactive exchanges of ideas  
and  opinions  in  cyberspace,  based  on  digital  messages  and  information  sent  from  
every  part  of  the  world,  constitute  the  foundation  of  a  global  democratic  society.  
Additionally,  the  digital  space,  sparking  a  cascade  of  new  business  models  and  
technological innovations, has become a frontier of economic growth.    

In  this  new  sphere  of  cyberspace,  however,  malicious  activities  are  prevailing.  
Stealing  personal,  business,  and  organizational  information  and  assets  has  been  
increasingly  persistent.  There  are  also  growing  threats  against  national  safety  and  
security;  governmental  bodies  and  business  operators,  which  provide  mission- 
critical   information   infrastructure   necessary   for   the   people’s   daily   lives   and  
economic  activities,  have  been  exposed  to  cyber  attacks  that  would  risk  their  
business operations and continuity. In light of such malicious activities, the greatest  
challenge  is  how  to  best  counter  these  threats  and  protect  intellectual  properties  
that are the fruits  of the  creativities and inspirations  of individuals and businesses,  
while  ensuring and  maintaining the free flow  of information that is the  “backbone”  
of  democracy,  the  safe  and  secure  living  environment  of  the  people,  economic  and  
social prosperity, and peace.    

Under   these   circumstances,   Japan   enacted   the   Basic   Act   on   Cybersecurity   in  
November  2014.  This  Act  prescribes  the  concept  of  cybersecurity  and  defines  the  
roles and responsibilities of the Government, local governments, and other relevant  
stakeholders;  it  also  designates  the  Cybersecurity  Strategic  Headquarters  as  the  
command  and  control  body  of  national  cybersecurity,  and  gives  strong  authorities,  
such    as   making      recommendations   to          national     administrative       organs,   to   the  
Cybersecurity  Strategic  Headquarters.  This  mission  document  is  to  be  formulated  
pursuant   to   the   Basic  Act   that   prescribes   the   Government’s   responsibility   to  
establish the Cybersecurity Strategy.  

Looking towards the  Games of the XXXII Olympiad and the Tokyo  2020 Paralympic  
Games   (hereinafter   “Tokyo   2020   Olympic               and    Paralympic       Games”)      and   the  
prospects   further   ahead   for   the   early   2020s,   this   strategy   outlines   the   basic  

                                                      1  

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

  

directions of Japan’s cybersecurity policy for the coming three years approximately.  
To the world, it articulates Japan’s clear vision for cyberspace; and by implementing  
this  strategy, Japan will  endeavor to  ensure  a  free,  fair,  and  secure  cyberspace;  and  
subsequently             contribute          to   the     improvement              of    socio-economic   vitality                  and  
sustainable  development,  the  creation  of  a  society  where  people  can  live  safe  and  
secure  lives,  and  peace  and  stability  of  the  international  community  as  well  as  
national security.    

To  achieve  this  objective,  the  Government  of  Japan  has  laid  out  this  strategy  as  a  
platform for the common understanding and actions of relevant stakeholders.    

     

  

                                                 

                                                                    2  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

  

                  2. Understanding on Cyberspace  

2.1. Benefits of Cyberspace  

Cyberspace  is  an  artificial  domain  for  the  free  exchange  of  ideas  without  regard  to  
national  borders;  it  is  a  digital  frontier  of  infinite  values  generated  by  intellectual  
creations  and  innovations  inspired  by  the  ideas  globally  exchanged.  The  private  
sector-led  investment  and  the  accumulation  of  wisdom  have  been  pivotal  to  the  
rapid  expansion  of  cyberspace; and, today,  cyberspace is an  essential foundation  of  
Japan’s  socio-economic  activities,  as  it  has  attracted  a  great  deal  of  users  due to  its  
non-discriminatory and non-exclusive nature of easy accessibility.    

On the other hand, earthshaking changes provoked by information communications  
technologies  (ICTs) evolution in cyberspace are only in their initial stages. Recently,  
all  kinds  of  “things”  or  physical  objects,  from  personal  computers,  home  electric  
appliances, automobiles, to robots and smart meters, have begun to be connected to  
networks  including  the  Internet,  benefitting  from  advanced  hardware,  such  as  
sensor  devices,  the  widespread  of  affordable  and  high-speed  Internet,  and  the  
advancement of Big Data analytics technologies, and more. Along with the increasing  
connectivity, physical objects and people in real space have become interconnected  
in a multi-layered manner without physical constraints, by harnessing the free flow  
of  information  and  accurate  data  communications  in  cyberspace.  With  this  cyber- 
physical   hybrid,   there   is   an   emergence   of   an   “interconnected   and   converged  
information       society”    where      cyberspace      and    real   space     have    become      highly  
integrated. It is a society that enables the members of the society to create innovative  
services and to generate brand new values exponentially.    

A  free  and  fair  cyberspace  is  a  prerequisite to benefit  from  cyberspace, which  is an  
enabler of the improvement of socio-economic vitality and sustainable development.  

  
2.2. Increasing Threats in Cyberspace  

While cyberspace has brought significant benefits to our lives, malicious activities to  
harm  these  benefits  are  increasing.  Cyberspace,  which  anyone  can  utilize  without  
geographic  and  time  constraints,  gives  advantages  asymmetrically  to  malicious  
attackers,  not  defenders.  At  the  same  time,  the  increasing  dependency  of  socio- 
economic   activities   on   cyberspace   and  the   evolution   of   organized   and   highly  
sophisticated  methods  (modus  operandi)  of  cyber  attacks  that  are  suspected  as  
state-sponsored  have  caused  grave  damages  and  exerted  negative  impacts  on  the  
people’s daily lives and socio-economic activities, and consequently, threats against  
national security have become more serious year after year.    

                                                      3  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

  

Additionally, since malicious activities in cyberspace will cause extensive impact on  
all kinds of connected physical objects and services, and the damage caused by cyber  
attacks  will  spread  more  rapidly  and  widely  in  real  space  due  to  the  arrival  of  the  
interconnected and converged information society, it is anticipated that the people’s  
living will be exposed to more immense cyber threats in the future.    

To  prevent  further  aggravation  of  such  threats,  the  realization  of  “free  and  fair  
cyberspace” must be in parallel with the realization of “secure cyberspace.”  

                                              

                                                                4  

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

  

                              3. Visions and Objective  

                                                                        1 
In accordance with the Basic Act on Cybersecurity , and based on the understanding  
on the  current  state  described  in the  preceding  chapter, Japan has  set the  objective  
of this strategy as follows.  

   Objective:         Ensure          a    free,      fair,    and       secure         cyberspace;            and  
  subsequently             contribute   to   the   improvement                        of   socio-economic  
  vitality and sustainable development, the creation of a society where  
  the  people  can  live  safe  and  secure  lives,  and  peace  and  stability  of  
  the international community as well as national security.     

    
(1) The Cyberspace Japan Aims for  

For the protection  of the freedom  of  expression, the  creation  of innovation, and the  
improvement of socio-economic vitality, cyberspace is required to be a space where  
freedom  is  assured  without  unnecessary  restrictions;  and,  in  which  all  actors  who  
wish to access are neither discriminated nor excluded without any legitimate reason.    

To  prevent  the  people’s  living  and  the  international  community  as  a  whole  from  
being  threatened  by  information  or  property  theft  and  the  malfunction  of  social  
systems posed by cyber attacks, cyberspace has to be a secure space with response  
capabilities  against  such threats, through the  promotion  of  a better  understanding  
on cyberspace among all actors, including individual people and organizations, and  
through each actor’s cooperative and self-motivated activities.    

Japan will  make  its  maximum  effort to  ensure  a free, fair, and  secure  cyberspace  
as illustrated above.    

                                                         

1  The  Basic  Act  on  Cybersecurity  (Act  No.  104  of  November  12,  2014),  Article  1:  “Facing  domestic  and  

foreign changes such as the intensification of threats against cybersecurity on a worldwide scale, and with  
the establishment of the Internet and other advanced information and telecommunications networks and  
the  utilization  of  information  and telecommunications technologies,  and  given the  situation that  it  is  an  
urgent issue to ensure the free flow of information and protect cybersecurity simultaneously, the purpose  
of  this  Act  is  to  comprehensively  and  effectively  promote  cybersecurity  policy  by:  stipulating  basic  
principles  of  national  cybersecurity  policy;  clarifying  the  responsibilities  of  the  Government  of  Japan  
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Government”),  local  governments,  and  other  concerned  public  parties;  
stipulating essential  matters for cybersecurity-related  policies such as cybersecurity strategy formulation;  
and establishing the Cybersecurity Strategic Headquarters and so forth, together with the Basic Act on the  
Formation of an Advanced  Information and Telecommunications  Network Society  (Act.  No.  144 of 2000),  
and as a result, attempting to enhance economic and social vitality, sustainable development and realizing  
social  conditions  where  citizens  can  live  with  a  sense  of  safety  and  security,  and  contributing  to  the  
protection of international  peace and security as well as  national security.”  

                                                           5  

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

  

  
(2) Policy Areas the Strategy Encompasses  

In  the  interconnected  and  converged  information  society,  activities  in  cyberspace  
and  those  in  the  real  world  are  closely  linked.  Ensuring  a  free,  fair,  and  secure  
cyberspace  in  such  hybrid  society  will  make  it  possible  for  individuals  in  the  real  
world  to  spend  their  daily  lives  safely  and  affluently;  for  enterprises  to  engage  in  
vital economic activities; and for the international community to maintain peace and  
stability.  

Japan is committed to ensure the rights and safety of the people, and to strive for the  
socio-economic  development  of  the  nation  as  well  as  building  and  developing  
international  order.  Standing  by  these  ideals,  and  while  undergoing  a  historical  
paradigm  shift  in  the  entire  human  society,  the  Government  of  Japan  has  set  the  
following  three  areas  as  its  policy  goals,  that  are:  the  improvement  of  socio- 
economic vitality and sustainable development; the creation of a society where  
the  people  can  live  safe  and  secure  lives;  and,  peace  and  stability  of  the  
international  community  as  well  as  national  security.  The  Government  will  
implement the Cybersecurity Strategy to reach these goals.  

Needless to say, Japan’s economic growth, crisis management, and national security  
have relied on the sound functions of socio-economic systems, and looming serious  
threats to these  socio-economic  systems  are  challenges to the  nation  as  a whole.  It  

                                                                                                         2 
is a standing policy of the Government of Japan: to promote IT utilization  , to assure  
the growth strategy3  firmly, and to take all possible means to ensure Japan’s national  

            4 
security  , through cybersecurity assurance.    

    
(3) The Future of the Nation the Strategy Envisions  

Targeting the early 2020s blueprinted in this strategy, Japan has ongoing projects to  
promote   the         development          of   highly     advanced        social    infrastructure,         such    as  
autonomous  systems  for  self-driving  cars  and  smart  communities.  Regarding  the  
Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games scheduled in 2020, while there is a very basic  
premise  to  take  all  possible  measures  to  ensure  the  security  of  various  social  

                                                         

2   Declaration to  be the World’s  Most Advanced  IT  Nation  (established on June 14, 2013; revised on June  

24, 2014) indicates: “Under the circumstances, as Japan strives to become the world’s highest level IT- 
based  society,  reinforcing  cyber  security  will  be  imperative  not  only  for  national  security  and  crisis  
management, but also for bolstering Japan’s industrial competitiveness through the use of IT and data.”    

3   National Revitalization Strategy (established on June 24, 2014) indicates: “To ensure the Growth Strategy,  

the free flow of information as well as the safety and reliability in IT usage must be assured…”    

4   National Security Strategy (established on December 17, 2013) indicates: “…cyberspace is necessary for  

promoting  both  economic  growth  and  innovation  through  the  free  flow  of  information  in  cyberspace.  
Protecting cyberspace… is vital to secure  national security.”    

                                                            6  

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

  

systems  supporting  the  Games,  it  will  surely  offer  a  great  opportunity  for  Japan  to  
showcase  its  national  excellence  to  the  outside  world.  Towards  the  coming  future  
where ICTs are interconnected with and embedded in physical objects and services,  
it  should  be  reaffirmed  that  Japan  has  unique  advantages  cultivated  over  long  
periods of time, which have earned global recognition as the “Japan brand,” such as  
the  inventions  of high-quality, technically  superior  products  and  services that have  
satisfied  consumer  confidence  at  home  and  abroad,  and  the  safe  and  secure  social  
systems that have developed by organically integrating these superior products and  
services. What Japan needs is a strategy to leverage these national advantages or the  
“Japan brand” for the improvement of its national competitiveness.    

To  utilize  cyber-physical  integrated  space,  it  is  essential  to  have  capabilities  for  
taking appropriate actions against potential threats hidden behind its convenience;  
and  to  this  end,  “investment”  will  be  required  to  generate  immense  added  values.  
Such   active        “investment”   will            enhance   and          sustain   Japan’s          reliability       in   the  
international  community  for  many years to  come,  and thereby will  enable Japan to  
make progress towards a more affluent society.    

  

    

  

  

                                              

                                                                7  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

  

                                  4. Basic Principles  

Japan affirms the following basic principles in policy planning and implementation  
for reaching the objective of this strategy.    

  
4.1. Assurance of the Free Flow of Information    

The advancement of cyberspace as a hub of creativities and inspirations is relied on  
the  assurance  of the  free  flow  of  information  in  cyberspace. Japan  considers that  it  
is  imperative  to  create  and  ensure  a  cyber  environment  where  the  transmitted  
information will be neither censored nor altered without any legitimate reason, and  
will be delivered to intended recipients.    

In  examining  regulations  in  cyberspace,  the  free  flow  of  information  must  be  fully  
respected,  and  careful  attention  should  be  given  to  the  protection  of  individual  
privacy  as  well. At the same time,  due  considerations  should  be  made  to  maintain  
the proper balance between necessary regulations and the protection of privacy. As  
a  basic  condition  for  the  free  flow  of  information  in  cyberspace,  morality  and  
common sense are requested not to offend rights and interests of others.    

  
4.2. The Rule of Law  

In the  interconnected  and  converged  information  society, the  rule  of law  should be  
thoroughly attained to cyberspace in the same way as it is applied in physical space.  
The  rule  of law  is  essential  for  cyberspace to be  developed  as  a  secure  and  reliable  
space with equal access for everyone. In Japan, cyberspace is governed by laws, rules,  
and  norms.  Similarly,  international  law  and  other  international  rules  and  norms  
should be  applied to  cyberspace  so that  cyberspace would be  also governed by the  
rule of law in an international context.    

Furthermore,  as  cyberspace  has  continued  to  expand  and  it  has  been  utilized  by  
various  actors  all  over the world,  it  is  required to  establish  international  rules  and  
norms  in  conformity  with  universal  values,  such  as  freedom  and  democracy,  for  
peace and stability of the international community.    

Japan  will  continue  to  engage  actively  in  the  development  and  implementation  of  
these  international  rules  and  norms,  and  will  also  act  on  the  steady  acceptance of  
such rules and norms by every country, taking into account its domestic situations.    

  
4.3. Openness    

Cyberspace must not be exclusively dominated by a certain group of actors, but must  

                                                        8  

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

  

be  open  to  all  people  who  want  to  utilize  it. With  its  openness  and by  maintaining  
assured interoperability, cyberspace connects ideas and knowledge, and brings new  
values into the world. At the same time, the majority of people’s access to cyberspace  
must not be denied for political gains of a certain small group.  

  
4.4. Self-governance  

During  the  past  decades,  the  Internet  has  made  progress  powered  by  the  self  - 
governance  of  various  participating  actors.  Even  if  cyber  threats  become  national  
challenges  requiring the  nation’s  all-out  efforts,  it  is  impossible,  and  inappropriate  
as  well,  for  a  government  to  take  all  charges  for  maintaining  order  in  cyberspace.  
With a view to achieving the coexistence of order and creativity in cyberspace, Japan  
respects  self-governance  capabilities  that  the  Internet  has  nurtured,  and  regards  
every  stakeholder’s  self-reliant  activities  for the  Internet  management  as the basic  
foundation of cyber governance, thereby promoting the development and operation  
of a  self-governance mechanism for the fulfillment  of the functions and missions  of  
various social systems connected to cyberspace, and for the deterrence of malicious  
cyber activities.    

  
4.5. Collaboration among Multi-stakeholders  

Cyberspace        is   a  multi-dimensional           space     composed        of   various     stakeholders’  
activities   in   a   variety   of   layers.   From   this  viewpoint,   it   is   necessary   for   the  
Government and all cyberspace-related stakeholders, including Critical Information  
Infrastructure  (CII)  operators,  enterprises,  and  individuals,  to  share  a  common  
vision of cybersecurity and fulfill their organizational responsibilities and duties or  
make individuals’  efforts. The  Government bears a responsibility to foster properly  
coordinated  relationships  among  these  stakeholders.  In  building  such  coordinated  
relationships,  Japan  will  take  dynamic  counteractions  against  cyber  threats,  by  
introducing interactive and real-time information sharing and other actions, taking  
into  account  current  situational  factors,  such  as  fast-growing  sophisticated  cyber  
attacks.    

    
On  these  principles  of  the  strategy,  any  act  of  terrorism  and  other  behaviors  that  
threaten peace, and any act to support terrorism or such destructive behaviors, will  
not  be  tolerated  with  respect  to  the  freedom  of  people;  instead,  these  principles  
should  be  reflected  in   cybersecurity  policies  in  harmony  with  perspectives   of  
people’s  safety  and  security  as  well  as  national  security.  In  line  with  these  five  
principles, and to protect the people’s security and rights, Japan reserves, as options,  
all   viable   and   effective   measures,   i.e.   political,   economic,   technological,   legal,  

                                                         9  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

  

diplomatic,  and  all  other  feasible  means.  Cybersecurity  policies,  as  expected by the  
people,   should   enable   the   coexistence   of   the   freedom   of   expression   and   the  
protection of their privacy; and the protection of their rights by deterring malicious  
actors’  activities  supported  by  timely  and  appropriate  law  enforcement  as  well  as  
the development of other relevant regulatory mechanisms.    

Building  the  state  of  a  world  soundly  governed  by  the  rule  of  law  it  is  a  way  to  
stabilize the  global  market  and  inspire  innovations;  similarly,  it  also  contributes to  
Japan’s national  security as well as peace and  prosperity in the world, as malicious  
actors are not tolerated in such the world.    

  

  

                                                

                                                                  10  

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

  

 5. Policy Measures towards Achieving the Objective  

The   following   are   the   goals   and             directions   of   the   policies   scheduled   to   be  
implemented  in  coming three years,  for  delivering  results  of the  strategy.  They  are  
based  on the five basic principles previously  described and illustrated with respect  
to  each  policy  area  where  the  strategy  contributes.  Each  policy  is  expected  to  be  
consistent with the following three approaches, to the maximum extent feasible.    

  
(1) Being Proactive, not Reactive    

Perpetrators  in  cyberspace  are  always  advancing  their  modus  operandi.  Given  the  
reality that cyberspace has vulnerabilities inherent to itself, Japan will not wait until  
some      damage   would   be           done;     instead,   Japan   will   take          necessary       measures  
proactively, by conducting analyses on future social changes and potential risks.  

  
(2) Acting as a Leader, not Just a Follower    

For  achieving  the  goal  set  in  (1),  with  recognition  that  cyberspace  is  a  space  built  
and  operated  by  actors  of  the  private  sector  as  the  main  driving  forces,  Japan  will  
implement   policies   to           catalyze   their       self-motivated         activities     and   their      own  
initiatives.  At  the  same  time,  Japan  will  undertake  a  leading  role  as  a  responsible  
member  of  the  international  community  and  proactively  contribute  to  peace  and  
stability in cyberspace that is global by nature.    

  
(3) Envisaging Cyber-Physical Space, not Only Cyberspace  

All kinds of physical objects and people have been interconnected by ICTs in a more  
multidimensional  way,  and  the  integration  of  physical  space  and  cyberspace  has  
become  more  intertwined.  Attention  should  be  paid  to  the  fact  that  any  event  in  
cyberspace        affects     society   various        events      including   those        in   physical      space.  
Recognizing  the  transformational  process  leading  to  an  unprecedented  society  
consisting  of the  IoT  systems, Japan will  implement  policies by  precisely  capturing  
such social transformation.    

                                           

                                                           11  

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

  

5.1. Improvement of Socio-Economic Vitality and Sustainable  
       Development  

  
In  the  emerging  interconnected  and  converged  information  society,  all  kinds  of  
physical     objects,     from     personal      computers,       home      electric    appliances       and  
automobiles, to  robots  and  smart  meters,  are  connected to  networks  including the  
Internet.  This  interconnectivity  will  lead  the  emergence  of  transformative  systems  
(Internet  of  Things  systems;  hereinafter  referred  to  as  “IoT  systems”)  that  will  be  
able to develop new services by using Big Data generated in the networks, and so on.  
As the IoT systems will prevail, the integration of cyberspace and physical space will  
become more advanced and intensive.  It is foreseen that  enterprises will  shift their  
efforts  to  create  new  business  by  utilizing  the  IoT  systems  and  adapt  existing  
businesses to this more sophisticated environment. For the improvement of Japan’s  
socio-economic  vitality  and  sustainable  development,  it  is  highly  important  that  
enterprises in Japan will not fail to seize these new business opportunities.    

When enterprises provide new services by using the IoT systems, ensuring “security  
as  a  quality  feature”  is  a  prerequisite.  It  means  that  safety  and  security  are  pre- 
installed  as  essential  service  quality  features,  which  is  expected  by  individual  
customers and business users in the market. Suppose a physical object was remotely  
controlled  by  cyber  attacks  to  make  unplanned  movements;  personal  data  was  
stolen  via  a  wearable  device  that  was  compromised  or  hacked;  or,  a  database  
involving various stakeholders was hit by a single cyber attack and several millions  
or tens of millions of personal and other information were stolen, which resulted in  
causing  serious  social  and  economic  impacts.  Such  risks  closely  connected  to  real  
space would harm the reliability and quality of the IoT-based services. It suggests a  
new challenge to tomorrow’s society at large, that is, how to minimize security risks  
at  an  acceptable  level,  in  counterbalance  with  the  merits  of  the  services  provided  
with the IoT systems.    

In the interconnected and converged information society, for enterprises in Japan to  
lead  the  national  economy  by  realizing  the  creation  of  new  business  and  adapting  
current  businesses  to  the  more  sophisticated  environment,  and  to  bring  about  the  
largest benefits  of the  society  of this kind, it is required to take proactive measures  
in   industry-academia-public             partnerships        to   address      the    above-mentioned  
challenge.  Likewise,  it  is  the  demands  of  the  current  digital  age  to  achieve  higher  
level  security  than  ever  before  as  a  quality  feature  of  services  by  using  Japan’s  
advantages  developed  over  years,  including  the  provision  of  high-quality  services,  
the enterprise management to build stakeholder confidence, and the creation of the  
fair market environment. All of these efforts to meet the new demands will become  

                                                      12  

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

  

a source of corporate values and international competitiveness.    

In this  line  of thought, with  regard to the  IoT  systems  for  realizing  new  services  in  
the interconnected and converged information society, enterprise management, and  
business  environment  supportive for them, the  Government will take the following  
strategic approaches.    

  
5.1.1 Creation of Secured IoT Systems  

Given  the  prospect  for  the  massive  use  of  the  IoT  systems  during  the  Tokyo  2020  
Olympic and Paralympic Games, the success of this world event will not be achieved  
without industry-academia-public coordination to make up-front investments in the  
assurance of high level security as a quality future in the IoT systems. Without such  
joint efforts, it is also difficult for enterprise in Japan to create new business and new  
employment opportunities by utilizing the IoT systems.    

Aiming  at  creating  the  secured  IoT  systems  capable  of  meeting  market  needs  by  
2020,  and  subsequently  enhancing  the  international  reputations  of  Japan’s  IoT  
systems, the Government will make efforts as follows.    

  
(1) Promoting New Business Harnessing Secured IoT Systems  

For  an  IoT  systems-related  new  business  to  become  successful,  it  is  imperative  to  
achieve high level security as a quality feature, which is the base of competitiveness.  
The  IoT  systems will not become intrinsically  secured, however, just by retrofitting  
security,  which  would  rather  cause  a  large  increase  in  cost.  In  this  context,  the  
Government   will   promote   the   idea   of   “Security   by   Design,”   an   approach   to  
incorporate  the  assurance  of  security  into  the  initial  phase  of  the  planning  and  
design of the entire IoT systems that include existing systems as part of them. More  
specifically,   as  to   IoT   systems-related   business,  the   Government  will   promote  
security  measures  for  these  systems  in  a  cross-sectoral  manner,  based  on  the  
Security  by  Design  approach,  and  will  give  its  prioritized  support  to  the  growth  of  
such new business.    

  
(2) Improving Structural Frameworks Concerning IoT Systems Security  

For  the  improvement  of  socio-economic vitality  and  sustainable  development,  it  is  
crucial to stimulate business innovation in IoT systems-related large scale business  
with the  pertinent  cross-industrial  coordination  among  stakeholders  of  industries,  
academia, and the public sector. In this course, such business should be promoted in  
the  Security  by  Design  approach.  To  make  it  possible  for  relevant  stakeholders  to  
collaborate  based   on  mutual   confidence  and   each  stakeholder’s  self-motivated  
activities,  it  is  necessary  to  build  a  common  understanding  on  relevant  matters  

                                                        13  

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

  

regarding  security  measures  required  for  the  business  concerned,  e.g.  the  goals,  
means,  and  time  frames,  and  to  clarify  the  tasks  of  relevant  stakeholders  on  that  
basis.    

  
For example, the development of highly trusted  Intelligent Transport Systems  (ITS)  
concerns multi-stakeholders of industries, academia, and the public sector, including  
relevant  governmental  bodies,  enterprises,  and  research  institutes.  It  is  expected  
that:  these  stakeholders  first  develop  objective  insights  on  both  of  the  coexisting  
advantages and risks, which would be brought by the adoption  of  ITS; second, they  
build  a  common  understanding  on  related  factors,  e.g.  required  security  measures,  
their implementation methods, and time frames; then, based on these recognitions,  
they  make  each  stakeholder’s  tasks  explicit.  In  this  way,  they  can  accelerate  their  
collaborations  based  on  mutual  confidence  and  each  stakeholder’s  self-motivated  
activities, and it will result in effective and high value-added business.    

In this view, among the government-led IoT systems-related large scale business, the  
Cybersecurity  Strategic  Headquarters will handle those possibly having substantial  
impacts  on  socio-economic activities in  order to facilitate program planning, policy  
formulation,   and   overall   coordination   required   for   cross-cutting   cybersecurity  
measures;  this  will  be  done  with  an  aim  to  promote  the  consistent  and  exhaustive  
implementation  of  required  measures,  for  example,  by  promoting  organized  and  
converged coordination among relevant governmental bodies and entities.    

  
(3) Considering Regimes for Enhanced IoT Systems Security  

For the timely  introduction  of the  IoT  systems, which  are  assured with  a high level  
security  as  a  market-expected  quality  feature,  in  the  market,  appropriate  security  
measures  must be taken  in the whole  supply  chain  of the  IoT  systems.  This  means  
that  stakeholders will  need  a  policy  platform to build  a  common  understanding  on  
security     measures        required      for   the    entire     IoT    systems      and    the    individual  
components  of  the  IoT  systems.  In  addition,  they  can  challenge  new  business  
opportunities  more  easily,  if  there  are  safety  guidelines  and/or  reliability  indices,  
including those from security perspectives, as required in progressively introducing  
the   IoT   systems   into  the   market.   For  these   reasons,  the   Government  will,   in  
collaboration  with  industries  and  academia,  establish  comprehensive  guidelines  
and standards for IoT systems security, including the components of the IoT systems,  
such  as  M2M  (Machine  to  Machine)  devices  and  wearable  devices,  in  the  energy,  
automotive, medical, and other relevant industries.    

Meanwhile, it is impracticable to provide the secured IoT systems, unless necessary  
measures  are  taken,   e.g.   releasing  and   installing   security  patches   or   software  
updates,  by  quickly  pinpointing  technical  problems  developing  in  cyberspace.  The  

                                                        14  

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

  

Government  will  seek  measures  for  relevant  parties  to  make  concerted  efforts:  to  
examine  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  IoT  systems  and  devices  comprising  the  IoT  
systems; to encourage the suppliers of the IoT systems and devices to take necessary  
actions to modify detected vulnerabilities; and to elaborate to create specific means  
to inform users  of the  IoT  systems and  devices about  safeguard measures to fix the  
detected  vulnerabilities.  Similarly,  the  Government  will  promote  relevant  parties’  
collaboration  to:  synthesize  and  analyze  the  data  on  security  quality  and  threats  
detected  in the  use-phase  of the  IoT  systems;  feedback the  results  of  synthesis  and  
analysis  to  stakeholders,  such  as  IoT  systems  developers;  and  realize  and  provide  
more secured and higher-quality services.    

  
(4) Implementing Technological Development and Demonstration Related to  
      IoT Systems Security  

For the purpose of the promotion of new business creation utilizing the IoT systems,  
it is necessary to advance technological development and other measures to assure  
security,  by  addressing  risks  associated  with  the  procurement  and  introduction  of  
unreliable   and      cheap     devises,   based      on   the   understanding   that          IoT   system  
components         have    the    characteristics       different     from     those    of   conventional  
information  and  communications  devices,  for  example,  in terms  of longer life  cycle  
from  design  to  disposition  and  limited  throughput  capacity.  From  this  standpoint,  
the  Government  will  work  on  the  development  and  demonstration  of  ICTs, taking  
into account of technical features of IoT system components.    

Besides, it is crucial to take security assurance measures for the entire IoT systems,  
for  the  purpose  of  providing  services  with  immense  added  values  by  using  the  
systems composed of a variety of networked physical objects. The  Government will  
work  on the  development  and  demonstration necessary  for the  examination  of  IoT  
system-related  security measures and  others, including the  development  of  system  
testing     environment,        social    sciences     research,     such     as   the    methodological  
improvement   of   risk   analysis   and   evaluation   on   the   entire   systems,   and   the  
confirmation methods of the authenticity of hardware including IC chips.  

  
5.1.2 Promotion of Enterprise Management with a Security Mindset  

For    the   creation     of   new    business      and    other    business      activities,    enterprise  
management  in the  interconnected  and  converged  information  society  requires,  in  
addition  to  the  existing  cybersecurity  measures,  the  more  comprehensive  and  
higher     standards      of   cybersecurity       measures,       including      the   monitoring       and  
assessment of security risks and appropriate investment decisions on management  
resources;  the  promotion  of  the  adoption  of  security  functions  in  products  and  

                                                      15  

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

  

services;  cybersecurity  human  resources  development;  and  the  improvement  of  
organizational cybersecurity capabilities.    

For   this   reason,   the   following   will   be   undertaken   to   promote   the   enterprise  
management with a security mindset at enterprises in Japan.    

  
(1) Changing the Thinking of Senior Executive Management  

It  is  indispensable  for  enterprise  management  that  senior  executives  utilize  their  
business-critical systems and trade secrets, being aware of their strategic values and  
roles.  In bringing products and  services in which high level  security is  assured as a  
quality   feature  to  the   market,   and   in   making   management   decisions   for   new  
business      creation,    cybersecurity   knowledge   has   become   a   basic   competency  
required  for  enterprise  senior  executives.  For  the  enhancement  of  Japan’s  socio- 
economic  vitality  as  well  as  sustainable  development,  it  is  necessary  that  more  
enterprise  senior  executives  will  grasp  such  societal  changes  precisely,  and  raise  
awareness  of  security  measures  not  as  an  inevitable  “cost”  of  business  but  as  the  
“investment”  for  more  progressive  management.  To  this  end,  the  Government  will  
build  a  guiding  framework  that  enables  stakeholders,  such  as  the  market  and  
investors,  to  properly  evaluate  enterprises’  efforts  to  address  cybersecurity  as  a  
critical management challenge; and a framework that gives financial advantages, e.g.  
fund-raising,  to  enterprises  making  such  efforts.  Similarly,  the  Government  will  
implement  collaborative  awareness  raising  activities  with  the  private  sector  to  
cultivate the cybersecurity understanding of enterprise senior executives.  

Meanwhile, to incorporate cybersecurity in their business strategies, it is necessary  
for  enterprises  to  assign  a  chief  cybersecurity  executive  at  the  board  level.  To  this  
end, the public and private sectors will work together, aiming that Chief Information  
Security  Officer   (CISO)’s  functions  will  be  adequately  positioned  at  the  senior  
executive management level of each enterprise.    

  
(2) Fostering Cybersecurity Workforce for Advanced Management Skills and  
      Competencies  

To leverage  cybersecurity  perspectives  and  capabilities  in  enterprise management,  
it  is   necessary       for   both     senior     executive      management          and     cybersecurity  
professionals  to  share  their  corporate  management  strategy  and  the  directions  of  
cybersecurity challenges and solutions. The Government is planning to promote the  
creation   of  talent   pools   of   intermediators,  who   are   capable   of   understanding  
management          policies     decided     by    senior     executive      management;         presenting  
cybersecurity visions; and facilitating the communications between senior executive  
management and cybersecurity professionals.    

                                                       16  

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

  

As  cybersecurity  measures  have  become  indispensable  in  enterprise  management  
and business strategies, there are increasing organizational needs for enterprises to  
develop cybersecurity talent as their in-house workforce. To respond to such needs,  
the    Government         will   examine       long-term      human       resources      strategies     and  
performance        appraisal     methods,       taking    into   consideration        career    paths     for  
cybersecurity  professionals,  intermediators,  and  senior  executives  responsible for  
enterprise  risk  management  including  cybersecurity  risks,  and  will   encourage  
senior  executive  management to  adopt  such  cybersecurity workforce  development  
policies.    

  
(3) Strengthening Organizational Capabilities    

In the interconnected and converged information society, installing assured security  
in  products  and  services  will  enhance  enterprise  competitiveness  and  will  lay  the  
foundations  for the  continuity  and  progress  of  enterprise  activities.  In this  context,  
the Government will seek to increase the understanding of the value of the “Security  
by  Design”  among  relevant  actors  working  on  products  and  services.  From  the  
viewpoint of the protection of trade secret and business continuity, the Government  
will promote and disseminate information about effective business management, e.g.  
risk-analysis-based  organizational  management,  and will take  necessary  measures  
to   enhance      cybersecurity       throughout       supply     chains    beyond      the   barriers     of  
organizations.    

Moreover,   with       regard   to   the     improvement        of   response      capabilities     against  
cybersecurity incidents, such as cyber attacks that would pose serious business risks  
to enterprises, it is encouraged that enterprises will adopt necessary measures, such  
as creating and operating a CSIRT (Computer Security Incident Response Team) with  
liaison functions for incident detection and response; developing plans and tools for  
rapid  response  to  and  recovery  from  cybersecurity  incidents;  conducting  cyber  
exercises;  and  improving  corporate  business  functions  for  more  effective  public  
communications;  the  Government  will  support  these  efforts  of  enterprises  for  the  
aimed improvement in word and deed.    

In  addition,  the  Government  will  provide  its  support  and  advice  to  enterprises  by  
creating     the    guidelines      of   and    other    information       on    cybersecurity-related  
management,          including      the    improvement          of   organizational        cybersecurity  
mechanisms   under   the   leadership   of   senior   executive   management,   effective  
measures based on the latest trends in cyber attacks and damages, and information  
disclosure  policies;  the  Government  will  also  establish  an  objective  framework  to  
evaluate  enterprises’  activities  taken  on  the  basis  of  such  support  and  advice  with  
certain  evaluation  methods,  such  as  third  party  certification.  As  for  information  
sharing,  including  information  on  measure-related  challenges,  best  practices,  and  

                                                     17  

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

  

the  latest  trends  in  cyber  threats  and  incidents,  the  Government  will  support  the  
further advancement and expansion of information sharing networks in the private  
sector  and  between  the  public-private  sectors,  including  platform  building  for  
information sharing, by actively utilizing incorporated administrative agencies with  
cybersecurity-related  knowledge  and  experiences,  as  well  as  organizations  and  
other  entities  with  incident  information  sharing  and  analysis  functions,  e.g.  ISACs  
(Information Sharing and Analysis Centers).    

  
5.1.3 Improvement of Cybersecurity Business Environment  

For  Japan’s   IoT   Industry 5   and   other   ICTs-based   digital  businesses  to  become  

internationally   competitive   and   subsequently   become   the   engines   of   national  
economy,   and   for   Japan   to   build   capacities   for   the   self-reliant   assurance   of  
cybersecurity,   it   is   required   to:   improve   domestic   environment   necessary   for  
cybersecurity-related businesses to become as a growth industry; and develop a fair  
market  environment  in  Japan  as  a  basis  of  every  business.  The  Government  will  
implement   the         following      measures,       aiming   at   the      improvement          of   business  
environment           where       assured        cybersecurity          and      enhanced         international  
competitiveness of enterprises in Japan can be achieved.    

    
(1)   Promoting Cybersecurity-related Businesses  

Along with the growing IoT industry and associated businesses, it is anticipated that  
the  demand  for  cybersecurity-related  businesses,  including  consulting  and  human  
resources   development   business,  will   be   further   increased   in  the   future.   The  
Government will support the development of cybersecurity businesses, for example,  
by  fostering  enterprises  having  a  potential  for  a  large  scale  business  at  home  and  
abroad, venture business, and other prospective businesses, so that they could meet  
the increasing demand and become a growth industry as a whole.    

Initially, for the development of global networks to collect cyber-related information  
and  for  the  promotion  of  intelligent  business  with  data  analysis  and  information  
service capabilities in this regard, the Government will work on to establish leading  
projects  of  Japan’s  cybersecurity-related  businesses,  by  taking  measures,  such  as  
extensive  and  intensive  investment  using  sovereign  wealth  funds  (SWFs)  in  the  
cybersecurity field.    

Meanwhile,  given  that  the  utilization  of  secured  cloud  services  is  considered  to  be  
effective  for   small  and   medium   sized   enterprises  and   other   entities  having  a  

                                                         

5   Industry related to IoT systems, including the provision of devices and services.    

                                                         18  

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

  

difficulty     in   building       sufficient     security      environments          by    themselves,        the  
Government will promote the wide implementation of relevant measures, including  
security audit regarding cloud services.    

Additionally, in the cybersecurity field that requires high maneuverability to address  
its  constant  changes, it is  critical to vitalize business venture and  other  enterprises  
striving for innovative new business and technological development. For this reason,  
the  Government  will  utilize  SWFs  to  undertake  such  activities  as  the  promotion  of  
collaborative  research  and  development  (R&D),  including  international  exchange  
programs among domestic and foreign venture enterprises; the promotion of public  
research  institutes  and  venture  enterprises;  and  nurturing  venture  enterprises  by  
taking advantages of R&D achievements.    

Furthermore,   to   promote   cybersecurity-related   businesses,   it   is   necessary   to  
undertake the review of the existing mechanisms flexibly. The Government will work  
on necessary reviews, including the clarification of the applicability of the copyright  
law   to   reverse   engineering 6   for   security   purposes   and   the   reexamination   of  

necessary mechanisms.    

  
(2) Developing Fair Business Environment  

For building  economic  systems that always  spur innovation and produce  corporate  
profits,  it  is  essential  to  protect  the  values  of  technological  information,  including  
enterprises’   core  technologies  and  production   expertise.  The   Government  will  
implement         necessary       measures,       including      legislative     measures        to   safeguard  
enterprises’ intellectual property more firmly and to enhance the measures taken in  
the   case   of  violations;  awareness   raising  activities;  and  practical  training  and  
exercises.   Besides   that,   the   Government   will   take   a   strict   action   against   any  
reprehensible  conduct  using  security  as  an  excuse  or  a  reason to  produce  negative  
effects on international trade rules and agreements.    

  
(3) Improving Environment for Japanese Enterprises’ Global Operations  

For  Japan’s  Internet  of  Things  industry  and  cybersecurity-related  businesses  to  
become internationally competitive and subsequently lead the national economy as  
a   growth      industry,   Japan’s   policy   perspectives             in   this   regard     must   be   fully  
incorporated in international frameworks, including international rules and norms.  
Working  in  tandem  with  industries  and  academia,  the  Government  will  act  as  a  
global     leader     in   international        discussion       for   establishing       the    international  

                                                         

6  A practice or a process of analyzing and disassembling software and hardware to uncover structures,  

specifications, purposes, element technology, and others.    

                                                         19  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

  

frameworks of mutual recognition arrangement regarding the international security  
standards as well as the evaluation and certification mechanisms of the IoT systems,  
including  control units; the  Government will also work  on information  sharing and  
the dissemination of Japan’s best practices in international settings.    

For  the  international  operations  of  Japan’s  IoT  industry  and  cybersecurity-related  
businesses, it is  essential to assure  security in  social infrastructure abroad,  such as  
the security of data produced and circulated in the IoT systems. From this standpoint  
of view, the Government will support the development of necessary mechanisms for  
cybersecurity  as  well  as  outreach  and  awareness  activities  in  the  Association  of  
Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  and  other  countries  that  have  strong  economic  
ties with Japan.  

                                                             7 
In  addition,  so-called  “supply  chain  risk   management”  has become  critical,  as the  
international  operations  of  Japanese  enterprises  have  expanded  in  recent  years.  
Taking   it   into   consideration,   the   Government   will   promote   supply   chain   risk  
management,  for  example,  by  promoting  necessary  R&D  as  well  as  bilateral  and  
regional cooperation with ASEAN and other countries.    

     

                                             

                                                         

7   Risks existing in the processes of design, production, procurement, installation, and operation of devises  

(including  IC  chips)  and systems; these risks include a risk that viruses and malicious programs might be  
installed during these processes.    

                                                              20  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

  

5.2. Building a Safe and Secure Society for the People  

  
In recent years, there have been a growing number of incidents seriously threatening  
the people’s living, particularly, the security of individual personal information and  
properties;  and  associated  damages  have  become  more  grave  and  widespread.  
Under  the  circumstances  in  which  the  cyberspace  environment  will  be  further  
drastically evolving, e.g., with the expanding IoT systems and the launch of the Social  
Security  and  Tax  Number  System  (the  My  Number  system)  operation,  a  safe  and  
secure  society  for the  people  cannot be built,  unless  multi-layered  cybersecurity  is  
assured      by    relevant      multi-stakeholders,          from     governmental         entities,     local  
governments, and cyber-related business operators, to private enterprises and each  
individual citizen.    

The  functions  and  services  of  CII  and  those  of  the  governmental  bodies  are  the  
mission-critical infrastructure for the people’s living and  socio-economic activities.  
Since  it  is  highly  likely  that  any  interruption  of  these  functions  and  services  will  
cause  direct  and  significant  consequences  to  the  people’s  safety  and  security,  it  is  
crucial  to  take  all  possible  measures  to  address  and  prevent  such  events.  It  is  
necessary  to  take  approaches  based  on  “mission  assurance”  in  which  mission  
owners  should  analyze  risks  and  should  have  discussions  with  asset  owners  from  
the viewpoint  to  accomplish  the  functions  and  services  of  CII  or  the  governmental  
bodies.  Mission  owners  should  ask  comprehensive  decisions  of  senior  executives,  
providing information on vulnerabilities including resultant risks.    

While     Japan     will   certainly      draw     the   world’s     attention      towards      the    major  
international events, including the Tokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games, it is  
anticipated that these events will attract malicious actors’ attention for cyber attacks  
and other cyber-related threats. As a matter of national prestige, Japan is determined  
to   make      concentrated        efforts    to   address      cybersecurity        concerns,      in   close  
coordination among relevant stakeholders. Further, Japan will maintain and advance  
knowledge,  skills,  and  experiences  to  be  gained  from  these  future  occasions,  as  
precious national assets that will be meaningfully utilized for the people’s safety and  
security.  

In  this  view,  aiming  at  responding  to  cyber  threats  and  subsequently  building  a  
society  where  the  people   can  live  safe  and  secure  lives,  the   Government  will  
implement the following measures.  

                                                                               
5.2.1 Measures for the Protection of the People and Society  

Protecting the people and society from cyber threats requires the seamless, secure,  

                                                       21  

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

  

and  stable provision  of devices and  services  comprising  cyberspace, as the  essence  
of a safe environment for cyberspace users. It also requires self-motivated efforts of  
cyberspace users, including individuals, enterprises, and organizations, to raise their  
cybersecurity awareness and literacy, and take  cybersecurity  measures voluntarily.  
Additionally, for inhibiting malicious behaviors and other threats in cyberspace, it is  
crucial  to  enhance  necessary  measures  proactively  to  track  incidents  and  prevent  
the recurrence of the incidents, together with preventive measures against potential  
crimes and threats in cyberspace.  

    
(1) Building a Safe and Secure Cyber Environment for Users  

Private     enterprises,      including     digital    device    manufacturers,         Internet     service  
providers,  network  management  business  operators,  and  software  developers,  are  
the  major  providers  of  the  components  of  cyberspace,  such  as  devices,  networks,  
and applications. Similarly, tools to deal with cyber risks are also provided mainly by  
the private sector.    

Besides a pursuit for convenience, being mindful of their responsibility to eliminate  
vulnerabilities  in  all  of  their  services  and  products,  these  cybersecurity-related  
business operators are encouraged to take the Security by Design approach by which  
security assurance is embedded into the initial phase of system planning and design,  
and   give   adequate   explanation   about  this   embedded   security   feature  to  their  
customers.  They  are  also  encouraged  to  make  their  efforts,  in  close  coordination  
with the  Government  and  relevant governmental  entities, to  improve  cyber  attack- 
related  incident  detection  and  analysis  functions,  and  take  necessary  actions,  such  
as issuing security alerts and tips for their customers and general users.    

Therefore,      the    Government         will    enhance      information        gathering      regarding  
vulnerabilities, e.g. software vulnerabilities; and the coordination and enhancement  
of monitoring systems to detect various cyber attacks on the Internet.    

In  order  to  protect  the  users  of  cyberspace  from  cyber  risks  which  require  urgent  
attention,  such  as  a  possible  exploitation  of  vulnerable  devices  for  being  used  as  
springboards        of  cyber     attacks,    and    to  build    a   safe   and    beneficial     Internet  
environment,  the  Government  will  elaborate  necessary  measures  to  prevent  a  
damage possibly induced by malware infection, in addition to provide security alerts  
and tips for the users of compromised devices.  

Furthermore,        there    are    ongoing     efforts    towards      2020     to   improve      Internet  
communications  environments  for  foreign visitors  coming  to  Japan,  e.g.  expanding  
public   Wi-Fi   spots.   Under   the   circumstances,   the   Government   will   reexamine  
necessary      measures       from   the   viewpoints        of   cybersecurity       as   well   as   user- 
friendliness.    

                                                      22  

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

  

  
(2) Promoting Security Measures Taken by Users of Cyberspace    

Regarding  the   Internet  use  with  personal   computers,  smartphones,  and   other  
devices,  on  the  one  hand,  public  awareness  and  knowledge  of  cybersecurity  has  
hardly  reached  a  sufficient  level;  there  is  another  concern,  on  the  other  hand,  in  
current environment where cyber risks have become more complex and diversified,  
that Internet users with insufficient cybersecurity awareness would become victims  
and  end  up  becoming  offenders  and  causing  subsequent  cybersecurity  incidents  
unknowingly.    

To  address  such  concerns,  and  to  support  the  self-help  efforts  of  the  public  or  
Internet   users,  the   Government  will   promote   outreach   and   awareness   raising  
activities  in  coordination  with  relevant  stakeholders,  such  as  the  “Cybersecurity  
Awareness  Month”  and  awareness  raising  of  appropriate  actions  against  malware  
and  suspicious  emails.  Particularly,  the  Government  is  planning  awareness  raising  
activities for the youth, more specifically those who are just about to begin to use the  
Internet,  along  with  their  parents  or  guardians.  Additional  efforts  will  be  made  to  
promote  tailored  awareness  raising  activities  for  those  who  do  not  belong  to  any  
organizations,  such  as  a  school  or  a  company,  for  they  often  do  not  have  enough  
opportunity to learn about cyber threats and cybersecurity measures. Moreover, the  
Government will continue to drive human resources development policies to foster  
cyber experts who are capable of answering Internet users’ questions and concerns,  
as well as the activities of these cyber experts.    

In  addition  to  comprehensive  awareness  raising  activities  for  the  public  at  large  
implemented  by  the  Government  and  its  relevant  entities,  it  is  encouraged  to  
revitalize local community-based outreach and awareness raising activities, for such  
activities  are  suitable to take  multifaceted  approaches to  meet  diversified  needs  of  
the people who have different backgrounds in terms of age-groups, occupations, life  
styles,  and  others. The  Government’s  actions will  include  strong  support  for  grass- 
roots  local  activities  that  enable  the  promotion  of  outreach  and  awareness  raising  
activities at the local level in  collaboration among multi-stakeholders  of industries,  
academia, and the public and private sectors.  

For the assurance of the people’s security and safety, it is critical to raise awareness  
not  only  for  individuals  but  also  for  organizations  and  entities,  such  as  private  
enterprises or organizations engaging in a wide variety of economic activities, local  
governments   responsible   for   administrative   services   directly   related   to   local  
residents,  and  public  entities  including  educational  organizations  handling  huge  
volumes  of  personal  information  of  students,  school  children,  and  their  parents  or  
guardians.  Especially,  for  organizations  and  entities  which  have  difficulties  to  take  
necessary  cybersecurity  measures by themselves,  such  as  small  and  medium  sized  

                                                       23  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

  

enterprises      and    small    local   public     entities,   the   Government   will         strengthen  
necessary  measures,  taking  into  consideration  that  they  require  the  collaborated  
efforts    of  the    stakeholders       of   the   Government,        relevant     entities,    industrial  
organizations,  and  others,  to  support  awareness  raising  measures,  including  the  
organization   of  seminars,  the  formulation  and   dissemination   of   cybersecurity- 
related   guidelines,   the   improvement   of   the   structures   to   share   cybersecurity  
information  concerning  the  latest  methods  of  cyber  attacks  and  other  relevant  
matters, and the implementation of training and exercises.    

    
(3) Enhancing Measures against Cybercrimes  

Along  with  the  enhanced  interconnectivity  of  cyberspace  and  physical  space,  the  
number  of  cybersecurity  incidents  closely  related  to  individuals  and  enterprises  
such as illegal money transfers by exploiting  Internet banking, stealing information  
by  targeted  attacks,  and  phishing  has  drastically  grown.  There  is  also  a  rise  in  the  
number  of  personal  or  confidential  information  theft,  among  which  a  large-scale  
personal data breach is one of the most serious cybersecurity incidents; as a result,  
these    increasing      cybercrimes       have   become       serious     social    concerns.   Without  
advanced cybercrime response and investigative capabilities, it is difficult to capture  
the    reality    of  malicious      cybercrimes,        control    cybercrimes        appropriately       in  
accordance  with   laws   and   statutes,   and   be   ready  to   handle   new   methods   of  
cybercrimes that would likely emerge in the near future.    

For  these  reasons, the  Government  will  strengthen:  the  improvement  of  structural  
arrangements  for  the  enhancement  of  information  gathering  to  obtain  a  better  
understanding         of    cyber     threats;     the    improvement          of    cybercrime-related  
investigative capabilities; cybercrime control, international coordination and more.  
In   addition,   since   advanced   technical   knowledge   is   essential   to   investigation,  
cybercrime control, and the prevention of damage and/or the spread of damage, the  
Government  will  advance  accumulation  of  necessary  know-how  and  technologies  
and  other  necessary  skills  by  improving  the  organizational  structures  for  digital  
forensics,  such  as  the  technological  advancement  for  malware  analysis  and  the  
sophistication  of  Internet-based  data  acquisition.  Likewise,  the  Government  will  
soundly  strengthen human  resources  development  and technological  development  
to   this   end.   Furthermore,   for   the   purposes           of  cybercrime   investigation   and  
prevention, the Government will aim at the active use of knowledge and experiences  
of   the   private   sector   and   the   enhanced   public-private   partnerships   including  
personnel exchange programs between the public and private sectors.  

Since cooperation from cyber-related enterprises is indispensable for the assurance  
of  cybercrime  traceability,  the  Government  will  take  measures  necessary  to  make  
progress  in this  area.  Especially with  regard to the  management  of  stored log  data,  

                                                      24  

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

  

the  Government  will  encourage  relevant  private  enterprises  to  take  appropriate  
actions based on the revision of the “Guidelines for Personal Information Protection  

                                                 8 
in Telecommunications Business.”     

  
5.2.2 Measures for Critical Information Infrastructure Protection  

Various   kinds   of   social   infrastructures   have   ensured   the   people’s   living   and  
economic activities, and a wide range of information systems has been used for the  
functions of these social infrastructures. In the circumstances, the public and private  
sectors      must      work      together      to    protect      CII,   in   particular,      information         and  
communications  services,  electric  power  supply  services,  and  financial  services,  of  
which  the  functional  failure  or  deterioration  would  risk  enormous  impacts  to  the  
people’s  living  conditions  and  economic  activities.  Such  task  cannot  be  entirely  
designated to the  Government as a sole stakeholder, leaving the private sector with  
no responsibility, or vice versa; rather, it calls for strong public-private partnerships.  
As  CII  is  required  to  provide  a  continuous  supply  of  service,  for  its  protection,  it  is  
crucial to reduce the occurrence of system failures caused by cyber attacks or other  
reasons to the minimum  extent; it is also  crucial to  carry  out  early  detection  of any  
system failure and prompt recovery from damage or failure.  

The   Government   established  the  third   edition   of  the   “Basic   Policy   of   Critical  
Information         Infrastructure         Protection  9      ”   and     identified      critical     information  
infrastructure  sectors10.  Based  on this  CII policy, the  Government has implemented  

various  measures,  including  the  enhancement  of  safety  standards  and  awareness  
raising,  the  implementation  of  training  and  exercises,  and  the  improvement  of  
information sharing arrangement between the public and private sectors.    

Having      achieved       substantial        results     in   protecting   Japan’s         CII,   these     existing  
measures will be implemented as they have been. Meanwhile, these measures would  
easily  lose  their  effectiveness  and  become  obsolete  without  any  modification  to  

                                                         

8  2004 Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications Bulletin No.695. The Guidelines were established  

with  the  purposes  of  improving  the  user-friendliness  of  telecommunications  services  and  protecting  
consumers’  rights  and  interests,  by  establishing  basic  procedures  respected  by  telecommunications  
business  operators  in terms  of  proper  handling  of  information  considered  as  secrecy of communications  
and other  personal information.    

9   Established on May 19, 2014 by the Information Security Policy Council: revised on May 25, 2015 by the  

Cybersecurity Strategic Headquarters    

10   Information and communications services, financial services, aviation services, railway services, electric  

power  supply  services,  gas  supply  services,  government  and  administrative  services  (including  local  
governments), medical services, water services, logistics services, chemical industries, credit card services,  
and petroleum industries.    

                                                           25  

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

  

match the needs of the constantly diversified social and technological environments  
related to CII. The Government will make efforts to regularly reexamine the existing  
measures  and  activities  as  indicated  in  the  following  sections,  and  coordinate  and  
promote the specific approaches of strengthening cybersecurity for those measures  
and   activities.   Meanwhile,   CII   operators   and   their   competent   ministries   have  
conducted critical information infrastructure protection (CIIP) against cyber attacks  
by  setting  the  safety  standards,  including  mandatory  standards  and  guidelines;  to  
this  extent,  with  regard  to  CII  sectors  having  the  original  standards  of  service  
maintenance  and  safety  assurance  stipulated  by  a  specific  law  regulating  a  certain  
industry,  the  Government  will  carry  out  a  constant  review  of  the  safety  standards,  
taking account of current environmental changes in cyberspace.    

  
(1) Conducting Constant Review on the Scope of CIIP    

Due  to  social  environmental  changes,  the  accumulated  relevant  knowledge  and  
experiences, and more, it has become necessary to include a certain sector, which is  
not  currently  identified  as  a  CII,  in the  CII  sectors,  as the  impact  of the  information  
system failure  of the  said  sector is assumed to be  serious.  For this, the  Government  
will conduct a constant review on CII itself. It should be noted that it is not necessary  
for the newly added CII sector to implement exactly the same CIIP measures as other  
incumbent CII sectors have done; because of an increasing number of the CII sectors,  
it becomes presumably difficult, too, to implement common measures across the CII  
sectors.  From these standpoints, the  Government will take necessary actions based  
on  the  characteristics  of  each  sector,  such  as  the  degree  of  interdependence  with  
other sector(s), the services it has provided, and any law concerning that sector. For  
example, the classification of the CII sectors may be one possible way of such review.    

Meanwhile,  as  for  the  current  CII  sectors,  for  more  reliable  and  secured  service  
provision, it is essential to assure “cross-cutting sector-wide protection”, rather than  
“pinpoint  protection”  with  each  CII  operator’s  limited  effort.  In  this  sense,  the  
Government  will  conduct  a  review  on  the  scope  of  CII  operators  regularly.  For  
example,   the   measures   exclusively   applied   to   the   major   operators   would   be  
expansively applied to small and medium sized enterprises; or, they would be more  
inclusively  applied  to  peripheral  businesses,  too,  such  as  relevant  outsourcing  
contractors and major affiliated businesses that are indirectly related to the services  
provided by the CII operators.    

In   addition,   consideration   should   be   made   to   provide   protection   for   private  
enterprises outside the CII sectors, since CII is not the single target of cyber attacks.  
With  regard  to  Japan’s  leading  enterprises  and  those  critical  to  national  security,  
including  those  requiring  certain  measures,  e.g.  the  physical  protection  of  nuclear  
materials,  the   Government  will   further   consider   necessary   measures,   such   as  

                                                       26  

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

  

enhanced  information  sharing  arrangements, whether  or  not these  enterprises  fall  
in the definition of CII.    

  
(2) Ensuring Effective and Prompt Information Sharing  

As cyber attacks have become more complex and sophisticated, in order to counter  
diversified  cyber  threats  appropriately,  the  public  and  private  sectors  must  closely  
collaborate  in  sharing  information  on  system  failures  possibly  caused  by  cyber  
attacks.  To  make  information  sharing  more  active,  it  is  essential  to  relieve  CII  
operators’  psychological  burden  of  possibly  losing  credit  or  ruining  reputation  of  
their  businesses  if  providing  information  to  others;  and  enable  them  to  recognize  
the  advantages  of  such  action.  The  Government  will  build  consensus  on  necessary  
modification,  such as  concealing informers’ identities and  specifying the  scope and  
limit  of  information to be  shared,  and  create  an  environment where  informers will  
not suffer any unreasonable loss or disadvantage from providing information. As for  
those  handling  the  provided   information,  they  are   required  to  have  adequate  
information analysis capabilities; and issue security warnings and alerts in a timely  
and  appropriate  manner  based  on  the  provided  information.  The  Government  will  
strive  to  create  an  interactive  and  advanced  information  sharing  environment,  
including building platforms as a basis of collecting, analyzing, and sharing provided  
information so that CII operators can properly obtain information necessary for CIIP  
from cyber attacks.    

In view  of the year  2020,  more  effective  and  faster  information  sharing  is  required  
in  building  a  world-class  defense  framework  against  cyber  attacks.  Given  that  it  is  
effective to collect not only information on system failures at or above a certain level,  
which are subjected to reporting by a specific law regulating a certain industry and  
others, but  also  information  on  minor  system  failures  as well  as those  showing the  
signs of cyber attacks or predicting cyber attacks, the Government has made efforts  
to  collect  such  information, based  on  a  consensus  among  relevant  stakeholders;  in  
the   circumstances,  the   National   center   of   Incident   readiness  and   Strategy  for  
Cybersecurity  (NISC)  and  the  competent  ministries  of  CII  operators  will  work  in  
tandem      more     closely     and    engage     in   information       gathering      proactively.     The  
Government         will    also    work      to    strengthen       coordination        among       relevant  
governmental entities, particularly to accumulate necessary information at the NISC  
for  the   purpose   of   building   a   structure   for   prompt   information   sharing  with  
necessary measures, such as building a hotline between the NISC and CII operators,  
improving  information  sharing  methods  and  procedures,  and  adopting  automatic  
information processing.  

When   a   CII   operator   reports   a   cyber   attack  to   relevant   governmental  bodies  
responsible   for   incident   response,   the   governmental   bodies   will   work,   as   a  

                                                      27  

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

  

coordinated effort, on situational awareness to obtain an accurate understanding of  
what  is  happening,  while  helping  the  CII  operator(s)  manage  the  critical  situation.  
The   Government  will   extensively   share   obtained   information   on  the   occurred  
incident, including attackers’ methods, with the governmental bodies, CII operators,  
and other relevant parties, to prevent the damage from becoming more serious and  
more extensive.    

For  the  purpose  of  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  these  measures,  the  Government  
will conduct cross-sectoral training and exercises for stakeholders of the public and  
private sectors, and will continue to make necessary improvements.    

  
(3) Offering Tailored Support to CII Sectors  

As  for  local  governments,  their  responsibility  and  the  cooperative  measures  taken  
by the  Cybersecurity  Strategic  Headquarters to  support them are prescribed under  
the Basic Act on Cybersecurity. All local governments, regardless of their scales, have  
a unique status, as they are required the security standards similarly to those of the  
Government   and   government-related   entities,   because   of   their   functions,   e.g.  
handling  sensitive  information.  There  is  an  environmental  transition  expected  in  
local  governments,  for  they  will  need  to  adopt  new  systems  due  to  the  nationwide  
introduction  of  the  My  Number  system.  The  Government  will  provide  necessary  
assistance,  in  accordance  with  the  Basic  Act  on  Cybersecurity,  for  their  security  
assurance, and will examine and take necessary measures regarding the information  
systems of local governments, with the object of strengthening cybersecurity for the  
operation of the My Number system.    

The     Government         will   take     necessary       cybersecurity       measures,       based      on  
consideration  of  effective  approaches,  including  operation  systems  development  
and    improved       operational       frameworks        build    upon     advanced       cybersecurity  
measures;  those  measures  include  the  separation  of  the  systems  for  handling  the  
affairs using the individual numbers prescribed under the Act on the Use of Numbers  
to  Identify  a  Specific  Individual  in the Administrative  Procedure  from  the  Internet.  
At   the   same     time,    the   Government        will   enhance      monitoring       and    oversight  
mechanisms  based  on  professional  and  technological  knowledge  and  experiences,  
in   coordination      with     relevant    entities.    Furthermore,       aiming     at   building     the  
monitoring and detection mechanisms to supervise the interconnected national and  
local operation systems of the My Number systems as a whole, the Government will  
build    frameworks        with    capabilities     of  monitoring       and    prompt      detection     of  
cybersecurity  incidents,  taking  account  of  possible  information  sharing  with  the  
Government   Security   Operation   Coordination   team   (GSOC).   Additionally,   with  
regard to the intergovernmental and public-private coordination for authentication  
at  the  occasion  of  introducing  the  My  Number  system,  the  Government  will  also  

                                                     28  

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

  

work  to   improve   environments   necessary  to   make  the   best   balance   between  
increased user-friendliness and security assurance.    

With   regard   to   industrial   control   systems           (ICS),   there   is   a   concern   that   IT  
malfunction  may  evoke  the  disruption  of  safety  assurance  and  the  interruption  of  
the  provision  of  sustainable  services.  Smart  meters  in  the  electric  power  supply  
services     sector    and    factory    automation        systems     in   chemical      and   petroleum  
industries  are  good  examples.  For  ICS  to  become  more  resilient,  it  is  necessary  to  
reaffirm the importance  of assuring the  safety of  ICS, by implementing information  
security measures for ensured continuous service delivery.    

In  addition,  there  has  been  the  shift  of  ICS  to  the  openings  of  technologies  and  
networks,  e.g.  the  use  of  standard  products  and  the  introduction  of  open-standard  
protocols. As  a  result, the  open  control  systems have become  popular,  for  example,  
as replacements of the existing conventional equipment; on the other hand, that has  
created a pressing need for addressing vulnerability issues and unauthorized access.  
Under  the  circumstances,  the  Government  will  collect,  analyze,  and  disseminate  
useful information, e.g. information on vulnerabilities of ICS and ICS equipment and  
information  on  cyber  attacks.  It  will  be  done  based  on  the  information  sharing  
arrangement in a harmonized manner with the sharing of information on other than  
ICS.  The  Government  will  promote  the  use  of  internationally  approved  third-party  
certification  schemes  that  enable  objective  evaluations  on  the  level  of  satisfactory  
security performance, taking into account that specialized knowledge and skills are  
necessary for the procurement and operation of ICS and other associated equipment.    

    
5.2.3 Measures for the Protection of Governmental Bodies  

As  for  the  governmental  bodies  and  government-related  entities,  the  Government  
has  addressed  cybersecurity  assurance  by  establishing  and  utilizing,  as  a  main  
measure, the common standards for the governmental bodies. Up to these days, the  
Government  has  worked  on  further  improving  the  standard  of  government-wide  
measures,  and  reflecting  newly  emerged  threats  and  challenges  in  the  common  
standards, where necessary.    

Meanwhile, it is expected that social environment will be transformed more rapidly  
by  2020.  It  is  more  than  likely  that  cyber  attacks  against  the  governmental  bodies  
and government-related entities will become more sophisticated and manipulative,  
and that IT-related products and services would become more multi-functional and  
diversified.  In  anticipation  of  such  rapid  transformation,  the  Government  must  be  
ready   to   face   a   dramatic   increase   in   cyber   threats   or   unforeseen   challenges  
accompanied  by  that.  Many  of  the  information  systems  currently  in  the  design  or  

                                                      29  

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

  

development  planning  phases  will  be  operational  in  2020,  and  will  be  required  to  
remain secured for many years to come. Meanwhile, most of cybersecurity measures  
cannot work like a quick remedy for cyber threats. In this context, it should be taken  
into  account  that  cybersecurity  assurance  in  2020  cannot  be  achievable  unless  
proactive  actions  are  taken  well  in  advance  before  new  threats  and  challenges  
emerge.    

It is a prerequisite for the governmental bodies and government-related  entities to  
continue the full implementation of ongoing cybersecurity measures so that they can  
take  flexible  and  prompt  counteractions  to  address  not  only  existing  threats  and  
challenges      but    also   unforeseen       threats     and    other    emerging       concerns.     The  
Government  will  focus  its  forward-looking  effort  on  the  priorities  outlined  in  the  
following sections; incorporate them timely in the regulations, such as the common  
standards  for  governmental  bodies;  and  ensure  the  full  implementation  of  these  
regulations by certain measures, such as audit and daily learning.    

  
(1) Strengthening Defense Capabilities of Information Systems and  
     Promoting Multi-layered Measures against Presumed Cyber Attacks  

To respond to cyber attacks, such as spear phishing e-mail attacks apparently aiming  
at   stealing,    damaging,       or    altering    information,       the    Government        will    take  
government-wide,  multi-layered  measures  based  upon  the  assumption  of  cyber  
attacks. This must also include contingency plans for the possibility a certain entity  
would  be  used  as  a  springboard  for  the  entity  that  is  the  original  target  of  a  cyber  
attack.  In  promoting  these  measures,  the  Government  will  ensure  that  they  are  
based on the common standards for the governmental bodies, and will conduct risk  
analysis     intending      to    perform      its   administrative        responsibilities,       for   the  
optimization of these measures as the entire governmental bodies.    

  
i. Incident prevention  
The  Government  will  robustly  implement  preventive  measures,  such  as  giving  
support for announced software vulnerabilities and detected malware and utilizing  
electronic signature and certification technology, and will make prompt and flexible  
readjustments corresponding to environmental changes.    

More      specifically,     the    Government          will    strengthen:       cybersecurity-related  
information gathering and analysis functions; and the organizational arrangements  
for  government-wide  information  sharing  and  for  cooperation  with  the  private  
sector. The  Government will also advance supply chain risk management and other  
measures to incorporate security assurance into the planning and designing phases  
of  information  systems.  Furthermore,  the  Government  will  promptly  and  flexibly  
readjust  the  measures  taken  for  the  information  systems  in  operation,  in  view  of  

                                                     30  

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

  

environmental         changes.      Additionally,       the   review      and     improvement         of   the  
implementation status of information security measures will be undertaken through  
penetration tests and other examinations.    

  
ii. Prevention of damage and the spread of damage  
It  is  extremely  difficult  to  prevent  all  cybersecurity  incidents,  such  as  malicious  
penetration   into   information   systems   by   cyber   attacks   exploiting   unrevealed  
vulnerabilities  or using malware, including  Zero-Day attacks.  For this reason, while  
aiming  to  prevent  the  outbreak  of  cyber  attacks,  the  Government  remains  equally  
determined to respond to cybersecurity incidents effectively and in a timely manner  
in order to obtain early situational awareness and to limit the harmful consequences  
of an attack as well as the spread of damage that the attack might cause.    

More   specifically,   the   Government   will   work   on   the   enhancement   of   GSOC’s  
functions      covering      the    entire    governmental         bodies     to    detect    and     analyze  
cybersecurity   incidents;  the   enhancement   of   governmental   Computer   Security  
Incident   Response   Teams           (CSIRT)   as   well   as   situational   awareness   and   risk  
management  functions   of   every  governmental  body;  and  the  acceleration  and  
sophistication  of  information  provision  and  sharing  in  the  case  of  a  cybersecurity  
incident. At  the  same  time,  the  Government  will  implement  training  and  exercises  
for  incident  readiness  and  subsequently  incorporate  lessons  learned  from  such  
training  and  exercises  in  its  cybersecurity  policies  and  measures;  the  Government  
will also aim to improve the capabilities of personnel with designated cybersecurity  
duties     and    the   coordination        among      these     personnel;      and     to   fully   enforce  
organizational  responses  to  cybersecurity  incidents  under  the  direction  of  senior  
executive  officers  of  each  governmental  body.  Moreover,  for  risk  reduction  by  the  
improvement  of  monitoring  effectiveness  and  other  means,  the  Government  will  
work  on  further  reduction  and  consolidation  of  connections  to  the  Internet  in  the  
governmental  information  systems.  Additionally,  the  Government  will  strive  to :  
reinforce   fact-finding   activities   in   the   case   of   emergencies,   including   critical  
incidents involving a governmental body or governmental bodies; share the results  
of  the  fact-finding  analysis  in  order  to  prevent  the  damage  of  the  incident  from  
spreading; and incorporate them in the existing measures.  

  
iii. Damage mitigation    
For mitigating damage  over the period starting from the incident occurrence to the  
completion of the initiated emergency measure, the Government will take necessary  
measures  to  prevent  the  spread   of  penetration  and  not  to  allow  attackers  to  
accomplish the purpose(s) of their attacks.    

More   specifically,   special   consideration   will   be   made   on   the   improvement   of  

                                                       31  

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

  

preventive measures against unauthorized access to personal information, sensitive  
information,       and     other     information       with     high    confidentiality       or    integrity  
requirement  i.e.  those  of  which  leakage  and  manipulation  would  cause  serious  
negative  impacts  on the  people,  society,  and  more.  In this  context, the  Government  
will   strive   to   achieve     more   trusted       information       management,          including   the  
separation  of  information  systems, where  necessary,  according to the  substance  of  
administrative   functions   as   well   as   the   nature   and   quantities   of   information  
processed;   and   the   use   of   operational   regulations.   The   Government   will   also  
accelerate  its  effort  to  implement  “defense-in-depth”  measures  against  targeted  
cyber   attacks,   including   those   concerning   system   availability,   such   as   system  
breakdown. In addition, the Government will work to establish methods to evaluate  
priorities   regarding:   the   enhancement   of   incident   response   corresponding   to  
different risks and their impacts; and focused measures for information systems.    

    
(2) Achieving More Resilient Organizational Response Capabilities    

The   Government   will   seek   to   achieve   more   resilient   organizational   response  
capabilities that enable more flexible and prompt responses to accelerating changes.    

The  following  are  examples  of the  planned  activities: the  review  and  improvement  
of  organizational  arrangements  and  frameworks  to  enhance  measures  concerning  
the  governmental  bodies  and  government-related  entities,  by  conducting  periodic  
self-assessment,  management  audit  from  an  independent  perspective,  and  other  
assessments;  and  the  promotion  of  risk-based  and  organized  measures  for  and  
management  of  information  systems,  such  as  the  formulation  of  risk  management  
policies   and   the   standards         of   measures      on   a   basis   of   risk   assessment,   the  
establishment   of   a   scheme   for   contingency   planning   based   on   consensus   of  
stakeholders for unforeseen circumstances, and so on. Since there is no panacea for  
responding to unknown threats and other cyber concerns, the Government will also  
plan  to   create  a   community  that   contributes  to  government-wide  information  
sharing  on  cybersecurity  incidents  and  active  dialogues.  In  addition,  since  human  
resources are the key of organized response capability, the Government will work to  
ensure enhanced cybersecurity literacy in the entire staff including senior executive  
officers. At the same time, the  Government will foster and acquire cyber talent who  
will take a leading role to advance response capabilities of the governmental bodies  
and  government-related  entities;  this  will  be  done  by  utilizing  qualifications  and  
other special skills as one of objective criteria to evaluate individuals’ competencies.    

  
(3) Adapting to Technological Advancement and Change in Business  
      Performance Styles    

To  perform  administrative  functions  in  a  way  adjusting  to  the  sophistication  and  

                                                      32  

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

  

rationalization  of  administrative  affairs  by  the  utilization  of  multi-functioned  and  
diversified IT products and services, and in a way to meet the demands of the digital  
era, the  Government will make efforts to prevent incidents and the deterioration of  
security standards due to the inappropriate use of new IT products and services.    

More specifically, the Government is planning to collect the government-wide status  

data   regarding  the   adoption   of   new   IT   products   and   services   as  well   as  the  

information   on   implemented   measures;   and   to   establish   and   implement   the  

common   measures   across   the   governmental   bodies,   taking   into   account   the  

characteristics of these IT products and services. In terms of the changes in the styles  

of   performing         administrative         functions      based      on    the    IT   use,    the    relevant  

governmental  bodies  and  government-related  entities  will  closely  collaborate  to  

adapt the performance styles appropriately, based on assured cybersecurity.    

  
(4) Comprehensively Enhancing Measures through the Extended Scope of  
      Monitoring and Others    

To  strengthen  cybersecurity  throughout  the  government  bodies  as  a  whole,  the  
Government  will  aim  at  the  comprehensive  enhancement  of  measures  taken  by  
incorporated  administrative  agencies  and  by  special  corporations  closely  working  
with the governmental bodies to perform their public functions.    

More  specifically,  the  Government  will  work   on:  the  improvement   of  incident  
response  capabilities  of  such  entities; the  enhancement  of  auditing of  such  entities  
by their competent ministries; and the promotion of cybersecurity measures at such  
entities,  in  accordance  with  the  governmental  measures  (as  described  above  from  
(1)  to  (3)),  taking  into  consideration  their  characteristics.  The  Government  will  
gradually  add  such  entities,  in  particular,  to  the  subjects  of  monitoring  by  GSOC,  
taking  into  consideration  equitable-burden  sharing  among  beneficiaries;  include  
such  entities  as  the  subjects  of  auditing  and  fact-finding  activities  that  the  NISC  
conducts as a mandate given by the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  Headquarters; and take  
other  necessary  measures.  With  regard  to  the  above-mentioned  measures,  the  
Government will  examine promptly the necessary revisions  of the relevant laws, in  
view     of   possible      arrangement          for   coordination         with     relevant      entities    with  
professional   knowledge   and   skills,   and   will   take   appropriate   actions,   where  
necessary.    

    

  

                                          
  

                                                          33  

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

  

5.3. Peace and Stability of the International Community and  
        Japan’s National Security  

  
A free, fair, and secure cyberspace is global common domain, where communications  
in  a  global  scale  are  available,  and  is  a  foundation  for  peace  and  stability  of  the  
international  community.  In  particular,  regarding  cyberspace  Japan  firmly  believes  
that  recognizing  the  diversity  of  values,  respecting  self-governance  and  securing  
people’s  freedom  of  speech  and  corporate  activities  based  on  the  rule  of  law  will  
bring  peace  and  stability  to  the  international  community,  thereby  ushering  in  
prosperity   for   all.   Indeed,  Japan   has  built   an   economy   and   society  where   an  
extremely  high-quality  life  and   sustainable   development  are  possible,  through  
utilizing  the  benefits   of  free,  fair,  and   secure   cyberspace.   On  the   other  hand,  
domestically  and  internationally,  social  systems’  dependency  on  cyberspace  has  
been increasing and thus the situation in which cyber attacks significantly affect the  
socioeconomic  activities  in  the  real  world  with  sophisticated  method  and  with  
greater  impact  is  arising.  Under  these  circumstances,  defending  cyberspace  from  
cyber  attacks  and  ensuring  its  secure  use  are  critically  important  challenges  for  
peace  and  stability  of  the  international  community  and  Japan’s  national  security  
which must be addressed imminently and drastically.  

Addressing   these   challenges   to   ensure   Japan’s   security,   the   Government   will  
drastically enhance the response capabilities of the whole nation and further engage  
in  cooperation  and  collaboration  with  allies  and  like-minded  countries  as  well  as  
confidence building  measures with  relevant  states.  In  addition,  from the viewpoint  
of pursuing a free, fair, and secure cyberspace, the Government strongly disapproves  
of  exclusive  possession,  control,  censorship,  theft  or  destruction  of  information  by  
oppressive  regimes  as  well  as  malicious  use  of  cyberspace  by  non-state  actors  
including   terrorists.   Japan   will   proactively   contribute   to   the   maintenance   of  
international  order  and  ensure  its  national  security by building  peace and  stability  
of the international community from the policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace”  
based on the principle of international cooperation.  

Under   the   above   recognition,   the   Government   adopts   the   following   strategic  
approaches  for building  peace and  stability  of the  international  community  as well  
as its national security. For the implementation of these measures, the Government  
will  further  advance  the  centralization  of  relevant  information  including  those  on  
cybersecurity  measures  of  the  governmental  bodies  and  related  entities  into  the  
Cabinet Secretariat, and enhance its common external responses.    

  

                                                        34  

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

  

5.3.1 Ensuring Japan’s National Security  

As all kinds of things, including the social systems, are networked and cyberspace is  
increasingly integrated with the real world; many organizations have heavily relied  
upon  cyberspace.  As  a  result,  cyber  attacks  have  become  capable  of  causing  great  
damages  to  state’s  politics,  society,  economy,  and  culture.  Today,  Cyberspace  is  not  
only for economic activities, but also for national security and intelligence activities.  
Disruptive  activities,  theft  of  classified  information  and  falsification  of  data  by  
organized,  well-prepared,  and  advanced  cyber  attacks  including  those  that  are  
suspected as state-sponsored, are actual threats today.  

To  protect  cyberspace  from  these  advanced  cyber  attacks,  it  is  necessary  to  take  
prompt  and  appropriate  measures  based  on  advanced  knowledge  at  all  phases:  
prevention,  detection, and response.  For this reason, through analyzing  cyberspace  
in  peacetime,  the  Government  intends  to  further  enhance  its  capabilities  of  early  
identification  and  situational  awareness  including  the  signs  of  cyber  attacks  by  
various  actors,  and  of  detecting  and  addressing  threats  promptly.  To  this  end,  it  is  
critical  to  strengthen  the  Government’s  functions  of  information  gathering  and  
situational  awareness,  including  information  sharing  with  foreign  governmental  
entities,  and  situational  analysis,  and  to  promote  cross-sectoral  and  cross-cutting  
efforts comprehensively.    

Moreover, it is necessary for Japan’s national security to protect the function of social  
systems owned by the Government and critical infrastructure operators from cyber  
attacks.  Regardless  of  the  public  or  private  sector,  vertically-segmented  structure  
and   rigid   conventionalism   would   be   a   favorable   condition   for   attackers.   The  
Government  will  share  such  an  understanding  with  various  relevant  actors  and  
further strengthen current cooperation with them to achieve a seamless and multi- 
layered  protection  against  these  attacks.  In  addition,  the  Government  will  further  
enhance  its  capability  to  respond  to  cyber  attacks,  which  can  occur  at  any  phases,  
appropriately and accordingly to their scale and level.  

Furthermore,  bearing  in  mind  that  cyber  attacks  can  be  easily  conducted  across  
national borders, and there are  some  cases in which  cyber attacks are  suspected to  
be  state-sponsored  or linked with military  operation in real world, it is essential to  
proactively  enhance  cooperation  and  collaboration  with  allies  and  like-minded  
countries  or  organizations  on  sharing  threat  information  and  human  resources  
development among others. It is also important to advance confidence building with  
other countries.  

  
(1) Enhancing Response Capabilities of Relevant Governmental Bodies  

In  order  to  respond  to  more  diversified  and  complex  cyber  threat,  it  is  critical  to  

                                                      35  

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

  

enhance Japan’s whole resiliency and  capabilities. To this  end, the  Government will  
strengthen  the  capabilities  of  law  enforcement  agencies,  the  Self-Defense  Forces,  
and  other  relevant  organizations  in  both  quantity  and  quality.  In  order  for  these  
organizations to play full part, the Government will consider a wide range of effective  
means such as reviewing various systems including human resources  development  
and recruiting, introduction and learning of latest technologies, and R&D. In addition,  
to    counter      cyber     attacks      targeting      the    classified      information        owned       by  
governmental  bodies,  the  Government  will  enhance the  efforts  related  to  counter- 
cyber-intelligence  in  the  Cabinet  Information  Research  Office  and  other  relevant  
entities.  

  
(2) Utilizing and Protecting Japan’s Advanced Technology  

Japan’s advanced technology is not just for securing Japan’s economic advantage but  
are  also  a  critical  national  asset  in  terms  of  national  security.  In  particular,  actors  
who  deal with  critical  information  for  national  security,  e.g. technologies  related to  
outer space, nuclear energy, security, and equipment of the Self-Defense Forces, need  
to  keep  in  mind  that  critical  information  could  become  a  possible  target  of  cyber  
attackers  worldwide.  These  actors  will  take  all  feasible  means  to  ensure  its  cyber  
security  to  ensure  Japan’s  national  security,  and  effectively  utilize  the  advanced  
technologies.       Relevant       actors    will    take    necessary       measures:       further     raising  
cybersecurity  awareness   of   all   the   people   involved   in   advanced   technologies,  
enhancing   monitoring   and   response   capability   against   foreign   cyber   attacks,  
tightening  examination  and  verification  of  goods  and  service  procurement  and  
taking  other  necessary  measures,  including  enhanced  collaboration  between  the  
public and private sectors for information sharing.  

  
(3) Protecting Governmental Bodies and Social System  

As  governmental  bodies  have  a  mission  to  defend  and  support  the  people’s  living  
and  socio-economic  activities,  the  shutdown   of  their  functions  is  a  significant  
concern  to  the  national  security.  The  execution  of  missions  of  the  governmental  
bodies  relies  on  CII  and  other  services  provided by business  operators  responsible  
for  the  social  systems.  These  business  operators  themselves  have  an  important  
mission  to  continuously  provide  services  indispensable  for  the  people  and  society.  
Therefore,  ensuring  cybersecurity  of  these  CII  operators  is  of  extreme  importance  
for Japan’s national security and the assurance of the missions of the governmental  
bodies as well as the  continuous provision  of  services indispensable for the people  
and society. To this end, it is necessary for these operators, in collaboration with the  
governmental bodies, to take  all  feasible  measures with  a  clear  recognition  of  how  
the  effect  of  cyber  attacks  on the  provision  of  services will  impact the  execution  of  
missions of the governmental bodies and the business operators themselves.  

                                                        36  

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

  

In  this  context,  the  Government  and  business  operators  in  charge  of  CII  and  other  
social  systems  will  further  enhance  their  daily  efforts  to  bring,  share,  and  analyze  
beneficial  information,  such  as vulnerabilities  and  attack  information,  and  address  
to  threats  in  a  necessary  manner.  It  is  also  expected  to  accelerate  interactive  
information exchange between the public and private sectors.  

As the defense authorities, the  Ministry of  Defense and the  Self-Defense  Forces will  
further  enhance  protection of  their  own  networks  and  infrastructure,  and  deepen  
coordination  with  stakeholders  relevant  to  the  assurance  of  missions  of  the  Self- 
Defense Forces in light of the possibility that cyber attacks against the social systems  
indicated  above  may  become  a  major  impediment  to  the  accomplishment  of  their  
missions.  

  
5.3.2 Building Peace and Stability of the International Community  

Ensuring  both  cyber  security  and  the  free  flow  of  information  at  a  global  scale  is  
necessary for peace and stability of the international community.    

Cyberspace  is  a  space  where  data  is  transmitted  and  processed  through  hardware  
and software, which are managed and operated by various global actors and actors  
in countries all over the world, and linked by autonomous and cooperative networks.  
Therefore, in  order  to  have  active  communications,  social,  economic,  and  cultural  
activities  in  such  a  space  with  international  nature,  it  is  necessary  to   ensure  
appropriate  cybersecurity  of globally widespread  components,  so  that  people  can  
trust it when using it.    

Through  the  free  flow  of  information  at  a  global  scale,  cyberspace  has  become  a  
foundation for all kinds of social, economic, and cultural activities on earth, and has  
promoted  mutual  understanding  across  national  borders.  This  remarkable  global  
nature  of  cyberspace  would  be  undermined  if  the  authorities  divide  it  with  their  
excessive restriction or control.    

In addition, in order to ensure security of cyberspace, it is important that Japan will  
implement  measures  to  create  an  internationally  stable  cyber  environment  that  
leads to peace and stability of the international community, as well as Japan.  

Under this recognition, with a view to build peace and  stability  of the international  
community,   Japan   will   take   a   leading   role   as   a   responsible   member   of   the  
international        community,        and     engage      in    ensuring      cyber      security     through  
international cooperation with various stakeholders as well as securing the free flow  
of information at a global scale based on the following policies.    

  

                                                        37  

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

  

(1) Establishing the International Rule of Law in Cyberspace  

Recognizing  the  diversity  of  actors  and  values,  Japan  will  take  active  roles  in  
establishing the  international  rule  of  law  in  cyberspace, with the basic  principle  of  
the free flow of information.  

  
i. Developing international rules and norms  
Japan  is  of  the  view  that  existing  international  law  applies  to  cyberspace.  With  
regard  to  security  in  cyberspace,  the  Government  has  participated  in  the  Group  of  
Governmental  Experts  (GGE)  established  in the  First  Committee  of the  UN  General  
Assembly,  and  the  GGE  submitted  a  report  indicating  that  “international law … is  
applicable and is essential to maintaining peace and stability and promoting an open,  
secure, peaceful and accessible ICT environment.” Japan will further actively engage  
in  the  discussions  on  the  application  of  specific  individual  international  law,  and  
subsequently  make  contributions  to  the  development  of  international  rules  and  
norms  for  cyberspace with the view that  existing  international law  is  applicable to  
cyberspace.    

In  addition  to  the  GGE,  there  have  been  discussions  among  multi-stakeholders  
focusing on socio-economic aspect, Internet governance and other topics in various  
fora including the UN and its specialized agencies, the Organisation for Economic Co- 
operation and Development  (OECD), the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation  (APEC)  
and   the   Global   Conference   on   Cyberspace.   Japan   will   further   cooperate   with  
domestic  and  foreign  stakeholders  in  these  discussions  and  actively  promote  the  
development   of   international   rules  and   norms  with  a  view  that   ensuring  the  
openness, interoperability, autonomy and the free flow of information in cyberspace  
will  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  development  of  society,  economy,  and  
culture.    

  
ii. Materializing International Rules and Norms  

Japan  will  contribute  to  the  development  of  international  rules  and  norms  for  
cyberspace and will proactively engage in their materialization.  For instance, in the  
national   security   field,   Japan   will   advance   confidence   building   measures,   as  
described  later,  at  conferences  of  international  organizations  or  cyber  dialogues  
with  other  countries,  based  on  the  results  of  discussions  on  the  application  of  a  
specific individual international law. With regard to  measures against  cybercrimes,  
as a Party to the Convention on Cybercrime, Japan will make efforts in the expansion  
of   its  Parties,     strengthen       international       cooperation       among      law    enforcement  
authorities  for  a  prompt  and  effective  assistance  in  investigation,  and  enhance  
international       investigation   for   arresting   transnational             criminals   to      effectively  
address  cybercrimes  that  easily  transcend  national  borders.  The  Government  will  

                                                        38  

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

  

take the initiative in implementing international rules and norms and subsequently  
make  contributions to the  establishment  of the rule  of law in  cyberspace and bring  
peace and stability to the international community.  

  
(2) International Confidence Building Measures  

Cyberspace  has  become  a  basis  for  all  kinds  of  activities,  including  social  and  
economic  activities  as  well  as  military  operations.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  
necessary  to  deepen international  discussions  at  the  UN  and  other  fora  on  how  to  
prevent  unexpected  situations  stemming  from  cyber  attacks  and  share  common  
understanding  among  many  countries.  To  this  end,  the  Government  will  actively  
provide   information   on   its   fundamental   stance   and   share   stances  with   many  
countries at multilateral  conferences,  such as the  UN, as well as bilaterally in  cyber  
dialogues  and  conferences.  Moreover,  Japan  will  promote  international  confidence  
building by creating multi-layered contact mechanisms, e.g. points of contact among  
countries  or  the  private  sectors,  for  transnational  cybersecurity  incidents  during  
peacetime and conduct contact exercises and other measures.    

  
(3) Measures against the Malicious Use of Cyberspace by International  
      Terrorist Organizations  

In  order  for  cyberspace to  remain  a domain that  contributes to  peace  and  stability  
of   the   international   community,   it   is   necessary   to   prevent   malicious   use   of  
cyberspace        by    international       terrorist     organizations.        With     the    expansion       of  
cyberspace,  non-governmental  actors  that  advocate  extremism  have  been  using  
cyberspace for malicious purposes such as the dissemination and demonstration of  
their  ideas,  recruiting  and  solicitation,  and  fund-raising  for  terrorism.  Taking  into  
account the international statements such as the resolutions of UN Security Council,  
Japan  must  implement measures  against  such  international terrorist  organizations  
in coordination with the international community. For this, the Government will take  
necessary   measures,   e.g.   strengthening   information   gathering   and   analysis   on  
activities   of   international   terrorist   organizations   in   cyberspace,   including   the  
utilization of technologies that gather terrorism-related information on the Internet.    

  
(4) Cooperation on Cybersecurity Capacity Building  

As  a  responsible  member  of the  international  community  founded  on  freedom  and  
democracy,  Japan  will  actively  engage  in  capacity  building  based  on  its  experience  
and accumulation in ICT development.  

It  is  necessary  for  various  actors  around  the  world  to  cooperate  and  address  the  
transnational threats in  cyberspace as the lack of  competence  of  some countries  or  
regions to address these threats would be a risk for the entire world including Japan.  

                                                        39  

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

  

In fact, it is confirmed that many cyber attacks against Japan have come from abroad.  

In addition, the activities of the Japanese people and companies are globalizing; e.g.  
the  number  of  people  traveling  abroad  and  enterprises  expanding  overseas  are  
increasing.   With   the   development   of   informatization,   these   activities   become  
increasingly  reliant to  cyberspace  and  social  infrastructure  managed  and  operated  
by their destinations.  

For  these  reasons,  cooperation  on  capacity  building  to  ensure  cybersecurity  of  
countries around the world would not  only  contribute to those  countries that need  
the assistance but also benefit Japan and the entire world.    

With  the  development  of  information  communications  society,  Japan  has  been  
developing legislation and policy frameworks for cyber security, and it has engaged  
in  the  assurance  of  cybersecurity  of  governmental  bodies,  CII  operators,  other  
organizations,  and  individuals;  measures  against  cybercrimes;  human  resources  
development to foster cyber experts; and R&D of cybersecurity technologies. Based  
on  these  experiences  and  accumulated  knowledge,  the  Government  will  further  
actively cooperate on capacity building as a responsible member of the international  
community with a basic principle of the free flow of information. To this end, in full  
coordination  and  cooperation,  the  Government  as  a  whole  will  make  capacity  
building plans and implement them efficiently and effectively.    

  
(5) Developing World-class Human Resources  

In addressing these international cybersecurity efforts, it is necessary for the Japan  
to  continuously  participate  in  and  contribute  to  international  conferences  to  state  
its position and deepen communications with various actors around the world. The  
participants of such conferences would be required to have sufficient cybersecurity  
expertise as well as understanding on the context of each country’s society, economy,  
culture  and  other  aspects.  Therefore, the  Government will  develop  abundant  high- 
quality  international  human  resources,  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  that  
have   technical   expertise   on   cyberspace,   and   are   well-versed   in   international  
relations,  international  security,  international  cooperation  among  other  fields,  and  
capable of successfully working at the international arena.  

  
5.3.3 Cooperation and Collaboration with Countries around the World  

By  cooperation  and  in  partnership  with  countries  around  the  world,  Japan  will  
realize  peace  and  stability  of  the  international  community  as  well  as  of  Japan’s  
national security. International cooperation and partnership also contributes to the  
strengthening  of  international  capabilities  to  counter  cyber  attacks  in  which  state  

                                                       40  

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

  

involvement is suspected. On the solid basis of the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements,  
Japan  will  keep  in  mind  its  geographical  and  economic  relation  or  the  extent  of  
shared values with partner countries, and as a responsible member of international  
community  founded  on  freedom  and  democracy,  Japan  will  expand  and  develop  
cooperation  with  other  countries.  In  addition,  from  a  perspective  of  avoiding  and  
preventing  unexpected  escalations  caused  by  cyber  incidents  arising  from  cyber  
attacks,  Japan  will  make   efforts  in   confidence  building,   establish  international  
cooperation systems in various fields, and ensure cyberspace security.    

  
(1) Asia Pacific  

Asia  Pacific  region  has  a  deep  historical  connection  with  Japan,  and  the  flow  of  
people  among  nations  and  investment  by  Japanese  companies  are  increasing. As  a  
responsible  member  of  this  region,  Japan  will  vigorously  promote  international  
partnership  on the  cybersecurity  field,  cooperation towards  capacity  building,  and  
collecting  and  sending  information  in  this  region,  through  various  bilateral  and  
multilateral channels.  

Japan  has  a  history  of  partnership  with  ASEAN  for  more  than  40  years.  In  the  
cybersecurity field, Japan has a close and cooperative relationship through multiple  
channels such as the ASEAN-Japan Information Security Policy Meeting. Through the  
framework   of   international   conferences   or  joint   projects,   and   the   continuous  
implementation  of  various  and  practical  capacity  building  based  on  the  needs  of  
each country, Japan will further deepen and expand cooperation in the cybersecurity  
field  with  ASEAN  countries,  and  actively  contribute  to  the  realization  of  resilient  
cyberspace   of   ASEAN.   In   addition,   considering   economic,   social,   and   cultural  
situations of each ASEAN country, and the various views towards cyberspace, Japan  
will enhance bilateral cooperation with each member countries.    

Japan  will  strengthen  its  cooperation  and  partnerships  with  regional  strategic  
partners  that  share  basic  values.  Japan  will  enhance  bilateral  cooperation  in  the  
cybersecurity  field  through  various  channels  between  those  countries,  such  as  the  
sharing  and  utilization  of  information  on  cybersecurity-  related  policies  and  cyber  
attacks  from  peacetime;  and joint  exercises  against  cyber  attacks,  and will  address  
challenges in cyberspace in regional and international arena, hand in hand.  

Japan     will   also    exchange      its  views     towards      cyberspace        or   information       on  
cybersecurity  strategies,  discuss the possibility  of  cooperation in the  cybersecurity  
field, and deepen mutual understanding and partnership with other countries in the  
Asia-Pacific  region.  Japan  will  also  actively  participate  in  the  regional  frameworks,  
such  as APEC  and ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF),  and take  part  in the  development  
of   economy,   society,   and   culture   by   ensuring   security   and   the   free   flow   of  

                                                      41  

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

  

information in regional cyberspace.  

  
(2) North America  

Based  on  shared  basic  values,  Japan  will  enhance  its  cooperation  with  the  North  
American  countries  in  the  cybersecurity  field.  In  particular,  the  United  States  is  
Japan’s  ally  that  closely  cooperates  at  all  levels,  based  on  the  Japan-U.S.  Security  
Arrangements. Sharing common values on cyberspace as well, both countries closely  
cooperate and  share information through the Japan-U.S.  Cyber  Dialogue, the Japan- 
U.S.  Policy  Cooperation  Dialogue  on  the  Internet  Economy,  the  Japan-U.S.  Cyber  
Defense  Policy  Working  Group,  and  other  various  bilateral  channels.  Japan  will  
continuously  deepen  its  cooperation  with  the  United  States  in  a  concrete  manner,  
such as the  sharing and utilization  of information  on  cybersecurity-related policies  
and  cyber  attacks;  response to  cybersecurity  incidents;  and the  implementation  of  
joint  projects  in  the  area  of  advanced technology.  Japan  will  also  closely  cooperate  
with the United States in responding to a wide range of cyberspace issues, including  
the    development          and     implementation           of   international        rules     and     norms,  
international  security,  and  Internet  governance, and  make collaborative efforts for  
international peace and stability together.  Furthermore,  the  defense  authorities  of  
both  countries  will  advance  sharing  information  on  threats,  joint  training  and  
exercises against cyber attacks, and cooperation for human resources development;  
and  strengthen  operational  cooperation  between  the  Self-Defense  Forces  and  the  
United   States  Armed   Forces  under  the   new   Guidelines  for  Japan-U.S.   Defense  
Cooperation.        By   solidifying   the   whole-of-government                cooperation,   Japan   will  
enhance the U.S.-Japan Alliance’s deterrence and response capabilities.    

  
(3) Europe  

European  countries  which  share  basic  values  and  principles,  e.g.  market  economy,  
are  Japan’s  partners  that  take  leading  roles  in  building  peace  and  stability  of  the  
international community. As for the cyberspace issues, Japan will further strengthen  
cooperation  with   each   country  and   relevant   organizations   of   Europe,  through  
various channels, including defense authorities; for instance, Japan will enhance the  
sharing  and  utilization  of  information  on  cybersecurity-related  policies  and  cyber  
attacks  from  peacetime,  joint  training  and  exercises  against  cyber  attacks,  joint  
projects in the field of advanced technologies, as well as response to and cooperation  
on cyberspace issues in the international arena.  

  
(4) Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle East and Africa  

Regarding the Latin America and the Caribbean region as well as the Middle East and  
Africa  region,  Japan  will  build  and  strengthen  its  partnership  with  countries  that  
share  common  values  with  Japan,  and  consider  the  possibility  of  cooperation  and  

                                                        42  

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

  

partnership with other countries on capacity building and other measures.  

                                                     

                                                                           43  

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

  

5.4. Cross-Cutting Approaches to Cybersecurity    

  
In order to achieve the three policy goals the improvement of socio-economic vitality  
and sustainable development; the creation of a society where the people can live safe  
and  secure lives;  and  peace  and  stability  of the  international  community  as well  as  
national  security  it  is  imperative  for  the  Government  to  make  a  tireless  effort  for  
advancing       prominent        research      and    technological       development         and     fostering  
outstanding talent as the engines for the accomplishment of these goals. Such cross- 
cutting  approaches  require  a  long  period  of  time  to  produce  tangible  results  and  
require a wide range of activities as well; the Government will take steps in mid and  
long  term  perspectives,  and  will  make  progress  in  these  activities  by  harnessing  
relevant public-private business partnership or arrangements and those of relevant  
governmental bodies.  

  
5.4.1 Advancement of R&D  

ICTs  have  interwoven  with  the  people’s  social  activities,  and  used  more  widely  in  
their economic activities, too, as the drivers of innovation. Along with the significant  
expansion  of  networked  systems  and  devices,  including  those  utilized  by  CII  and  
others,  now  more  than  ever,  there  is  a  growing  need  for  cybersecurity  measures  
taken  by  the  Government,  private  enterprises,  and  other  relevant  stakeholders.  To  
combat  evolving  cyber  attacks  which  have  become  more  advanced,  sophisticated,  
and  complex  on  a  daily  basis,  it  is  crucial  to  promote  productive  R&D  to  invent  
creative  and  innovative  cybersecurity  technologies  in  comprehensive  R&D  areas,  
including networks, hardware, and software. In line with the following R&D policies,  
the  Government  will  promote  R&D  in  coordination  with  relevant  stakeholders,  by  
profiting from the combination of diverse information, perspectives, and advantages  
held by each stakeholder.    

    
(1) Improving Detection and Defense Capabilities against Cyber Attacks    

For    the    protection      of   the    Government,         CII,   enterprises,      organizations,        and  
individuals  from  cyber  threats,  including  more  sophisticated  and  complex  cyber  
attacks, in the interconnected and converged information society where the IoT and  
cyber-physical  systems  have  prevailed,  it  is  required  to  further  advance  detection  
and  defense  capabilities based  on  a better  understanding  of  actual  situations.  R&D  
for   capacity      building      in   this   regard      requires      the    profound       environmental  
improvement  that  enables  R&D  to  be  implemented  with  a  good  grasp  of  actual  
threats  and  concrete  needs. Additional  attention  should be  paid to the  point that it  
is important to put cybersecurity R&D into practical use with consideration of social  

                                                        44  

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

  

needs and promote the active utilization of R&D accomplishments in society. To this  
end,  the  Government  will  promote  information  and  data  sharing  necessary  for  
governmental   bodies,   researchers,   and   other   relevant   stakeholders   in   a   user- 
friendly manner. For example, to boost resilience against cyber attacks, data suitable  
for  academic  evaluation,  including  the  data  transmitted  in  M2M  systems,  will  be  
continuously   collected   in  actual   environments,  and   subsequently  used  for  the  
development  of  data  analysis  technologies.  Moreover,  the  Government  will  initiate  
necessary actions, including the examination of relevant laws and statutes as well as  
standards concerning research. It is also the Government’s plan to improve defense  
capabilities, for example, by incorporating cybersecurity into the planning phase of  
the R&D projects promoted by the Government.    

  
(2) Promoting Interdisciplinary Research on Cybersecurity    

In combatting cyber threats, it is not sufficient enough anymore merely to consider  
risks  on  information  systems  or  conduct  academic  research,  since  the  impacts  of  
cyberspace  in  the  real  world  have  increased  due  to  the  advanced  integration  of  
cyberspace and physical space. It requires the exploration of analysis methodologies  
across  multiple  areas,  including  laws  and  statutes,  policies,  current  affairs,  and  
technologies. From this standpoint, the Government will promote: the collaboration  
with  multidisciplinary  research  that  encompasses  various  fields,  including  social  
sciences  perspectives,  e.g.  law,  international  relations,  international  security,  and  
business       management;         the     promotion        of   research       on    cybersecurity        in  
interdisciplinary  fields;  and  the  examinations  and  R&D  in  a  way  to  look  ahead  to  
future  social  and  technological  transformation,  such  as  Big  Data  and  Artificial  
Intelligence  (AI).  Needless to  say, the results  of various  R&D,  including those  in the  
fields of science and technologies, must not produce adverse effects in human society.    

(3) Securing Cybersecurity Core Technologies  

To  take  measures  against  predicted  cyber  threats,  including  cyber  attacks  that  are  
evolving  every  day,  it  is  vital  for  Japan  to  secure  its  core  technologies  required  to  
make   self-reliant   efforts   for   the   invention   and   development   of   technological  
fundamentals of cyber attacks and cyber defense, the frameworks of systems, and so  
on. With regard to basic research that fosters  core technologies, although they may  
not be exactly profitable in terms of business revenue, it should be noted that some  
of them, e.g. cryptographic research, will become a potential source of new business  
opportunities,  if  partnered  with  successful  entrepreneurial  ventures  and  other  
prospective actors, and that there are mission-essential technologies from a national  
security viewpoint and for other reasons. For this reason, the Government will seek  
to   make     steady     progress     in   building     supportive      environments         for   R&D     at  
appropriate research institutes, such as public research institutes, universities, and  

                                                     45  

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

  

other relevant organizations.    

(4) Enhancing R&D in International Coordination  

As  for  technological  measures  to  tackle  more  advanced  and  sophisticated  cyber  
attacks,  in  order  to  develop  more  progressive  technologies  for  internationally- 
coordinated  measures  that  enable  accurate  responses  to  cyber  attacks,  it  is  highly  
effective that “unique” technologies of different counties are organically linked each  
other  and  developed  in  such  linkage,  since  cyber  attacks  are  launched  beyond  the  
national   borders.   The         Government   will   work   hard              on   R&D   in   international  
coordination,  paying  careful  attention  to  research  contents  and  national  security  
concerns.      As    part    of   ongoing      collaborative       efforts     for   various     international  
standardizations,  the  Government  will  also  strive  to  establish  and  disseminate  the  
various international standards and the frameworks for mutual recognition related  
to cybersecurity technologies and others.  

(5) Partnering with Relevant Entities    

R&D  achievement  cannot  be  made  overnight.  It  is  a  task  requiring  long  term  
engagement. It is a common challenge not only for the field of cybersecurity but also  
for  other  fields  of  research  to  build  R&D  supportive  environment  and  nurture  
researchers.  The  Government  will  promote  active  measures  comprehensively  in  
industry-academia-public              coordination,        taking      cybersecurity        viewpoints        and  
environmental  changes  into  account,  and  in  coordination  with  the  Council  for  
Science, Technology, and Innovation and other relevant organizations that are major  
stakeholders of such measures.11    

    
5.4.2 Development and Assurance of Cybersecurity Workforce  

Today,  ICTs  are widely  and  extensively  ingrained  in the  people’s living  as the  social  
foundation.  In  the  emerging  interconnected  and  converged  information  society,  
cybersecurity is an essential literacy, to one degree or another, for a variety of human  
resources,  from  cybersecurity  experts  and  conventional  ICTs  experts  to  IoT  users.  
Cybersecurity  workforce  development  is  a  pressing  task  for  Japan,  as  there  is  a  
critical  domestic  shortage  of  cybersecurity  experts,  both  in  quality  and  quantity12.  

                                                         

11   For  example,  “Ensuring  Cybersecurity  in  Critical  Information  Infrastructure,  etc.”  was  selected  as  a  

candidate of a new research project for the “Cross-Ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program  
(SIP)” at the Council for Science, Technology and Innovation on June 18, 2015.    

12  According to the estimate of May 2013 made by the Information-Technology Promotion Agency, Japan  

(IPA), there were approximately 265,000 experts working in the field of information security; among them,  
however, only around 105,000 experts were considered to have required skills to perform their duties, and  
the rest of 160,000 were considered to be necessary for some kind of education or training to acquire the  

                                                        46  

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

  

As described in the following sections, the Government will make efforts to: expand  
cybersecurity   education  and   education  in   cybersecurity-related  fields;  identify,  
foster,  and  recruit  talented  individuals;  and  create  career  paths  in  a  long  term  
perspective   for   cybersecurity-related   personnel.   Overall,   the   Government  will  
establish  guidelines  to  improve  human  resources  development  comprehensively  
and soundly.    

It should be noted that it is necessary for such human resources to develop not only  
technological capabilities but also high ethical standards.  

  
(1) Promoting Human Resources Development Corresponding to Social  
      Needs in Higher Education and Vocational Training  

Regarding  highly  skilled  experts  who  will  lead  a  future  society,  it  is  necessary  to  
implement  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  human  resources  development  that  
matches  social  needs,  in  more  organic  industry-academia-public  coordination. The  
Government  will  support  higher  education  institutions,  such  as  graduate  schools,  
universities,  and  colleges  of  technology  to  implement  programs  to  offer  students  
learning  opportunities  to  develop  a  solid  foundation  in  both  the  basic  theory  and  
practice  of  cybersecurity  and to  advance their  practical  cybersecurity  skills.  In this  
regard, the Government will encourage these higher education institutions to ensure  
that these  programs will have  a  component to  evaluate  students’ basic  qualities, in  
terms of their knowledge and other necessary competencies.    

Furthermore,  for building  industry-academia-public  partnerships, the  Government  
will take measures of practical exercises for human resources development, such as  
developing   cyber   training   conditions   in   a   cloud   environment   and   supporting  
educational material development through industry-academia-public partnerships,  
in  addition  to  the  improvement  of  close  coordination  and  information  sharing  
among them.    

In the  current  circumstances where  cybersecurity has become a business-essential  
challenge for organizational management, e.g. enterprise business management, the  
role  of  the  intermediators  capable  of  dualistic  thinking,  both  from  management  
strategy  and  technological  viewpoints,  is  highly  important;  it  is  because  they  can  
work  as  moderators  between  the  board  level  and  security-related  professional  
personnel,  and  as  a  result,  can  work  to  promote  the  appropriate  allocation  of  
business  resources  to  security.  In  this  sense,  the  Government  will  support  higher  
education  institutions  to  develop  “hybrid”  human  resources  or  individuals  multi- 

                                                         

lacked  skills.  On  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  same  estimate,  approximately  further  80,000  
information security experts would be potentially in short.  

                                                       47  

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

  

talented      with    comprehensive          knowledge         and    skills   in   various      fields,   from  
cybersecurity  and  ICTs,  social  sciences  such  as  law  and  business  management,  to  
organizational management and others.    

For    the    provision       of   secured      products       and    services,     cybersecurity-related  
knowledge is indispensable in engaging in the manufacture of products and services.  
Taking  into  consideration  that  cybersecurity  is  an  essential  literacy  for  multiple  
people,  from  experts  in  all  of  the  ICTs-related  fields  to  ICTs  users,  the  Government  
will  examine possible measures, including recurrent  education at higher  education  
institutions,  the  expansion  of  opportunities  for  practical  exercises  in  industry- 
academia-public  coordination,  and  the  promotion  of  the  active  use  of  vocational  
training.    

  
(2) Expanding Elementary and Secondary Education for Cybersecurity    

In   the   interconnected   and   converged   information   society,   it   is   the   essential  
foundation for enriching and developing the people’s socio-economic activities and  
living  that  the  IoT  systems  and  other  ICTs  are  fully  available  for  use  by  all  actors,  
including   individuals,         enterprises,   and   governmental             entities.    In   this   society,  
cybersecurity   is   a   literacy,   to   one   degree   or   another,   required   for   everyone.  
Cybersecurity  literacy  includes  logical  thinking  capability  and  understandings  of  
ICTs  as  well  as  the  basic  mechanisms  of  equipment.  It  is  vital  to  cultivate  such  
literacy    based      on   school     children’s      developmental         stages     starting     from    the  
elementary and secondary education levels. Moreover, learning cybersecurity at the  
pre-tertiary  education  level  is  critical  for  the  development  of  cyber  experts  at  the  
higher  education  stage;  pre-tertiary  learning  is  equally  required  for  conventional  
ICTs experts and ICTs users to become cybersecurity literate.    

The  Government  will  further  promote  elementary  and  secondary  education  for:  
nurturing practical skills, scientific understanding of information, and participatory  
attitudes towards the data-driven society; facilitating understanding of information  
morality,  including  information  security  and  other  associated  understandings;  and  
fostering logical thinking capability and understandings of  ICTs as well as the basic  
mechanisms  of  equipment,  and  more.  It  is  also  the  Government’s  plan  to  improve  
and  expand  training  and  other  activities  for  teachers  to  improve  their  ICTs-based  
teaching capabilities.    

  
(3) Identifying, Fostering, and Recruiting World-class Exceptional Talent    

With   regard   to      cybersecurity-related   human   resources,   the                  Government   will  
continue to  make  efforts to  discover  exceptionally talented  individuals,  in  addition  
to  promote  cybersecurity  education  offered  by  educational  institutions,  such  as  
graduate schools engaging in cybersecurity-specific advanced research cooperation.  

                                                        48  

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

  

It  is  also  aimed to  promote the  development  of  self-help  cybersecurity  capabilities  
to examine appropriate incident responses, through research on various methods of  
counteractions against cyber attacks, including defensive and offensive methods.    

Moreover,  given  the  fact  that  cybersecurity  has  become  a  global  challenge,  the  
exceptionally  talented  domestic  human  resources  are  expected  to  become  globally  
competent;  in  other  words,  it  needs  to  nurture  individuals  who  are  capable  of  
working  across  the  national  borders.  For  this  reason,  the  Government will  actively  
launch  various  initiatives,  such  as  more  supports  for  organizing  contest  events  by  
inviting  overseas  participants,  and  building  networks  among  talented  individuals.  
With such initiatives, talented domestic individuals will become more motivated by  
knowing  their  levels  of  cybersecurity  skills  compared  with  the  global  standards,  
while staying in Japan.    

    
(4) Building Long Term Career Paths for Cyber Experts  

A  majority  of  organizations  are  using  ICTs  as  a  tool  to  achieve  their  business  
objectives.   This   means  that   organizations   using   ICTs   are   required  to   address  
cybersecurity   as  their  business   management   issue.  At  these   organizations,  all  
business levels, from the operational level to the board level, need to be equipped by  
human  capacity  with  cybersecurity  expertise  to  ensure  cybersecurity  readiness,  
based  on  the  different  needs  at  each  business  level.  As  for  cybersecurity-related  
industries,  their  human  resources  challenge  is  to  employ  not  only  cybersecurity- 
specific   personnel   but   also   those   who   perform   supervisory   duties   for   them.  
Moreover, to  clarify  career  paths  corresponding with the  organizational  needs will  
be  beneficial  for  enterprise  senior  executives,  educated  cybersecurity  personnel,  
and human resources developers.    

In  this  regard,  the  Government  will  aim  at  creating  a  virtuous  circle  of  supply  and  
demand  of  human  resources  through  appropriate  measures:  the  visualization  of  
competency, by  developing  qualification  schemes to  evaluate  cybersecurity-related  
personnel’s   practical   skills   timely   and   appropriately   and   by   establishing   the  
standards of basic skills required to perform assigned functions at organizations; the  
promotion  of  activities  for  better  matching  of  occupational  supply  and  demand,  
including  the  expansion  of  internship  opportunities,  with  consideration  of  the  
nature  of businesses  concerned  and host  organizations’  needs; the  development  of  
career paths for cybersecurity human resources across industries, academia, and the  
public  sector;  the  promotion  of  other  relevant  measures  in  various  perspectives,  
including business finance, and so on.    

  
(5) Strategizing Human Resources Development for Enhanced Organizational  
     Capacities    

                                                        49  

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

  

There   are   rapidly   increasing   and   aggravating   cyber   attacks  that  target  whole  
organizations,  including  governmental  bodies  and  CII  operators.  To  tackle  cyber  
attacks  in  an  accurate  and  timely  manner,  it  is  not  enough  to  make  the  efforts  of  
individuals to enhance their cyber defense capabilities; what is important is aligning  
these  individual  efforts  in  an  organic  fashion  for  building  enhanced  organizational  
capacity. For the overall organizational improvement of cybersecurity capabilities in  
effective  and  efficient  way,  it  is  crucial  to  create  competitive  environments  where  
different   organizations   could   learn   from   each   other,   while   helping   individual  
organizations  grasp  their  current  levels  of  practical  skills  as  well  as  challenges  
specifically.    

For this reason, the Government will work to systematize organizational capabilities  
necessary  to  counter  cyber  attacks,  and  make  practical  exercise  activities  more  
comprehensive to improve such organizational capabilities. The enhancement of the  
public-private collaboration frameworks will be also undertaken by the Government  
for   the   purposes   of   collective   damage   control   and   recurrence   prevention   or  
reduction in the event of serious cyber attacks or other cybersecurity incidents.    

                                           

                                                           50  

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

  

      6. Promotion and Implementation of Cybersecurity  
                                             Strategy  

The Cybersecurity Strategic Headquarters performs the command and control body  
functions  to  promote  this  strategy,  and,  as  its  secretariat,  the  NISC  takes  a  leading  
role  to  implement  cybersecurity  policies  in  line  with  this  strategy.  To  this  end,  the  
NISC  fulfills  its  functions: to  implement  required  measures,  including the  network- 
based    cybersecurity   vigilance        and   monitoring       of  malicious     activities   against  
information systems of administrative organs, audit, and fact-finding activities; and  
to  enhance   governmental          cybersecurity      capabilities,   in   terms     of   information  
gathering     and    analysis    on   domestic      and   foreign    cybersecurity,      international  
cooperation,  cybersecurity  workforce  development  for  and  by  the  governmental  
bodies, and others. To fully perform its responsibilities, the NISC will take necessary  
measures,  including:  further  enhancing  its  response  capabilities  by  appointing  
highly advanced cybersecurity experts from the private sector and other means; and  
building  frameworks  for  rapid  information  sharing  with  relevant  governmental  
bodies  (including those  of  senior  executives)  so that the  NISC  can  obtain necessary  
information quickly in the case of a cybersecurity incident and the Government as a  
whole can take appropriate actions.    

The  governmental  bodies  have  the  responsibilities  to  implement  cybersecurity  
measures, in close coordination with the NISC, necessary for the fulfillments of their  
functions,     and   to   share    information      with    and    provide    essential     advice    for  
organizations  and business  operators  under their jurisdictions.  Especially, to boost  
national  cybersecurity  capabilities  as  a  whole,  the  enhanced  coordination  will  be  
intended  among  parties  concerned,  including  active  information  sharing  among  
industries,  academia,  and  the  public  sector,  in  addition  to  relevant  governmental  
bodies. In particular, to become capable of taking necessary measures in the case of  
a cybersecurity incident, while controlling the situation in a steady and calm manner,  
it  is  essential to work  on the  routine basis to  enhance the governmental  structures  
for incident readiness, i.e. detecting, analyzing, and responding to cyber attacks and  
other  cybersecurity  incidents.  In  this  sense,  the  Government  will  implement  the  
government-wide  measures  to  strengthen  its  information  gathering  and  analysis  
functions,  e.g.  coordination  with  the  private  sector  and  cyber  counterintelligence  
activities, for the purposes of: expanding daily information gathering activities; and  
foreseeing and detecting cyber threats promptly. The Government will also build the  
organizational  structures  with  advanced  capabilities  for  information  gathering,  
analysis,  and  sharing to  perform  an  integrated  cycle  of  detection,  analysis,  decision  
making, and response regarding cyber attacks.  

                                                   51  

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

  

With   regard   to   its   crisis   management   function,   with   the   aim   of   its   further  
enhancement,  the  Government  will  review  its  ways  of  taking  initial  responses  to  
cyber   attacks   and   other   cybersecurity   incidents   and   confirming  the   status   of  
measures taken against them, such as the recommendation(s) made by the  Chief of  
the  Cybersecurity  Strategic  Headquarters.  At  the  same  time,  the  Government  will  
build    an    organizational       framework        that    enables     the   governmental         bodies,  
independent  administrative  agencies,  cybersecurity  business  operators,  and  other  
relevant  stakeholders  to  respond  jointly  to  cyber  incidents,  such  as  massive  cyber  
attacks;  the  Government  will  also  make  proactive  efforts  for  coordination  with  
relevant parties having specific expertise, in terms of incident responses to massive  
cyber attacks, practical training and exercises for human resources development and  
others,  in  coordination  among  industries,  academia,  and  the  public  sector.  These  
efforts  include  measures  to:  utilize  the  knowledge  and  experiences  of  relevant  
entities,  such  as  Information-Technology  Promotion  Agency  (IPA),  for  monitoring,  
audit, fact-finding activities, and other functions performed by the Government; and  
utilize  the  technical  knowledge  and  skills  of  relevant  entities,  such  as  the  National  
Institute    of   Information       and    Communications           Technology       (NICT),     regarding  
infrastructure  for   simulation   exercises  as  well  as   monitoring  and  analysis  for  
strengthening        cybersecurity-related          response      capabilities.     To    achieve     these  
purposes,   the   Government   will   take   necessary   measures,   including   legislative  
measures.  

In  recent  years,  there  is  an  increase  in  highly  advanced  and  well-planned  cyber  
attacks that  might be  suspected as  state-sponsored.  Countering  such  cyber  attacks  
is  one  of  the  most  critical  challenges  for  Japan’s  crisis  management  and  national  
security.   The   Cybersecurity   Strategic   Headquarters   will   collaborate   and   share  
information  with  the  crisis  management  organs,  including  the  serious  terrorism  
response headquarters,  where  necessary,  and  take  appropriate  actions  concerning  
national security, in close coordination with the National Security Council.  

Moreover,      it  is   an   upmost      necessity      for  Japan     to   work     towards      ensuring  
cybersecurity for the major international events, including the Tokyo 2020 Olympic  
and  Paralympic  Games,  to  the  maximum  extent  feasible.  Especially  with  regard  to  
the  Tokyo  Olympic  and  Paralympic  Games,  based  on  a  clear  understanding  of  
cybersecurity       risks   and    challenges      related   to   the    Tokyo   2020   Olympic         and  
Paralympic  Games,  the  Government  will  accelerate  the  formulation  process  of  the  
Tokyo  2020  Olympic  and  Paralympic  CSIRT  as  a  core  organ  responsible  for:  the  
accurate   prevention   and         detection      of  cyber   attacks   against   relevant         entities  
involving the management and operation of the Olympic and Paralympic Games and  
other  associated  businesses  as  well  as  those  against  the  services  provided  by  
relevant     CII;   and   the   sharing     of   information   absolutely         necessary   for   these  

                                                     52  

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

  

stakeholders to take appropriate measures. The Government will take steady actions  
step   by    step   to:    build    and    maintain       necessary      organizations,        facilities,   and  
cooperative  relationships;  assure  a  pool  of  cybersecurity  experts;  and  conduct  
comprehensive preparatory training based  on the process taken for and  during the  
42nd  G7  Summit  in  the  Ise-Shima  region  in  2016  as  well  as  the  Rugby  World  Cup  
held in Japan in 2019. Capabilities developed through these measures will be utilized  
later for the sustainable enhancement of Japan’s cybersecurity.    

These   cybersecurity   policies   are   highly   critical   from   the   viewpoint   of   crisis  
management  and  national  security.  To  promote them  more  firmly, the  Government  
will  start  feasible  measures  promptly  and,  where  necessary,  take  actions,  without  
delay,  to  establish  new  procedures  required  for  the  implementation  of  certain  
measures.  Such  measures  include:  securing  and  executing  the  budget  appropriate  
for  the  Government  as  a  whole  by  certain  ways,  e.g.  the  reallocation  of  the  budget  
and  other  resources to  additional  necessary  expenses  and  others, with  cost-saving  
efforts, such as streamlining and increasing efficiency in administrative affairs by the  
review  of  administrative  works,  system  reforms,  and  the  reexamination  of  other  
activities;  and  appointing  highly  talented  individuals  as  in-house  cybersecurity  
experts at the governmental bodies, by assuring employment conditions that would  
suit the professional values of their expertise.  

                                         

                                                        53  

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

  

                             7. Plan Process and Review  

Based  on  the  current  state  of  the  nation  as  well  as  the  future  scenarios  for  Japan’s  
society in the early  2020s, this strategy extracts critical issues that Japan has faced,  
and  outlines  the  basic  strategic  directions  over  the  coming  three  years,  for  the  
resolution   of   these   issues.   For   the   steady   implementation   of   the   strategy,   in  
compliance   with   the   Basic   Act   on   Cybersecurity,   the   Cybersecurity   Strategic  
Headquarters will establish an annual plan for each fiscal year during the triennium,  
and  will  produce  an  annual  report  for  the  corresponding  year,  by  reviewing  the  
status of progress in policy implementation.    

At  the  same  time,  the   Cybersecurity   Strategic   Headquarters  will   establish  the  
guidelines   and   basic   policy   of   budget   plans   for   the   governmental   bodies   to  
implement   cybersecurity   measures   effectively   in   line   with   the   directions   the  
strategy  indicates.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the  situations  and  technical  premises  in  
cyberspace  are  frequently  evolving  in  an  incoherent  fashion,  the  Government  will  
undertake a functional review flexibly, where necessary, regardless of the timeframe  
the three year plan covers.    

  

        

        

        

                                                                54  
