 

Ministry of Information and Communications Technology 

 

 
 
 

National Information 
Assurance and Cyber 

Security Strategy 

(NIACSS) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2012 

 
 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
Acknowledgement 
 

This  document  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  support  of  many 
people.  

Document Review 

Ver. 

Type 

Date 

Comments 

1.0 

Draft 

June 1st , 2011 

Initiated by Minister of ICT,   

Draft 

July 26th, 2011 

Eng. Atef Al Tell 

CNIP  program 
NITC(Dr. Ahmed Otoom) 

is  added  by  SPI  Adv., 

Draft 

August 14th, 2011 

Review by Minister of ICT, 

Draft 

Draft 

Draft 

Draft 

August 15th, 2011 

August 18th, 2011 

September 4th,2011 

September 11th, 2011 

Eng. Atef Al Tell 

Review by Timothy Bloechl on V2.0 

Review by GM &  SPI Adv., NITC 

Review by PS Dir. & E-Gov Dir., MoICT 

Review  by  PS  Dir.,  MoICT,  SPI  Adv.,  and 
GM, NITC 

Final Draft  October 16th, 2011 

Public Review 

Final 

July 30th, 2012  

Review by Minister of ICT,  

Approved 

September 24th,2012 

Approved by Cabinet  

Eng. Atef Al Tell 

2.0 

3.0 

4.0 

5.0 

6.0 

7.0 

8.0 

9.0 

9.0 

 

Point of Contact 

Please direct inquiries about this strategy, if any, to the following point of contact 
 
Organization: National Information Technology Center (NITC) 
Name: Dr. Ahmed Otoom 
Title: DG’s Advisor for the Implementation of E-Gov.  Information Strategies and Policies 
Email: ahmad.o@nitc.gov.jo 
Telephone: (+962 65300269) 
Fax: (+962 65300277) 

 

 

 

 Page 2 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
Table of Contents 
1. 

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................. 4 

2. 

3. 

Scope ....................................................................................................................................... 6 

Strategic Objectives ................................................................................................................. 6 

4.  National Information Security priorities.................................................................................. 7 

4.1.  Risk Management Program ............................................................................................. 7 

4.2.  National Computer Emergency Response Team (JOCERT)........................................... 8 

4.3. 

Security Awareness and Capacity Building Program ...................................................... 9 

4.4.  Develop National Information Security Standards and Policies ................................... 10 

4.5. 

Legal and Regulatory Regime ....................................................................................... 11 

4.6.  National Encryption System .......................................................................................... 12 

4.7. 

International Information Security Cooperation Program ............................................. 13 

4.8. 

Securing National Information Systems and Networks................................................. 14 

4.8.1. 

Personnel Security ............................................................................................... 14 

4.8.2. 

Physical Security .................................................................................................. 15 

4.8.3. 

Network and Communication Security ............................................................. 15 

4.8.4. 

Software Security ................................................................................................. 15 

4.8.5. 

Procedural Security ............................................................................................. 16 

4.8.6. 

Electro-Magnetic Emissions (Radiations)  Security ......................................... 16 

4.9.  Critical National Infrastructure Protection (CNIP) Program ......................................... 17 

5. 

Implementation Road Map ................................................................................................... 17 

6.  Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 19 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Page 3 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
1 .   E X E C U T I V E   S U M M A R Y  

Jordanian  Government  organizations  and  private  sector  have  different 
approaches  to  ensure  the  security  of  their  information  systems  and  critical 
information infrastructures. However, these approaches: are generally basic; 
not  systematic;  subjective;  have  no  clear  definition  or  boundaries,  are  not 
thorough;  do  not  meet  international  standards;  and  do  not  deal  effectively 
with  threats  emerging  from  cyberspace.  Moreover,  cyber  security  efforts 
across  Jordanian  Government  organizations  and  private  sector  are  not 
consolidated and risks are not addressed at the national level. 

The  revolution  in  information  and  communication  technologies,  powerful 
personal  computers,  high-bandwidth  and  wireless  networking  technologies, 
widespread  use  of  the  internet,  and  the  high  volume  of  information 
exchanged over  the internet and local networks make it very difficult within 
currently  adopted  approaches  to  obtain  and  maintain  the  desired  level  of 
information  security.  The  weaknesses  in  current  approaches,  coupled  with 
rapid  advancements  in  technology  place  national  networks  at  higher  risks. 
The  nation  needs  secure  and  reliable  national  information  infrastructures 
which  are  resilient  to  malicious  attack  or  arbitrary  disruption  to  maintain  a 
high  level  of  trust  in  these  systems  across  government,  with  the  private 
sector, and within the citizenry.  

Government  of  Jordan  recognizes  the  challenges  posed  by  malevolent 
actors’ access to cyberspace. Reports of cyber-attacks and their impact are a 
routine,  daily  occurrence  around  the  world.  Furthermore,  while  we  know 
what  is  known  from  these  reports,  the  high  probability  of  unreported  or 
unknown  attacks  or  intrusions  causes  even  greater  concern.    These 
challenges  require  coordinated  and  focused  efforts  from  all  government 
organizations and strong partnerships between the public and private sectors, 
and  with  our  citizens.  Meeting  these  challenges  requires  all  information 
assurance and security plans and activities adhere to a nationwide strategy to 
guarantee  consistency  and  successful  implementation  of  a  coordinated  and 
effective cyber defense.  

 

 Page 4 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 

technical  and  managerial  measures 
Information  Assurance: 
integrity,  availability, 
designed 
authenticity,  possession  or  control,  and  utility  of  information  and 
information systems. 

the  confidentiality, 

to  ensure 

This  National  Information  Assurance  and  Cyber  Security  Strategy 
(NIACSS)  is  not  only  intended  to  secure  the  Internet  cyberspace,  it  should 
provide  a  secure  and  trusted  computing  environment  for  all  IT-related 
throughout  all 
infrastructure 
identified  national  priorities 
herein.    The  NIACSS  should 
augment  the  overall  National 
Security  Strategy  (NSS)  for 
Jordan.  The  main  purpose  of 
the  NIACSS 
to  give 
structure, 
and 
concerned 
empower 
organizations  to  more  effectively  secure  computer  networks  they  own, 
operate, control, or interact with.  

The  NIACSS  aims  to  provide  a 
strong  foundation  to  secure  the 
National  IT  Infrastructure  and  is 
not  only  confined  to  secure  the 
Internet cyberspace  

involve, 
all 

is 

support 

road  map.  The 

strategic  objectives 

identifies  strategic  objectives,  national  priorities,  and  an 
NIACSS 
implementation 
the 
Government’s  vision  for  the  path  ahead.  This  vision  aims  to  improve 
information  assurance  and  cyber  security  measures  in  Jordan.  Supporting 
national information security priorities address the critical needs required to 
guarantee  a  successful  and  effective  protection  of  the  national  cyberspace.  
The  NIACSS  also  considers  the  following  important  areas:  Organization, 
Technical,  Legal,  Capacity  Building,  and  Partnerships.  National  cyber 
security  priorities  demand  collaboration  within  the  Government,  and  with 
international  partners,  the  private  sector,  and  the  population. 
  The 
implementation road map guides successful implementation of the identified 
priorities towards achieving the strategic objectives.  

 

 Page 5 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
This document is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 list the Scope and 
the Strategic Objectives of (NIACSS), respectively. Section 4 lists National 
Information  Security  Priorities.  Section  5  outlines 
the  Strategy 
Implementation  Road  Map.  Finally,  Section  6  summarizes  the  overall 
strategy. 

2 .   S C O P E  

The National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy applies 
to  all  information  domains  to  achieve  comprehensive  information 
security  in  Jordan.  Although  the  government  is  the  developer  of  this 
strategy,  a  successful  implementation  requires  collaboration  among  all 
involved  parties:  government,  international  partners,  and  the  private 
sector. Efforts of involved parties must complement rather than conflict 
with each other.  Strategies and policies developed by the private sector 
should augment, comply, and be consistent with this strategy. 

3 .   S T R A T E G I C   O B J E C T I V E S  

3.1.  Strengthen Jordan’s National Security by Preventing Cyber Attacks to 

Critical Information Infrastructures. 

3.2.  Minimize  Risks 

to  Critical 

Information 

Infrastructures  and 

Government Networks by Reducing Vulnerabilities. 

3.3.  Minimize Damage and Recovery Time from Cyber Attacks regardless 

of source or intent. 

Information  Systems  Security, 

3.4.  Enhance  Jordan’s  Economy  and  improve  National  Prosperity  by 
Increasing  Confidence  and  Trust  in  Government,  and  by  extension, 
Private 
encouraging 
investment  and  creating  opportunities  for  enhanced  collaborative 
processes. 
Increase  Information  Security  Awareness  and  its  importance  to 
National Security through a National Information Security Awareness 
and Training Program. 

3.5. 

thereby 

 

 Page 6 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
4 .   N A T I O N A L   I N F O R M A T I O N   S E C U R I T Y  

P R I O R I T I E S  

To  achieve  the  National  Strategic  Objectives  listed  above  (Section  3), 
Government  of  Jordan  organizes  its  NIACSS  across  nine  major  national 
interdependent  priorities,  each  priority  demanding  collaboration  across 
Government,  and  with  international  partners,  the  private  sector,  and  the 
citizenry.  Taken  as  a  whole,  these  priorities  form  the  action  lines  of  the 
NIACSS Implementation Roadmap.  The nine priorities (not sorted in order 
of importance) are: 

1)  Risk Management Program 
2)  National Computer Emergency Response Team (JOCERT) 
3)  Security Awareness and Capacity Building Program 
4)  National Information Security Standards and Policies 
5)  Legal and Regulatory Regime 
6)  National Encryption System 
7)  International Information Security Cooperation Program 
8)  Securing National Information Systems/Networks 
9)  Critical National Infrastructure Protection (CNIP) Program 

   Risk Management Program 

4.1. 
A  Nation-Wide  Risk  Management  Program 
will  establish  the  needed  framework  for  high 
level impact risk management on the national 
level.  It  will  not  address  individual  risks,  for 
government  entities  and  private  sector,  with 
little  or  no  impact  on  the  national  level. 
Government  organizations  and  private  sector 
must  address  and  manage  their  own  risks. 
They  must 
risk 
management programs or plans that are inline 
with  the  Nation-Wide  Risk  Management 
Program. 

develop 

their  own 

Government 
organizations 
and 
private  sector  will 
develop and maintain 
management 
risk 
programs 
that  are 
the 
inline 
nation-wide 
risk 
management 
program. 

with 

In  cyberspace,  risks  can  never  be  reduced  to 
zero  and  there  is  no  100%  secure  system. 

 

 Page 7 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

identifying 

 
Therefore, understanding  the  magnitude  and potential  impact  of  these  risks 
informs  organizational  prioritization  against  limited  resources.  Proper  risk 
assessment and management in Government organizations will contribute to 
business  continuity  and  mission  success.  Organizations  should  assess  risk 
both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  by 
threats  and 
vulnerabilities.  The  likelihood  and  impact  of  each  risk  should  be  evaluated 
against  organization  missions  and  assets  to  identify  security  gaps.    These 
gaps  then  define  the  true  nature  of  the  potential  risk  faced  by  the 
organization  against which  leaders  must decide  either to  accept  the  risk, or 
take action to minimize or reduce the potential threat.  
 
As no system is risk-free, government organizations should maintain disaster 
recovery  plans  that  are  products  of  effective  risk  management  programs. 
Successful disaster recovery plans ensure organizations are back in operation 
in a short time period after incidents occur. Government organizations must 
adapt to  the  following  strategies, for  responding to  risks,  where  applicable: 
mitigation, transference, acceptance, and avoidance.  
 

 

of 

information 

through 

the 

technologies 

 National Computer Emergency Response Team (JOCERT) 

4.2. 
Information  systems  are  targets  for  cyber-attack  due  to:  1)  revolutionary 
and 
growth 
telecommunication 
in 
government  organizations  and  big  business 
as  well;  2)  availability  of  Government  E-
services 
E-Government 
program; 3) increasing   internet penetration 
rate  and  e-commerce  usage,  and;  4)  the 
increasing number of connected systems and 
networks.  
 
Cyber-attacks increase the possibility of data disclosure,  data manipulation, 
data loss, and systems sabotage.  These factors trigger the urgent need for a 
National  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (JOCERT).  At  its  highest 
level,  the  JOCERT  helps  the  nation  prepare  for,  prevent,  respond  to,  and 
recover from cyber incidents and attacks.  The JOCERT, which will require 
management and/or operational assets at national and organizational levels, 
will enable Jordan to  be better positioned to  manage and respond to cyber-

Government of Jordan 
will establish a 
National Computer 
Emergency Response 
Team (JOCERT) 

 

 Page 8 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
attacks and incidents to achieve a higher level of efficiency and transparency 
in dealing across government, with citizens and the private sector. 
 
The  JOCERT  will  coordinate  with  regional  and  international  emergency 
warning  systems  and  should  offer 
four  kinds  of 
capabilities/services:  proactive,  reactive,  quality  management,  and  training. 
JOCERT  will  deal  with  information  system  security  incidents  utilizing  the 
following methodology: receiving alerts, analyzing incidents, responding to 
incidents, and announcing incidents, respectively. 

following 

the 

   Security Awareness and Capacity Building Program 

4.3. 
 

in 

resources. 

investment 

Cyber  Security  and  Information  Assurance  Awareness  and  Training 
Programs are a critical priority. Establishing and maintaining these programs 
empowers  Government  organizations  and 
private  sector  and  yields  a  great  potential 
return  on 
terms  of 
contributing  to  the  protection  of  critical 
information 
  Organizations 
which continually train their workforce in 
security  policy  and  role-based  security 
responsibilities  will  have  a  higher  rate  of 
success in protecting critical information. 
Government  of  Jordan  will  develop  these 
programs  in  cooperation  with  the  private  sector.  These  programs  should 
have the following characteristics: 

Government of Jordan 
will design, develop, and 
implement CS&IA 
Awareness and Training 
Programs. 
 

  Increases public awareness of cyberspace security issues and efforts. 

  Addresses cyberspace security policy, tactics, techniques, and procedures 

including response plans in the event of cyber-attack.  

  Expands  the  government  information  technology  workforce  especially 

those focused on cyberspace security.  

  Involves  and  encourages  academic  and  research  institution  efforts  to 

improve Cyberspace security education, knowledge and capabilities. 

  Include a strong and well-balanced On-the-Job Training (OJT). 

 

 

 Page 9 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

   Develop National Information Security Standards and Policies 

 
4.4. 
An  authorized  government  entity,  National  Information  Assurance  and 
Security  Agency  (NIACSA)  (Section  5),  will  develop  and  or  customize 
nationwide  cyberspace  security  overarching  standards  considering  current 

The  efforts  of  implementing  nationwide  overarching  standards  and 
policies  will  be  assigned  or  managed  by  NIACSA  (Section  5). 
NIACSA  will  also  audit  and  evaluate  the  compliance  with  these 
standards and policies. NIACSA should have a flexible organizational 
structure  in  which  development,  review,  evaluation  and  audit  are 
assigned to responsible departments such that segregation of duties is 
maintained. 

international  standards,  policies,  and  best  practices,  such  as  encryption 
algorithms,  encryption  keys  management,  software  development,  physical 
and logical access control, and networks security. NIACSA will develop the 

Information Security Policy must be developed and enforced to meet 
optimum 
for  government 
organizations and private sector. 

requirements 

information 

security 

necessary guidelines and training programs to guarantee that related entities 
can implement such standards and policies 
Individual government entities and private sector that have different security 
requirements will have the ability to develop their own security policies that 
do not contradict with the nationwide security policy. NIACSA, Government 
entities  and  private  sector  must  co-operate  to  ensure  that  their  policies 
augment, comply, and be consistent with the nationwide policies.  

 

 Page 10 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
A  nationwide  policy  should  be  developed,  published  and  communicated  to 
provide  direction  and  support  for  information  security  per  this  strategy, 
relevant laws, regulations and international information security standards.  
 
The resulting information security standards and policies should be reviewed 
at planned intervals to accommodate for the rapid change of the cyberspace 
environment  to  ensure  currency  and  effectiveness.  Standards  and  policies 
should  have  a  single  owner  for  development,  review  and  evaluation.  At 
national and organizational level, officials and any other necessary party will 
be  designated  to  help  develop,  promulgate,  and  review  standards  and 
policies. There should be defined management review procedures.  Reviews 
should provide recommended improvements or changes needed according to 
law, and organizational and technical environments. The reviews should also 
consider feedback from interested parties, status of preventive and corrective 
actions,  trends  related  to  threats  and  vulnerabilities,  reported  incidents  and 
actions taken to respond and recover from these incidents.  . 
 
Information Security Policies should:  

  Assign and define information security  classification  levels required for 

the Government organizations. 

  Comply with Jordanian laws and adopted international standards. 
  Define organizational roles and responsibilities. 
  Define policy distribution, training, and implementation timelines. 
  Provide  compliance  and  certification  procedures,  and  approval 

authorities.    

  Provide  procedures 

for  corrective  actions 

for  non-compliance. 

 

4.5. 
 

   Legal and Regulatory Regime  

The  need  for  empowering  laws  and  regulations  to  support  and  enforce  the 
implementation of the strategy is a must.  A specialized committee should be 
formed  with  members 
Information  and 
Communications  Technology  and  Ministry  of  Justice  experts  to  further 
explore this area and provide recommendations. 
 

the  Ministry  of 

from 

 

 Page 11 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
Government  organizations  and  private  sector  need  to  develop  their  own 
internal  regulations  consistent  and  compliant  with  national  laws  to  cover 
information security-related legal issues. 
 

   National Encryption System 

 

later  on  produce 

4.6. 
 
A  National  Encryption  Centre  (NEC)  will  be 
established to manage, control, plan, monitor, and 
enforce  the  national  strategic  encryption  policies 
and 
indigenous  national 
algorithms  and  keys.  Government  organizations 
and involved parties will adhere to the encryption 
standards,  policies,  or 
strategic  guidelines 
approved  and  or  developed  by  the  NEC.  While 
the  private  sector  will  have  the  flexibility  to  use 
their  own  encryption  solutions,  these  solutions 
should never violate the approved standards, policies, or strategic guidelines. 
 
Government  organizations  and  private  sector  need  to  use  encryption  along 
with  other  security  measures  to  protect  classified  sensitive  and  critical 
information  assets.  The  following  strategic  needs  list  for  Government 
organizations  will  ensure  investment  in  encryption  today  delivers  strategic 
value to national security efforts: 

A National 
Encryption 
Centre should be 
established 

4.6.1  A  national  encryption  policy  will  be  developed,  coordinated,  and 

placed in force. 

4.6.2  Applicable  international  standards  and  best  practices  should  be 

considered for adoption for better encryption management. 

4.6.3  Encryption  should  be  applied  to  all  data  deemed  sensitive  or 

classified.  

4.6.4  Encryption should be considered where necessary when data is stored, 

transmitted/disseminated and or processed.  

4.6.5  Government  organizations  must  ensure  encryption  is  used  in  parallel 

with other necessary security measures (defense-in-depth).  

4.6.6  Government  organizations  must  continually  monitor  or  audit  all 
automated  and  manual  actions  and  ensure  procedures  are  in  place  to 
guarantee  the  integrity  and  security  of  encryption  capabilities  and 
associated logs. 

 Page 12 of 20 

 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 

4.7. 
 

 

   International Information Security Cooperation Program 

Jordan is connected to other countries through information networks. Cyber-
attacks  can  cause  serious  problems  for  national  security.  Therefore,  the 
government and all concerned must prepare to defend critical infrastructures 
and respond effectively.  To do so requires international cooperation. 

Jordan needs to be part of an international effort to raise awareness, develop 
and promote security standards and best practices, investigate and prosecute 
malevolent  users  across  borders,  and  negotiate  and  conclude  bilateral  and 
multi-national agreements. The following actions support this priority: 

4.7.1  Share  and  analyze 

information  on  vulnerabilities, 

threats  and 

incidents. 

4.7.2  Participate in, utilize, and get benefits from current international 
efforts, such as cyber war exercises and international cyber alarm 
initiatives. 
4.7.3  Coordinate 

investigations  of  cyber-attacks  and  other  potential 
computer-related crimes with international partners as required by law 
and agreement.  

4.7.4  Promote  research  and  development  and  encourage  the  application  of 

internationally certified security technologies. 

National information security cannot be achieved or strengthened to a 
required 
international 
governments,  research  centers,  universities,  organizations, and  the 
private sector.  

level  without  cooperating  with  other 

 

 

 

 Page 13 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
4.8. 

   Securing National Information Systems and Networks 

Securing  national  systems  should  not  only  prevent  security  breaches,  but 
also  detect  and  respond  to  possible  attacks.  Employing  Defense-in-Depth 
multiple layers of protection methods 
is  critical  to  securing  government 
systems  and  networks.  Defense-in-
Depth  is  not  limited  to  technical 
security  methods  and  procedures.  
Defense-in-Depth  should  also  be 
resilient 
rapid 
change  in  the  cyber environment.   It 
also  includes  a  close  examination  of 
personnel  security,  network  setup  and  configuration,  and  operational 
procedures.    Security  vulnerabilities  across  personnel,  technology,  and 
operations must be considered throughout the system's life cycle.  

Employ Defense-in-Depth to 
protect national information 
systems 

to 

accommodate 

It  is  through  the  combination  of  people,  technology  and  operations  which 
provides  the  greatest  cyber  security  posture.  Tactics,  techniques,  and 
procedures must be developed in the following areas to ensure success:  

4.8.1. Personnel Security 

 

Government organizations and private sector must issue security clearances 
to  users,  system  administrators,  and  any  other  parties  using  or  accessing 
information  systems.  Security  clearance  validation  and  renewal  requires 
appropriate management, background checks, and commitment of resources. 
Also, cleared personnel require a “need-to-know” and integration in physical 
security systems to ensure control and monitoring of man and machine in the 
government  information  systems.  Private  sector  will  manage  personnel 
security issues under its control. Private sector still needs to cooperate with 
the  authorized  government  organization(s)  to  fulfill  personnel  security 
requirements outside its authority. 

 

 

 

 Page 14 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
4.8.2. Physical Security 

Government  organizations  and  private  sector  must  employ  all  necessary 
measures  to  deter,  delay,  and  detect  attackers  or  potential  insider  threats 
from accessing a facility, resource, or information stored on physical media.   
When  the  physical  environment  is  threatened,  appropriate  response  options 
must be in place.  Organizations should plan for this event, as well as natural 
disasters,  manmade  catastrophes,  accidental  damage  and  other  various 
events  which  could  damage  the  information  infrastructure.  These  plans 
should  be  tested  and  exercised  regularly  to  ensure  response  times  and 
effectiveness. 

 

4.8.3. Network and Communication Security  

networks, 

sector  must  defend 
infrastructures, 
they  own 

the 
Government  organizations  and  private 
networks 
communications 
boundaries,  and  computing  systems 
through  using 
proper  COMSEC  and  TRANSEC  technologies,  protection  paths  and 
secure 
communication 
infrastructures  must  be  secure,  reliable  and  available, 
they  must 
maintain  the  trust  of  government,  private  sector  and  individuals,  and 
should  be 
to  malicious  or  arbitrary  disruption  and  or 
deception. 
 

alternatives. 

National 

networks 

and 

critical 

that 

resilient 

4.8.4. Software Security 

Government  organizations  and  private  sector  must  ensure  software 
consistently  exhibits  required  desirable  properties  even  when  the  software 
comes  under  attack.  It  should  minimize  the  numerous  flaws  and  errors  in 
software that are often located and exploited by attackers to compromise the 
software’s security and other required properties. Software should be able to 
resist most attacks and tolerate the majority of those attacks it cannot resist. 
If  neither  resistance  nor  tolerance  is  possible  and  the  software  is 
compromised,  it  should  be  able  to  isolate  itself  from  the  attack  source  and 

 

 Page 15 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
degrade  gracefully.  Resistance  and  tolerance  are  relatively  ensured  by 
having  software  manufactures  a)  adhere  to  software  security  development 
lifecycle  and  b)  constant  vulnerability  assessment,  analysis  of  perceived 
vulnerabilities, and rapid counter-measures or other configuration changes. 

A  certification  and  accreditation  program  should  be  established  for  all 
critical  software  that  will  be  used  in  government  entities  and  business 
entities  that  operate  critical  national  infrastructure.  Moreover,  Government 
organizations  and  private  sector  will  follow  national  guidelines,  standards, 
rules  and  best  practices  needed 
to  guarantee  software  acquisition, 
procurement,  outsourcing,  in-house  developed  software,  and  Commercially 
available  Off-The-Shelf  (COTS)  components  will  deliver  software  that 
commit to the national security rules and do not yield security breaches.  

4.8.5. Procedural Security  

and 

in 

security 

organizations 

Government 
ensure 
information 
place,  well-
understood,  and  successfully  implemented.  These  procedures  should 
meet  the  set  of  regulations,  rules,  best  practices,  national  information 
security  policies  and  standards  that  direct  how  an  entity  manages, 
protects its communications and distributes sensitive information.  

sector  must 
are 

private 
procedures 

related 

4.8.6. Electro-Magnetic Emissions (Radiations)  Security 

sector  must  ensure 

Government  organizations  and  private 
that 
sensitive  information  is  not  leaked  through  system  electro-magnetic 
take 
emissions 
necessary 
should 
measures 
information  and 
sensitive 
this  vulnerability  utilizing 
prevent 
Tempest  Devices,  shielding,  Faraday  caging  and  or  any  other 
necessary measures. 

(radiations).  Organizations 
systems  having 

to  protect 

adversaries 

exploiting 

from 

 

 

 

 Page 16 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
4.9. 

  Critical National Infrastructure Protection (CNIP) Program 

to 

a  program 

responsible 

assurance 

for 
(CNI) 

the  private  sector 

related-issues 
Infrastructure 

Government  of  Jordan  will  cooperate  with 
for 
establish 
and 
cyber 
information 
the  Critical 
security 
including 
National 
SCADA  systems.  The  CNI  are 
those 
information  assets  or  systems  of  critical 
value 
include 
to  Jordan. 
telecommunications, 
providers, 
banking  and  finance,  health  institutions, 
electrical  power  grid,  and  water  supply. 
CNI  support  economic,  political  and  social  life  of  Jordan  such  that 
any  entire  or  partial  loss  or  compromise  of  these  systems  may  result 
in  a  serious  impact  on  a  national  level;  or  may  be  of  instant  concern 
to the Government and people. 

A CNIP program is 
needed to secure 
systems of critical 
value to Jordan 

  Examples 

ISP 

The  government  should  regulate,  co-operate  and  work  closely  with 
those  parties  who  manage,  own,  or  operate  CNI.  The  government 
should  engage  with  those  parties  in  order  to  regulate  and  provide 
security  guidance  in  both  of  physical  and  virtual  domains  to  secure 
CNI.  

5 .   I M P L E M E N T A T I O N   R O A D   M A P  

Having  an  NIACSS  represents  only  the  first  step  towards  achieving  the 
expected  objectives.  Jordan  Government  is  committed  to  a  persistent 
the 
implementation  mechanism  utilizing 
appropriate resources to fulfill this strategy.  

Due  to  the  abstract  high-level  nature  of 
NIACSS,  it  will  be  explored  further  by 
NIACSA  that  will  be  established.  NIACSA 
will 
provide 
a 
supplementary 
“NIACSS 
Implementation  Road  Map”.  The  Road 

document 

enough 

details 

in 

A detailed NIACSS 
Implementation Road 
Map Document is 
required. 

 

 Page 17 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 
Map document will translate priorities and objectives listed in NIACSS into 
specific  well-defined  initiatives/projects.  The  implementation  of  these 
initiatives/projects will contribute to realizing the overall identified NIACSS 
objectives. 

 

NIACSS  calls  for  establishing  a  well-defined  organization  called  National 
Information  Assurance  and  Cyber  Security  Agency  (NIACSA).  NIACSA 
should  be  the  focal  point  for  all  information  assurance  and  Cyber  Security 
related issues and assigned the following responsibilities: 

 

5.1.  Be  the  single  point  of  reference  and  a  coordination  lead  Agency  for 
Jordan’s  information  assurance  and  cyberspace  security.  NIACSA 
should act as regulatory and advisory body. NIACSA should develop 
and  review  all  security-related  strategies,  standards,  policies,  laws, 
and champion required change in co-ordination with all stakeholders. 

5.2.  Manage and coordinate the efforts needed to implement the NIACSS 

related projects. 

5.3.  Manage the CNIP Program. 
5.4.  Manage Nation-Wide Risk Management Program 
5.5.  Audit  all  government’s  information  systems  and  procedures  to 
guarantee  compliance  with  national  security  standards  and  policies. 
Hence,  the  NIACSA  will  be  responsible  for  Compliance  and 
Certification. 

5.6.  Establish and manage the operation of : 

  National Cyberspace Security Operations Centre (CSOC). 
  National Computer Emergency Response Team (JO-CERT). 
  National Encryption Center (NEC). 

 
5.7.  Coordinate  with  all  government  entities  (including  Military,  Public 
Security  Department,  Civil  Defense  Department,  and  General 
Intelligence  Department)  and  private  sector  regarding  information 
assurance and cyber security. 
  Define Success criteria. 
  Raise the concern of cyberspace security within these entities. 
  Raise the visibility of cyberspace security within entities budgets. 
  Provide  technical  assistance  to  public  and  private  sectors  to 

guarantee proper protection of information systems and networks. 

 

 Page 18 of 20 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 

  Provide  proper  training  and  awareness  sessions  to  entities’ 
employees  to  help  them  comply  with  national  standards  and 
policies and to facilitate the implementation of the CIACSS. 

  Define  stages  for  cyberspace  security 

implementation  and 

enforcement. 

 
5.8.  Provide crisis management in response to attacks on  national critical 

information systems. 

5.9.  Coordinate with peer international agencies. 
5.10.  Organize  and  carry  out  evaluation  attacks  on  national  networks  in 

order to measure their readiness. 

5.11.  Be  fully  prepared  to  carry  out  preemptive  and  reactive  attacks  on 

hostile networks and or systems. 

6 .   C O N C L U S I O N  

Jordan  Government  realizes  the  threats  imposed  by  the  revolutionary 
changes  in  Information  Technology  and  the  cyberspace  environment. 
NIACSS is  presented  as  a  result  of the  government’s  review  of  the  current 
information security situation. Current approaches are basic, not systematic, 
subjective,  have  no  clear  definitions  and  boundaries,  not  thorough,  do  not 
follow  international  standards,  and  are  not  able  to  deal  effectively  with  the 
threats  especially  those  emerging  from  the  cyberspace.  Efforts  in  this  field 
are not consolidated and risks are not addressed at the national level. 
 
NIACSS  presents  the  strategic  objectives,  national  information  security 
priorities, and the implementation road map required to ensure and maintain 
a  resilient  and  trusted  computing  environment  that  supports  national 
security,  enhances  the  economy,  and  builds  awareness  and  trust  of  citizens 
towards  achieving  national  prosperity.  The  following  nine  major  national 
information  security  priorities  collectively  contribute  to  achieving  the 
strategic  objectives  and  help  to  prevent,  deter,  and  protect  national 
infrastructures against damage or attacks and minimize damage and recovery 
time from attacks that do occur: 
 

1)  Risk Management Program 
2)  National Computer Emergency Response Team (JOCERT). 

 Page 19 of 20 

 

National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS)  2012 

 

3)  Security Awareness and Capacity Building Program 
4)  National Information Security Standards and Policies 
5)  Legal and Regulatory Regime 
6)  National Encryption System 
7)  International Information Security Cooperation Program 
8)  Securing National Information Systems/Networks 
9)  Critical National Infrastructure Protection (CNIP) Program 

 

Those  nine  major  national 
interdependent  priorities  demand 
collaboration within Government, with international partners, with the 
private sector, and with the citizenry of Jordan.  
 

For implementation purposes, NIACSS calls for establishing a well-defined 
organization  called  National  Information  Assurance  and  Cyber  Security 
Agency  (NIACSA)  that  oversees  the  efforts  required  to  implement  the 
NIACSS and its  related  projects.  NIACSA  is  foreseen  as  a  central  national 
entity  for  governmental  and  non-governmental  organizations  regarding  all 
information assurance and cyber security related issues.   

 

 Page 20 of 20 

