i

February 2014Government of Kenya
Ministry of Information Communications and Technology
Telposta Towers, 10th Floor, Kenyatta Ave
Nairobi, Kenya

ii

February 2014Executive Summary

Global information and communication technology (ICT) growth has transformed how individuals, businesses, 
and governments produce and receive information. Adoption of ICT into everyday life is widespread in Kenya. 
The Government of Kenya is proud of this development and is actively encouraging its continued growth through 
national initiatives such as Kenya’s Vision 2030, ICT Master Plan, and the recent deployment of nationwide fiber-
optic network infrastructure. Such efforts provide a dramatic increase in interconnectivity among businesses 
and individuals throughout Kenya. Kenyan public and private sector organizations are now using this increased 
bandwidth  and  ICT  capabilities  to  efficiently  deliver  services,  conduct  business  transactions,  and  share 
information across organizational, social, and geographic boundaries. 

As Kenya matures into an information society the nation faces an increasingly evolving cyber threat landscape. 
Nation  states,  criminal  organizations,  and  hacktivists  from  all  over  the  world  are—and  will  continue—to 
exploit ICT vulnerabilities in Kenya. This is simply a reality that every nation with robust ICT infrastructure 
faces. While these actors seek to illicitly access, alter, disrupt, or destroy sensitive personal, business, and 
government information, we are working diligently to evolve our means of protecting information in order to 
counter today’s threats as well as those coming from over the horizon.

In  response  to  these  threats,  and  in  direct  support  of  the  national  priorities  and  ICT  goals  defined  in 
Vision  2030,  Kenya’s  ICT  Ministry  developed  a  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  (Strategy).  The  Strategy 
defines Kenya’s cybersecurity vision, key objectives, and ongoing commitment to support national priorities 
by encouraging ICT growth and aggressively protecting critical information infrastructures.

The Government of Kenya is committed to the safety, security, and prosperity of our nation and its partners. 
We  see  cybersecurity  as  a  key  component  in  that  commitment,  providing  organizations  and  individuals 
with increased confidence in online and mobile transactions, encouraging greater foreign investment, and 
opening a broader set of trade opportunities within the global marketplace. Successful implementation of 
the strategy will further enable Kenya to achieve its economic and societal goals through a secure online 
environment for citizens, industry, and foreign partners to conduct business.

Cybersecurity is a shared responsibility. The Government of Kenya will continue to partner with government, 
private sector, academia, and other non-government entities to implement our Strategy in the most efficient 
and  effective  way  possible.  We  have  every  confidence  that  we  will  meet  these  challenges  together  and 
increase recognition of Kenya as a trusted partner and cybersecurity leader in the East African Community 
(EAC), Africa, and the world.

1

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

INTRODUCTION
The Importance of Cyberspace
Cyberspace  is  more  than  just  the  Internet  and  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT).  It  is  a 
domain  similar  to  the  domains  of  land,  air,  sea,  and  space,  but  with  its  own  distinct  characteristics  and 
challenges. The cyber domain is characterized by the digital storage, modification, and exchange of data via 
networked systems and supported by critical information infrastructures. It has national and international 
dimensions that include industry, commerce, intellectual property, security, technology, culture, policy, and 
diplomacy. As such, cyberspace plays a critical role in the global economy. 

Similar to other nations with a robust ICT infrastructure, Kenya’s conducts its social, economic and national 
security activities in this digital, interconnected environment. For example, the Government of Kenya relies on 
common infrastructure, information technology (IT) platforms, and new technologies to increase the efficiency 
and effectiveness of government services. One of the main priorities of the Government of Kenya towards the 
realization of national development goals and objectives for wealth and employment creation, as stipulated 
in the Kenya Vision 2030, is to achieve an e-Government capability. At the same time, the development, 
implementation, and adoption of technologies such as mobile computing, mobile banking, and broadband 
communications enables Kenyans to connect with a speed and ease—unthinkable only five years ago. 

However, these same technologies can present new risks that can cause widespread damage to national 
security,  economic  growth,  and  critical  infrastructures.  Moreover,  the  reach  and  impact  of  cyberspace 
is  accelerating  across  the  national  and  international  boundaries,  making  it  a  complex  challenge  for  any 
government  to  address  alone.  For  this  reason,  the  Government  of  Kenya  considers  securing  its  national 
cyberspace a national priority to continue to facilitate economic growth for the country and its citizens. 

2

February 2014Government of Kenya Cybersecurity 
Implementation Hierarchy
ICT growth is particularly prevalent in Africa, where 
technological advancement and innovation are driving 
progress in key sectors (e.g., agriculture, education, 
financial services, government, and health). In 2009, 
the  regional  fiber-optic  underwater  cable  increased 
ICT  mobilization  and  interconnectedness  across 
Kenya and much of East Africa. 

With  the  rapid  growth  of  technology,  the  Kenyan 
people  have  quickly  become  accustomed  to  and 
dependent on the services provided to them through 
government  and  business  websites,  banking 
connectivity with central banks and other individuals, 
and  ease  of  communications.  These  advances 
continue to bring new and exciting opportunities to 
businesses and individuals across Kenya.

According to statistics released by The 
Communications Authority of Kenya (CAK), 
Kenya had an estimated 16.4 million 
Internet users and 30.7 million mobile 
network subscribers as of the second 
quarter of fiscal year 2012/2013

(source: http://www.cck.go.ke/resc/downloads/Sector_statistics_for_
Quarter_2_-_2012-2013.pdf)

3

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

THE CYBERSECURITY CHALLENGE
The Evolving Threat Landscape
Aggressively supporting the technological advancements in Kenya has resulted in a more open, interconnected 
nation which can offer adversaries avenues for exploiting computer networks. Cyber attacks are continuously 
evolving—to a great extent faster than cyber defences—resulting in an ever-increasing frequency of attacks 
and the probability of success over time. Figure 1 provides a snapshot of the sophistication of cyber-attacks 
from 1980-2012. These cyber attacks may come from hacktivists seeking to publicize political views, from 
criminal  organizations  seeking  financial  gain,  from  terrorist  groups  seeking  to  inflict  economic  or  political 
damage, or from state-sponsored intelligence and security organizations advancing their own economic or 
national security aims. Many attacks involve extremely sophisticated technological and social engineering 
techniques; however, low-technology penetrations—such as insider threats—remain a danger. 

Figure 1:  Compounding Cyber Attack Progression

4

February 2014Cybersecurity—a National Priority
The expansive and dynamic nature of ICT creates a 
wide and deep range of challenges. The Government 
of Kenya is addressing these challenges to provide 
for  cybersecurity  at  the  national  level,  enabling 
economic growth and protecting the interests of the 
Kenyan  people.  In  evaluating  the  potential  paths 
forward, the Government of Kenya identified several 
key  challenges  resulting  directly  from  emerging 
risk areas inside Kenya, the East Africa Community 
(EAC),  and  internationally.  By  addressing  these 
risks  and  understanding  the  impact  of  Kenya’s 
cybersecurity  efforts, 
technology  growth  and 
economic development will be significantly enabled 
by cybersecurity implementation. 

Both financial and non-financial institutions 
need high awareness of the need for secure 
online systems. This will ensure a secure 
online environment for conducting business 
and other economic activities. Encourage the 
use of security standards while designing, 
building and deploying IT systems.

(source: http://www.ict.go.ke/docs/MasterPlan2017.pdf)

Risks  and  challenges  can  manifest  from  various 
sources—even  from  those  areas  where  technology 
is  enabling  significant  growth  and  prosperity.  For  example—by  providing  people  with  the  ability  to  access 
and exchange information, they become dependent on that information to socialized with family and friends, 
conduct business, and feel connected in our modern world. The National Cyber Security Master Plan addresses 
emerging cyber risks and the challenges that the ICT may face in the future. 

Recognizing this and understanding the critical role ICT plays in Kenya’s economy, the Government of Kenya 
developed  the  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  (Strategy).  The  Strategy  supports  the  three  pillars  of  the 
Vision 2030 and supports other national initiatives such as the National ICT Master Plan1 (see Figure 2). The 
purpose of the Strategy is to clearly define Kenya’s cybersecurity vision, goals, and objectives to secure the 
nation’s cyberspace, while continuing to promote the use of ICT to enable Kenya’s economic growth.

Figure 2:  Cybersecurity Strategy Benefits

1 The National ICT Master Plan strategic goals are: (1) every citizen connected; (2) Kenya is Africa’s ICT hub; (3) public service for all; and (4) a society built 
on knowledge. 

5

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY
To promote the Government’s commitment to cybersecurity, the Strategy includes four strategic goals: 

1.  Enhance the nation’s cybersecurity posture in a manner that facilitates the country’s growth, safety, and prosperity.

2.  Build national capability by raising cybersecurity awareness and developing Kenya’s workforce to address 

cybersecurity needs.

3.  Foster information sharing and collaboration among relevant stakeholders to facilitate an information sharing 

environment focused on achieving the Strategy’s goals and objectives. 

4.  Provide national leadership by defining the national cybersecurity vision, goals, and objectives and coordinating 

cybersecurity initiatives at the national level.

The subsequent sections outline specific objectives for each goal. 

Goal 1: Enhance the Nation’s Cybersecurity Posture
Objective: Protect Critical Information Infrastructure
The Government of Kenya is promoting ICT usage to both the government and the Kenyan public through an 
undersea and terrestrial cable and network installations, increased availability of mobile/wireless technology, 
and a movement towards e-government services. However, the increased use of and reliance on ICT exposes 
Kenya to increased cyber risks. Threat actors can exploit ICT vulnerabilities to perpetrate crimes against the 
Government of Kenya and Kenya’s citizens who rely on ICT to perform electronic transactions or obtain key 
critical government services. Also, natural disaster may pose a threat by causing potential damage critical 
information infrastructure and disrupting communications. As such, it is imperative that as the Government of 
Kenya protect critical information infrastructure. Its cybersecurity activities should also be flexible enough to 
counter and mitigate the increasingly complex threats and vulnerabilities to ICT infrastructures.

The Government of Kenya is taking steps to increase the security and resilience of its critical information 
infrastructure to protect its government, citizens and residents, and corporations from cyber threats and to 
reap the social and economic benefits of cyberspace. The government is doing this through a coordinated 

6

February 2014effort with other countries to increase the security of global 
cyberspace  as  a  whole.  This  includes  securing  critical 
infrastructures,  applications,  and  services.  Additionally,  the 
Government  of  Kenya  is  working  with  relevant  stakeholders 
to  build  cybersecurity  capabilities  focused  on  operations, 
infrastructure  and  mission  assurance.  Within  the  National 
Cybersecurity  Master  Plan  the  Government  has  identified 
a  governance  and  capability  structure  (Figure  3)  which  will 
support scalable growth of cybersecurity within the public and 
private sectors.

Goal 2: Build National Capability
Objective: Awareness and Training: Inform and educate 
the Kenyan public and workforce to secure the national 
cyberspace
As  part  of  building  national  capability  goal,  the  Government 
of Kenya is informing and educating the public and workforce 
on  how  to  secure  the  national  cyberspace.  This  includes 
partnering  with  other  government  organizations,  the  private 
sector, and academia to ensure that people with cybersecurity 
responsibilities  possess  the  appropriate  level  of  cyber 
qualifications  and  competencies.  This  effort  incorporates 
human  capital  management, 
leadership  development, 
education  and  training,  and  strategic  communication  and 
change  management  to  develop  a  nation-wide  workforce  for 
the future. Additionally, the Government of Kenya is: 

 ■ Working with academia to develop cybersecurity 

Figure 3:  Kenya Cybersecurity Goals and Objectives

curriculums for higher education and specialized training 
programs to ensure competency building for cybersecurity professionals; and

 ■ Developing, promoting, and implementing incentive programs to increase the appeal of cybersecurity 

career paths to attract and retain Kenyans into this critical field.

Objective: Communications and Outreach: Elevate cybersecurity awareness for government, private sector, 
and the Kenyan public
The Government of Kenya is developing, launching, and promoting targeted awareness programs to inform 
the general public and workforce of common cybersecurity threats and counter measures. Through targeted 
communications and outreach activities, the Government of Kenya is:

 ■ Increasing the understanding of cyber threats and empower the Kenyan public to be safer and more secure 

online; and

 ■ Communicating approaches and strategies for the public to keep themselves and their families and 

communities safer online.

7

February 2014Goal 3: Foster Information Sharing and Collaboration
Objective: Develop a comprehensive governance framework to leverage resources, reduce conflict and 
duplication of effort, and work toward Kenya’s long-term cybersecurity goals
Cybersecurity  is  a  complex,  multidisciplinary  challenge  that  requires  coordination  across  a  wide  array  of 
stakeholders. Therefore, implementing the Strategy requires developing a comprehensive governance model 
that includes meaningful participation by relevant stakeholders, working together toward the common goal 
of securing Kenya’s cyberspace. Through this governance framework, the Government of Kenya intends to:

 ■ Develop the required laws, regulations and policies required to secure the nation’s cyberspace;

 ■ Solicits stakeholder input and feedback, as appropriate; and

 ■ Balance information security, privacy considerations and economic priorities.

Cultivate a culture of information sharing that facilitates the real time exchange of cybersecurity information

Successful  implementation  of  the  Strategy  requires  the  sharing  of  cybersecurity  information  (cross- 
organizational and cross-sector) in a trusted and structured manner. The Government of Kenya will develop 
and  manage  a  secure  information-sharing  capability  to  promote  knowledge  and  lessons  learned  among 
relevant stakeholders.

Goal 4: Provide National Leadership
Objective: Develop and Coordinate Implementation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy and Master Plan
Enhancing Kenya’s cybersecurity posture is a top priority for the Government of Kenya. As such, the Government 
of Kenya will continue to provide a single, unified agenda that will guide all relevant national stakeholders. 
Specifically, the ICT Ministry will:

 ■ Continue to refresh the Strategy (vision, goals, and objectives), as required and establish a tactical 

roadmap for achieving national cybersecurity objectives; and

 ■ Use the Strategy, and complementary Cyber Security Master Plan to identify and implement relevant 

cybersecurity initiatives, in conjunction and in collaboration with relevant stakeholders.

8

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

KEY BENEFITS
The Government of Kenya expects to see considerable benefit from the development of a holistic national 
cybersecurity  strategy.  These  benefits  will  be  realized,  not  only  within  ICT  circles,  but  across  social  and 
economic areas by all Kenyans. 

These  benefits  clearly  impact  and  improve  the  Pillars  of  Growth  established  by  Kenya  Vision  2030:  The 
Economic Pillar, The Social Pillar, and The Political Pillar by directly supporting the goals of increasing prosperity, 
improving the quality of life, and moving to the future as one nation.

Benefit Area

Details of Benefits Resulting from Improved Cybersecurity

Private Sector 
Growth

Greater 
Cooperation 
with Relevant 
International 
Organizations

 ■ Added e-commerce applications due to a more secure environment
 ■ Growth in the quantity of e-commerce transactions
 ■ Lower business risk and uncertainty
 ■ More competition among firms as secure e-commerce grows
 ■ Financial sector growth as the number of financial transactions grow
 ■ More sustainable economic growth through sustained security and increased 

confidence in e-commerce 

 ■ Through e-markets, suppliers are able to interact and transact directly with 

buyers, thereby eliminating the costs related to intermediaries and distributors. 
Businesses can increase revenues and margins

 ■ Increased incentives to participate in the formation of international rules, 

including intellectual property rights, contract law, electronic signatures and 
authentication, consumer protection, jurisdiction and others; secure electronic 
commerce issues are addressed in international for a such as WIPO (World 
Intellectual Property Organization), UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law), the Hague Conference on Private International Laws, 
ISO (International Standard Organization) including COPOLCO (Consumer Policy 
Committee), OECD and others

9

February 2014Benefit Area

Details of Benefits Resulting from Improved Cybersecurity

Improved 
Organizational 
Performance 
and Reduced 
Transactions 
Cost

 ■ Lower costs due to improved efficiency of transactions
 ■ Lower cost leads to an increase in the number of firms in the market
 ■ Provides avenues for firms to enter into the business-to-business and business-

to-government global supply chains

 ■ Easier marketing of agricultural products and local sourced goods in the 

global market

 ■ Reduction of search costs as buyers and sellers are together in a single online 

trading community

 ■ Reduction in the costs of processing transactions (e.g., invoices, purchase 

orders and payment schemes), with the automation of transaction processes 
 ■ Efficiency in trading processes and transactions as sales can be processed 

through online auctions

 ■ Online processing improves inventory management and logistics

 ■ Increase in price transparency as the gathering of a large number of buyers and 

sellers in a single e-market reveals market price information and transaction 
processing to participants; the publication of information on a single purchase 
or transaction makes the information readily accessible and available to all 
members of the e-market

 ■ Increased price transparency can exert downward pressure on price differentials 

in the market; buyers are provided much more time to compare prices and 
make better buying decisions

 ■ Expansion of borders for dynamic and negotiated pricing wherein multiple buyers 

and sellers collectively participate in price-setting and two-way auctions; prices 
can be set through automatic matching of bids and offers; the requirements of 
both buyers and sellers can be more easily aggregated to reach equilibrium price 
levels, which are lower than those resulting from individual actions

 ■ Trade liberalization as cross-border transactions costs decline
 ■ Resolution of patent issues:   international programs will contribute to 

achieving harmonized patent protection for progress and developments  in 
secure transactions

 ■ Enhanced public welfare through improved access to online goods and services
 ■ Greater social cohesion as wage and income disparities lessen due to improved 

communication and information sharing, i.e., a better functioning labor market
 ■ More options for consumer transactions (more, reliable distribution channels)
 ■ Lower transactions costs
 ■ Lower prices in longer term

 ■ Expedited government financial transactions enabling greater efficiency and 

expediency in resource allocation

 ■ Improved communications

Promote Anti-
Corruption in 
Government and 
Industry

A More 
Competitive 
Business 
Environment

Transparency 
and Efficiency  
in Government

10

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

CONCLUSION
As Kenya’s remarkable ICT growth continues, ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of public 
and  private  sector  information  across  Kenya’s  ICT  infrastructure  is  of  significant  importance.  Kenya’s 
National Cybersecurity Strategy serves to demonstrate the government’s commitment to improving Kenya’s 
cybersecurity posture and share overarching vision, goals, and objectives. Implementation of the strategy 
is supported by an evolving national Cybersecurity Master Plan, which has been developed to define (and 
ultimately govern) a prioritized roadmap of discreet cybersecurity projects. 

Both  the  strategy  and  master  plan  are  critical  to  securing  the  online  environment  for  citizens,  industry, 
and foreign partners; increasing the Kenyan people’s confidence in online transactions, data security, fraud 
protection,  and  privacy;  encouraging  greater  foreign  investment  and  enhancing  trade  opportunities;  and 
enabling Kenya’s broader economic and societal goals.

11

February 2014MINISTRY OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

e  
g

y  

i b l
o l o
r.

s

s

n

e

o
h
s

I M A G E   H E R E   p
c
e
s   w i t h  t
o m e   u
i n
s
u
r   h
b
s
i n   u

s
e
e   o

TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

Term

Broadband

Definition

A  type  of  high-capacity  telecommunications  especially  as  used  for 
access to the Internet.

Computer Incident Response 
Team 

The personnel responsible for coordinating the response to computer 
security incidents within an organization 

Critical Infrastructure 

Cybersecurity 

Cyberspace 

e-Government

Globalization 

Governance

A term used to describe assets that are essential for the functioning 
of  a  society  and  economy.  (e.g.,  electrical  grid,  telecommunications, 
water supply) 

The processes and mechanisms by which computer-based equipment, 
information and services are protected from unintended or unauthorized 
access, change or destruction 

The  notional  environment  in  which  communication  over  computer 
networks occurs 

Short  for  electronic  government,  it  is  digital  interactions  between  a 
government and citizens, government and businesses, government and 
employees, and also between two governments

Growth to a global or world-wide scale 

Consistent management, cohesive policies, guidance, processes and 
decision-rights for a given area of responsibility

Information and 
Communication Technology 
(ICT) 

The applications of computers and telecommunications equipment to 
store, retrieve, transmit and manipulate data 

12

February 2014Term

Insider Threat 

Social Engineering 

Definition

A malicious individual who is also an employee or officer of a business, 
institution, or government

A  non-technical  kind  of  intrusion  (or  “hack”)  that  relies  heavily  on 
human  interaction  and  often  involves  tricking  other  people  to  break 
normal security procedures 

13

February 201414

February 2014