NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY II

NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY II

Approved and made enforceable by the Government Council on 27.03.2015

FOREWORD OF THE PRIME MINISTER, 
MINISTER OF STATE

You  have  in  your  hands  the  second 
 version  of  the  national  cybersecurity 
strategy  approved  by  the  Government 
on  27th  March  2015.  The  task  force  in 
charge of revising the first version of 2012 
operated under the authority of the High 
Commissioner for National Protection and 
was composed of  representatives of the 
State’s  Information  Technology  Centre, 
the government CERT, the Department of 
Media and Communications, the Ministry 
of 
the  Government 
Communications  Centre,  the  Intelligence  Service,  the  Grand  Ducal  Police 
Force and the Army. First of all, the task force assessed the impact of the strat-
egy which was adopted in 2012 and then made the amendments that were 
required in light of the conclusions of this assessment. 
 
The introduction of seven objectives, complemented by action plans  resulting 
in  specific  timelines  and  the  identification  of  actors  responsible  for  the 
 implementation  of  approximately  forty  different  actions,  should  ensure 
 adequate implementation of this new national cybersecurity strategy by the 
end of 2017.

the  Economy, 

The  adaptation  of  this  strategic  document  is  in  line  with  the  focus  areas 
that were defined in 2012 and reflects Luxembourg’s willingness, and even 
 determination,  to  provide  the  country  with  electronic  communication 
 infrastructures that meet international security standards. It is a prerequisite 
for  the  development  of  a  digital  society,  in  the  same  spirit  of  the  “Digital 
Lëtzebuerg” initiative, as having a safe technological environment will build 
up the trust of citizens and companies in these technologies, and this will, in 
turn, ensure that our country’s objectives of economic growth are met. 

Xavier Bettel

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword of the Prime Minister, Minister of State .............5
Introduction .............................................................................9
Situational Analysis of the Cybersecurity Strategy I  ........ 11
Axis 1: Ensuring the Operational Protection of Communication and 
Information Processing Infrastructures and Information Systems ....................11
Preventive Operational Strand  ....................................................................................11
Defensive Operational Strand .....................................................................................12

Axis 2: Modernising the legal framework ................................................................... 13
“Legal monitoring”  ........................................................................................................13

Axis 3: Developing national and international cooperation.................................14

Axis 4: Informing, educating and raising awareness 
about the risks involved ....................................................................................................16

Objectives of educating, informing and raising the awareness 
of end users .......................................................................................................................16
Objectives of educating, informing and raising the awareness 
of service providers .........................................................................................................17

Axis 5: Developing and implementing norms and binding standards .............18

Cybersecurity Strategy I in the Image of Other National Strategies ................20
“ENISA National Cyber Security Strategies Checklist” ........................................20
The Dutch Strategy  .......................................................................................................20
Findings of the Comparison ........................................................................................20

Cybersecurity Strategy II ...................................................... 23
Definition of Cybersecurity  .............................................................................................23

Objectives of the Cybersecurity Strategy II  ...............................................................23

Objective 1: Strengthen National Cooperation .....................................................23
Action Plan Objective 1 ..................................................................................................25

Objective 2: Strengthen International Cooperation ...........................................26
Action Plan Objective 2 .................................................................................................27

Objective 3: Increase the resilience of the digital infrastructure ....................28
Action Plan Objective 3.................................................................................................30

Objective 4: Fight cybercriminality ...........................................................................31
Action Plan Objective 4 .................................................................................................32

Objective 5: Inform, train and raise awareness of the risks involved .............33
Action Plan Objective 5..................................................................................................35

Objective 6: Implement norms, standards, certificates, labels and  
frames of reference for requirements for the government and critical 
infrastructures .................................................................................................................36
Action Plan Objective 6 ................................................................................................36

Objective 7: Strengthen cooperation with the academic and 
research sphere .................................................................................................................37
Action Plan Objective 7..................................................................................................37

Implementation .................................................................................................................. 38
Glossary ................................................................................. 40

8

INTRODUCTION
The 2013 government programme emphasises the importance of cybersecuri-
ty for the well-being of society. Aware of the risks associated with information 
and communication technologies (ICTs), the Cyber Security Board (CSB) devel-
oped a national strategy on cybersecurity in 2012. On 11th March 2014, the Cyber 
Security Board established a task force composed of representatives of the 
State’s Information Technology Centre, the government CERT, the Department 
of  Media  and  Communications,  the  Ministry  of  Economy,  the  Government 
Communications Centre, the Intelligence Service, the Grand Ducal Police Force 
and the Army, operating under the authority of the HCPN, to develop a new 
version of the said strategy.

Cybersecurity has become a critical asset for the attractiveness of our econ-
omy. For this reason, the government is determined to review its strategy on 
a recurring basis, update its governance tools and ensure to remain sovereign 
with respect to certain critical services related to security. 

The government understands that information security is a societal challenge 
that needs to be addressed jointly by engaging in appropriate behaviours and 
implementing effective and efficient organisational and technical measures 
while complying with principles of proportionality and necessity. 

The  government  promotes  national  and  international  cooperation,  and  is 
determined  to  democratise  information  security  by  identifying  potential 
synergies while reducing the costs and complexity of procedures for all stake-
holders.

AT EVELLA SI QUATEST, QUODIAM QUE QUATECAT.10

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

11

SITUATIONAL 
ANALYSIS OF THE 
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY I 

The cybersecurity strategy I provides for a regular 
review of its procedures. This chapter is dedicated 
to this task. 

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF  
THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I 
The cybersecurity strategy I provides for a regular review of its procedures. 
This chapter is dedicated to this task. 

Axis 1: Ensuring the Operational Protection of Communication and 
Information Processing Infrastructures and Information Systems
Preventive Operational Strand 

Luxembourg has many initiatives under way in the field of prevention. These 
initiatives are coordinated by the Cyber Security Board (CSB) and most of them 
are executed by public actors. In the preventive field, priority was given to 
organisational security measures:

•   The government has identified risk analysis as a priority. Indeed, it is only 
after such an analysis that an entity may identify the organisational and 
technical measures required. This analysis ensures that the measures put 
in  place  comply  with  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  necessity.  As  a 
result, CASES developed an optimised approach to risk analysis based on a 
common taxonomy, taking advantage of the sectoral knowledge bases and 
offering  great  synergistic  potential:  the  MONARC  optimised  risk  analysis 
methodology.

•   The CTIE, GOVCERT and CIRCL conducted internal risk analyses.

•    An inventory of databases dealing with personal data under the responsibil-
ity of the State has been compiled by the CSB’s “Database” working group.

•    The CSB instructed a “Mobile devices” working group to prepare a proposal 
to equip members of the government with secure mobile communication 
devices. The findings were presented to the CSB.

•   With regards to risk treatment, CASES has developed several good practice 

guides that are made available to all the entities concerned. 

•   As  for  the  identification  of  threats,  tools  for   exchanging   information  on 
 indicators of compromise have been  developed and made available to all 
parties concerned.

12

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

13

Several national actors (CSSF, ILR, NCDP, ILNAS and HCPN in the future) require 
from  their  constituent  a  risk  analysis  according  to  specific  criteria  for  the  
sectors and assigned missions. The government must strive to improve the 
harmonisation of the approaches as well as frames of reference for require-
ments  in  order  to  reduce  the  individual  effort  of  regulated  entities.  The 
government’s ambition is to turn risk analysis into a governance tool which 
complies with the principles of proportionality and necessity. 

Defensive Operational Strand

•   Cyber plan: On 19th March 2014, the government adapted the emergency inter-
vention plan in the event of an attack against information systems or of a tech-
nical fault of information systems (“PIU Cyber”). This plan is regularly tweaked 
during European cyber exercises in which Luxembourg participates actively.  
 
“PIU Cyber”, developed under the authority of HCPN, sets out government 
action in the event of significant issues with information systems of the 
public or private sector that may cause a major malfunction, or the unavaila-
bility of these systems, which would threaten the vital interests or the basic 
needs of the country or the Grand Duchy’s population, in full or in part. It 
should be noted that routine incidents are managed by operational CERTs. 
 
The plan first determines the crisis management bodies, such as the crisis 
unit, the operational unit, the cyber risk assessment unit and the communi-
cation/information unit. It then lays down the process to alert the author-
ities  and  release  information  to  the  public,  emergency  measures,  related 
actions as well as the respective officials and actors. During the implemen-
tation  of  the  various  measures  of  prevention  and  protection,  ministries, 
administrations and services of the State can be assisted by the government 
CERT  (primarily  focused  on  the  public  sector  and  critical  infrastructures) 
and, if necessary, by the CIRCL (primarily focused on the private sector).

•    In addition to the CIRCL, which consists of a CERT dedicated to the private 
sector and communes, several private and public sector CERTs were created: 
GOVCERT.LU for government and critical infrastructures, RESTENA-CSIRT in 
charge  of  the  education  and  research  sector,  as  well  as  HealthNet-CSIRT 
covering the health sector. It is up to these CERTs to support their respective 
constituent.

1  http://circl.lu/ projects/#bgp-ranking 
2  http://circl.lu/services/passive-dns/ 
3 

 http://circl.lu/services/ dynamic-
malware-analysis/

•   Similarly, to increase the attractiveness of the economy, Luxembourg CERTs 

offer specialised services in the field of information security:
-   Tools to create health indicators of Luxembourg networks. These include 
BGP-Ranking1  and  passive  DNS2  projects  which  allow  incident  manage-
ment to be more prompt and efficient. 

-   Tools for the exchange of compromise indicators specific to threats con-
sidered dangerous, including the MISP platform and the DMA dynamic 
analysis3 tool. These indicators allow all relevant entities to detect any 
incidents in their networks. 

-   Tools to provide individual information to interested parties regarding the 

 

 

 

vulnerabilities of products they use. 

Axis 2: Modernising the legal framework
“Legal monitoring” 

The legal framework has several levels, namely: 

•  at national level:

Regular meetings take place between the Prosecution service, the GOVCERT, 
the  Grand  Ducal  Police,  the  CSIRT  RESTENA,  the  CIRCL,  the  Ministry  of  the 
Economy, the SRE and the NCDP in order to discuss the evolution of threats 
and possible solutions. 

In this regard, it is appropriate to mention the law of 18th July 2014 on:

•   The approval of the Council of Europe’s Convention on Cybercrime opened 

for signature in Budapest on 23rd November 2001.

•   The approval of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime on:
 
-   the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed 

via computer systems, done in Strasbourg on 28th January 2003,

-  the amendment of the Criminal Code,
-  the amendment of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
-   the amendment of the amended Act of 30th May 2005 on the protection 

 
 
 

of privacy in the electronic communications sector.

14

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

15

•   The participation of the CIRCL in the development of computer software 
that  facilitates  the  sharing  of  information  on  indicators  of  compromise: 
Malware  Information  Sharing  Platform  (MISP).  Said  software  was  made 
available to all NATO allies and used by almost all CERTs in Europe.

•   Active  participation  of  Luxembourg  CERTs  in  international  networks 

(TF-CSIRT, FIRST, etc.); Luxembourg CERTs enjoy a very good reputation.

•   Luxembourg’s collaboration with Germany and Belgium with respect to risk 

management.

•   The establishment of a cyber risk assessment unit (“CERC”) by the PIU Cyber, 
framing the cooperation between, in particular, the HCPN, CTIE, SRE and the 
CERTs concerned in the event of a significant incident. Said assessment unit 
is chaired by the GOVCERT.LU.

•   GOVCERT.LU’s participation in conferences bringing together the GOVCERTs 

of Europe.

•   The participation of Luxembourg CERTs in various European research pro-

jects, particularly in the field of phishing and the fight against “botnets”.

4 

 The ratification of the Budapest 
Convention on Cybercrime by 
Luxembourg; Max Braun; journal 
of Luxembourg courts; No. 35, 5th 
October 2014.

Following the ratification of the Budapest Convention in August 2014, adapta-
tions were made to the Luxembourgish legal framework. An article containing 
all the texts in question was published in the journal of Luxembourg courts4.

  On  the  other  hand,  along  with  the  NCDP,  the  government  considered  the 
possibility of creating a software platform that would allow all the entities 
concerned to perform PIAs (Privacy Impact Assessments) as requested by the 
European texts on the protection of personal data. 

•  at community level:

Reviews and text proposals were drawn up regarding projects of directives 
developed by competent community bodies (EFMS; FOP). Examples include 
Directive  2013/40/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  
12th August 2013 on attacks against information systems and replacing Council 
framework decision 2005/222/JHA of 24th February 2005, or the Council and 
Parliament’s proposal for a directive on measures to ensure a common high 
level of safety of information networks within the Union.

Axis 3: Developing national and international cooperation

Over the past few years, Luxembourg has given special attention to national 
and international cooperation in cybersecurity. Examples include:

•   An active participation in the 2012 and 2014 Cyber Europe exercises of the 

European Union.

•   The participation in NATO’s CC13 and CC14 Cyber Coalition exercise as an 

observer.

•   The signature of a MoU on cybersecurity between the HCPN and NATO’s 

Cyber Defence Management Board (CDMB).

•   The designation of two contact points for cybersecurity at the GOVCERT.LU 

in the context of the MoU with NATO.

•   The establishment of a 24/7 service responsible for national and interna-
tional contact-making for the treatment of cyber crisis computer emergen-
cies, the management of which is provided in collaboration with the NATO 
Computer Incident Response Capability on their platform for sharing infor-
mation on cyber incidents.

16

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

17

Axis 4: Informing, educating and raising awareness about the risks 
involved
Objectives of educating, informing and raising the awareness of end users

Luxembourg  understands  that  awareness  and  education  are  essential  for 
all persons concerned to adopt adequate behaviour patterns in the field of 
information security. Many threats aimed at exploiting human vulnerabilities 
exist. It is important to reduce these vulnerabilities by training all the persons 
concerned and raising their awareness:

•   With respect to users/Internet users, the following actions were undertaken:
 

-   Existing websites and websites to come:

 
 
 
 
 
 

·  www.govcert.lu
·  www.circl.lu
·  www.bee-secure.lu
·  www.cases.lu 
·  www.police.lu 
·  Government portal on cybersecurity.

-   Recurring articles in the press (by the CIRCL, CASES, BEE SECURE or the 

Grand Ducal Police, depending on the case in question).
-   Annual awareness campaigns of CASES and BEE-SECURE. 
-   Alerts (from the CIRCL, CASES, BEE SECURE, the Grand Ducal Police or the 

Ministry of the Economy, depending on the case in question).

-   More technical reports and communications by the GOVCERT and CIRCL5 

or savvy users and IT professionals.

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

5 

   http://circl.lu/pub/

•   For students, parents, educators and teachers, the authorities organised:

-   Compulsory BEE-SECURE training sessions (two hours in all classes of 7th 

secondary and technical secondary).

-   Optional  BEE-SECURE  training  sessions  (two  hours  in  basic  education 

classes).

-   Evening meetings with parents of pupils (with some success).
-   Training sessions for educators (with an average success).
-   Training sessions for teachers (with little success). 

The government is determined to expand its training and raising awareness 
offers. Given the great need for IT experts in the next few decades, the gov-
ernment  continues  its  efforts  to  stimulate  young  people’s  (boys  and  girls) 
interest in computing and programming.

•   Civil servants and public employees benefit from:

 

 

 
 
 
 

-   Optional CASES training sessions (three hours organised by the INAP on its 
own premises). It consists of three sessions per year. For the moment, these 
training sessions are not compulsory for all new government officials.

-   Optional CASES training sessions (three hours organised by the INAP on 
the premises of the administration). These training sessions have been 
fairly successful: 4-5 administrations per year rely on them.

-  Specialised CASES training sessions (very little success).
-  GOVCERT training sessions for new data protection officers.
-  Warnings and information provided by the GOVCERT.
-  Publication of the CTIE’s IT Charter.

Very few applications come from small and medium enterprises. The govern-
ment has implemented a price-regulated and very advantageous awareness 
service, provided by private CASES-certified experts. 

Objectives of educating, informing and raising the awareness of 
service providers

Many  of  the  actors  who  are  subject  to  a  regulatory  regime  are  obliged  to 
attend training sessions. However, a good overview is not yet available.

Obligations can derive from: 

•   certification  standards  such  as  ISO/IEC  27001  (ISO/IEC  27002)  to  which  

certain enterprises are subject;

•   requirements of regulators:
 
 

-  the CSSF for certain types of PSF as well as for banking institutions;
-   the ILNAS for Public Key Infrastructures (PKIs) as well as for dematerialisa-

tion and electronic archiving service providers;

 

-   the NCPD for processing security (Articles 22 and 23 of the law of 27 July 

2007).

GOVCERT.LU, CIRCL and CASES offer training sessions to businesses. In the case 
of CASES, the training sessions are not free and they are offered by trainers 
from certified specialised companies. 

18

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY I

19

The  owner  or  operator  of  a  critical  infrastructure  must  ultimately  notify 
the High Commissioner for National Protection of any incident which had 
a significant impact on the security and continuity of the infrastructure’s 
operation.

•   The management of PSDCs (dematerialisation and storage service providers).

Conclusions of the Analysis of the Cybersecurity Strategy I

When  drafting  the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  I,  the  competent  body  at 
inter-ministerial level was the CSB. With regards to the execution of tasks, 
it turned to the creation of ad hoc working groups within the CSB, respec-
tively to the assignment of missions to members of the CSB.

In any case, while the CSB is the appropriate forum for discussions and 
decisions of a strategic nature, it seems hardly suitable to perform all the 
work  required  in  the  context  of  the  implementation  of  a  cybersecurity 
strategy. These tasks could be better coordinated by a permanent opera-
tional body. 

Therefore, in the future, emphasis will need to be placed on supervising the 
new strategy and on the modalities of the implementation, rather than on 
a thorough reform of the objectives and areas that remain relevant.

CASES  makes  available  to  enterprises  a  catalogue  of  governance  and  risk 
analysis services, as well as a platform including tools associated therewith:  

http://my.cases.lu/.

In  the  context  of  coordination  and  computer  incident  response,  the  CIRCL 
provides companies and especially computer teams with proactive tools and 
services to make operational and reactive security more effective and efficient:

http://circl.lu/services/ and http://circl.lu/projects/.

Axis 5: 
Developing and implementing norms and binding standards

for  operators  of 

critical 

infrastructures: 

•   A  new 

regulator 

 
The  bill  of  law  on  national  protection  provides  for  the  establishment  of 
the  High  Commissioner  for  National  Protection  as  new  cross-regulator, 
responsible for all operators of critical infrastructures in the areas of phys-
ical  security  as  well  as  the  security  of  information  systems.  Thus,  in  the 
future, operators will be required to provide to the High Commissioner for 
National Protection all data requested for the purposes of census, desig-
nation and protection of critical infrastructure. This data includes all the 
information  needed  in  the  context  of  crisis  prevention  or  management. 
 
Data  relating  to  critical  infrastructures  which  are  subject  to   registration, 
communication,  statement,  census,  filing,  permission  or  notification 
imposed by the law or relevant regulations are communicated to the High 
Commissioner for National Protection, upon his request, by the ministerial 
departments, administrations and government services that hold such data.  
 
The  owner  or  operator  of  a  critical  infrastructure  is  required  to  develop 
a  plan  of  security  and  continuity  of  the  activity,  which  includes  security 
measures for the protection of the infrastructure. The High Commissioner 
for National Protection addresses recommendations regarding these safe-
ty  measures  to  the  owner  or  the  operator  of  a  critical  infrastructure, 
allowing  the  latter  improve  resilience  and  facilitate  crisis  management.  
 
The owner or operator of a critical infrastructure is also required to appoint 
a security officer whose role is to be the contact person of the compe-
tent  authority  for  issues  relating  to  the  security  of  the  infrastructure. 

20

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

21

6 

7 

8 

 The OECD, OSCE, ENISA  
(European Network and Information 
Security Agency)
 NCSS2:  
National Cyber Security Strategy 2  
 http://www.enisa.europa.eu/  
activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/ 
national-cyber-security-strategies-
ncsss/cyber-security-strategies-pa-
per

Cybersecurity Strategy I in the Image of Other National Strategies

The vast majority of nations have a cybersecurity strategy. Several interna-
tional organisations6, consulting firms and universities have compiled com-
parisons. For this analysis, two documents were selected, the Dutch strategy 
(NCSS27) and a comparison of strategies of European Union member states 
edited by ENISA.

“ENISA National Cyber Security Strategies Checklist”

An  analysis  of  the  2012  cybersecurity  strategy  via  an  ENISA8  questionnaire 
reveals that the current text has two weaknesses that need to be remedied in 
the future: on the one hand, the definition of the term “cyber security” and, on 
the other, the dialogue with the academic and industrial world.

The Dutch Strategy 

The second version of the 2013 “NCSS2” Dutch strategy is in line with the objec-
tives of the first version, further developing its implementation. Emphasis is 
placed on cooperation with the private sector and on the accountability of all 
stakeholders (government, citizens and economic actors). A joint action plan 
with a timeline over two years is presented in detail in the new text.

Findings of the Comparison

The comparative analysis reveals that it would be useful to develop the follow-
ing elements to a greater extent in the new text:

•   Introduce a definition of cybersecurity;
•   Initiate dialogue with the academic and industrial world;
•   Introduce the concept of cyberdefence;
•   Formally instruct a body to handle the coordination of the new strategy’s 

implementation;

•   Set up action plans.

22

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

23

9 

 Recommendation ITU-T X.1205 
following UN resolution 181 
(Guadalajara/2010)

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

Definition of Cybersecurity9 

“Cybersecurity  is  the  collection  of  tools,  policies,  security  concepts,  security 
safeguards,  guidelines,  risk  management  approaches,  actions,  training,  best 
practices, assurance and technologies that can be used to protect the cyber 
environment and organisation and user assets. Organisation and user assets 
include connected computing devices, personnel, infrastructure, applications, 
services, telecommunications systems, and the totality of transmitted and/or 
stored information in the cyber environment. Cybersecurity strives to ensure 
the attainment and maintenance of the security properties of the organisation 
and user assets against relevant security risks in the cyber environment. The 
general security objectives comprise the following:

•   Availability;
•   Integrity, which may include authenticity and non-repudiation;
•   Confidentiality.”

Objectives of the Cybersecurity Strategy II 

In broad terms, this cybersecurity strategy is designed to protect the public 
and  private  actors  against  cyber  threats  while  promoting  economic  and 
social development in cyberspace.

The  government  recognises  that  information  security  should  not  be  con-
sidered as a burden, but rather as an opportunity. It is about democratising 
information  security  by  promoting  collaboration  while  reducing  the  com-
plexity and costs to all stakeholders. 

The government intends to achieve this goal by defining the following objec-
tives and action plans:

Objective 1: Strengthen National Cooperation

The  need  for  a  comprehensive  approach  raises  the  issue  of  government 
coordination  so  that  all  stakeholders  can  collaborate  consistently,  avoiding 
duplication of functions and promoting the development of synergies and the 
consolidation of initiatives with a view to maintaining, or even to developing a 
high-quality image both nationwide and internationally. 

CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY II 

The  government  recognises  that  information 
security  should  not  be  considered  as  a  burden, 
but rather as an opportunity. It is about democra-
tising information security by promoting collabo-
ration while reducing the complexity and costs to 
all stakeholders. 

24

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

25

At national level, increased cooperation between all stakeholders is a prereq-
uisite to implement the strategy consistently. The methodology of governance 
must be based on concepts defined in risk management, as proposed by ISO/
IEC 27005: 2011, i.e. establishing the context, estimating risks, assessing risks, 
treating, accepting and finally communicating risks; all in a context of contin-
uous improvement. 

An important objective for the government is to increase the attractiveness of 
the economic position by introducing adaptable, flexible and modern govern-
ance tools. Governance must be risk-orientated.

The following are affected by this approach: 

•   government bodies (HCPN, GOVCERT, SRE, CTIE, Army);
•   prosecuting  authorities  (Grand  Ducal  Police  and  the  Prosecution  

service);

•   independent national authorities concerned (ILR, CSSF, NCDP);
•   sectoral actors (CIRCL, RESTENA, private CERTs);
•   public-private partnerships (PPP).

The creation of a national agency for the securi-
ty of information systems (ANSSI) will facilitate 
the implementation of the contemplated action 
plans.

The  creation  of  a  national  agency  for 
the  security  of  information  systems 
(ANSSI),  decided  by  the  government 
when adopting the draft Grand Ducal 
Decree  on  this  matter  in  its  sitting 
of  21st  January  2015,  will  facilitate  the 
implementation  of  the  contemplated 
action plans. 

The  ANSSI’s  mission  is  to  define  policies  and  guidelines  for  the  security  of 
classified  and  unclassified  information,  ensure  that  norms  and  standards 
are established, that the necessary measures regarding the security of infor-
mation  systems  are  implemented  and  that  their  application  is  guaranteed, 
certify the means of processing of unclassified information (digital systems, 
services, infrastructures), and finally to act as national CERT and ensure the 
government CERT’s hosting (GOVCERT.LU). It will bring together under a single 
line of command all active players in the field of cybersecurity in relation to 
the public sector and critical infrastructure, and will have to cooperate with 
all suitable private sector stakeholders, if necessary by means of formalised 
cooperation agreements. 

Action Plan Objective 1

#  Action

Note

Formalise the 
exchange of infor-
mation and cooper-
ation between the 
two entities.
Ditto

Creation of a single 
operator for classi-
fied and unclassified 
State networks

1

2

3

4

5

Creation of an ANSSI

Identification and 
allocation of human 
and budget resourc-
es needed for the 
proper functioning 
of an ANSSI
Set up a cooperation 
agreement between 
the ANSSI and the 
SRE

Set up a cooperation 
agreement between 
ANSSI and SMILE
Promote cooperation 
with ISPs

6 Merger of CTIE and 

GCC operators

7

8

9

Establishment and 
operation of a single 
website on the topic 
of cybersecurity
Clarify the CSB’s mis-
sions after creating 
an ANSSI
Adopt a system for 
the management 
of risks related 
to the security of 
information systems 
based on the ISO/IEC 
27005:2011 standard

10 Set up a 

“Governance” work-
ing group for the 
purpose of perfect-
ing the governance 
model at national 
level

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
HCPN, PGD, SMILE, 
GOVCERT, CTIE/
CCMD, SRE/ANS
HCPN, Ministry of 
State

Schedule

2015

2015-2016

ANSSI, SRE

2015

ANSSI, SMILE

2015

ANSSI, CERTs

2015-2017

Ministry for Public 
Function and 
Administrative 
Reform, CTIE, CCG
ANSSI, GOVCERT, 
SMILE, CTIE, SIP, SMC

2015

2015-2016

CSB, SMC

2015

ANSSI, SMILE

2015-2016

CSB

2015-2016

26

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

27

Objective 2: Strengthen International Cooperation

Active cooperation with the international  
community is imperative

The  need  for  cooperation  between 
all  those  involved  both  nationally  and 
internationally,  stems  from  the  supra-
national nature of communication net-
works.  Therefore,  active  cooperation 
with  the  international  community  is 
imperative, in particular at the level of CERTs and law enforcement agencies. 
The purpose of this cooperation is to lead to an exchange of information and 
mutual assistance between the competent services of the different countries 
and in international fora, as well as to the creation of common solutions and 
approaches.

However, international cooperation must not be limited to the exchange of 
operational information. It must also focus on methodological aspects and 
tools in the field of incident management, on systems for detecting abnor-
malities,  early  warning  systems,  risk  management,  security  policies,  raising 
awareness and education. 

At international level, cooperation can take the form of bilateral contacts or 
rely on multilateral exchanges within institutions/groups/communities, such 
as (non-exhaustive list):

Action Plan Objective 2

#  Action 

Notes

1

2

Establish an inven-
tory of all the 
agreements, collab-
orations and partici-
pations at bi- or mul-
ti-national level.
Identify good prac-
tices for coopera-
tion (in Europe and 
internationally) and 
participate in groups, 
respectively estab-
lish key partnerships.

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
CSB

Schedule

2015

ANSSI, CERTs, SRE, 
Army

2015-2017

•   the Benelux
•   the European Union
 
 

groups

-   ENISA, NIS platform, EFSM and other high-level groups
-   TF-CSIRT,  EGC,  CERT-Verbund,  CLUSIx,  R2GS  clubs  and  other  technical 

•   Germany: BSI
•   Switzerland: ISB
•   Austria: Ministry of Finance, A-SIT
•   France ANSSI
•   the Council of Europe
•   NATO/CCDCoE/CDMB
•   OECD/OSCE
•   Europol/Interpol/FBI
•   FIRST (and other specialised communities of the CERT sphere)

28

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

29

Objective 3: Increase the resilience of the digital infrastructure

Defensive Operational Strand

The security of the digital infrastructure lies  
in its ability to guarantee a certain level of 
availability, integrity and confidentiality. 

The  security  of  the  digital  infrastruc-
ture  lies  in  its  ability  to  guarantee  a 
certain  level  of  availability,  integrity 
and confidentiality. The security of the 
digital infrastructure carries a cost and 
requires the know-how of experts. For 
this  reason,  it  is  advised  to  make  the 
most of synergies that may arise and to pool as much as possible risk analysis, 
the establishment of situational analysis and the setting up of measures to 
handle risks and incidents.

Preventive Operational Strand

In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  necessity,  the  gov-
ernment  should  encourage  all  parties  concerned  to  implement  preventive 
measures. Information, training, guides to good practice as well as method-
ologies  will  be  made  available  to  stakeholders.  The  system  of  governance 
implemented by the government will help private and public actors as well as 
regulators to identify necessary treatments and to respectively define frames 
of reference for requirements in the field of cybersecurity. The principles of 
necessity and proportionality are essential to fulfil the needs of cost-effective-
ness, which, in turn, has a great impact on the attractiveness of the economic 
position.

In  the  preventive  sphere,  it  is  possible  to  capitalise  on  a  large  number  of 
 synergies: 

It must be acknowledged that no information system, regardless of its level 
of protection, is perfectly secure. Therefore, sufficient capacity is necessary to 
detect intrusions, but also to react once an incident is detected, to handle the 
issue efficiently and restore the operability of the systems affected.

In this context, three types of operational measures are intended to achieve 
this objective, i.e.:

•   sharpen operational aspects in the implementation of the Cyber PIU for sig-

nificant cyber incidents;

•   create simulations and/or sectoral and national exercises on the response to 
incidents affecting the security of sensitive or critical information and com-
munication systems, and participate in international exercises in this area;

•   improve  cooperation  between  CERTs  when  handling  routine  incidents 
through cooperation agreements and the establishment of an information 
exchange platform.

•   Governance  tools  for  analysis,  risk  management,  as  well  as  metrics  of 
threats and vulnerabilities (made available to CERTs) may be used by regula-
tors and private and public actors.

•   Frames of reference for requirements developed by regulators will be har-

monised through the use of taxonomy and common methodology.

•   In  terms  of  risk  management,  contextualised  approaches  will  be  offered 

that will substantially reduce the effort and investment in risk analyses. 

•   With regards to the treatment of risks, the pooling of certain security meas-

ures is planned.

•   In terms of CERTs, threats and vulnerabilities are monitored. The result of 
such monitoring is made available to all Luxembourg actors and used in the 
context of governance and risk management tools.

30

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

31

Objective 4: Fight cybercriminality

The  fast  evolution  of  digital  infrastructure  continuously  generates  new 
threats. It is therefore important to regularly assess if the legal bases in force 
are still adapted and if they allow to prosecute and sanction new forms of 
cybercrime.

Legal monitoring must identify the contradictions or discrepancies in laws, 
regulations and circulars, and harmonise the approach of all state actors. 

The  need  for  legal  monitoring  still  derives  from  the  cross-border  nature  of 
criminal acts which calls into question, to some extent, the principle of territo-
rial application of legal rules. In fact, when it comes to crimes committed using 
a computer system or network, the number of places and countries involved in 
such fraudulent acts is likely to increase. The offence can be partly committed 
in a country and partly in another, or even in a third, while the offender can be 
located practically anywhere in the world. Therefore, the evolution of technol-
ogies and fraudulent behaviours needs to be closely monitored.

In order to be effective, legal monitoring should include the follow-up of ini-
tiatives launched amongst communities or even internationally. Indeed, the 
global nature of networks and systems requires a global response and any 
purely national approach would be doomed to failure.

The fast evolution of digital infrastructure continuously 
generates new threats. It is therefore important to regularly 
assess if the legal bases in force are still adapted and if they 
allow to prosecute and sanction new forms of cybercrime.

Schedule

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
ANSSI, CASES, 
research

ANSSI, CASES, CERTs

ANSSI, ILR, CERTs, 
private sector
CERTs

2015-2017

2015-2017

Implementation of 
the PIU Cyber.

HCPN, ANSSI, CIRCL, 
GOVCERT, CTIE, PGD, 
SRE

EMA

2016

2016

HCPN, CERTs, private 
sector

2016

EMA, HCPN, CERTs

2015

HCPN, CERTs

2016

ANSSI, CERTs

2015-2017

Action Plan Objective 3

#  Action 

Notes

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Propose tools  
for sectoral risk  
management
Develop good  
sectoral practices
Intensify pooling of 
security measures
Develop perfor-
mance indicators 
for security, monitor 
these indicators
Implement tools and 
detailed procedures 
to manage  
significant incidents
Develop a military 
doctrine for the 
cyber sphere
Participation in the 
preparation and 
execution of the EU’s 
“Cyber Europe 2016” 
exercise.
Participation in the 
preparation and 
execution of NATO’s 
“Cyber Coalition 
2015” exercise
Implement national 
exercises including 
the private sector

10 Develop good  

practices, methods 
and tools for read-
iness at different 
levels (critical infra-
structure, telecom 
operators/providers, 
large companies, 
administrations, 
SMEs) 

32

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

33

Action Plan Objective 4

# Action 

Notes

1

2

3

4

5

6

Continue the work 
of the “Cybercrime” 
working group.

Creation of a legal 
WG with the follow-
ing missions:
•   Analysis of the 

current legal 
framework

•   Analysis of the 

provisions in force 
abroad

•   Transposition 
of European 
directives and 
adaptations of 
the national legal 
framework

Continue interna-
tional cooperation 
in the fight against 
cybercrime (EC3 
Europol)

Continue the coop-
eration with the 
EUCTF (European 
Cybercrime Task 
Force)
Continue the  
cooperation with 
Interpol
Continue the  
cooperation with 
the FBI

When

2015-2017

2015-2017

Responsible party, 
Actor(s) 
Prosecution ser-
vice, PGD, ANSSI, 
CIRCL, GOVCERT.
LU, RESTENA CSIRT, 
NCDP, SRE
Ministry of Justice, 
Prosecution service, 
SMC, NCDP, ANSSI, 
PGD, SRE

PGD

2015-2017

Purpose:
•   Facilitate joint 
actions in the 
fight against 
cybercrime

•   Data-merging 

Centre

PGD

PGD

PGD

via Europol

Via the Liaison 
Officer in Brussels

2015-2017

2015-2017

2015-2017

Objective 5: Inform, train and raise awareness of the risks involved

Raising the awareness of public and private sectors of the risks involved and 
means  of  protection  is  an  essential  element  of  the  strategy,  which  largely 
contributes  to  reducing  potential  vulnerabilities  and  motivating  actors  to 
participate actively in the strengthening of security. It is important to make 
all the actors concerned come to the realisation that they can amply protect 
themselves against threats and potential dangers by adopting a responsible 
behaviour.

In the medium term, improved security in cyberspace will not happen without 
fostering the accountability of all the actors of the sectors in question. A large 
proportion of the vulnerabilities exploited by cybercriminals are made possi-
ble by negligence in the design and use of systems that are on the market. For 
example: the late publication and application of corrigenda, the non-compli-
ance with procedures and the prevalence of convenience over security. The 
legislator, owners and operators of infrastructures as well as the users and 
providers of IT solutions will have to join efforts in order to secure the cyber-
space for the benefit of all. 

Any awareness-raising, education and information related process should be 
addressed to all the actors, namely:

•   End users and more specifically:
 
 
 
 
 
 

-   children and young people;
-   students, parents, educators, teachers;
-   civil servants and public employees;
-   private employees;
-   freelancers and other professionals;
-   IT professionals, specialists and other ICT experts.

•   Decision-makers and private executives with responsibilities
 

-   of the private sector.

•   Providers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-   of physical hosting services (data centres);
-   of communication services;
-   of cloud computing services;
-   of electronic signature services;
-   of dematerialisation and electronic archiving services;
-   of integration and ICT equipment supplying services;
-   of ICT consultancy services;
-   of information security services.

34

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

35

•   Operators of critical infrastructures:
 
 
 
 

-   decision-makers;
-   operators of infrastructures;
-   IT professionals;
-   non-expert employees/users.

The constant evolution of the threat means that citizens and enterprises must 
regularly be informed of the extent and nature of ongoing attacks, but also 
of the tools to be implemented and procedures to be applied in order to be 
effectively protected.

Training will allow interested parties to update their knowledge of potential 
threats and means of protection.

The constant evolution of the threat means that citizens 
and enterprises must regularly be informed of the extent 
and nature of ongoing attacks, but also of the tools to be 
implemented and procedures to be applied in order to be 
effectively protected.

Action Plan Objective 5

#  Action

Notes

1 Make the CASES 

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

training compulsory 
for each new civil 
servant
Include methodo-
logical aspects in 
the CASES training 
programme
Introduce compulso-
ry training in primary 
and secondary edu-
cation
Establish an invento-
ry of training obliga-
tions incumbent on 
service providers
Develop an attrac-
tive training pro-
gramme for SMEs
Promote post-sec-
ondary training in 
the field of security
Develop a rais-
ing-awareness/train-
ing programme for 
decision-makers
Develop a training 
programme for 
operators of critical 
infrastructures

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
CSB and MFPRA, 
CASES, external ser-
vice provider

Schedule

2015

CASES, external ser-
vice provider

2016

CASES, Ministry of 
National Education, 
Childhood and Youth

2016

CASES, professional 
associations in the 
field of ICT and/or 
information security
CASES, Chamber of 
Trades

2015-2016

2015-2016

UNI, MESR

2015-2017

CASES, Chamber of 
Trades, Chamber of 
Commerce, Fedil

2015-2016

ANSSI, GOVCERT, 
CASES, CI operators

2016-2017

36

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY II

37

Objective 6:  
Implement norms, standards, certificates, labels and frames of refer-
ence for requirements for the government and critical infrastructures

Information security requires actors to have a suitable behaviour as well as the 
implementation of appropriate organisational and technical measures. Prior 
to the establishment of preventive security measures, a risk analysis must be 
performed  to  assess  potential  losses  related  to  a  compromised  availability, 
integrity or confidentiality of assets. It must also be borne in mind that the 
major impact is often the loss of trust and reputation.

Implementing  consistent  and  effective  secure  systems  within  the  State 
requires the existence of methods of risk analysis, policies and security stan-
dards which are consistent and adapted to specific contexts. Organisational 
and  technical  security  measures  described  in  these  policies  and  standards 
must be applied by the different admin-
istrations. 

Implementing consistent and effective secure 
systems within the State requires the existence 
of methods of risk analysis, policies and security 
standards which are consistent and adapted to 
specific contexts.

Similarly,  critical  or  sensitive  infrastruc-
ture operators will be invited to comply 
with  a  number  of  frames  of  reference, 
respectively  to  target  sectoral  certifica-
tion so as to prove their maturity in terms 
of security.

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
HCPN, ANSSI, SMILE

Schedule

2015-2017

ANSSI, HCPN

2015-2017

ANSSI,CSSF, ILR, 
NCDP, ILNAS

2015-2016

Action Plan Objective 6

# Action

Notes

1

2

3

Risk analysis for pri-
ority sectors
Implementation of 
SSI norms and stand-
ards for classified 
and unclassified net-
works of the public 
sector and critical 
infrastructures
Establish an invento-
ry of standards and 
good practices in the 
different sectors

Objective 7:  
Strengthen cooperation with the academic and research sphere

The University and public research centres specialised in ICT have developed 
cutting-edge  skills  in  the  security  of  information  systems,  “big  data”  and  
the use of information systems for the purpose of controlling the quality of 
services.

It  is  appropriate  to  systematically  put  these  skills  to  use  for  the  benefit  of 
improving the national cybersecurity environment, both through research per 
se and training.

In this same context, it must be ensured that these skills continue to be devel-
oped in close consultation with the private sector and government authori-
ties, while promoting international cooperation academically.

In the medium term, University courses 
or  training  modules  could  be  devel-
oped at the University of Luxembourg, 
together  with  all  actors  –  private  and 
public – to adopt a response to cyberse-
curity needs while taking into account 
national specificities.

It must be ensured that these skills continue  
to be developed in close consultation with the 
private sector and government authorities, 
while promoting international cooperation  
academically.

Action Plan Objective 7

# Action

Notes

1

2

Develop protocols 
and cryptographic 
algorithms
Develop a cyberse-
curity training pro-
gramme

Responsible party, 
Actor(s)
UNI, CRPs

Schedule

2015-2017

UNI, CRPs

2015-2017

38

Implementation

This  strategy  defines  the  objectives  which  are  important  to  achieve  in  the 
next three years. Each objective is complemented by an action plan outlining 
concrete measures to be implemented following a definite time frame, as well 
as the actors called on to contribute to their implementation.

The cybersecurity strategy is intended to evolve over time. It will be periodically  
revised in order to be adapted to new realities. 

The cybersecurity strategy is intended to evolve over time.  
It will be periodically revised in order to be adapted to new 
realities. 

39

GLOSSARY

40

GLOSSARY
ANSSI	
National Agency for the Security 
of Information Systems: national 
authority for the security of classi-
fied and unclassified information 
systems installed and operated by 
the State and operators of critical 
infrastructures for their specific 
needs.

BEE	SECURE	stopline
Centre for reporting illegal and/or 
harmful online content.

CASES
Cyberworld Awareness & Security 
Enhancement Services: programme 
of the SMILE economic interest 
grouping.

CC13 
Cyber Coalition: NATO annual cyber-
defence exercise.

CCDCoE 
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre 
of Excellence: NATO Centre of 
Excellence for Cyber Defence in 
Tallinn (Estonia).

CDMB	
Cyber Defence Management Board: 
body of NATO in charge of cyberde-
fence affairs of the alliance.

CERC 
Cyber Risk Assessment Unit: group of 
cyber experts created in the context 
of the PIU Cyber.

CERT 
Computer Emergency Response 
Team: team taking charge of cyber 
security incidents.

CIRCL	
Computer Incident Response Centre 
Luxembourg: CERT in charge of cyber 
incidents in the private and commu-
nal sectors, operated by the SMILE 
grouping of economic interest. 
 
CSB	
Cybersecurity Board: Created by 
decision of the Governing Council 
on 18 July 2011. It is the Luxembourg 
Cybersecurity Board’s mission to 
develop the national strategic plan 
to combat cyber attacks. It is chaired 
by the Minister of Communications 
and Media.

CSIRT	
Computer Security Incident 
Response Team, synonym of CERT.

CSSF 
Financial Sector Supervisory 
Commission.

CE2012 
Cyber Europe 2012: bi-annual exer-
cise of the EU.

CTIE	
State Information Technology 
Centre.

41

EC3	
European Cybercrime Centre.

ICT
Information and 
Communication Technology.

PSF
Professionals of the Financial 
Sector.

EFMS	
European Forum for Member 
States on CIIP.

EMA 
Army Chief of Staff.

ENISA	
European Network and 
Information Security Agency.

EUCTF	
European Cybercrime Task Force.

FOP	
Friends of the Presidency.
 
GOVCERT 
Government CERT: CERT tak-
ing charge of cybersecurity 
incidents in the public sector 
and critical infrastructures. 
Created by Grand-Ducal Decree 
of 30th July 2013 determining 
the organisation and powers 
of the Government computer 
emergency treatment centre, 
also referred to as “Computer 
Emergency Response Team 
Gouvernemental”.

GT 
Working group.

HCPN	
High Commissioner for National 
Protection.

ILNAS	
Luxembourg Institute for 
Standardisation, Accreditation, 
Security and the Quality of 
Products and Services.

ILR
Luxembourg Institute of 
Regulation.

ISP	
Internet Service Provider.

MISP 
Malware Information Sharing 
Platform.

MONARC 
CASES methodology of risk  
analysis.

MoU 
Memorandum of 
Understanding. 
 
NCSS2
National Cyber Security  
Strategy 2.

NCDP	
National Commission for Data 
Protection.

PGD 
Grand Ducal Police.

PIU 
Emergency response plan.

PKI 
Public Key Infrastructure - 
LUXTRUST in this case.

RESTENA
Teleprocessing Network 
of National Education and 
Research.

SMC 
Media and Communications 
service.

SMILE	
“Security Made In Lëtzebuerg”: 
economic interest grouping 
of major operators of the BEE 
SECURE, CASES and CIRCL  
governmental initiatives. SMILE 
is composed of three members: 
the State (represented by three 
Ministries: the Ministry of  
the Economy, the Ministry of 
the Family, Integration and the 
Greater Region, the Ministry of 
National Education, Childhood 
and Youth), the SYVICOL (Trade 
Union of Cities and Communes 
of Luxembourg) and the SIGI 
(Intercommunal Trade Union  
of Computer Management).

SSI 
Security of information systems.

43

PUBLISHER / CONTACT
LE GOUVERNEMENT DU GRAND-DUCHÉ DE LUXEMBOURG
Ministère d’État
Haut-Commissariat à la Protection nationale
211, route d’Esch . L-1471 Luxembourg
Email: Secretariat@hcpn.etat.lu

