National Cyber Security

National Security Vision

Malaysian’s Critical National Information 
Infrastructure will be secure, resilient and 
self-reliant. Infused with a culture of 
security, it will promote stability, social 
well being and wealth creation

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

Background

The alarming rise of premeditated attacks with 
potentially catastrophic effects to interdependent 
networks and information systems across the globe has 
demanded that significant attention is paid to critical 
information infrastructure protection initiatives.

For many years Governments have been 
protecting strategically critical 
infrastructures, however in recent times 
the information revolution has 
transformed all areas of life. The way 
business is transacted, government 
operates, and national defence is 
conducted has changed. These activities 
now rely on an interdependent network 
of information technology 
infrastructures and this increases our 
risk to a wide range of new 
vulnerabilities and threats to the 
nation’s critical infrastructures. These 
new cyber threats are in many ways 
significantly different from the more 
traditional risks that Governments have 
been used to addressing. Exploiting 
security flaws appears now to be far 
easier, less expensive and more 
anonymous than ever before.

The increasing pervasiveness, 
connectivity and globalization of 
information technology coupled with 
the rapidly changing, dynamic nature of 
cyber threats and our commitment to 
the use of ICT for socio-economic 
development brings about the critical 
need to protect the critical information 
infrastructures to provide greater 
control. This means that Governments, 
including the Malaysian government, 
must adopt an integrated approach to 
protect these infrastructures from 
cyber threats.

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

The National Cyber Security Policy

This National Cyber Security Policy has been designed to facilitate 
Malaysia’s move towards a knowledge-based economy (K-economy). The 
Policy was formulated based on a National Cyber Security Framework that 
comprises legislation and regulatory, technology, public-private 
cooperation, institutional, and international aspects.

The National Cyber Security Policy seeks to address the risks to the Critical National 
Information Infrastructure (CNII) which comprises the networked information systems of 
ten critical sectors. The CNII sectors are:
National Defence and Security

Information and Communications

• Banking and Finance 
•
• Energy
• Transportation
• Water
• Health Services
• Government
• Emergency services
• Food and Agriculture

The Policy recognizes the critical and highly interdependent nature of the CNII and aims to 
develop and establish a comprehensive programme and a series of frameworks that will 
ensure the effectiveness of cyber security controls over vital assets. It has been developed 
to ensure that the CNII are protected to a level that commensurate the risks faced.

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

The Eight Policy Thrusts

THRUST 1: Effective Governance
Centralise coordination of national cyber security 
initiatives
Promote effective cooperation between public and private 
sectors
Establish formal and encourage informal information 
sharing exchanges

THRUST 2: Legislative & Regulatory Framework
Review and enhance Malaysia’s cyber laws to address the 
dynamic nature of cyber security threats
Establish progressive capacity building programmes for 
national law enforcement agencies 
Ensure that all applicable local legislation is 
complementary to and in harmony with international laws, 
treaties and conventions

THRUST 3: Cyber Security Technology Framework
Develop a national cyber security technology framework 
that specifies cyber security requirement controls and 
baselines for CNII elements
Implement an evaluation/certification programme for 
cyber security product and systems

THRUST 4: Culture of security and Capacity Building
Develop, foster and maintain a national culture of security
Standardise and coordinate cyber security awareness and 
education programmes across all elements of the CNII
Establish an effective mechanism for cyber security 
knowledge dissemination at the national level 
Identify minimum requirements and qualifications for 
information security professionals

THRUST 5: Research & Development Towards Self-Reliance
Formalise the coordination and prioritization of cyber security 
research and development activities 
Enlarge and strengthen the cyber security research community 
Promote the development and commercialization of intellectual 
properties, technologies and innovations through focused research 
and development
Nurture the growth of cyber security industry

THRUST 6: Compliance and Enforcement
Standardise cyber security systems across all elements of the CNII
Strengthen tho monitoring and enforcement of standards 
Develop a standard cyber security risk assessment framework

THRUST 7: Cyber Security Emergency Readiness
Strengthen the national computer emergency response teams 
(CERTs)
Develop effective cyber security incident reporting mechanisms
Encourage all elements of the CNII to monitor cyber security events
Develop a standard business continuity management framework
Disseminate vulnerability advisories and threat warnings in atimely
manner
Encourage all elements of the CNII to perform periodic vulnerability 
assessment programmes

THRUST 8: International Cooperation
Encourage active participation in all relevant international cyber 
security bodies, panels and multi-national agencies
Promote active participation in all relevant international cyber
security by hosting an annual international cyber security 
conference 

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

Implementation Approach

Phase I (0 - 1 year)

Addressing 
Immediate 
Concerns

- Stop-gap measures to address fundamental 

vulnerabilities to the cyber security of the CNII

- Creating a centralize platform for security 

mechanism

- Raising awareness of cyber security and its 

implications

Phase II (0 - 3 years)

Building the 
Infrastructure

- Setting-up the necessary systems, process, 

standards and institutional arrangements 
(mechanisms)

- Building capacity amongst researches and 

information security professionals

Phase III 
(0 - 5 years and 
beyond)

Developing 
Self-Reliance

- Developing self-reliance in terms of technology as 

well as professionals

- Monitoring the mechanisms for compliance 
- Evaluating and improving the mechanisms
- Creating the culture of cyber security

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

The successful implementation of the eight policy thrust as contained within the 
National Cyber Security relies on a coordinated and focused approach. The key 
feature of the Policy implementation is:

Establishment Of The Malaysia Cyber Security Centre

The Malaysia Cyber Security Centre is envisioned to become a one-stop coordination centre for national cyber security 
initiatives by adopting a coordinated and focused approach, with the key objective of strengthening the country’s cyber 
security arena.
The centre will be under the purview of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOSTI), and overseen by the 
National IT Council for policy direction and the National Security Council in times of national crisis.

The key functions of the Malaysia Cyber Security Center are :

• National Cyber Security Policy Implementation

Defines, communicates and updates (when necessary) the national cyber security programmes to all the CNII.

• National Coordination

Closely coordinates cyber security initiatives of  various key Agencies and organisations in Malaysia.

• Outreach

Promote and facilities formal and informal mechanism for information sharing across the CNII. This includes 
promoting cyber security awareness, training and education programmes to grow the competency of 
information security professionals and the industry as a whole.

• Compliance Monitoring

Facilities the monitoring of compliance to cyber security policies and standards across the CNII.

• Risk Assessment

Assesses and identifies cyber security threats exploiting vulnerabilities and risks across the CNII.

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

Conclusion

Today’s unrelenting march towards an IT centric infrastructure with 
increasingly complex interdependencies, increasingly frequent 
cyber attacks and dynamic risk profile has required governments to 
review traditional protection mechanisms. 21st century 
infrastructure protection programmes will need to consider a host 
of virtual as well as physical threats.

Key to the success of any protection programme is effective governance and coordination. The National 
Cyber Security Policy focuses particular attention upon this area. The establishment of a single 
coordinating body will help tp provide additional levels of organization, clarity and accountability. It will 
enhance the operations of current organisations who will continue to perform their duties and enhance 
the security of the CNII.

Alongside clear and effective governance, the National Cyber Security Policy provides mechanisms for 
improving the trust and cooperation between the public and private sectors, improving cyber security 
skills and capacity, and focuses on enhancing existing skills and capacity, and focuses on enhancing 
research and development initiatives and practices with the aim towards self-reliance. It also maps out 
emergency readiness initiatives and dictates a programme of compliance and assurance across the whole 
of the CNII

The National Cyber Security Policy also reaches out to Malaysia’s international partners and describes 
methods whereby Malaysia can share cyber security knowledge with the region and the wider world. It 
propels Malaysia towards greater international recognition in this field.

Taken as a whole, the National Cyber Security Policy aims to improve trust and cooperation in the CNII 
both at home and abroad, for the benefit of the people of Malaysia.  

© Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation

Prepared by:

Ministry of Science, Technology And Innovation
ICT Policy Division.
Level 5, Block C5,
Federal Government Adminstrative Centre,
62662 Putrajaya
MALAYSIA.
Tel: 603-88858000 
www.mosti.gov.my

