 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Republic of Malawi 

 

NATIONAL ICT POLICY   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

An ICT-led Malawi 

2013 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Item   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

       Page 

FOREWORD ................................................................................................ii 

PREFACE ....................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 

LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS .................................................... iv 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS ................................................................................. v 

1. 

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. 1 

1.1. 

BACKGROUND ................................................................................ 1 

1.2. 

LINKAGES WITH OTHER RELATED POLICIES ....................................... 2 

1.3. 

Problem DEFINITION ....................................................................... 4 

1.4. 

PURPOSE OF THE POLICY ................................................................. 5 

2. 

BROAD POLICY DIRECTION .............................................................. 6 

2.1. 

OVERAL POLICY GOAL ..................................................................... 6 

2.2. 

OVERAL POLICY OUTCOMES ............................................................. 6 

2.3. 

OVERAL POLICY OBJECTIVES ............................................................ 7 

3. 

POLICY PRIORITY AREAS ................................................................. 7 

3.1. 

STRATEGIC ICT LEADERSHIP ............................................................ 8 

3.2. 

HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT ....................................................... 8 

3.3. 

E-GOVERNMENT SERVICES .............................................................. 9 

3.4. 

ICT IN INDUSTRIES ......................................................................... 9 

3.5. 

ICT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT ............................................. 10 

3.6. 

ICT IN THE PRIORITY GROWTH SECTORS ........................................ 11 

3.7. 

RESPONSIVE ICT LEGAL, REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL 

FRAMEWORK ................................................................................ 11 

3.8. 

PROMOTING NATIONAL SECURITY .................................................. 12 

3.9. 

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION...................................................... 12 

3.10.  UNIVERSAL ACCESS OF ICT AND ICT RELATED SERVICES.................. 13 

4. 

IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY ......................................................... 14 

4.1. 

INSTUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS....................................................... 14 

4.2. 

OBLIGATIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND PERFORMANCE 

ACCOUNTABILITY OF MITA ............................................................. 15 

4.3. 

IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ................................................................. 16 

4.4. 

MONITORING AND EVALUATION ..................................................... 16 

i 

 

ii 

 

 

iii 

 

 

LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ICT 

Information and Communications Technology 

MACRA 

Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority 

MDGs 

Millennium Development Goals 

MGDS II 

Malawi Growth & Development Strategy II 

MITA 

Malawi Information Technology Agency 

TCP/IP 

Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol 

UNECA 

United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 

UNDP 

United Nations Development Programme 

 

 

 

 

iv 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

Broadcasting: any communication or transmission of any message or signal to 

the public by means of any electronic gadgets. 

e-Government Service: public service provided electronically by a Ministry or 

Government  department,  local  authority,  or  body  established  by  or  under  any 

law or controlled or funded by the Government. 

ICT: (Information and Communications Technology) the technologies including 

computers,  telecommunication,  audio-visual  systems,  and  postal  systems  that 

enable the collection, processing, transportation and delivery of information and 

communication services to users. 

Information  Society:  social,  business  and  educational  environment  where 

individuals and organisations communicate and access the world’s commercial, 

educational and entertainment resources over a universal network linking them 

together. 

Internet:  an  interconnected  system  of  networks  that  connects  computers  via 

the Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) and includes future 

versions thereof.  

Local Content: information that emphasize the culture and language diversity 

of Malawi and are produced by or under Malawians’ control. 

Knowledge-based  Economy:  Is  an  economy  which  embraces  development 

and utilisation of ICT in its socio-economic development activities. 

Operator:  a person or organisation that operates ICT facilities and/or services 

of telecommunications, broadcasting, IT applications, or postal services. 

Regulation: the process of ensuring that public utilities operate in accordance 

with legal rules.  These rules may govern the offering of service by an operator 

and includes practices, classification and definitions. 

 

v 

Telecommunication: 

  any  domestic  or 

international 

transmission  of 

information  by  wire,  radio  waves,  optical  media,  or  other  electromagnetic 

systems, between or among points of user’s choosing. 

Tele-density:  Percentage of telephone users in a population. 

Universal  Access:  allowing  everyone  in  the  country  to  have  access  to  ICT 

facilities within a reasonable distance and at a reasonable cost. 

Universal Service: a policy of the Government to make ICT services, including 

advanced ICT services available throughout the country at affordable prices so 

that they are either available or easily accessible to anyone whenever they are 

needed, regardless of their geographic or physical location, and with due regard 

to people with special needs. 

 

vi 

1. INTRODUCTION  

The  National  Information  and  Communications  Technology  Policy  has  been 

developed by Government of Malawi  to give direction on ICT development in the 

country.   

 

The  ICT  Policy  will  support  the  national  goal  of  wealth  creation  and  reduction  of 

poverty through sustainable economic growth and infrastructure development.  

The policy is providing a framework for deployment, exploitation and development 

of  ICT  to  support  the  process  of  accelerated  socio-economic  development  in 

Malawi.  Government  will  provide  direction 

for  systematic  ICT  program 

development,  implementation,  monitoring  and  review  through  this  policy. 

Government aims at consolidating an ICT approach for the mobilization, allocation 

and utilization of resources to realize institutional, community, sector and national 

development policies and strategies. 

This  ICT  Policy  covers  Information  Technology  (IT),  Telecommunications, 

Broadcasting and Postal services.  

The ICT Policy aims at guiding: 

a.  The provision of ICT services in the rural areas and to the vulnerable groups; 

b.  The investment in priority ICT areas; 

c.  The Public Sector  in the planning for the national development and utilization 

of ICT; and 

d.  The  formulation  of  an  appropriate  regulatory  and  legal  framework  aimed  at 

safeguarding  fundamental  human  rights,  protecting  privacy,  promoting 

electronic services, and promoting competition in the ICT sector. 

 

1.1.  BACKGROUND  

ICT has increasingly become one of the dominant factors affecting every facet of 

development not only in Malawi but the world over.  Significant ICT advances are 

constantly  taking  place  and  continue  to  impact  on  socio-economic  operations  at 

various  levels  of  society.    ICT  advances  have  brought  about  changes  in  the  way 

business  is  conducted.    At  the  moment  nations  and  organizations  are  investing 

 

1 

more resources into the development and use of ICT in order to be more efficient 

and effective in their operations. 

Malawi, as one of the developing economies in the world, has over the years faced 

a number of socio-economic challenges which are associated, among other things, 

with  inadequate  communication  infrastructure,  very  low  utilization  of  ICTs  and 

lack of information. 

Major  reforms  in  the  ICT  sector  started  in  the  1990s  through  separation  and 

commercialization  of  the  then  incumbent  Telecom  operator  and  Post  Office  into 

Malawi Telecom Limited (MTL) and Malawi Postal Corporation (MPC), respectively. 

These  reforms  were  supported  by  the  Communications  Sector  Policy  and  the 

Communications  Act  of  1998.  In  addition,  through  the  Act,  the  Malawi 

Communications  Regulatory  Authority  (MACRA)  was  established.  However,  with 

passage  of  time,  the  1998  Communications  Sector  Policy  has  been  overtaken  by 

the significant developments in ICT. 

 The  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDG)  report  of  2011  for  Malawi  indicates 

that use of Internet by the population  in  Malawi  improved from the low  levels of 

0.07 percent in 2005 to 17 percent in 2011.  Use of mobile and fixed telephones 

(tele-density)  has  improved  from  2.63  percent  to  about  27  percent  in  the  same 

period. This is largely due to the increase in use of mobile telephones.  While data 

on computer ownership and use for Malawi is not available, the country has a very 

low  computer  density  as  compared  to  other  countries  in  the  African  region.  

Furthermore,  most  of  the  telephones  and  computers  are  concentrated  in  urban 

areas.  Government of Malawi, through various initiatives, has provided a total of 

51 tele-centres that are currently operating in rural areas, providing access to ICT 

equipment and Internet services to the general public.  Currently Malawi is ranked 

number  159  out  of  the  190  countries  on  the  UNDP’s  e-government  development 

index. 

For  Malawi  to  play  a  meaningful  role  in  the  global  economy,  the  above  status 

needs to improve.   

 

1.2.  LINKAGES WITH OTHER RELATED POLICIES 

A  number  of  existing  policies,  legislation  and  programmes  have  in  one  way  or 

another informed and fostered the development of this ICT Policy.  Within the ICT 

 

2 

sector,  relevant  policies  that  have  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  Policy 

including  the  1998  Communications  Sector  Policy,  Digital  Broadcasting  Policy  of 

2013  and  the  Science  and  Technology  Policy.    Other  policies  include  the  Vision 

2020,  the  Malawi  Growth  and  Development  Strategy  II,  the  Millennium 

Development  Goals  (Goal  8:    Developing  Global  Partnerships)  and  the  1998 

National  Decentralization  Policy.    In  addition  to  the  above,  several  existing 

enactments  and  programs  have  also  encouraged  this  process.    Of  particular 

significance include the Communications Act (1998),  the Science and Technology 

Act of 2003.   

 

 

 

 

3 

1.3.  PROBLEM DEFINITION   

In terms of the ICT Sector, Malawi is faced with the following challenges: 

i. 

Inadequate ICT infrastructure especially in the rural areas.  As of 2012, there 

was  a  total  of  only  2,112  kilometres  of  fiber  optic  cable  in  the  country, 

concentrated  in  urban  areas.        The  situation  described  above  makes  it  a 

challenge  for  Malawi  to  provide  electronic  services  to  the  general  public, 

especially to those that reside in rural areas.   

ii.  Underdeveloped  research  and  development  capacity  in  ICT.    No  patented 

ICT-based innovation has been recorded in the country.  The country imports 

almost all of its ICT products and services. 

iii. 

Inadequate specialized ICT professionals and institutional capacity. There are 

very  few  certified  professionals  in  specialist  ICT  areas.    Malawi  continues  to 

depend  on  international  experts  as  well  as  institutions  for  capacity 

development and for implementing and managing complex ICT initiatives.        

iv.  High  investment  cost  for  ICT  infrastructure.    ICT  infrastructure  is  heavily 

dependent on imported material.  Linked to the above challenge, experts for 

constructing the infrastructure have to be imported.  Return on investment is 

low, especially in the rural areas due to the low telephone and computer use 

in those areas, and investors shun from investing in the rural areas.  This is 

evidenced through the inadequate ICT infrastructure in Malawian rural areas. 

v.  Lack of local and relevant Internet content and e-services that may be useful 

to the rural communities makes it difficult to implement ICT programmes.   

vi.  Lack  of  legal  instruments  for  protection  of  individuals  and  societies  from 

abuse  arising  from  the  use  of  ICT  and  participation  in  information  society.  

Users do not trust online and electronic services in the absence of the law. 

vii.  Lack  of  awareness  of  ICT  and  e-services  and  their  potential.    Awareness 

programmes on ICT and ICT-based services have not been implemented on a 

large scale in Malawi due to a lack of coordination. 

viii.  Low  levels  of  online  public  services  and  low  levels  of  engaging  the  citizens 

using  ICTs.    There  has  never  been  a  deliberate  policy  to  facilitate  the 

provision  of  electronic  platforms  for  citizen  engagement  in  the  development 

 

4 

process.  Public entities, therefore, have not been encouraged to ensure that 

their services are available online and electronically. 

The above challenges are of huge magnitude and have a negative impact on the 

growth  of  the  economy.    In  addition,  the  e-government  development  index  of 

2011 ranks Malawi on number 159 out of 190 countries in the World.  

 

Largely  responses  to  the  problems  have  been  uncoordinated  and  far  apart.  The 

following section elaborates the responses to specific problems: 

  To  address  the  challenge  of  inadequate  ICT  infrastructure  especially  in  the 

rural  areas,  government  has  established  tele-centres 

in  rural  areas. 

Government  is  also  implementing  a  Regional  Communication  Infrastructure 

Program  Malawi  Project  (RCIP-MW)  that  will  implement  fiber  optic  cable 

connectivity to Tanzania with very high speed Internet Capacity.   

  Government  is  currently  reviewing  the  Communications  Act  (1998)  and 

drafting  the  Electronic  Transactions  and  Management  Bill  in  order  to  address 

the challenges that are affecting the development of ICT in the country. 

  Government 

is 

implementing  an  e-Schools 

initiative  where  computer 

laboratories with internet access are being implemented in public schools.   

The  development  of  this  policy  will,  among  other  things,  help  Government  and 

various  stakeholders  to  effectively  deal  with  the  above  mentioned  and  any 

emerging problems associated with ICT at different levels of society. 

 

1.4.  PURPOSE OF THE POLICY 

Given  the  benefits  and  opportunities  offered  by  ICT,  it  is  acknowledged  that 

Malawi  cannot  effectively  forge  ahead  with  its  development  agenda  without 

putting  in  place  an  appropriate  framework  for  ICT  to  support  and  accelerate 

various  initiatives  and  interventions  at  all  levels  of  society.    Therefore,  this  ICT 

Policy sets out Malawi’s development agenda in the information age based on the 

fundamental principles of the Constitution of the Republic of Malawi as outlined in 

Chapter  3.  The  policy  is  also  based  on  the  Policy  Framework  Document:  “An 

Integrated  ICT-led  Socio-economic  Development  Policy  and  Plan  Development 

Framework for Malawi’’. 

5 

 

In this Policy, Government has defined priority areas that will have a huge impact 

in  the  realization  of  an  information  society  and  knowledge-based  economy.    As 

Malawi implements the policy, the following benefits are expected to be realised: 

 

job  creation  and  foreign  currency  savings  through  local  production  of  ICT-

based products and services; 

  higher  education  status  for  the  country  due  to  the  increased  access  to 

education and learning materials at all levels of education;  

 

lower  doctor-patient  ratios  and  improved  access  to  medical  care  and 

information;  

  diversified marketing opportunities  and increased income for the country.  

Some  of  the  initiatives  that  will  be  implemented  through  this  policy  include 

improvement  of  ICT  infrastructure  and  connectivity  to  international  internet 

routes with increased internet bandwidth.  These initiatives are intended to bring 

down the cost of communication especially for the internet-based applications and 

services.   

Through  this  policy,  Government  will  establish  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework 

to protect consumers of ICT products and services.  

 

2.  BROAD POLICY DIRECTION 

2.1.  OVERAL POLICY GOAL 

The goal of the ICT Policy is to contribute to socio-economic development through 

maximum integration of ICT in all sectors and the provision of ICT services to the 

rural areas.  

2.2.  OVERAL POLICY OUTCOMES 

The following outcomes will be realized after implementing this policy: 

a.  Increased access to basic health and educational facilities; and increased skills 

in ICT; 

b.  Improved  engagement  of  citizens,  increased  access  to  Government  services 

and improved Government transparency; 

 

6 

c.  Vibrant  ICT  industry  that  will  facilitate  the  development  of  ICT  products  and 

services as well invigorating other industries; 

d.  Universal Access to ICT Services; 

e.  Diversified income opportunities for Malawi; 

f.  Provision of enhanced ICT services in a secure and trustworthy environment; 

g.  Professional and world-class ICT-based products and services; 

h.  Improved access to relevant information and public services. 

 

2.3.  OVERAL POLICY OBJECTIVES 

The  overall  objective  of  the  policy  is  to  facilitate  the  creation  of  an  enabling 

environment  for  efficient,  effective  and  sustainable  utilisation,  exploitation  and 

development  of  ICT  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  including  the  rural  and 

underserved  communities,  in  order  to  attain  an  information-rich  and  knowledge-

based society and economy. 

 

3. POLICY PRIORITY AREAS 

The  transformation  of  Malawi  into  a  predominantly  information-rich  society  and 

knowledge-based  economy  requires  targeting  areas  of  priority  and  of  major 

contribution to the economy in a more integrated approach.  In this respect,  ten 

priority areas have been addressed by the policy; namely:  

1.  Strategic ICT Leadership,  

2.  Human Capital Development,  

3.  E-Government Services,  

4. 

5. 

6. 

ICT in Industries,  

ICT Infrastructure Development,  

ICT in the priority Growth Sectors,  

7.  Responsive ICT Legal, Regulatory and Institutional Framework,  

8.  National Security, 

9. 

International Cooperation, and 

10.  Universal Access of ICT and ICT related services. 

 

7 

 

 

3.1.  STRATEGIC ICT LEADERSHIP  

An analysis of Malawi’s ICT environment currently indicates that there is need to 

build  and  enhance  ICT  strategic  leadership  for  an  integrated  and  responsive 

national ICT programme.  The policy aims at establishing strategic ICT leadership 

at  all  levels  of  society  to  take  the  lead  in  sourcing;  creating  an  attractive 

environment  for  investors  and  consumers;  identifying  areas  needing  priority 

funding and support; and obtaining and directing resources.   

Objective:  To provide sustained high level ICT leadership and championship 

oversight, inspiration and political goodwill.  

Policy Statement 1:  The policy will ensure that Government shall raise the level 

of  awareness  among  those  in  leadership  positions  on  the  role,  use,  application 

and potential of ICT. 

Policy  Statement  2:    The  policy  will  ensure  that  Government  shall  raise  the 

profile  of  ICT  in  the  society  and  promote  confidence  in  utilizing  ICTs  to  the 

citizens. 

3.2.  HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT 

The  value  of  human  capital  is  increased  through  education,  healthcare  and 

acquisition of skills through training.  Currently, there is limited access to health, 

education and training services by the majority of Malawians.  The integration of 

ICT  in  service  delivery  within  the  education  and  health  sectors  will  facilitate  and 

accelerate interventions in human capital development.  

Objective:      To  increase  access  to  healthcare,  education  and  training  facilities 

through ICT utilization. 

Policy Statement 1:  The policy will ensure that Government shall integrate ICTs 

in the education systems at all levels in order to improve access to and quality of 

education; improve management of education systems. 

Policy Statement 2: The policy will ensure that Government shall integrate ICTs 

in  the  health  delivery  systems  at  all  levels  in  order  to  improve  access  to  the 

 

8 

nation’s  limited  health  facilities,  improve  management  of  health  services  and 

information dissemination, and enhance medical research. 

Policy Statement 3: Government shall develop a large pool of highly skilled ICT 

personnel  to  carry  out  ICT  research  and  develop  ICT  innovations  within  the 

country. 

 

3.3.  E-GOVERNMENT SERVICES 

Electronic government is the utilisation of ICTs in provision of public services.  Use 

of ICTs enhances accountability and promotes equitable allocation and distribution 

of  public  resources.    ICT  plays  a  crucial  role  in  improving  the  efficiency  of  the 

operations  of  the  public  service;  particularly  in  improving  the  delivery  of  quality 

service  to  the  general  public  and  the  provision  of  national  security.    Malawi  is 

currently  ranked  159  out  of  190  countries  due  to  its  low  utilisation  of  ICTs  for 

public service provision.   

Policy  Statement  1:    Government  shall  deploy  ICTs  to  facilitate  effective  and 

efficient  public  service  delivery  and  interaction  between  the  public  service  and 

citizens of Malawi, companies, government institutions, cooperating partners and 

other stakeholders of the Government of Malawi; 

Policy  Statement  2:    Government  shall  deploy  ICTs  in  order  to  enhance 

oversight functions in Government. 

 

3.4.  ICT IN INDUSTRIES 

Malawi  is  currently  promoting  the  production  of  export-quality  products  and 

services through its  local  industry sector.   However, the country still depends on 

imported goods as the local industry is unable to meet even the internal demands.  

The ICT industry in Malawi is under-developed.  The growth of the ICT industry, if 

properly  harnessed,  will  influence  the  rapid  development  of  all  industries  in 

Malawi.   

Policy  Statement  1:    The  policy  shall  promote  the  use  of  ICT  in  the  private 

sector’s service delivery and in research and development of goods and services; 

 

9 

Policy Statement 2:  Government shall promote local and foreign investment for 

innovative production, R&D and diffusion of ICT by the private sector. 

Policy  Statement  3:    Government  shall  establish  and  promote  an  enabling 

environment for private sector investment in ICT; 

Policy  Statement  4:    The  policy  will  ensure  that  Government  introduces 

initiatives  to  promote  the  development  of  a  domestic  and  export-oriented  ICT 

industry; 

Policy Statement 5:  Government shall promote the implementation of “Green” 

ICT to encourage the use of environmentally-friendly ICT products. 

 

3.5.  ICT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 

ICT  infrastructure  is  the  base  for  communication  and  delivery  of  electronic 

services.    ICT  infrastructure  in  Malawi  is  under-developed,  especially  in  the  rural 

areas.   

Objective : To develop the ICT Infrastructure in order to improve access and 
delivery of services as well as reduce communication costs. 

Policy  Statement  1:  Government shall  promote  ICT  infrastructure  development 

in  all  areas  of  the  country  to  provide  basic  means  for  electronic  communication 

and delivery of e-services.   

Policy Statement 2: Government shall facilitate the establishment of a reliable, 

adaptive  and  robust  national  ICT  backbone  infrastructure  that  feeds  into  equally 

high quality regional and international ICT infrastructure; 

Policy  Statement  3:  Government  shall  promote  and  facilitate  domestic  and 

foreign private sector investments in ICT infrastructure development; 

Policy Statement 4: Government shall encourage sharing and co-location of ICT 

infrastructure and ICT facilities by service providers. 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

3.6.  ICT IN THE PRIORITY GROWTH SECTORS  

The  growth  sectors  of  MGDS  include  Agriculture,  Tourism  and  Mining.  There  is 

potential  for  ICT  to  stimulate,  modernise  and  sustain  processes  and  systems  in 

agriculture, tourism and mining sectors.  

Policy Statement 1: Government shall encourage the utilisation of ICTs in agro-

business  industry;  agricultural  extension  services;  research  in  agricultural 

production and processing.   

Policy  Statement  2:  Government  shall  encourage  the  utilisation  of  ICTs  to 

ensure  that  Malawi’s  presence  as  a  unique  and  attractive  tourist  destination  is 

recognized  on  the  global  map  through  the  provision  of  up-to-date  tourism 

information; 

Policy Statement 3: Government shall ensure that ICTs are used to strengthen 

sustainable  natural  resource  and  environmental  management  practices;  Provide 

access to geographical information on natural resources and wildlife habitats and 

exact location and quantities of minerals;  

Policy  Statement  4:  Government  shall  encourage  the  use  of  ICT  to  explore 

marketing  opportunities  for  Malawi’s  products  including  exportable  natural 

resources products; 

Policy  Statement  5:  Government  shall  promote  the  utilisation  of  ICTs  in 

environmental protection. 

 

3.7.  RESPONSIVE ICT LEGAL, REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL 

FRAMEWORK 

The  ICT  Sector  is  a  very  dynamic  sector  that  requires  regular  updates  in 

legislations  and  regulations.    Currently,  Malawi’s  Communications  sector  is 

regulated  by  the  Communications  Act  1998,  which  only  focuses  on  postal, 

broadcasting and telecommunications. 

Policy  Statement  1:  The  policy  will  ensure  that  Government  develops  and 

harmonises  legal  instruments  to  ensure  that  the  ICT  industry  is  regulated  to 

safeguard  human  rights,  facilitate  fair  competition  within  the  industry  and 

promote accountability to the public.   

 

11 

Policy Statement 2:  The policy will ensure that Government develops laws and 

institutional  framework  to  govern  the  use  of  electronic  evidence,  and  to 

coordinate development and utilisation of ICTs in Malawi. 

3.8.  PROMOTING NATIONAL SECURITY 

Globalization  and  pervasiveness  of  crime  and  other  security  challenges  have 

brought perverse tendencies which are threats to national security.  Malawi needs 

to  establish  adequate  capacity  to  deal  with  national  security,  violation  of  human 

rights,  undesirable  impacts  of  ICTs  including  the  violation  of  privacy,  spread  of 

undesirable materials, cyber-crimes, digital frauds and terrorism.  Surveillance and 

readiness of security agencies require the use of specialized skills and ICTs. 

Policy  Statement  1:  Government  shall  create  statutory  obligations  for  ICT 

service providers to address security needs of the country. 

Policy  Statement  2:    Government  shall  enhance  the  capacity  of  security 

agencies  to  be  up  to  date  with  developments  in  the  ICT  sector,  including 

cyber crimes. 

Policy  Statement  3:  Government  shall  use  ICTs  to  provide  early  warnings  to 

mitigate risks and impact of disasters and facilitate relief management. 

Policy  Statement  4:    Government  shall  promote  the  use  of  ICTs  to  mitigate 

crimes and enhance public security. 

Policy  Statement  5:    Government  shall  establish  mechanisms  for  cooperation 

with international security agencies to combat cross-border crimes. 

 

3.9.  INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 

ICT is the key element in the globalisation process.   Countries cannot operate in 

isolation and close cooperation between different countries is of great importance.  

In  accordance  with  the  existing  foreign  policy,  the  Government  of  Malawi  will 

therefore,  consolidate  the  existing  regional  and  international  relationships  in  the 

ICT sector and establish new ones where they do not exist.  

Policy  Statement  1:    Government  shall  ensure  that  Malawi  is  a  major  and 

regular  player  in  the  regional  and  international  ICT  committees  and  increase  the 

level of participation in regional and international ICT fora. 

 

12 

Policy  Statement  2:    Government  shall  ensure  that  Malawi  adheres  to  the  ICT 

standards  as  enlisted  in  international  and  regional  agreements  to  which  it  is  a 

signatory. 

 

3.10. UNIVERSAL ACCESS OF ICT AND ICT RELATED SERVICES. 

The  majority  of  Malawians  live  in  rural  and  underserved  areas.    These  areas  do 

not  have  adequate  access  to  ICT  services  due  to  poor  or  no  network  coverage, 

insufficient  access  to  public  pay  phones  as  well  as  personal  phones,  very  limited 

availability  of  postal  and  Internet  services,  limited  TV  coverage,  and  lack  of 

relevant  Internet  content  that  may  be  useful  to  them.    One  of  the  fundamental 

principles of the Constitution of the Republic of Malawi is to enhance the quality of 

life in rural communities and to recognize rural standards of living. 

Policy  Statement  1:    Government  shall  ensure  that  all  people  in  every  part  of 

the country have access to affordable, reliable and efficient essential ICT services 

in their community by 2016. 

Policy  Statement  2:  Government  shall  promote  the  development  and 

implementation  of  initiatives  for  the  creation  and  development  of  electronic  local 

content that will inform, educate and entertain the public. 

Policy  Statement  3:    Government  shall  ensure  the  provision  of  financial 

incentives to ICT service providers for expansion of infrastructure and services to 

areas  that  are  not  economically  viable  and  ensure  that  services  are  viable  and 

sustainable in the long term; 

Policy  Statement  4:    Government  shall  facilitate  the  deployment  and 

exploitation  of  ICTs  in  the  promotion  of  diversification  and  improvement  of  the 

quality  of  information;  increasing  accessibility  to  ranges of  information  resources 

within  and  outside  the  country  and  creating  a  supportive  environment  for  the 

development of the mass media and the private press in the information age; 

Policy  Statement  5:  Government,  in  coordination  with  Non-governmental 

organizations  and  development  partners,  shall  mobilize  financial  resources  for 

implementation of ICT programmes for women and the youth; 

Policy Statement 6: Government shall encourage and promote the development 

of special ICT services for the disadvantaged communities and the disabled; 

 

13 

Policy  Statement  7:  Government,  in  coordination  with  Non-governmental 

organizations  and  development  partners  develop  capacities  targeted  at  special 

groups of people in society to ensure that ICT initiatives are all-inclusive; 

Policy  Statement  8:    Government  shall  encourage  development  partners,  non-

government organizations, as well as the private sector's participation to facilitate 

the roll-out of community-based ICT initiatives. 

 

4. IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY 

4.1.  INSTUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 

The following institutions or agencies will play a central role in the coordination of 

implementing the ICT Policy: 

1.  The  Department  of  E-Government  should  be  restructured  into  Malawi 

Information  Technology  Agency  (MITA)  that  will  be  a  quasi-autonomous 

organization  under  the  ministry  responsible  for  ICT.  The  organization 

should  be  charged  with  responsibility  of  accelerating  a  robust  ICT 

development and utilization in Malawi; 

2.  The  Ministry  responsible  for  Information  should  be  responsible  for  ICT 

Policy formulation, monitoring and evaluation; 

3.  The  mandate  of  the  Cabinet  Committee  on  Media  and  Communications 

should  be  enhanced  to  include  provision  of  ICT  strategic  direction  and 

oversight  for  Malawi’s  ICT  sector  and  ensure  that  ICT  is  integrated  in 

national development; 

4.  A  National  ICT  Steering  Committee  with  membership  from  Principal 

Secretaries  and  Heads  of  public  institutions  and  Chamber  of  Commerce 

shall  be  established  to  provide  oversight  and  leadership  on  Sector  ICT 

Strategy  formulation  and  implementation.  The  committee  shall  report  to 

the Cabinet Committee through the Ministry responsible for information; 

5.  District  ICT  Committees  shall  be  established  to  be  responsible  for 

determination  of  ICT  utilization  for  rural  development  and  service  delivery 

and monitoring of ICT utilization among sectors and communities; 

 

14 

6.  Community  ICT  Committees  or  Clubs  shall  be  established  in  communities 

with  responsibility  to  determine  utilization  of  ICT  in  demanding  and 

accessing  services  from  relevant  authorities;  and  will  contribute  towards 

identification of the needs for ICT centers; 

7.  The capacity of Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (MACRA) shall 

be  enhanced  to  effectively  discharge  current  and  additional  mandate  as  a 

regulatory body on ICTs. 

Roles  and  responsibilities  for  other  implementing  agencies  have  been  outlined  in 

the Implementation Strategy document. 

 

4.2.  OBLIGATIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND PERFORMANCE 

ACCOUNTABILITY OF MITA 

Obligations 

MITA  shall  be  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  accelerating  a  robust  ICT 

development in Malawi. 

 Responsibilities  

The responsibilities of MITA shall include the following: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

To implement the National ICT Policy. 

To lead in ICT innovation and development. 

To coordinate human and institutional development for the promotion 

of ICT development and utilization.  

4. 

To facilitate ICT development and utilization across all sectors i.e. rural 

community  access,  e-government,  and  among  the  business  and 

private sector.  

5. 

To  coordinate  all  national  ICT  programs  to  ensure  their  linkage  with 

national priorities. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

To coordinate sustainable development of ICT infrastructure in Malawi. 

To develop and enforce ICT standards in Malawi.  

To mobilize financial  resources for the implementation of the National 

ICT Policy.  

 

 

15 

Performance Accountabilities of MITA 

Currently, the department of E-Government with support from UNDP 

is  coordinating  the  development  of  Malawi  Master  ICT  Plan.  The 

master  plan  shall  be  for  the  period  2013  –  2024,  phased  into  four 

phases.  The  plan  shall  be  comprehensive  and  shall  include  smart 

performance indicators. 

MITA  shall  be  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  the  plan. 

Annually the Ministry responsible for ICTs shall develop performance 

agreements with MITA. 

 

4.3.  IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 

Implementation  of  this  policy  will  be  guided  by  the  detailed  Implementation, 

Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy which is separate document that accompanies 

the policy document.   

 

4.4.  MONITORING AND EVALUATION 

The  implementation  of  the  Policy  shall  be  monitored  and  evaluated  for 

effectiveness  and  responsiveness  in  meeting  intended  goals  and  objectives. 

Monitoring  will  be  done  annually  or  as  may  be  determined.  Evaluation  shall  be 

conducted every three years to measure impact.  

 

16 

