National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

1

Publication Date: 24th March 2014
Version: 1.0

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abbreviations 

Foreword by Joseph Muscat, Prime Minister 
Foreword by Edward Zammit Lewis, Parliamentary Secretary 

1. 

Introduction 

2.  The Local ICT Landscape: Challenges And Opportunities 

3.  The Digital Malta Vision 
3.1  Strategic Themes 
3.2  Underlying Principles 

4.  Digital Citizen 
4.1  Goals 
4.2  Guiding Principles 
4.3  Actions 
 
 
 

Enhancing Digital Literacy and Social Equality 
Access For All 
Stimulating Local Content 

5.  Digital Business 
5.1  Goals 
5.2  Guiding Principles 
5.3  Actions 
 
 
 
 

Transforming Business 
Sustaining Entrepreneurship and Attracting New Businesses 
eCommerce - Going Global 
Stimulating Research & Innovation 

6.  Digital Government 
6.1  Goals 
6.2  Guiding Principles 
6.3  Actions 
 
 
 
 

Citizen and Business-Centric Government 
Efficient Government 
Open Government 
Essential Government Services 

7.  Regulation And Legislation 
7.1  Goals 
7.2  Guiding Principles 
7.3  Actions 
 
 
 

Legislative Infrastructure 
Interoperability and Standards 
A Robust Internet 

3

4
5

6

10

20
20 
23

24
24
25
28
28
29
29

30
30
31
34
34
35
36
37

38
38 
39
42 
42
43
44
45

46
46 
46 
48
48 
49 
49

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

1

50
50
51
52
52
52
54
54
55

56
56
57
58
58
60
61

62
65
66
66
67
68

70
73
73
74
75
76

Infrastructure 

8. 
8.1  Goals 
8.2  Guiding Principles 
8.3  Actions 
 
 
 
 
 

A Nationwide NGA Network 
Spectrum and Networks 
International and Regional Connectivity 
Cyber Security 
Government Shared Infrastructure 

9.  Human Capital 
9.1  Goals 
9.2  Guiding Principles 
9.3  Actions 
 
 
 

Building Capacity and Skills 
Strengthening The Workforce 
Regional Hub for High Quality eSkills Education and Training 

10.  Attaining The Vision 
10.1  Critical Success Factors 
10.2 Political Leadership 
10.3 Governing Body 
10.4 Operational Bodies 
10.5 Support Functions 

11.  Measuring Success 
11.1  Performance Targets 
11.2  Performance Indicators 
11.3  Benchmarking Exercises 
11.4  Qualitative Evaluations 
11.5  Specific Assessments 

2

ABBREVIATIONS

BYOD 

Bring Your Own Device

CHOGM  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting

CIO 

Chief Information Officer

CSIRT 

Computer Security and Incident Reporting Team

DAE 

Digital Agenda for Europe

ENISA 

European Union Agency for Network and Information Security

EU 

FDI 

European Union 

Foreign Direct Investment

FITA 

Foundation for IT Accessibility

FSWS 

Foundation for Social Welfare Services

GCI 

GDP 

ICT 

IPv6 

IT 

LGA 

LSA 

Global Competitiveness Index

Gross Domestic Product

Information and Communications Technology

Internet Protocol version 6

Information Technology

Lotteries and Gaming Authority

Learning Support Assistant

MBPS 

MegaBits Per Second

MCA 

Malta Communications Authority

MCST 

Malta Council for Science and Technology

ME 

MITA 

NGA 

NSO 

PC 

QoS 

R&D 

R&I 

SME 

Malta Enterprise

Malta Information Technology Agency

Next Generation Access

National Statistics Office

Personal Computer

Quality of Service

Research and Technological Development

Research and Innovation

Small and Medium Enterprise

STEM 

Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

3

Foreword by 
JOSEPH MUSCAT 
Prime Minister

The advance of technology is exciting with so many opportunities. We as a country need to embrace 
technology, set a path and ensure we use it well. The Digital Malta Strategy is that path.

It is important that all our people are involved in the advance of the Maltese economy. Nobody 
should be left behind. This Strategy not only results from a wide consultation but also from an 
underlying deep concern to involve everyone. In its pages are actions and commitments to turn us 
into a digital society.

Information and Communications Technology is an important industry in itself, while just about every 
other industry depends on ICT to thrive. This strategy will encourage innovation and entrepreneurial 
ventures and will help all businesses remain competitive and fight their corner in the global economy.

There is also a clear message here that Malta is a good place to set up business. We not only 
offer the European open market, and good links with Africa and the Middle East, but we are well 
positioned on the digital superhighway. We are accelerating in the fast lane of technology and don’t 
intend to take our foot off the pedal.

The road ahead is a lot clearer because of the Digital Malta Strategy. I encourage you to be part of it.

4

Foreword by 
EDWARD ZAMMIT LEWIS 
Parliamentary Secretary 

We live in a competitive world. We can buy products from around the corner or thousands 
of miles away. And what we make we can sell in the local shop or to a market of millions. This is the 
global economy. 

Barriers have come tumbling down. We can be continents apart yet communicate in an instant. The 
world is more inter-connected and that is the way it will stay.

In both government and business there has been recognition of the need to understand new 
technology and utilise it. But could we be doing more? The answer is yes. We would be foolish to 
allow ourselves to lag behind our competitors. 

The Digital Malta Strategy sets out how everyone can learn, broaden their skills and make good use 
of technology. It sets out what we should be doing for the next few years, but it is also flexible in that 
it recognises how fast technology changes and puts us on alert for future developments. The young 
are born into modern technology and have never known a world without gaming, mobiles and the 
Internet. Grandparents may not be so enthusiastic with gadgetry yet they still delight in video chats 
with their grandchildren on the other side of the world. And everybody else is constantly living in an 
online world of email, social media and the web. Government has increasingly put its services online 
and there can be few businesses not powered by technology. 

Technology matters to us all, and that is why the Digital Malta Strategy is so important. It is the way 
forward for all Maltese.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

5

1

INTRODUCTION

ICT can empower the economy and society, 
directly and indirectly. It is both critical 
infrastructure and an enabling tool. Malta 
recognises this and government is setting out a 
vision to transform the country into one which 
will prosper as a digitally-enabled nation in all 
sectors of society.  

This will be done through the implementation 
of this strategy, which is being branded as 
Digital Malta.

1.  The term ‘digital’ within this text refers to the application 
  of information and communication technology

6

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

7

1  INTRODUCTION

The Strategy outlines three strategic themes - 
Digital Citizen, Digital Business and Digital Government, 
and these are supported by three strategic enablers: Regulation and 
Legislation, Infrastructure and Human Capital.  

The Strategy puts forward a suite of guiding principles and actions for 
ICT to be used for socio-economic development.  It sets out how ICT can 
make a difference in areas such as the economy, employment, industry 
and small businesses, and how it can be used for national development, to 
empower citizens and transform government.  It encourages everyone to 
reap the benefits that ICT can bring: better education, stronger businesses, 
efficient Government, sustainable economic growth and much more. 
Truly, it can provide a better quality of life for the Maltese. It is essential 
that the benefits of this nation’s knowledge society are enjoyed by every 
citizen irrespective of age, gender, sexual orientation, disability, education, 
economic means or race.  This will be achieved through intervention to 
circumvent obstacles. There will be action to enhance digital literacy and 
social equality, increase access for all and stimulate local content. 

8

The ICT industry in Malta has achieved 
substantial growth in the past decade. 
Excluding the iGaming sector, it now accounts 
for more than 5% of the nation’s GDP. Besides 
being a sector in its own right, ICT also helps 
other business sectors to develop and grow. 
It is the enabler of the smart specialisation 
areas identified in the National Research and 
Innovation Strategy 2020.  The Digital Malta 
Strategy has been designed to foster a strong, 
competitive, ICT-enabled and export-oriented 
industry, able to compete globally. It will also 
propel ICT further in sustaining business and 
innovation, contributing to economic growth.

Innovative application of ICT is also a crucial 
catalyst in the transformation of government.  
Sophisticated ICT implementations carry little 
value if citizens and businesses are not able to 
use public services or participate in the policy 
making process in meaningful ways.  This 
strategy advocates the re-engineering of public 
services to achieve greater responsiveness 
to citizen and business needs, using multiple 
channels.  Government will have an open 
approach to communicating and sharing 
information following the principles of 
transparency, participation and collaboration.

Technology is continually advancing so this 
strategic plan will not, in the conventional 
jargon of management, be limited only to 
rational policy interventions. The Digital Malta 
Strategy is pragmatic, and flexible enough to 
react to future developments. There is high-level 
strategic direction that allows entities flexibility 
in implementation.  

Digital Malta is not just a Strategy to provide 
national policy direction on ICT initiatives 
covering 2014-2020. It also constitutes a 
framework, permitting policy makers, business 
leaders and entrepreneurs to take decisions now 
knowing they will be supported by policy that is 
responsive to the technological advances of the 
coming years.

The Digital Malta vision is ambitious. The 
path towards achieving it will no doubt need 
refinement and, sometimes major updating, 
because today’s assumptions will carry 
diminished significance as events unravel and 
competitive advantages shift.  These refinements 
will be reflected in the Programme of Initiatives 
complementing the Digital Malta Strategy. Each 
year a recalibration of the Initiatives will take 
place after measuring outcomes and targets 
achieved.

This document is the result of an extensive 
consultative process.  The first phase covered 
a series of consultation workshops with ICT 
stakeholders from the public and private sectors, 
associations and other interest groups from 
civil society, as well as the public at large.  The 
second phase included more focused discussions 
with stakeholders involved in the eventual 
implementation and ownership of parts of 
the Strategy.  This consultative approach will 
continue during the life-time of the Strategy.

Digital Malta reflects the collective aspirations 
and goodwill of stakeholders, structured in 
the form of a national plan owned by the 
stakeholders themselves. It is a journey that all 
stakeholders will nurture to attain a vision of 
where Malta wants to be.  

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

9

2

THE LOCAL ICT LANDSCAPE: 
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

Malta has shown remarkable resilience in the 
face of the sovereign debt crisis that affected 
many other countries in Europe 2. Nevertheless, 
the crisis cannot be ignored because of the 
exposure that comes from having a small, open 
economy.  Indeed, in May 2013, the European 
Commission recommended that Malta be 
placed under an Excessive Deficit Procedure 
and called for reforms in pensions, healthcare 
and sustainable public finances.  According 
to Eurostat, the unemployment rate in Malta 
ranks among the lowest in the EU and, in 2013, 
the inflation rate fell to 1.38% compared to 
2.72% and 2.42% in 2011 and 2012 respectively.  
The rate of economic growth for 2013 was 
higher than expected 3 and a growth of 1.7% is 
projected for 2014 4.  

2.  Most affected countries were southern European countries, Ireland and Slovenia.
3.  Source: Statement published by Standard & Poor’s on 17th January 2014.
4.  Source: 2014 Budget Speech as presented on 4th November 2013.

10

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

11

2  THE LOCAL ICT LANDSCAPE

In the GCI for 2013-2014, Malta has climbed six places and now ranks number 41, out of 148 
countries 5.  Switzerland, Singapore and Finland are ranked in the top three positions.  Compared to 
other European countries, Malta is placed 17th 6.  Among southern European countries, France and 
Spain performed better than Malta, while Italy, Turkey, Portugal and Cyprus performed worse.  The 
results are encouraging, but there is no room for complacency and Malta should actively strive to 
improve its competitiveness.  A strong digital economy is central to any country’s competitiveness, 
growth and jobs strategy.  Our technological readiness is vital in this regard, with Malta ranking 16th 
in the Technology Readiness index (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1

TECHNOLOGICAL 
READINESS INDEX 
MALTA RANKS 16 
OUT OF 148 COUNTRIES. 
(Source: World Economic Forum)

5.  Source: The Global Competitiveness Report (2013 – 2014) - 
  http://reports.weforum.org/the-global-competitiveness-report-2013-2014/.
6. This ranking takes into consideration European countries that are not members 
  of the EU, such as Switzerland and Norway.

12

Universally, ICT is acknowledged as a fundamental 
enabler and one of the pillars for socio-economic 
development.  The past ten years have seen a 
rapid growth of the ICT industry in Malta.   ICT 
contributes circa 5.7% value-added to national 
GDP 7 (Fig. 2) and employs 3.3% of a population 
of 165,300 gainfully employed 8 (Fig. 3).  
   

In 2013, the World Economic Forum ranked 
Malta in 28th place (out of 138 countries) in 
its Networked Readiness Index (Fig. 4), which 
measures the preparedness of an economy 
to use ICT to boost competitiveness and well 
being.  Malta also featured in fourth place for the 
importance of ICT to the government vision and 
in fifth place for successfully promoting the use 
of ICT within the country 9. The fact that there is 
political consensus on ICT strategic direction is a 
strength.

Fig. 2

Source: NSO

Fig. 3

Source: NSO

7.  Source: NSO – Gross Domestic Product.  The ICT sector excludes iGaming, which is classified under a different category.
8.  Source: NSO - Gainfully Occupied Population.
9.  Source: The Global Information Technology Report 2013 prepared by the World Economic Forum.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

13

2  THE LOCAL ICT LANDSCAPE

Fig. 4

NETWORKED READINESS INDEX
MALTA RANKS 28 OUT OF 138 COUNTRIES. 
(Source: World Economic Forum)

TAKE-UP OF ICT

Improving ICT access and its use is an important 
challenge.  Although the ICT footprint is 
increasing, not all homes, schools, or businesses 
have taken it up or are using it as they could.

Compared to other EU countries, Malta falls 
behind in the numbers using the Internet, 
uploading self-created content, using Internet 
banking, taking online courses, and looking for a 
job or sending a job application.

SMEs and start-up companies need 
encouragement to see ICT more as a tool for 
reducing costs, innovating and gaining access 
to wider markets. Citizens are expecting ICT to 
play a more significant role in the next generation 
of healthcare services; it shall enable patient 
empowerment, and safer and more 
personalised care.

14

Fig. 5

Source: Eurostat

People with age-related 
dependencies or different 
abilities need to be empowered 
to stay active, live independently 
and avoid institutionalisation. 
All citizens, including those at 
risk of exclusion (for example, 
those with different abilities, 
low digital literacy/eSkills), need 
access to smart environments 
and innovative services.

Greater effort is needed to 
encourage learning among 
unskilled working-age adults, 
the elderly and people with 
disabilities.  Those without 
eSkills risk not reaping benefits 
from ICT, both in terms of 
earnings and job prospects.  ICT 
offers great potential to bring 
the unemployed back into the 
workforce.

Over the past decade ICT has 
become integrated in schools, 
with all pupils having access 
to computers and the Internet.  
Yet, building capacity in 
education remains a challenge. 
It is important that teachers 
have the skills to harness 
eLearning materials. Teaching 
methods need updating and 
there must be sufficient digital 
content for students to gain full 
advantage of the benefits of ICT.  

HUMAN CAPITAL

The industry, both the ICT-
producing and the ICT-using 
sectors, are supported by 
experienced, efficient, skilled 
and multi-lingual professionals.  
In 2012, Eurostat reported that 
Malta ranked in 23rd position 
out of the EU27+ in terms of 
computer skills. Between the 
2007 and 2012, the average 
number of ICT-related graduates 
from the University of Malta was 
151.  The highest number of ICT 
graduates from the University 
of Malta was registered in 2011 
with 197 – a share of 6.8% of all 
graduates.  During the same 
period, the average number of 

graduates from the ICT Institute 
within MCAST, which is the 
country’s leading vocational 
education and training institution, 
in levels 5 & 6 was 542 graduates.  

Work practices are flexible and 
unit labour costs are generally 
competitive and responsive 
to market conditions.  These 
attributes are complemented by 
a competitive tax regime. 

Within the ICT labour market, 
the low female participation rate, 
the misalignment between the 
ICT education curriculum and 
industry needs (such as the lack of 
specialised skills for the iGaming 
sector) and the lack of supportive 
education are serious weaknesses.  
These are hampering resource 
capacity, resource readiness and 
innovation.  

The arrival of ‘cheaper’ skilled 
competitors, particularly from 
the Baltic region, Eastern 
Europe and Asia, poses a new 
threat to the digital industry in 
Malta.   

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

15

2  THE LOCAL ICT LANDSCAPE

THE CHALLENGES 
FOR THE LOCAL ICT INDUSTRY

Similar to other industries, it is clear that the ICT 
industry in Malta is past the stage where it can 
attempt to achieve higher levels of economic activity 
on the basis of low labour costs.  Incentive packages 
are no longer sufficient in attracting investment, 
because today there are equally attractive incentives 
in other countries.  Investors seek profitable 
opportunities in countries offering the best prospects 
in terms of competitiveness.  If Malta is to improve 
its performance in attracting FDI, greater focus on 
knowledge and innovation-based investment and on 
economic efficiency 10 is needed.  These factors 
carry the promise of sustained growth in the 
wealth-generating capacity of the Digital Economy. 

SMEs within the ICT industry know that their main 
weakness in terms of growth is the small size of the 
local market.  Some of these businesses are adopting 
a more outward-looking entrepreneurial culture that 
is focused on exports rather than relying on short-
term advantages in the captive domestic market.  
However, these SMEs face a multitude of difficulties.  
The World Economic Forum has identified a list of 
problematic factors for doing business in Malta.  The 
top three are inefficient government bureaucracy, 
limited access to financing and insufficient capacity 
to innovate.  Malta also lacks the adequate schemes 
for business angel investors 11, who are generally 
needed by start-ups to take off, and by established 
ICT businesses to expand.  This may reflect Malta’s 
entrepreneurial culture, which tends towards lower 
risk or conventional “bricks-and-mortar” ventures. 

Currently, most local ICT companies are software 
services and hybrid solution providers and 
integrators.  Few qualify as software products 
companies, deriving well over half of their sales from 
licence fees.  This may suggest that less intellectual 
property, inherent in the software being developed, 
can be translated into patents or copyrights.  
Similarly, the lack of participation and contribution 

in open source communities limits the exposure of 
Maltese skills and the potential to increase FDI. 
The small size of the Maltese islands presents special 
opportunities for the ICT industry.  These include 
the deployment of “first-in-the-world” nation-wide 
projects or “test bed” projects in strategic alliances 
with ICT multinational companies.  Highlighting 
these opportunities is important in FDI strategy, 
especially when it comes to targeting ICT investment 
and building partnerships. With important events 
due to take place, with ‘including the hosting of 
the CHOGM in 2015, Malta’s EU Presidency during 
the first half of 2017 and Valletta as the European 
Capital of Culture in 2018, now is the time to launch a 
branding exercise.

TRUE VALUE TO CITIZENS

For the past twenty years, government has 
substantially invested in ICT.  Government capitalised 
on the lack of complexity in Malta compared to 
large countries, which often have two or more levels 
and branches of administration, multiple police 
forces, several courts of justice and region-based 
healthcare systems. Government adopted policies 
favouring the consolidation of its investments, as 
well as standards to support such policies.  This led 
to the adoption of corporate systems and shared 
services across all departments. A robust and 
resilient ICT infrastructure forms the back-bone 
of an interconnected government.  Most of these 
initiatives were implemented in partnership with 
the private sector.  Government also established a 
strong governance framework and strengthened the 
eCommerce legislative framework.  More recently, 
Government inaugurated a TIER III Data Centre, 12 
hosting government infrastructure and information 
systems.  This Data Centre is the fifth data centre 
in Western Europe and one of only 34 data centres 
worldwide certified to reach the Tier III Facility 
Certification. 
 

10. The term economic efficiency refers to the use of resources so as to maximize the production of  
  goods and services - Sullivan, Arthur; Steven M. Sheffrin (2003). Economics: Principles in action.
11. Business angel is an affluent individual who provides capital for a business start-up.
12. Tier III Facility Certification verifies that each and every component within the MITA Data Centre 
  can be maintained, replaced or upgraded without disrupting the service. 

16

Public projects are most fruitful when they are 
owned and funded by the respective government 
entity (as opposed to a more prescriptive, centralised 
entity) and driven by business objectives.  In order 
to widen government efficiency, ICT champions are 
required in important decision-making positions 
and ICT strategies need to be integrated into overall 
government policy. 

Malta is considered one of Europe’s high performers 
in delivering eGovernment.  The country is constantly 
improving its eGovernment platform to ensure 
that the number of services available online can 
increase without a proportionate increase in cost and 
complexity.  The platform’s architecture promotes 
reusability and scalability.  In the eGovernment 
Benchmark 2012 report, Malta ranked first in four 
benchmarks (user-centric government, transparent 

government, citizen mobility, business mobility) 
and second in the enablers benchmark.  The 2012 
report also highlighted that eGovernment users are 
expecting more from the services being supplied.  
Statistics from Eurostat highlight that the take-up 
of public online services by citizens is below the 
EU average.  Malta ranked 18th (Fig. 6) in terms 
of percentage of individuals using eGovernment 
services and 15th (Fig. 7) in terms of enterprises 
using the Internet to interact with government.  
The messages are clear.  Users want to interact on 
everything from health and education to security and 
tax.  They expect government to focus on finding out 
what citizens want, rather than deciding what they 
need.  Citizens are also expecting government to cut 
red tape.  The development of Digital Government 
has to be hand-in-hand with efforts to reduce 
bureaucracy. 

Fig. 6

Source: Eurostat

Fig. 7

Source: Eurostat

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

17

2  THE LOCAL ICT LANDSCAPE

HARNESSING NEW PARADIGMS

The drive of the European Commission to accelerate interoperability, making systems and organisations 
work together, poses additional challenges and opportunities.  It nurtures the concept of connected 
government through the alignment of departmental processes, standardisation, discovery and reuse 
of ICT assets and continuous rigour in improving the level of trust in the services provided by the 
public sector.  Implementation of information systems within the public sector needs to incorporate 
the principles and recommendations of initiatives such as the European Interoperability Framework, 
European Interoperability Strategy and the semantic initiatives promoted through the European 
Commission’s Joinup platform13.

National technological infrastructure is in a good shape and compares quite favourably at an 
international level (Table 1).  Malta has an impressive proliferation of mobile telephony and Internet 
access. Similarly, there is high digital confidence by consumers.  By 2012, the mobile penetration 
rate in Malta reached 132%, slightly higher than the EU average of 130%14.  In 2012, 77% of households 
had access to the Internet – slightly higher than the EU27 average of 76%.  In this regard, the main 
concerns are the dependence on other countries for Internet connection, the capacity of international 
connectivity, the affordability of broadband for users and the lack of local content for the web and 
mobile devices15. 

 
 
Indicator   

 
Malta           EU Average        Malta Ranking

                     

Mobile Penetration Rate 
Households having access to Broadband Internet 
NGA lines as a % of total fixed broadband lines 

132% 
 77% 
 47% 

130% 
  72% 
 20% 

13th 
7th 
7th 

Table 1

The new enterprise ICT landscape of cloud services, mobility and BYOD, and social media usage, 
creates very different types of network traffic to the traditional mix of in-house client-server workloads.  
Architecture and networks need to evolve to keep pace.  Not only is more bandwidth required to 
accommodate the workloads involved, but also time delay must be avoided. Lower latency, particularly 
over wide-area networks, is needed to ensure good response times for cloud-based applications and 
other services.

13. JoinUp is the sharing and re-use interoperability solutions for public administrations platform (http://joinup.eu).
14. Source: European Commission 
  (http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/sites/digital-agenda/files/DAE%20SCOREBOARD%202013%20-%20SWD%202013%20217%20FINAL.pdf).
15. The term ‘mobile devices’ within the context of this document includes mobile phones, tablets, laptops, ultrabooks, etc.

18

MAXIMISING OPPORTUNITIES

Malta’s ICT priorities are guided by government 
strategic priorities and the Europe 2020 Strategy 
flagship initiatives. More specifically these tie 
in with the Digital Agenda for Europe and the 
Innovation Union.  Malta already has strong 
regulatory authorities and agencies including the 
LGA, the MCA, the Government’s IT arm, MITA 
and various other successful endeavours such 
as the eSkills Malta Foundation, upon which it can 
successfully build. 

The expectations of what ICT can deliver, are 
higher than ever and are likely to keep on 
growing.  The main elements are in place for the 
industry to prosper.  The challenges now are to 
prioritise and implement the missing elements. 
Malta’s ICT industry must emerge from its plateau 
state and move quickly to exploit opportunities.  
It needs to build on its strengths, minimise its 
weaknesses and aim for sustained growth. 

RAMPING UP ICT-DRIVEN 
INNOVATION

The budget allocation for ICT faces competition 
within government, placing an onus on departments 
and entities to make the most efficient use of 
both national and EU funds.  Participation in 
EU-funded projects by government bodies may 
need increased resource and legal governance 
support. Government needs to consider innovative 
means to procure ICT services, explore the 
feasibility of private funding and public-private 
partnerships, and consider the prospect of re-using 
and sharing with other countries.    

In the past, R&I strategies for ICT had been 
identified as a priority area. In the National Research 
& Innovation Strategy 2020, ICT is now singled out 
as an enabling technology for all sectors because 
of its potential to innovate industries.  Since Malta’s 
size cannot sustain the entire R&D life cycle, efforts 
should be directed to applied research that is closer 
to the market16 and in existing areas of strength 
that could enhance Malta’s profile as a centre of 
ICT excellence.  Many companies in Malta associate 
R&D to the closed innovation model of larger 
companies and multinationals.  In comparison, open 
innovation approaches are more collaborative and 
leverage complementarities, and are, therefore, 
more adaptive to the needs of small businesses. 
Combining industrial innovation with educational 
policies and focusing on areas of strength (smart 
specialisation) increases the chances of Malta and 
its industrial base (both ICT and non-ICT) gaining a 
competitive advantage through differentiation.

The contribution of ICT towards energy efficiency 
in Malta is still marginally low.  ICT offers many 
opportunities to offset the costs of energy 
through green ICT measures, such as, energy 
efficient equipment, virtualised environments, grid 
computing, cloud computing, home automation 
systems and advanced virtual services.

16. Source: MCST 2011.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

19

3

THE DIGITAL MALTA VISION

Digital Malta is a vision for the country in 2020 when:

“Malta will prosper as a digitally-enabled 
   nation in all sectors of society.”
This is an exciting goal, advancing the nation’s digital economy to let business prosper and 
improve the quality of people’s lives. To meet this vision there is a need to address the most 
pressing strategic issues and capitalise on digital opportunities.

3.1  STRATEGIC THEMES

Digital Malta will take ICT policy development and implementation 
to a higher gear, meeting the expectations of all - the Citizen and 
civil society, Business and government. This vision will be enabled 
by supportive regulation and legislation, sound infrastructure and 
productive human capital. These building blocks will empower 
stakeholders to collaborate both within and across sectors.  
This is represented by Fig. 8:

20

Fig. 8

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

21

3  THE DIGITAL MALTA VISION

Digital Malta is built upon 
three vertical strategic pillars 
with clear goals to:

Improve the wellbeing of 
Citizens and civil society. 
Everyone, including vulnerable 
and minority groups, will benefit 
from a higher standard of living. 
Basic digital skills will empower 
citizens to seize opportunities 
presented by technology and 
digitisation.  Digital services 
will be affordable, secure and 
accessible to all regardless 
of skill and economic means. 
Local digital content will be 
encouraged.

Transform the way Business 
operate. Digital Malta will 
increase competitiveness and 
boost the attractiveness of 
local industry. It will promote 
more start-ups, attract foreign 
investment, enable strategic 
alliances, encourage angel 
investment and nurture niche 
service providers.  Business will 
be encouraged and supported 
to exploit (i) the opportunities 
of the European Digital Single 
Market, (ii) Malta’s strategic 
location in the Mediterranean, 
with ready access to the 
European and North African 
markets, (iii) Government’s 
strategic alliances with 
foreign ICT organisations, 
(iv) opportunities to expand into 
new or bigger markets.

Enhance the delivery of 
Government. Better application 
of digitisation will result in 
reduced bureaucracy, increased 
efficiency and transparency. 
The public service will be closer 
to civil society and enterprises, 
improving the government’s 
decision-making processes. 
Open Government and 
eDemocracy will be facilitated. 
On-line government services 
will be more accessible through 
the use of smart devices and 
mobile-friendly applications 
as well as websites and 
social media. Government’s 
technological capabilities will 
be widened to include open-
source, cloud computing and 
big data concepts. Information 
sharing across government 
systems and services will be 
promoted, as will be the re-use 
of public sector information by 
third parties.

These vertical strategic pillars need to be supported by a suite of enabling / driving forces:

Regulation & Legislation
Of central importance will be 
government’s direction and 
priorities at a Strategic and 
Digital Policy level. Regulation 
and legislation will ensure an 
empowered digital society is 
realised. Good ICT governance 
will be promoted, with 
judicious use of resources and 
participation by all stakeholders. 
International best practices will 
be adopted.  

Infrastructure
Infrastructure services need to 
be accessible, reliable, secure, 
affordable and resilient. They 
shall provide for disaster 
recovery where appropriate.   
Investment by private sector, 
will ensure fast broadband, 
wifi, next-generation access and 
robust government information 
systems architecture.   

Human Capital
It is important to invest in 
people to ensure the supply 
of eSkills to meet the future 
needs of different sectors. 
Action will be taken to develop 
a high quality specialised skills 
base, maximising employment 
opportunities, with an 
emphasis on increasing female 
participation and tackling 
inequalities. 

The portrayal of this six-pillar model, with a three-dimensional perspective, carries through to sectors 
such as health, education, transport, justice, welfare and taxation, and themed areas of specialisation 
identified in the ‘National Research and Innovation Strategy 2020’.  The diversity of each area and 
sector will be taken into account when tailoring initiatives.

22

3.2  UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES

Core principles 
underpin the 
implementation of the 
Digital Malta vision:

1.
Ensuring all citizens 
are offered the 
possibility to 
benefit from ICT as 
a fundamental right.

4.
Engaging the 
private sector 
as an important 
player in the 
delivery of the 
Strategy.

2.
Advocating 
proactive 
leadership, 
and delivering 
programmes that 
meet needs.

3.
Supporting national 
priorities in line with 
government policy, 
the National Reform 
Programme and the 
EU obligations. 

5.
Optimising value 
and accountability.

6.
Ensuring 
collaboration 
between 
stakeholders 
to make the 
best use of 
national strategic 
information 
assets, encourage 
synergies 
and minimise 
fragmentation. 

8.
Supporting and enabling R&I in identified areas 
of strength, capability and centres of excellence 
(smart specialisation).

7.
Encouraging a more-
environmentally 
friendly society 
through greener 
procurement, 
implementation and 
application of ICT. 

9.
Adopting an open and 
experimental mindset, 
capitalising on lessons learned 
from success stories and 
respecting best practices and 
international standards.

10.
Maximising 
opportunities from 
multiple funding 
sources, including 
European and 
international 
funding 
programmes and 
the private sector.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

23

4

DIGITAL CITIZEN

4.1  GOALS

Digital technologies can improve the quality of life of all citizens.  Every Maltese, irrespective of age, 
gender, sexual orientation, disability, education, economic means and race should grow as a digital 
citizen with rights, responsibilities and abilities to access and use ICT.  Digital technologies must serve 
as a social equaliser, enabling everyone to participate and contribute in community activity.

Raise awareness 
of how ICT can 
improve daily life 
and work.

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic pillar are 
to: 

Build social 
cohesion to 
overcome social, 
health, age 
and disability 
vulnerabilities.

Provide every 
citizen with the 
tools to balance 
work with family 
commitments, 
pursue leisure and 
lifelong learning, 
and to remain 
active within the 
community.

Ease access to 
technology and 
connectivity, and 
help citizens to 
learn how to get 
the best out of it.

Empower civil 
society to become 
more actively 
engaged in digital 
activities of the 
community.

Build trust in the 
digital world.

Use digital 
technologies to 
preserve, enhance 
and promote 
Maltese culture 
and identity, and 
to enable access 
to quality content 
and services.

24

4.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

Citizens will be supported to:

i.  Adopt digital technologies to help with their work and improve 

their quality of life.

ii.  Create value content that can be accessed through digital means.
iii.  Collaborate with others to make the Internet a safer place for 

everyone.

iv.  Re-use public sector information while respecting privacy 

legislation, national security and the need to protect intellectual 
property rights of third parties.

v.  Be innovative in applying digital technology.

C.

Barriers that stop 
citizens from 
exploiting the 
benefits of the 
Internet must be 
removed. 

When planning 
and implementing 
digital initiatives, 
feedback from 
citizens and civil 
society will be 
sought.

B.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

25

Improve the wellbeing of 
Citizens and civil society. 
Everyone, including vulnerable 
and minority groups, will benefit 
from a higher standard of living. 
Basic digital skills will empower 
citizens to seize opportunities 
presented by technology and 
digitisation.  Digital services 
will be affordable, secure and 
accessible to all regardless 
of skill and economic means. 
Local digital content will be 
encouraged.

26

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

27

4  DIGITAL CITIZEN

4.3  ACTIONS

ENHANCING DIGITAL LITERACY AND SOCIAL EQUALITY

Achieving widespread digital literacy is vital for inclusivity and social cohesion. For example, digitally 
competent workers and digitally competent citizens can be more successful in the job market and 
contribute more effectively within the community. Those without digital competences are in danger 
of falling behind.

ICT offers people the tools to overcome limitations.

1. Basic level of ICT 

competence

An education and awareness programme will be launched to boost 
ICT competences, media literacy and confident, critical and safe use of 
the Internet.  The programme will be implemented at community level. 
Vulnerable groups will be a major focus.

2. Empowering the 
young through a 
safer Internet

Digital Citizenship will become part of the National Education Curriculum, 
to equip children and youths with the abilities to interact and use the 
Internet safely and intelligently. Parents and carers will be involved 
together with educators and youth workers. This action will stimulate the 
production of creative online content, empower the younger generation 
and help create a safer environment.  With the support of competent 
authorities this measure will help combat cyber child abuse and 
exploitation.

3. Empowering 

vulnerable/minority 
groups and the 
elderly

Initiate an ongoing programme designed to assist every citizen, in par-
ticular the ageing and the vulnerable to harness the potential of ICT. Ap-
propriately equipped ICT access and training centers will be set up within 
local communities to support the programme.

4. Accessibility 
and Assistive 
Technology

Internet accessibility standards will be promoted to enable everyone, 
irrespective of  disability, to navigate and access content to access and 
use of assistive technologies will be promoted and facilitated to help 
independent living of the elderly and vulnerable groups. This will also 
stimulate market demand for diverse, affordable technologies. 

28

ACCESS FOR ALL

Every citizen, irrespective of age, gender, sexual orientation, disability, race, economic means and 
employment should have the opportunity to access and make use of ICT for their daily needs.

5. NGA Networks 

There will be promotion of NGA networks by demonstrating their 
potential applications and by supporting their introduction in homes, 
offices and public buildings.

6. Free access to 

wireless Internet

There will be free access to wireless Internet in public buildings, main 
squares and many public spaces around the islands.

7. Portable devices 

for children

Portable devices will be provided for children, their teachers and LSAs as 
part of the government’s vision of transforming formal education through 
the use of digital technologies.

8. Citizen 

Engagement

Contact with citizens and between citizens will be promoted, especially 
through the use of mobile apps and social networking websites.  
Guidelines on social media strategies for local government and NGOs 
will be developed, encouraging them to act as intermediaries in a more 
participative civil society. 

9. Promote innovative 

ICT applications

Innovative ICT applications that lead to a better lifestyle will be promoted 
in a joint partnership with the private sector.  The initiative will focus on 
developments that enhance daily activities such as shopping, banking, 
commuting and entertainment.

STIMULATING LOCAL CONTENT

Relevant, alluring and engaging content drives people to make use of ICT. High quality local content 
will draw more people online. The Internet offers the opportunity to overcome economic limitations, 
and to reach households with greater ease. The Internet also offers unprecedented opportunities to 
digitally preserve heritage.

10. Developing online 

content

A programme will be established to support and stimulate the 
development of high quality online content that is appealing, educational 
and culturally distinctive. Government will support joint collaborations 
between public and private media providers to produce, stream or make 
available local digital content. 

11. Maltese language 

tools

Government will facilitate the development and distribution of language 
tools to support the use of Maltese as a medium for teaching and learning, 
and therefore widening take-up of ICT in the Maltese language.

 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

29

5

DIGITAL BUSINESS

5.1  GOALS

Malta’s businesses will have a greater chance of success if powered by ICT. Local firms must be 
encouraged and supported to embrace ICT to transform themselves into digital enterprises. This will 
strengthen their competitiveness and make them more export-orientated. Local ICT companies have 
an important role to play in bringing about this change. 

Increase and 
support ICT 
entrepreneurial 
activities.

Support the 
application of 
ICT.

Step up 
investments 
in R&I.

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic pillar are 
to: 

Align the supply 
and demand of 
eSkills.

Support local 
businesses to be 
more innovative 
and offer more 
competitive 
products and 
services.

30

5.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

Because of the country’s size and limited resources, ICT should be 
used in a strategic way, as an enabler of growth and innovation, and 
as a driver of economies of scale and pools of knowledge.

B.

Collaboration between the main local 
players in the ICT field will be fostered.  
User communities, ICT specialists and 
other professionals in ICT-enabled or 
supporting services will be encouraged to 
pool their resources to focus on generating 
products and services which are not just 
technological, but adaptive and value 
creating and able to serve both business 
and everyday needs.

C.

All stakeholders 
must aim to 
develop an 
environment 
that is conducive 
to business. 
Partnerships 
within the EU 
and with other 
countries in the 
region should be 
established to 
provide a platform 
for cooperation.

ICT-based R&I 
investment needs 
to be directed at 
niches and sectors 
of the economy 
that are already 
strong and areas 
of specialisation 
identified in the 
National Research 
and Innovation 
Strategy 2020. 

D.

E.

G.

Business 
sustainability 
and growth will 
be facilitated, 
and emergent 
economic 
opportunities will 
be exploited.  

Students and young 
entrepreneurs will 
be encouraged 
and supported 
to make use of 
local innovation/ 
incubation centres.

F.

Local stakeholders 
will be supported 
to participate 
in funding 
programmes 
supportive of local 
incubation centres 
and related efforts 
to gain international 
exposure.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

31

Transform the way Business 
operate. Digital Malta will 
increase competitiveness and 
boost the attractiveness of 
local industry. It will promote 
more start-ups, attract foreign 
investment, enable strategic 
alliances, encourage angel 
investment and nurture niche 
service providers.  Business will 
be encouraged and supported 
to exploit (i) the opportunities 
of the European Digital Single 
Market, (ii) Malta’s strategic 
location in the Mediterranean, 
with ready access to the 
European and North African 
markets, (iii) Government’s 
strategic alliances with 
foreign ICT organisations, 
(iv) opportunities to expand into 
new or bigger markets.

32

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

33

5  DIGITAL BUSINESS

5.3  ACTIONS

TRANSFORMING BUSINESS 

Demographic change, globalisation, and more recently, the worldwide economic crisis have placed 
strains on industry. There have been radical changes in societal patterns and technology, leading to 
changed business models and increased competition. The business landscape is complex but industries 
will always seek to identify opportunities to capitalise on.  ICT can serve as an important enabler for 
businesses in their transformation.

12. ICT initiatives for 

sectors facing stiff 
competition 

Government, working with industry, will organise a series of initiatives 
for sectors facing stiff competition (e.g. manufacturing, construction and 
retail) to help them benefit from ICT. 

13. Forum for the 

transformation of 
industries 
through ICT 

14. ICT capability 
framework for 
SMEs and 
co-operatives

15. ICT training 
programmes

A forum will be established,  comprising of executives from leading local 
firms and industry representative bodies. The forum’s mandate will be 
to develop programmes to raise awareness about how ICT can help 
industries transform themselves and become more profitable. The Forum 
will discuss issues such as internationalisation, eCommerce, the use of 
social networking as a business tool, the benefits of NGA networks, self-
regulation, compliance with web accessibility guidelines, and supply chain 
management.

A framework will be developed to enable local SMEs and co-operatives to 
assess their ICT capability, human capital and ICT-enabled processes and 
technology.  This will be supported by ‘benchmarking’ and roadmaps to 
enable these organisations to improve performance and derive increased 
ICT business value from their human, technical and operational assets.

Government will support enterprises by administering ICT training 
programmes for their employees.  The programmes will focus on unskilled 
and semi-skilled workers with the objective of improving their productivity, 
employability and mobility. They will also promote understanding of new 
business models enabled through technology.  In parallel, ICT up-skilling 
and re-skilling programmes will be re-introduced.  

34

SUSTAINING ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND ATTRACTING NEW BUSINESSES

The size, structure and type of ownership of many local enterprises, a tendency towards risk-aversion 
and a perceived lack of funding, support mechanisms and incentives all run counter to the culture of 
entrepreneurship needed for an innovation economy and towards attracting FDI.

There are a number of ICT-themed measures that can be taken to support and improve the level of 
business entrepreneurial activity in Malta.

16. Supporting 

entrepreneurship

Collaborating with stakeholders, government will:

    Invest resources to cultivate a widespread entrepreneurial mind-set, 

allowing for the launch of more ICT start-ups and young high-growth 
ventures exploiting ICTs.  Special emphasis will  be devoted to Gozo-
based entrepreneurial initiatives in view of the island’s difficulties in 
developing a mature ICT industry.

    Facilitate improved ‘access to capital’ programmes for start-ups, micro 

and small firms. This includes the setting up of a business angels 
network, incentives for crowd-funding and other investor schemes.

    Provide firms with incentives to deploy advanced ICT services in 

unprofitable areas. These could be interest-free credit, subsidies, or 
preferential tax rates.

17. Attracting FDI 

in ICT

Measures will be taken to attract foreign ICT companies with the objective 
of transforming Malta into a regional hub for technological cooperation 
and trade.  These will include:

    Corporate packages, structures and business models that target FDI 

in ICT ventures, start-ups, ICT educational collaborations and niche 
markets such as digital games, mobile apps and other creative content.

    Actively supporting SmartCity Malta and others involved in incubation 

or innovation activities.  

18. Cloud Computing

The government in partnership with industry will develop a strategy 
on ‘Cloud Computing’ aimed at establishing Malta as a world-class hub 
for the provision of cloud computing services, boosting innovation and 
productivity across the digital economy.

19. Digital Gaming 

Execute a Digital Games strategy in an attempt to strengthen what Malta 
offers operators in the sector, including improving the specialist skills base.   

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

35

5  DIGITAL BUSINESS

ECOMMERCE - GOING GLOBAL

The local ICT Industry is a vital part of the economy, but it must target international markets if it is to 
advance.  Digital technologies provide significant opportunities for growth through exporting.

eCommerce extends boundaries. Products and services can be easily marketed and traded over the 
Internet, expanding markets from neighbourhood to global.  While local firms can gain substantially 
from such opportunity, they also need to manage the challenges of eCommerce.

20. Widening horizons Government, working with industry bodies, will develop policies and 

incentives to:

    Enable ICT clusters to flourish. Technology development, innovation 

and internationalisation should be the main focus of clustering activity. 
Support may include seed funding, market intelligence services, and 
internationalisation services.

    Exploit Malta’s eGovernment expertise to develop training and 

consultancy services for other countries, especially those with cultural 
or traditional links in the Mediterranean or the Commonwealth.

    Promote the concept of ‘Born Global’ products and services.

21. ICT-focused 

incentive schemes

Incentive schemes and voucher-based credit lines will be developed to 
enable local SMEs and co-operatives to benefit from free or subsidised 
consultancy services. This will help them adopt digital technology and 
innovative business models to both establish themselves online and 
internationalise their products and services. 

22. eCommerce 

Government and industry stakeholders will:

markets

    Develop measures to sustain and grow the local eCommerce market 

on both the supply and demand sides.

    Implement initiatives to assist and further drive the adoption of 

eCommerce by business sectors with the potential to capitalise on 
web technologies and penetrate foreign markets.

Identify opportunities for Malta to attract business activities that operate 
or support global eCommerce markets.

23. Emerging 
electronic 
transactions

Government, working with payment providers, will develop an education 
programme to explain and promote different forms of electronic 
transactions and emerging monetisation models. The programme will 
explain business models, technologies, costs and risks.

36

STIMULATING RESEARCH & INNOVATION

Besides being a sector in its own right, ICT is a horizontal enabler for R&I. There needs to be 
continued investment in both ICT infrastructures, and innovation using ICT, as identified in the 
National R&I Strategy 2020. The two lines of investment are mutually reinforcing, as investment in ICT 
infrastructure and human capital provides the way for ICT-based innovation.

24. Harnessing 

international R&I 
funding 

Local ICT companies need to take advantage of pan-European and 
international R&I funding frameworks and industrial development funding 
opportunities.  To help in this, government will:

    Provide logistical and brokerage support.

    Offer incentives to companies to invest time and human resources 

researching and developing innovative products, processes, and 
services and new marketing methods.

25. Open innovation

Government will set up a multi-stakeholder Innovation Centre to offer 
incentives for ICT-themed R&D, idea-generation, incubation and innovation 
with a view towards co-creation and open innovation. Its purpose will be 
to:

    Create an environment to enable open collaboration by enterprises, 

academic institutions and public bodies wishing to engage in R&I 
activities, particularly projects requiring testing and validation in real-
life settings.

    Attract multi-national enterprises, contributing different technological 

platforms and expertise.

    Provide mentorship, specialised training and an alternative ICT 
incubation facility for young entrepreneurs, students and start-
ups wishing to test and demonstrate their innovations in a live 
environment.

    Serve as a networking hub and a show-case of locally developed talent 

and products.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

37

6

DIGITAL GOVERNMENT

6.1  GOALS

Government services should be designed around the requirements of the people. They need to 
be more user-friendly and less burdened by red tape. They should be accessible through multiple 
channels. The concept of service to the community needs to be expanded so that government 
involves citizens and businesses in decision-making processes. In addition, public data, which 
government creates, designs and manages, should be openly shared across entities and authorities, 
and externally with third parties for their commercial re-use. This will prevent costly duplication and 
re-invention.

Simplify existing 
digital public 
services.

Promote higher 
take-up of 
eGovernment 
services.

Extend 
government 
transparency and 
eDemocracy.

38

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic pillar are 
to: 

Enable fact-based 
decision-making. 

Encourage the 
re-use of public 
sector information.

Make government 
services accessible 
through mobile 
devices. 

Engage citizens 
and increase 
participation.

Stimulate greater 
collaboration 
between 
international 
partners, 
government, local 
enterprises and 
citizens.

6.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

B.

Online government services will meet EU 
regulations and embrace EU building blocks 
(e.g. eSignatures) in support of the EU 
Single Market. 

Online government 
services will be 
organised around 
customers’ needs.  
Businesses, 
local councils, 
community 
learning centres 
and the public 
will have a role 
in designing and 
implementing 
new or enhanced 
services.  

Government will 
equip leaders and 
decision makers to 
be better tuned in 
taking advantage 
of technological 
advancements.  
Similarly, 
government will 
take measures to 
cater for the needs 
of digital employees 
and to capitalise on 
their digital skills.

C.

New or enhanced 
government 
services will be 
designed for the 
web and mobile 
platforms. Most 
ICT services should 
function equally 
well across different 
platforms and 
devices.

Government 
systems will be 
regularly assessed 
for efficiency and, 
when necessary, 
be enhanced or 
replaced.

G.

F.

E.

16. Authorities, Corporations, 
Agencies and commercial 
public sector entities in which 
government has a majority 
shareholding, and are not  
listed on the stock exchange.

I.

Government will adopt open standards, 
encouraging the exchange of information and 
innovation, while seeking healthy competition 
and lower costs.  Equal consideration will be 
given to open source and closed source software.

D.

Government will use technology, coupled 
with business process reengineering, 
to rethink and redesign resources. A 
simplification of services will reduce paper 
use, cut costs and lower the risks that arise 
from cash handling.

Government will 
have an active 
online presence 
through social 
media.

Ministries and 
entities17 will own 
their ICT projects. 
Only horizontal 
services, shared 
across government, 
will be centrally 
owned and 
delivered.

Government 
employees will 
be supported by 
innovative, flexible 
technologies and 
associated business 
models.  

H.

J.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

39

Enhance the delivery of 
Government. Better application 
of digitisation will result in 
reduced bureaucracy, increased 
efficiency and transparency. 
The public service will be closer 
to civil society and enterprises, 
improving the government’s 
decision-making processes. 
Open Government and 
eDemocracy will be facilitated. 
On-line government services 
will be more accessible through 
the use of smart devices and 
mobile-friendly applications 
as well as websites and 
social media. Government’s 
technological capabilities will be 
widened to include open-source, 
cloud computing and big data 
concepts. Information sharing 
across government systems and 
services will be promoted, as will 
be the re-use of public sector 
information by third parties.

40

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

41

6 DIGITAL GOVERNMENT

6.3  ACTIONS

CITIZEN & BUSINESS-CENTRIC GOVERNMENT 

Government will expand its eco-system of easily accessible digital services and content.  Customers 
will be provided with a seamless and integrated web experience across government websites, and on 
mobile technologies too.  

Online services will be more cost effective with wider benefits for customers.
 
26. Transacting with 

government

Citizens and organisations will be able to transact securely with 
government using different channels. The take-up of online services will be 
encouraged by making them easy to use and available on mobile devices. 
These services will include online forms, ePayments and eInvoicing.  

27. One-stop shop

Citizens and businesses will benefit from a one-stop shop concept.  
They will be able to access services from their home or office, or 
through agents.  

Practices such as ‘one face to government’, ‘one-login’, 
‘service-personalisation’ and ‘ask-only-once’ will be the driving force.

42

EFFICIENT GOVERNMENT

Using technology and business process reengineering, Government will reduce bureaucracy and 
implement leaner processes, with the aim of offering new and improved public services.

Public officials will be empowered to share knowledge and collaborate within government and across 
agencies to serve customers better.

28. Collaborative 

Government will work with stakeholders to:

digital environment

    Assist departments and entities to adopt technology that integrates 

cross-departmental services.

    Facilitate the use, management, retention, preservation and archiving 

of born-digital records so that these remain accessible and usable.

    Protect corporate knowledge, and improve data security, integrity, 

accessibility, traceability and archiving.  Industry standards for records 
and information management and business classification scheme will 
be adopted.

    Strengthen knowledge sharing. 

    Enable workflows.

    Provide collaborative environments for unified working across multiple 

devices and media-types. 

29. Business Analytics  Public officials will be equipped with the right tools to analyse 

government data.  This will support decision-making and help identify 
gaps and opportunities.

30. ICT Innovation in 

procurement

Government will use its position as a major procurer to stimulate demand 
for innovative ICT. It will encourage collaboration between local players 
and, as an early adopter, it will act as a showcase for locally-produced 
technology.  

Innovative policies will improve procurement cycles and deliver better 
value. The eProcurement framework will be extended to cover eOrdering, 
eInvoicing and ePayments.

31. Strategic Alliances Government will continue to explore opportunities for cooperation, 

alliances and partnerships with reputable multinationals so as to maximise 
the return on investments and adopt international best practices. 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

43

6 DIGITAL GOVERNMENT

OPEN GOVERNMENT 

Government is committed to be transparent, and to encourage public engagement.  Online 
engagement will increase using digital technologies such as social media and crowd-sourcing, 
soliciting contributions from many.  Communications and eParticipation activities will be designed 
to promote better development of public policy, increase public trust and encourage citizens and 
businesses to collaborate with government.  

In line with EU regulations, government will open up public data for use by private organisations and 
the general public whilst promoting innovative application of such data.

32. Open 

Government 
Data 

In addition to facilitating the sharing of data across public administration, 
government will make public sector information available to all as 
allowed by law.  Structured data will be published in a way that it can be 
interlinked (Linked Open Government Data) and become more useful to 
Government entities, third parties and respective systems.  

The adoption of Big Data technologies will allow complex data to be 
processed, improving decision-making in critical areas such as finance, 
healthcare, transport, utilities and the environment.

33. eDemocracy

Government is committed to using ICT to encourage citizens to take part 
in democratic decision-making. Initiatives will be implemented to enhance 
the visibility, transparency and accountability of government. 

44

ESSENTIAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES

Government entities providing social initiatives and essential services such as education, healthcare, 
welfare, justice, tourism, utilities and transport may require ad hoc ICT programmes. The input of ICT 
should be seen as an opportunity to serve customers and cut across boundaries.

34. Sector specific 
ICT programmes

Sector specific ICT programmes or strategies will be developed by 
collaborating with all stakeholders.  There will be a philosophy of 
cutting across ministerial boundaries. The ultimate aim will be to secure 
consistency, buy-in, effectiveness in implementation and value to citizens 
and businesses as the ultimate beneficiaries. 

35. eLearning

A complete ICT infrastructure will be provided for educators, students 
and parents, encouraging a digital mindset and widening learning 
opportunities.  Educators will be supported to make full use of eLearning 
platforms and other digital learning technologies.  

36. eHealth

Citizens will be empowered by providing them with secure and easy 
access to their health records. Similarly, healthcare providers will gain 
secure and seamless access to the patients’ records.

37. Transportation

Government will use digital technology in land, sea and air transport. 
Special emphasis will be given to the deployment of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems for improving road safety, traffic flow and in-
country travel.

 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

45

7

REGULATION AND LEGISLATION

7.1  GOALS

Digital Malta requires a supportive regulatory and legislative framework.  

Continuously 
enhance the 
regulatory 
framework in Malta 
as it affects ICT, 
whether directly or 
indirectly.

Protect rights and 
freedoms.

Ensure that 
the Internet 
remains universal, 
innovative and 
open.

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic enabler 
are to: 

7.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

B.

ICT legislation and policy will be non-
discriminatory and technology neutral. It will 
foster value creation, innovation and growth 
in all industries and society at large.

Legislative measures and regulatory 
strategies pursued in other jurisdictions 
will be monitored and evaluated to see if 
local legislation needs improving.

46

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

47

7 REGULATION AND LEGISLATION

7.3  ACTIONS

LEGISLATIVE INFRASTRUCTURE 

The benefits of the Internet are best reaped when regulatory and legal frameworks ensure universal 
access, transparency, openness and economic sustainability. Specific actions will be required.

 
38. Digital 

Single Market

Malta will seek to maximise the benefits and opportunities deriving from 
legislation adopted within the EU.  As at 2014, these include:

    The Data Protection Framework.

    The Electronic Identification and Trust Services Regulation.

    The Information Society Directive.

    Regulation concerning the European single market for electronic 

communications and achieving a Connected Continent.

39. Radio spectrum 
for mobile data 
communications

The regulatory framework will ensure sufficient radio spectrum for mobile 
data communication while safeguarding the availability of spectrum for 
public security.

40. Digital legislation 

Government will work with stakeholders to:

and contracts

    Have a process whereby new laws, once enacted, are digital by default.

    Evaluate existing laws to align them with the Digital Malta vision.

    Enable contracts, which are subject to the formalities of the Notarial 
Profession and Notarial Archives Act, to be in digital format from the 
outset. 

41. Infrastructure 

based competition

The legal and regulatory framework shall support investment in new 
broadband networks and stimulate infrastructure-based competition.

48

INTEROPERABILITY AND STANDARDS

The fast pace of ICT development requires continuous review of industry standards. Government has 
a leadership role to play. It must ensure standards and policies produce optimal returns on investment 
in systems architecture and data that is open and interoperable.

42. Standards and 
Good Practice

Government will collaborate with stakeholders to support and promote:

    National and EU cross-border interoperability.

    ICT standards based on industry best practices. 

    Green ICT.

A ROBUST INTERNET 

Challenges posed by advancements such as cloud services, portability and social media require 
legislation that safeguards and protects citizens’ data without inhibiting entrepreneurial initiative and 
creativity.  Intellectual property and content will be protected through a regulatory framework that 
will also ensure a level playing field for enterprises to thrive and prosper.

43. Cyber Crime 

Legislation

Government will review existing legislation to ensure relevance and 
effectiveness in the cyber world, for example in dealing with cyber 
bullying. 

44. Digital legislation 

and regulation

Government will provide measures to maintain privacy, safety and security 
while surfing, transacting and operating on-line.  Legislation will address 
several matters:

    Safeguarding intellectual property rights.

    Patents.

    Sensitive and personal information.

    Cloud Computing and data ownership.

    Contentious content.

    Net Neutrality.

    Vendor Lock-in and Exit Management strategies.

    Online contracts and license agreements.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

49

8

INFRASTRUCTURE

8.1  GOALS

Communications and information infrastructure is required to support government targets for 
economic growth and social development.  

Provide the 
necessary 
foundations for 
a sound and 
prosperous digital 
ecosystem.

Provide safe, 
accessible and 
trustworthy 
services, while 
protecting 
fundamental 
rights, freedom 
of expression, 
personal data and 
privacy.

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic enabler 
are to: 

Introduce 
cost effective 
and timely 
technologies 
to keep Malta 
competitive and 
vibrant as a digital 
nation.

Implement 
infrastructure 
that is resilient, 
performs and 
capable of 
supporting future 
demands.

50

8.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

Government and the private sector will invest in network 
infrastructures and technologies, keeping up with national and 
international developments, providing Maltese citizens with platforms 
that are accessible, reliable and secure.

High quality 
service and 
affordable access 
will be driving 
forces.

B.

D.

Government will 
lead by example, 
adopting high 
quality standards 
and embracing 
important 
technology 
principles such 
as abstraction, 
loose coupling, 
cohesiveness and 
generality.

The design and 
implementation 
of government 
network 
infrastructure 
and applications 
will be based on 
open standards 
to ensure 
interoperability 
and collaboration 
at national and 
international level.

C.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

51

8 INFRASTRUCTURE

8.3  ACTIONS

A NATIONWIDE NGA NETWORK

The revolution in communications technology in the past few decades has created enormous social 
and economic opportunities. Technology is always evolving, and new investments are required if the 
country is to keep abreast of developments and provide industries and citizens with future-proof 
communications infrastructure.
 
45. Supporting NGA 

The MCA regulatory regime will foster innovation and investment to 
support the development of NGA Networks in Malta. It will have the 
objectives of ensuring competition and affordable access to these 
networks.

Networks 

46. Broadband Supply 

and Demand

The MCA will monitor supply and demand of broadband, anticipating 
change, supporting development and facilitating the deployment and 
development of NGA Networks in Malta.

47. IPv6 

Government will promote deployment of the IPv6 protocol, for identifying 
and locating computers on networks and traffic routes across the Internet. 
This acknowledges the need to prepare for an ‘Internet of Everything,’ 
where all objects connected to the web must be uniquely identified.

SPECTRUM AND NETWORKS 

Malta will have an infrastructure that guarantees citizens and business opportunities for 
socio-economic development. 

48. Network 

Infrastructure 
Sharing 
Opportunities

A framework to facilitate  and regulate network infrastructure sharing 
will be established to safeguard the long-term growth and development of 
the telecommunications sector, while ensuring healthy competition.

49. Safeguarding 

Networks

Risk mitigation measures will be introduced to safeguard networks from 
damage caused by third-party operations.

50. Quality of Service

End-user interest in the electronic communications sector will be 
safeguarded by improving the quality of information available to them and 
ensuring service providers meet contractually agreed QOS levels.
.

52

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

53

8 INFRASTRUCTURE

INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY 

Submarine cables are the backbone of the communication networks and the life blood of the Maltese 
economy. A better connected environment will contribute greatly to the economy’s efficiency and 
provide business opportunities.

51. International 
Connectivity

Opportunities for new submarine cable routes, connecting Malta to 
mainland Europe or North Africa, will be evaluated. The objective will be 
to strengthen the country’s connectivity to international networks and 
hubs, increase resilience and improve investment. 

52. Connectivity 

between Malta 
and Gozo

A feasibility study will determine optimal data connectivity between 
the Maltese islands with a particular focus on resiliency and bandwidth 
between Malta and Gozo.  The outcome will guide the type and extent of 
investment to be made.

CYBER SECURITY

The Internet’s huge footprint, its impact on society, and the ever increasing range of threats and 
vulnerabilities present a continuous need to protect cyberspace. A Critical Infrastructural Programme 
is needed with the participation of government and the private sector to ensure that confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information and cyber systems are preserved. Cyber attacks pose a 
relentless threat to Malta’s national security, economy and society.  Cyber security is also crucial 
for protecting human rights, freedom of opinion, information and association, and for enforcing 
obligations in cyberspace.  

53. National Cyber 

Security Strategy

Government will enforce a National Cyber Security Strategy, to help 
ensure a safer Internet, the protection of critical infrastructure, the rule of 
law, accountability and privacy. The main pillars will be designed to:

    Combat Cyber Crime. Law enforcement agencies will identify gaps and 

strengthen their capability to investigate and combat cybercrime.

    Strengthen National Cyber Defence.  Public and private entities will be 

guided and assisted in strengthening their cyber defence capabilities.

    Secure Cyberspace.  Higher levels of trust will be instilled through 

awareness programmes and the delivery of trustworthy, ICT-enabled 
services that assure confidentiality, integrity, availability and privacy.

    Build Capacity.  The skills and educational frameworks required will be 

identified and developed.

54

GOVERNMENT SHARED INFRASTRUCTURE

Government will continue incrementally to enhance its infrastructure. It will draft a roadmap, based on 
emerging business and technological requirements, to design and implement the next generation of 
government ICT infrastructure.  

54. Authentication 

Government will: 

Services 

    Simplify the process for authentication to access its online services.

    Work with banks and other organisations to develop a national 

electronic identity card as a trusted source of authentication.

    Bring authentication services into alignment with EU standards and 
allow fellow European citizens access using their national electronic 
identity.

    Develop a roadmap, aligned to likely technological advancements and 

emerging needs.

55. Trust Services

Services will be provided to facilitate the creation, verification, validation, 
handling and preservation of electronic signatures, electronic seals, 
electronic time stamps, electronic documents, electronic delivery services, 
website authentication, and electronic certificates. 

56. Modernisation and 

Re-Use 

Government will accelerate the modernisation of ICT implementations, 
maintain a cartography of ICT assets, and promote the re-use of mature 
local and EU established ICT building blocks using the Enterprise 
Architecture & Road-mapping Initiative of MITA.

57. Foresight

Foresight projects will be launched to identify how important ICT driven 
themes, such as identity and social networking, can be best used for 
stimulating economic growth. 

58. Incubation of novel 
ICT driven solutions

Government will pilot ICT projects and embrace those that modernise 
public administration or promote economic growth. This will be delivered 
in collaboration with various EU-led programmes.

 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

55

9

HUMAN CAPITAL

9.1  GOALS

The ability to develop and deploy educated and able workers is crucial in a knowledge economy. The 
skills and capacities that reside in people and that are put to productive use are important to create 
economic value in all sectors of society.  

Help educators 
embrace 
technology 
and adopt new 
teaching methods 
for developing 
the skills of their 
students.

The goals of the 
actions under this 
strategic enabler 
are to: 

Exploit e-content 
and technology 
to attract more 
people into 
lifelong learning.

Align the supply 
of STEM skills with 
the requirements 
of industries.

Increase female 
participation in 
STEM education 
and the workforce.

Develop a 
specialised 
skills base for 
spurring business 
development.

56

9.2  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A.

B.

The STEM skills 
and employment 
policy must 
be an integral 
chapter in national 
educational and 
employment 
strategies and 
policies.

A stimulating 
educational 
environment is 
needed to inspire 
creativity and 
innovation and 
encourage young 
adults to harvest 
their entrepreneurial 
skills. 

C.

Individuals will be encouraged to take up ICT, 
and ICT-enabled professions, as a career.

The application of digital technologies needs 
to be embedded in all university, college 
and school courses, and non-formal learning 
environments. 

D.

Government must 
address labour 
market shortages 
and industry 
requirements, 
ensuring there 
is synergy 
between industry, 
educational 
institutions and 
other stakeholders.

E.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

57

9 HUMAN CAPITAL

9.3  ACTIONS

BUILDING CAPACITY AND SKILLS

New skills are needed in an era of rapid economic and social change. Globalisation and technological 
advancements will drive the future.   Students must be equipped to manage emerging technologies, 
and the jobs and professions that will emanate from them.
 
59. Integrating critical 

skills across 
educational 
and formative 
experiences

Government will fund access to resources, training and industry readiness 
programmes. These will include apprenticeships and internships, and help 
with imparting skills such as problem-solving, computational thinking, 
and data and information processing. Soft-skills and aptitudes, such as 
intellectual curiosity, flexibility and e-entrepreneurship, will be woven 
into the fabric of formal education. Programmes will be supported and 
promoted in and after school, on and off campus, throughout the year, 
across public and private institutions. Projects and spin-offs, arising 
from such programmes, will be celebrated, for example through annual 
competitions.

60. Building national 

capacity in 
specialist skills-sets

Through educational institutions and industry, government will support 
the creation of specialist educational pathways, addressing labour market 
requirements. Government will develop the curriculum and provide 
technical materials.  

61. Investing further 

in and celebrating 
the education 
community 

Educators will be given opportunities and incentives to explore cross-
disciplinary approaches, embracing technology. Innovative teaching and 
achievements will be celebrated. Local best practice will be shared.

62. Awareness-raising 

on eSkills education 
and careers

Government will resource awareness campaigns about careers requiring 
eSkills and the education opportunities available. Target audiences will 
be identified by collaborating with stakeholders. Action will be taken to 
minimise the gender imbalance in the technology field.

58

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

59

9 HUMAN CAPITAL

STRENGTHENING THE WORKFORCE

Globalisation puts Malta’s workforce in direct competition with workers in every corner of the globe. 
Competency requirements are constantly changing at every level of business. Investment will take 
place to strengthen the workforce. Government will:

63. Improve 

employability 
through lifelong 
learning and career 
support

Work with educational institutions, community organisations and industry, 
to develop a Lifelong Learning Programme, with eSkills at its core, so 
as to improve worker employability in the digital economy. There will 
be a support framework of career guidance, financial incentives, flexible 
learning paths and intense use of eLearning. Special emphasis will be 
assigned to vulnerable groups.

64. Update the 

eCompetence 
Framework

Continue investing in the Standards for ITalent, as the eCompetence 
framework for providing defined, visible career streams for individuals in 
the ICT profession. The framework will be updated to reflect European 
and international developments standards and reflect feedback from 
stakeholders. Industry and educational institutions will be encouraged 
to adopt this eCompetence framework. The standards will be promoted 
as occupational guidelines with easy-to-use tools for professionals and 
aspiring practitioners to map their skills portfolio with career development.

65. Promote 

excellence in the 
professionalism 
of the local ICT 
workforce

Support mechanisms to develop excellence in the ICT workforce. The 
building blocks of the profession include the eCompetence framework, a 
foundational body of knowledge, ethics and education. Other supporting 
components will be explored, such as profiling tools, registers and 
portfolios for practitioners.

66. Quality assure for 

ICT educational 
programmes

Ensure the adoption of quality assurance processes in the delivery of ICT 
educational and training programmes so that the content and materials 
are in line with industry demands. This will be managed through the 
educational authorities.

67. Validate technology 
-related experience 
and education

Validate informal technology-related experience and education of ICT 
practitioners. This will be done jointly with the educational authorities and 
educational institutions.

68. Increase female 

participation 

Identify the main challenges women face to participate in the ICT 
workforce. Incentives will be offered to employers to recruit more women.

69. Take informed 

action

Monitor demand for eSkills. Qualitative and quantitative research will be 
shared with stakeholders for co-ordinated action when needed.

60

REGIONAL HUB FOR HIGH QUALITY ESKILLS EDUCATION AND TRAINING

The global marketplace necessitates global citizenship. Internationalised educational institutions can 
provide students with global perspectives of disciplines and careers. Growth in international STEM 
education and training will broaden outlooks, strengthen educational institutions’ offerings and, 
ultimately, improve national competitiveness.

70. eSkills education 

in other critical 
sectors

Government will embark on a plan to internationalise the Maltese eSkills 
educational sector to attract education tourism. This will capitalise on 
the success of the English-language educational tourism initiative. The 
plan will address the need to enhance Malta’s attractiveness as an eSkills 
training destination, deal with deficiencies, and provide investment 
support for educational providers.

71. International 
ICT education 
programmes

Incentives will be provided for the creation of joint international ICT 
education programmes at vocational, academic and executive levels. 
These programmes will be carried out in co-operation with reputable 
international educational institutions.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

61

10

ATTAINING THE VISION

Everybody needs to work together to make 
Digital Malta a success.  The Strategy is 
an enabler for the different bodies and 
organisations to achieve their objectives and 
as such should be deemed as an integral part 
of their operations. 

62

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

63

10 ATTAINING THE VISION

Fig. 9 depicts the role of the different stakeholders. 

Fig. 9
MAIN STAKEHOLDERS

POLITICAL CHAMPION
Office of the Prime Minister

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
Ministry/Parliamentary Secretariat
responsible for the Digital Economy

Ministry
responsible 
for Finance

GOVERNING BODY

SUPPORT
FUNCTIONS

Planning
Finance
Monitoring
Marketing
Auditing

OPERATIONAL BODIES

Malta Information Technology Agency
Malta Communications Authority
Malta Enterprise
Foundation for IT Accessibility
ICT MALTA

Business Champion
Citizen Champion
Ministry/Entity CIOs

Chamber of Commerce
eSkills Malta Foundation
ICT Forums

64

10.1  CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS

A suite of factors are critical for attaining the vision:

Strong political 
leadership, solid 
governance and 
commitment by 
all stakeholders 
to implement the 
initiatives.

Adequate 
funding.

Good programme 
and project 
management 
throughout the life-
cycle of initiatives.

Continuous 
engagement with 
stakeholders.

A culture of sharing 
of resources 
(accompanied by 
supportive business 
frameworks) across 
and between 
stakeholders.

Re-skilling of 
government 
employees and 
creating new 
structures and 
roles.

Government, 
business, 
organisations, leaders 
and individuals 
being more creative 
and open to 
experimentation with 
new technologies 
and methods.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

65

10 ATTAINING THE VISION

10.2  POLITICAL LEADERSHIP

10.3  GOVERNING BODY 

Within the public sector, the goals identified in 
Digital Malta will be considered as high priority and 
strategic direction will be given.

Politically championing the Strategy at the most 
senior level, and securing ownership from the 
respective areas, is fundamental for success.  
The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, will 
champion the attainment of Digital Malta through 
political will, supportive policy and adequate funding.  
The Ministry / Parliamentary Secretariat responsible 
for the Digital Economy will provide focus on 
ultimate goals, overall governance and the 
engagement of relevant parties.

Strong governance will support the leaders.  It will 
enable management of the dependencies and 
interactions between players and mitigate the risks 
associated with adopting different policies and 
implementing various actions.  Stakeholders need to 
work closely together to overcome challenges.
A governing body, representing the primary 
stakeholders, will be established.  It will report to the 
Ministry / Parliamentary Secretariat responsible for 
the Digital Economy and will:

  Oversee the implementation of the Strategy 

ensuring the necessary commitment, 
engagement and collaboration of stakeholders.

 

Senior figures within government will own and be 
accountable for actions and initiatives.  

  Provide leadership, mentorship and support to 

stakeholders in understanding and implementing 
the Strategy.

  Approve a programme of initiatives within the 

public sector on a yearly basis.

  Oversee progress and provide direction on major 

ICT investment.

  Develop a framework and tools to measure the 
benefits gained from the digital experience, and 
make the results accessible to all.

  Market and promote the Strategy and associated 

actions and initiatives.

  Celebrate and share success-stories.

  Re-calibrate the Strategy as necessary.

A sub-committee will be setup to determine yearly 
ICT budgets and to ensure savings from ICT projects 
are reinvested in ICT.  

66

10.4  OPERATIONAL BODIES 

The Digital Malta Strategy will be supported by a yearly ‘Programme of Initiatives.’ Initiatives will be identified 
and scoped by the respective owners and submitted to the Digital Malta Governing Body in the form of a 
business case for approval and prioritisation.  Once this is done, the respective owners will take measures to 
secure the necessary funding and to drive implementation in line with the direction provided.  

In this regard, at different stages of the Strategy timeline, various organisations, entities and individuals will be 
involved.  A number of new functions will be established:

  A Digital Society Stakeholder 

  An FDI multi-stakeholder 

Forum will be established 
for civil society, government 
and industry to discuss how 
ICT is impacting society, and 
how it can be used to create 
better social cohesion.  The 
Forum will look at eInclusion, 
digital citizenship and Internet 
safety; it will propose policy to 
government and encourage 
industry self-regulation.

  A Forum for Internet Safety 
and minors will be set up to 
bring together the MCA, the 
Commissioner for Children, 
FSWS, the Education 
Directorates, the Malta Police 
Force, industry representatives 
and others to share knowledge 
and to monitor developments.  
The Forum will put forward 
policy ideas and represent 
Malta on European bodies 
working in this field.  

committee will be responsible 
for designing corporate 
packages specifically 
targeting ICT multinationals. 
Special attention will be 
reserved for promoting 
and facilitating knowledge 
economy investments in Gozo. 
The committee will include 
stakeholders from public, 
private and independent 
bodies from both Malta and 
Gozo.

  An entity will be responsible 

for the coordination of 
national cyber security 
efforts. This entity will be also 
responsible for the creation, 
maintenance and governance 
of the National Cyber Security 
Strategy.

  A Data Governance Council 

will provide strategic direction 
for data related issues and 
decisions.

 

ICT Malta will be set up on 
similar basis to Finance Malta. 
It will be led by the business 
community and will have 
objectives to:

  Promote and market Malta 
to attract ICT investments;

  Assist the local ICT industry 

to penetrate the global 
market;

  Promote ownership of 

the Malta brand among all 
stakeholders;

  Synergise business 

sectors to create ICT 
areas of strength (e.g. 
software development), 
to contribute towards 
economic growth.

  Citizen and Business 

Champions.  Two individuals 
will be appointed to champion 
‘Digital Citizen’ and ‘Digital 
Business’ activities.  They will 
be the central contact point 
for initiatives within these two 
strategic themes and will lead 
their implementation.

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

67

10 ATTAINING THE VISION

In addition, where appropriate, the remit, the strategic direction, the structures and the operations of existing 
organisations will be aligned in such a way so as to be in a stronger position to implement this Strategy:

  The MITA will continue to 

  The Ministry and Entity’s Office 

drive government’s ICT policy, 
programmes and initiatives 
within Malta.  

  The MCA will, in line with its 
regulatory remit, continue to 
ensure an optimal environment 
for the deployment of multiple 
high speed fixed and mobile 
networks, while promoting 
public and business uptake 

  of ICT.

  ME and MCST will promote 
Digital Malta in their spheres.

  The FITA will be given 
a stronger role to build 
and promote accessibility 
standards across government 
and industry.

of CIOs will be responsible for 
developing, managing and 
implementing the Ministry’s ICT 
strategy and an ICT programme 
plan as directed by Digital 
Malta.  The Office of CIOs will 
be strengthened to ensure that 
these Offices are in a position to 
successfully deliver.   

  Structures responsible for 

combating cyber crime 
and supporting Critical 
Information Infrastructure 
Protection, especially those 
relating to CSIRT Malta, will 
be reinforced.  Furthermore, 
National early warning cyber 
security advisory capability 
and National law enforcement 
agencies will be strengthened.

  The Malta Internet Governance 
Forum will serve as the national 
platform for the protection of 
human rights and democracy 
on the Internet. The Forum will 
be open to all local stakeholders. 
Its aims will include activities to 
promote data protection and 
privacy; coordinate cooperation 
against cyber crime and 
maximise the Internet’s potential 
to promote democracy and 
cultural diversity.

  eSkills Malta Foundation - 
Government will transform 
the eSkills Alliance into a 
purpose foundation giving it 
more independence, strength 
and agility.

10.5  SUPPORT FUNCTIONS 

The execution of the Strategy also requires the creation or strengthening of a number of support functions 
including:

  Planning and budgeting, monitoring and auditing, and marketing of the Strategy.  

  Foundation of bodies with a similar aim of increasing proliferation of ICT across the island.

These support functions will work in liaison with the operational bodies to reap the benefits that result from 
continuous collaboration. 

68

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

69

11

MEASURING SUCCESS

Digital Malta has bold goals in order to deliver a 
better quality of life and sustained economic growth.

The Strategy will be measurable and transparent, 
allowing all stakeholders to track its success.  

It will continually be monitored by the Governing 
Body. Reports will be presented on qualitative and 
quantitative assessments and progress achieved.        

The monitoring will also guide the re-calibration of 
Digital Malta, so that it remains equipped to satisfy 
evolving needs.

70

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

71

11 MEASURING SUCCESS

Fig. 10
MEASURING 
DIGITAL MALTA
An open and participatory approach 
will be adopted when measuring success.

PLANNING

CO-ORDINATION
with budget processes, 
other strategies and 
stakeholders

MONITORING

IMPLEMENTATION

PARTICIPATION
ensure participation
and build trust

72

11.1  PERFORMANCE TARGETS 

The following DAE targets are adopted for the Digital Malta Strategy: 

Target 

33% of SMEs selling online 
Fast broadband (>30 MBPS) coverage available for all 
50% of households taking up broadband subscriptions having >100 MBPS 
20% of population buying online across-borders 
50% of population buying online 
60% of disadvantaged people using Internet regularly 
75% of population using Internet regularly 
15% or less of the population have never used the Internet 
100% increase in ICT R&D Public Spending 
50% of population using eGovernment 
25% of population using eGovernment and returning forms 

Malta has already achieved the ‘Broadband coverage for all by 2013’ target. 

By

2015
2020
2020
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2020
2015
2015

11.2  PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

The success of the Strategy will be measured using three performance indicators:

  Existing benchmarking exercises carried out by reputable independent 

organisations.  

  Qualitative evaluations, identifying the extent of implementation and benefits 

delivered to citizens, business and government.  

  Assessments, surveys and audits analysing specific areas. 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

73

11 MEASURING SUCCESS

11.3  BENCHMARKING EXERCISES 

Various international organisations carry out studies to measure and compare 
the performance of different countries.  These measures will also be used by the 
Governing Body to gauge success:

Eurostat - Information Society Indicators

United Nations - eGovernment Indices 

  Percentage of Individuals using the Internet for 

  eGovernment development index 

interaction with public authorities

  Percentage of Individuals using the Internet for 

interaction with public authorities, by type of 
interaction

  Percentage of enterprises using the Internet for 

interaction with public authorities

  PC and Internet penetration rates for business of 

different sizes

  Percentage of Enterprises having purchased 

online 

  Percentage of Enterprises having received orders 

online

  Size of ICT workforce

  Contribution of ICT sector to GDP

  Contribution of ICT enabled sectors to GDP

  Total eCommerce export (or percentage of 
enterprises exporting through eCommerce)

  Total percentage of eCommerce trade within the 

local market

World Economic Forum - The Networked 
Readiness Index 

  Environment index

  Readiness index

  Usage index

 

Impact

  Online Service index 

  Telecommunication infrastructure index

  eParticipation index

European Commission - eGovernment
benchmarking 

  User-centric government

  Transparent government 

  Citizen mobility 

  Business mobility 

  Key enablers

  Effective government

  eGovernment use

INSEAD & Singaporean Human Capital Institute –
Global Talent Competitiveness Index 

  Enablers

  Attract

  Grow

  Retain

  Labour and Vocational

  Global Knowledge

74

11.4  QUALITATIVE EVALUATIONS 

In addition to quantitative measures, qualitative criteria will be used to assess whether or not:

 

 

 

ICT has contributed towards improving the economic competitiveness of the country. 

ICT has brought sustained improvements in the quality of life of Maltese citizens.

ICT has enabled sustainable economic growth in business.

  The Maltese public are constructively engaged in realising Digital Malta. 

  Government is more efficient and more open.

  Areas of ICT skills shortages have been addressed.

  Malta has a sound legal basis and regulatory framework for digital growth.

  The Maltese ICT community has critical mass, access to resources and supporting infrastructure. 

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

75

11 MEASURING SUCCESS

11.5  SPECIFIC ASSESSMENTS 

The rhythm of achievement will be monitored by closely observing specific areas.  
This will be done through assessing: 

  The readiness and use of ICT by local entrepreneurs to determine levels of access, skills, perceptions and 

technology foresight.

  The extent of use of ICT by SMEs in Malta. 

  The supply chain level of automation by industry sectors.

  The readiness of logistics services.

  The entrepreneurial culture and ICT integration within local business.

  The readiness of Maltese enterprises to internationalise.

  The attributes of non-users, particularly in relation to access, affordability and perceived uses.  Focus will 

be on working adults, the unemployed and the elderly.

  The use of ICT, perceptions and competence levels of the Maltese.  

  The level of satisfaction of users of online government services.

  The National Cyber Security Strategy based on considerations issued by International 

Organisations e.g. the ENISA 18.

  The realisation of benefits and value for money audits.

18. ENISA, “National Cyber Security Strategies — ENISA” Report/Study, 2012.

76

National Digital Strategy 2014 – 2020

77

78

