Contents

Minister’s Foreword 

Executive Summary 

Part One - Introduction 

Background
Purpose and Scope
The Pre-Launch of the Strategy

Part Two – Overall Direction

Prelude 
What is meant by Cyber security
Guiding Principles
Overall Vision
A Cyber Security Strategy Model

Part Three – The Strategy

The Goals and accompanying Measures 
The Goals
The Proposed Measures

Goal: Establish a governance framework
Goal: Combat Cybercrime
Goal: Strengthen National cyber defence
Goal: Secure Cyberspace
Goal: Cyber security Awareness and Education
Goal: National and International Cooperation

Conclusion

The Cyber Security Strategy Model Revisited
The Way Forward

References

Endnotes

Minister’s 
Foreword

In  today’s  globalised  world,  the  extensive  and 
efficient  use  of  Information  and  Communications 
Technologies  (ICTs)  is  increasingly  critical  for  the 
effective  functioning  and  growth  of  our  economy. 
It  is  an  increasingly  essential  means  for  the  private 
sector  to  compete  and  prosper,  through  its  ability 
to connect to the local markets as well as to those 
beyond  our  shores,  efficiently  and  cost  effectively. 
Competitiveness in a digital economy however calls 
for resilience to the security challenges posed within 
the  realm  of  cyber-space  -  ICT  and  its  constituent 
elements and its dependents. 

This  Strategy  aims  to  establish  the  foundations  to 
ensure  effective  cyber  security  within  Government, 
the  private  sector  and  civil  society.  It  does  not 
simply  entail 
technology  security  controls  but 
involves  measures  related  to  regulation,  legislation, 
awareness, education, expertise and foreign affairs.

Striving  for  cyber  security  is  a  continuous  journey. 
Cyber security can never be fully attained, considering 
that the technology itself, the day to day realities in 
technology adoption as well as the modes of cyber 
attack are in a continuous state of evolution. Hence 
the Strategy is not seen as cast in stone, but it shall 
need  to  evolve,  in  line  with  a  national  commitment 
and collective effort to adopt a cyber security culture. 

Embracing  security  as  a  normal  way  of  everyone’s 
cyber  lives  is  in  the  common  interest.  Ultimately, 
cyber security needs to be seen as a key cornerstone 
to  Malta’s  competitiveness  within  the  digital  world 
by  positioning  it  as  a  secure  online  jurisdiction 
and  potentially  presenting  opportunities  for  the 
development of centres of excellence in a number of 
local business sectors interacting within the realm of 
cyberspace. 

Hon Dr. Emmanuel Mallia
Minister for Competitiveness and Digital,
Maritime and Services Economy 

3

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Executive
Summary

Cyber-space  is  far  from  perfect.  It  is  at  risk  of 
vulnerabilities, some of which involve genuine human 
error,  whilst  others  are  exposed  to  malicious  intent. 
Furthermore,  global  innovations  within  its  realm  are 
even  faster  than  the  ability  to  secure  it.  Hence  the 
need for cyber security, that is, ensuring the safety, 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  cyber-
space. 

       understand their shared responsibility and  
       thus commitment to collaboration and
   cooperation, to ensure a safe, stable and secure
   environment

• Adopt a risk based approach, based upon the 
   premise that it is impossible to guarantee  

       immunity from any cyber attack.

Launching  cyber  security  on  a  national  scale, 
essentially calls for a planned, collective and systemic 
approach,  thus  leading  to  the  need  of  a  National 
Cyber Security Strategy. Digital Malta – the National 
Digital Strategy for Malta for the period 2014-2020 - 
recognises and proposes the fulfilment of such need, 
in  the  light  of  Malta’s  increased  dependence  upon 
cyber-space in its day to day interactivity, within and 
beyond  its  shores.  Indeed,  in  2015,  the  European 
Commission’s  e-Government  Benchmark  Report 
re-confirmed Malta as the leader in the delivery and 
performance  of  e-Government  services  amongst 
thirty-three countries. 

Malta is addressing such a need. A Green Paper for 
a National Cyber Security Strategy was launched in 
October 2015, as a basis for consultation. The Green 
Paper  presented  a  high  level,  strategic  approach 
for  cyber  security  on  a  national  scale.  It  intended 
to  inculcate  an  awareness  of  cyber  security,  its 
extent  and  its  implications  of  which  Malta,  as  an 
integral part of cyber-space, needs to consider. The 
National  Cyber  Security  Strategy  being  launched  is 
a  consolidation  of  the  proposals  presented  by  the 
Green Paper following online feedback and a number 
of consultation sessions held.

The National Cyber Security Strategy recognises that 
tackling cyber security entails the need to: 

• Safeguard the rule of law in line with Malta’s  
       Constitution and Malta’s role as a European 

   Union Member State
• Adopt a multi-disciplinary approach

• Ensure that all stakeholders of cyber-space;  
      government, private sector, and civil society  

All of the above constitute the fundamental principles 
upon which the overall vision is based. In essence, 
the Vision covers the need and expectations of three 
key  national  stakeholders  –  the  public  sector,  the 
private  sector  and  civil  society  to  ensure  cyber 
security.  Five  dimensions  enable  articulation  of  the 
vision into the strategy. They are Policy, Legislation, 
Risk  Management,  Awareness  and  Education  upon 
which the subsequent proposed strategy is based. 

Prior  to  proposing  the  strategy  however,  research 
and assessments have been made so as to enable a 
high level pragmatic approach towards cyber security 
within  the  local  context.  The  ensuing  strategic 
direction  within  the  Green  Paper  is  proposed  to  be 
attained by six goals, each of which carries a number 
of proposed measures, as follows:

1.    Goal: Establish a Governance Framework 
       that is based upon the premise that a cyber 
 
  security  strategy  needs  to  be  established,  
         and more importantly, be effectively implemented  
        and  maintained  on  a  continuous  basis.  Hence  
               the need to ensure the key coordination structures,  
      processes,  roles  and  practice  with  particular  
      focus  on  cyber  risk  management  within  the  
       public and private sector.

2.    Goal: Combat Cybercrime
          which aims to ensure and consolidate capabilities
       to tackle cybercrime.

3.    Goal: Strengthen National Cyber Defence 

which  aims  to  foster  sharing  of  cyber  security 
knowledge  and 
intelligence,  review  current 
legislation  and  regulations  in  line  with  cyber-
space  developments  and  ensure  digital 
resilience  on  a  national  and  organisation  wide 

4

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016“ Launching cyber 

security on a national 
scale, essentially calls for 
a planned, collective and 
systemic approach, thus 
leading to the need of a 
National Cyber Security 

Strategy. ” 

• Increased recognition on a nation-wide scale of 
the importance to adopt cyber security measures 
in day to day corporate and individual activities 
•  Evolving  maturity  of  overall  cyber  security 
capability 
•  Technological  developments  and  applicability, 
along with related cyber security challenges
• Evolution in cybercrime behaviour
•  Developments  on  a  national  scale,  in  line  with 
European Union direction on cyber security to its 
Member States of which Malta forms part.

Hence,  the  Strategy  would  be  expected  to  be 
periodically  reviewed  and  updated.  Ultimately,  the 
Strategy is understood as a means for national cyber 
security investment that indicates Malta as a :

• Secure online jurisdiction
• Centre of excellence in various business sectors  

       interacting within cyber-space.

scale of particular consideration are recent legal 
developments  at  EU  level,  notably  legislation 
pertaining to data protection and that related to 
Network and Information Security.

4.   Goal: Secure cyber-space

which  aims  to 
foster  self  regulation  and 
voluntary self commitment, bearing in mind that 
legislation  is  not  a  panacea  to  cyber  security 
commitments.  It  also  aims  to  stimulate  use  of 
standards  and  best  practices  that  guarantee 
security  whilst  allowing  for 
interoperability. 
Special focus is also given to promote security 
and  trust  of  online  public  services  and  to 
consolidate support to the private sector. 

5.  Goal: Cyber security Awareness and  
 

Education
which  aims  to  target  academia,  the  public 
and  private  sector  and  citizens  as  a  means  to 
sensitize  awareness,  knowledge  as  well  as 
capabilities  and  expertise  in  cyber  security. 
A  national  strategic  approach  towards  an 
ongoing educational and awareness campaign 
is especially recommended.

6.   Goal: National and International Cooperation 
which  aims  to  ensure  effective  consultation, 
cooperation  and  collaboration  on  a  national 
level,  on  a  European  and  on  a  global  basis, 
enabled  by  EU  and  international  institutions 
and activities, based on the understanding that 
cyber security has no bounds.

All six goals aim to cover two key strategic outcomes 
expected of the Strategy, namely those of:

•  Defending  and  protecting  the  national 
information infrastructure from cyber threats.
• Ensuring the security, safety and protection 
of users of cyber-space.

The  proposed  strategic  approach  is  by  no  means 
the  end  in  itself.  It  is  understood  that  the  launch 
of  the  Strategy  is  only  the  start  of  a  continuous 
process that calls for its implementation, evaluation 
and  maintenance  so  as  to  ensure  its  currency  and 
effectiveness in line with: 

5

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 20166

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part One

Introduction

7

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part One
Introduction

1.  BACKGROUND

2.   PURPOSE AND SCOPE

Up to a few decades ago, a country’s security interests 
focussed on protecting its borders, its waters and its 
airspace. Today, cyber-space forms an integral part 
of a country’s day to day reality. 

Information  and  Communications  Technology  (ICT) 
leads the way in interaction within and outside of a 
country’s territory and its disruption may potentially 
affect life. Hence, cyber-space cannot be left out of a 
country’s span of protection.

Malta  is  no  island  within  the  realm  of  cyber-space! 
Cyber-space  knows  no  boundaries.  It  transcends 
national  borders,  promoting  online  opportunities  of 
dialogue,  mutual  cooperation  and  understanding 
beyond our shores. However, the cyber world makes 
no distinction between its users of good intent or not. 

Therefore, as opportunities are limitless, so are cyber 
threats.  Such  malicious  attempts  in  cyber-space 
may  be  launched  anywhere,  in  any  vulnerable  area 
of a digital network, instantaneously leaving no time 
for  an  appropriate  response  and  with  very  minimal 
traceability or detection of its perpetrator. 

is  man-made  and 

like 
Ultimately,  cyber-space 
anything else of its sort, it is never perfect. The rapid 
advances of technology itself and the opportunities 
that  arise  from  it  do  not  allow  it  either.  Indeed  the 
innovations in technology and its adoption are even 
faster than the ability to secure it.

Malta’s  security  of  cyber-space  ultimately  calls  for 
a  planned,  collective  and  systemic  approach  that 
respects  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  whilst 
ensuring  confidentiality, 
integrity  and  availability 
of  cyberspace  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  Such  is  the 
intention  of  Digital  Malta  –  the  National  Digital 
Strategy  for  the  period  2014  till  2020  –  which 
identifies a National Cyber Security Strategy as one 
of its required actions.

This  Strategy  intends  to  set  an  overall  high  level 
direction  in  cyber  security  across  all  strata  of  the 
Maltese  economy  and  society.  As  a  first  issue,  it 
also intends to consolidate a recognition of the need 
for  a  planned  and  concerted  effort  by  the  various 
stakeholders involved so as to protect Malta and its 
interests.

“ Everyone is affected by 

cyber issues and everyone 
needs mutual assistance. 
It is therefore in everyone’s 
interest and responsibility 
to ensure a secure and safe 

cyber-space for all. ” 

This  Strategy  should  translate  into  timely,  specific 
and  actionable  measures  that  set  the  foundations 
for  a  national  cyber  security  framework  that  shall 
need  to  be  implemented,  maintained  and  updated 
so  as  to  ensure  currency  and  relevance  in  a  highly 
challenging,  dynamic  and  complex  environment  as 
that posed by cyber-space.

Through 
its  various  goals  and  corresponding 
measures, the National Cyber Security Strategy aims 
to:

• Position cyber security as a national investment, 
that gives an indication beyond Malta’s shores 
of the country’s commitment to a secure cyber- 
space for online transaction and interaction

• Convey  the  key  message  that  cyber  security 
cannot  be  achieved  in  isolation.  It  does  not 

8

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016(iii)  A  multi-stakeholder  perspective,  based  on  the 
understanding  that  apart  from  technology,  cyber 
security impacts upon all of country’s political, legal, 
economic and social well being.

The  Green  Paper  set  the  basis  for  consultation 
through:

1.  Online  feedback  using  http://mita.gov.mt/ncss  
 
that  
 

and 
lasted till 14 February 2016

http://www.konsultazzjoni.gov.mt 

2.  A series of consultation events, which were held  
 
between  March  and  June  2016  and  which  
targeted  a  number  of  social  and  economic  
 
 
sectors, namely:

• Economy and Finance
• Education and National Awareness
• Justice and Legislation
• Infrastructure and Health
• National Security
• The Public

The consultative process led to relevant updates to 
the proposals made within the Green Paper; leading 
to the issue of this first version of the National Cyber 
Security Strategy.
 

Part One
Introduction

simply  fall  within  the  domain  of  Information 
and  Communications  Technology  experts  and 
practitioners.  Everyone  is  affected  by  cyber 
issues and everyone needs mutual assistance. 
It 
interest  and 
responsibility to ensure a secure and safe cyber-
space for all. 

in  everyone’s 

is  therefore 

The National Cyber Security Strategy, above all, aims 
to align itself within the scope of:

•  Specific  EU  legal  requirements1.  Reference 
to  such  legal  requirements,  however,  does  not 
preclude  the  need  to  refer  to  the  specific  legal 
requirements for further direction. 

•  Digital Malta and other local strategy documents 
such  as  e-Commerce  Malta  -  the  National 
e-commerce  Strategy  (2014-2020)  -  published 
by the Malta Communications Authority2.

3.  THE PRE-LAUNCH OF
  THE STRATEGY

On 30th October 2015, the Minister for the Economy, 
Investment  and  Small  Business  launched  a  Green 
Paper  for  a  National  Cyber  Security  Strategy.  The 
Green  Paper  followed  extensive  research  based 
upon  various  published  sources  to  assess  cyber 
security from:

from  a  European  Union 
(i)  A  global  and 
that 
perspective,  based  on 
renders 
the 
interconnectedness 
any  challenge 
in  cyber  security  as  potentially 
impacting  any  country  applying  Information  and  
Communications Technology, including Malta.

the  understanding 
in  cyberspace 

(ii)     A domestic perspective, particularly with respect 
to: 

•  Experiences  and  concerns  expressed  by 
Maltese  participants  in  annual  Euro  Barometer 
surveys specialising in cyber security
•  Malta’s  current  official  position  in  particular 
aspects of cyber security

9

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 201610

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Two

Overall Direction

11

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Two
Overall Direction

4.  PRELUDE

This  Section  sets  the  scene  for  the  National  Cyber 
Security  Strategy,  through  a  definition  of  what  is 
meant by cyber-space and its security and an outline 
of the key principles leading to the vision expected to 
be attained through the strategy. 

A Cyber Security Model presented encapsulates the 
key dimensions that are to be addressed by means of 
goals and corresponding measures, proposed in Part 
3, for the implementation of the Strategy. 

5.  WHAT IS MEANT BY
  CYBER SECURITY

Definitions for cyber security abound; however they 
all  essentially  point  to  the  security  of  the  cyber-
space; namely all:

• 

Interconnected 
infrastructure 

ICT  hardware  and  software 

•  Data in transit and at rest on the networks
•  Connected users
•  Logical connections established among them

In view of the above3, the following definition of cyber 
security is being adopted:

It is the safeguards and actions that can be used to 
protect  cyber  domain  from  those  threats  that  are 
associated with or that may harm its interdependent 
networks and information infrastructure. It strives to 
preserve the availability and integrity of the networks 
and  infrastructure  and  the  confidentiality  of  the 
information contained therein.

information 

is  based  upon  the 
Essentially,  cyber  security 
foundations  of 
security,  namely 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability.  However, 
whilst  information  security  is  business  driven  and 
results  in  prudent  investment  in  safeguards  and 
countermeasures,  cyber  security  is  threat  driven 
where  all  cyber-space  is  at  risk.  The  inherent 

interconnectedness  of  cyber-space  exposes  all  of 
its  constituents  to  a  failure  of  their  most  vulnerable 
elements4 .

Additionally  effective  cyber  security  cannot  be 
reached by technological measures alone as modern 
cyber  attacks  could  bypass  all  defence  layers  by 
exploiting  the  human  factors  through  techniques 
such as social engineering5. 

Hence,  safeguards  and  actions  hereby  refer  to 
ongoing and planned measures which may potentially 
be of technical, operational, legislative, educational, 
behavioural or disseminative nature. 

Above  all,  cyber  security  cannot  be  seen  from  a 
technological  aspect  only,  but  needs  to  cover  the 
needs  and  expectations  of  the  state,  the  economy 
and  society,  all  of  which  are  increasingly  active 
participants in an interactive digital world.
 
6.  GUIDING PRINCIPLES

Within this context, the Strategy, in its lifecycle, shall 
be guided by a number of principles as follows:

Rule of Law

The  approach  on  cyber  security  shall  respect 
and  promote  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms 
as  chartered  within  European  Union  and  national 
legislation.  All  measures  shall  comply  with  the 
principles  of  necessity,  proportionality  and  legality, 
with appropriate safeguards to ensure accountability 
and redress.

Multi-stakeholder, 
collaborative approach

cooperative 

and 

The pervasive nature of cyber-space, essentially calls 
for a multi-stakeholder approach towards its security 
– both at a national level as well as beyond Malta’s 
shores. Hence, on a national level, cooperation and 
collaboration  of  various  stakeholders,  including  the 

12

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Two
Overall Direction

“ Whilst leading in its 

commitment towards 
cyber security on a national 
scale, Government cannot 
assume sole responsibility 
for protecting all of 
cyberspace. All users of 
ICT are responsible to 
take reasonable steps to 
protect systems and data 
on an individual and on a 

collective basis. ”

of  cyber  attack.  Hence  a  risk-based  approach  to 
assess, prioritise and take measures to ensure cyber 
security,  along  with  any  technology  investment  is 
necessary.

7.  OVERALL VISION

Within  the  context  of  the  articulated  principles,  an 
overall vision for the National Cyber Security Strategy 
is: 

To  ensure  a  secure,  resilient  and  trusted  digital 
interactive  environment  that  supports  Malta’s  safety 
and  security  whilst  maximising  on  the  benefits  of  a 
digital economy.

In specific terms, the vision entails that:

•  Civil  society  is  aware  of  cyber  risks  and 
undertakes  necessary  precautions  to  protect 
its  privacy,  confidentiality,  personal  integrity, 
identity and well-being

tapping 

•   The  Private  Sector,  whilst 

the 
opportunities  resulting  from  the  technology 
developments, actively ensures that it operates 
in a secure and resilient digital economy, whilst 
ensuring effective delivery of their services and/
or  goods  and  protection  of  their  customer’s 
privacy and integrity

•  The Public Sector leads the way in ensuring a 
secure  and  resilient  digital  environment  for  its 
interaction  with  and/or  service  delivery  to  civil 
society, private enterprise and with regional and 
international  partners,  as  well  as  in  placing 
Malta  as  a  secure  online  location  for  business 
interaction.

The National Cyber Security Strategy aims to address 
the  needs  and  expectations  of  each  of  the  above 
stakeholders, in the light of the proposed vision. 

public sector, the private sector, academia and civil 
society is necessary. A cooperative and collaborative 
approach  at  an  EU  and  international  level  is  also 
required.

Shared goal and responsibility

Effective  cyber  security  essentially  calls  for  the 
sharing  of  one  common  goal  that  transcends 
boundaries. Whilst leading in its commitment towards 
cyber  security  on  a  national  scale,  Government 
cannot assume sole responsibility for protecting all of 
cyberspace. All users of ICT are responsible to take 
reasonable steps to protect systems and data on an 
individual and on a collective basis. 

Risk Management

The  widely  diffused  use  of  cyberspace  coupled 
with  its  rapid  and  continuous  evolvement,  renders 
it  impossible  to  guarantee  immunity  from  any  form 

13

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Proposed goals and related measures underscore in 
more specific terms how the strategy is expected to 
be implemented. 

Part Two
Overall Direction

8.  A CYBER SECURITY  
  STRATEGY MODEL 

 

As outlined in Figure 1, the strategy addresses five 
dimensions  which  are  identified  within  the  Cyber 
Security  Capability  Maturity  Model  of  the  Global 
Cyber  Security  Capacity  Centre,  University  of 
Oxford6.

Policy
Legislation
Risk Management
Culture
Education

Civil Society
Public Sector
Private Sector

Policy

Legislation

Devising cyber 
security policy and 
strategy that sets 
the direction on a 
national level.

Creating 
effective legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks to 
support all aspects 
of the strategy.

Figure 1 – A Cyber Security Strategy Model for Malta

Risk
Management

Controlling 
risks through 
organisation, 
standards and 
technology.

Culture

Education

Fostering 
awareness to 
encourage a 
responsible cyber 
culture throughout 
society.

Building cyber 
skills into the 
workforce and 
leadership 
through effective 
education.

14

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three

The Strategy

15

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016global and regional aspect, apart from the national 
focus of related security. In all, the six goals aim to 
cover two key strategic outcomes expected from 
the Strategy, namely:

•  Defending  and  protecting 

the  national  
information infrastructure from cyber threats

•  Ensuring the security, safety and protection of  

users of cyber-space.

 

 

9.2  The Proposed Measures
A  set  of  measures  to  each  corresponding  goal  are 
proposed below, based upon:

•  Analysis,  as  well  as  consultations  undertaken  

within the local context,

•  Best practices noted in cyber security strategies  

within the European Union  and worldwide, 

•  EU 

legal  requirements  and  direction.  The   
measures  outlined  do  not  exclude  action  that  
may need to be taken with respect to specific EU  
legal requirements7.

•  Relevant action items within Digital Malta and  
other  local  strategies  such  as  e-Commerce  
Malta.8  

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

Part Three
The Strategy

9.  THE GOALS AND 
  ACCOMPANYING  
  MEASURES

 

 

9.1  The Goals

Digital Malta, and in particular, Action 53, proposes 
four  high  level  goals  for  a  National  Cyber  Security 
Strategy, which are:

• Combat Cybercrime 

Law  enforcement  agencies  are  to    identify  gaps 
and strengthen their capability to investigate and 
combat cybercrime.

• Strengthen National Cyber Defence 

Public  and  private  entities  are  to  be  guided  and 
assisted  in  strengthening  their  cyber  defence 
capabilities.

• Secure Cyber-space 

Higher  levels  of  trust  are  to  be  instilled  through 
awareness  programmes  and  the  delivery  of 
trustworthy, 
ICT-enabled  services  that  assure 
confidentiality, integrity, availability and privacy.

• Build Capacity (Cyber security Awareness

and Education) 

The skills and educational frameworks required are 
to be identified and developed.

However, sound and stable governance essential for 
the  effective  ongoing  implementation  of  a  National 
Cyber  Security  Strategy,  calls  for  two  other  goals, 
namely: 

•  Establish a Governance Framework to attain

a National  Cyber Security Strategy 
Given  that  at  this  stage,  only  the  technical  and 
operational  structures  are 
formation.  The 
strategic level that focuses on the long term trends, 
analysis and coordination in cyber security is also 
necessary.

in 

•  National and International Cooperation 

given  that  the  borderless  nature  of  cyber-related 
activity, essentially calls for particular regard to the 

16

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

framework 

governance 

1. Goal: Establish a governance framework
The 
the  
necessary  key  functions  and  corresponding  roles  
responsibilities,  as  well  as  policies  and  
and 
processes  necessary9 
robust  
foundation 
for  an  effective  national  cyber  
security strategy. 

to  constitute  a 

covers 

i.  Establish  the  necessary  key  coordination 
structures

that 

is  envisaged 

It 
functions  
(involving  multiple 
be  
required  to  ensure  sustainability  of  the  National  
Cyber Security Strategy:

stakeholders) 

following 

shall 

the 

a.  At the strategic level:

i. A function for the articulation and periodic review 
of  the  National  Cyber  Security  Strategy.  The  
creation  of  this  function  is  required  in  the  short 
term.  This  body  would  need  to  work  in  close 
cooperation  with  the  strategy  implementation 
function(s) referred to below

ii.  A  strategy  implementation  function  to  oversee 
implementation of the strategy and monitor cyber 
security operations.  Such function needs to have 
the necessary funding, resources and mandate to:

• take a leading, active role in the implementation 
of the National Cyber security strategy, keeping 
in  view  of  policy  and  planning  developments 
within  the  realm  of  Malta’s  digital  economy 
and  society  as  well  as  further  cyber  security 
related  developments  on  a  national,  EU  and 
international perspective 

• ensure security preparedness of the public and  
private sector of their ICT, in line with established 
security  requirements.  This  implies  driving  for 
effective  engagement  and  ongoing  high  level 
coordination  across  Malta’s  public  and  private 
sector.

b.  At  the  operational  level,  function(s)  for  the 
national  coordination  of  cyber  detection  and  
response.  Computer  Security  Incident  Response 
Teams  (CSIRTs)    tend  to  be  of  such  technical  and 

17

operational nature. This entails ensuring consolidation 
of a top level National CSIRT10. It also implies close 
communication  and  coordination  of  the  CSIRT  with 
the  proposed  strategy 
implementation  function,  
given that it would  need to be involved on:

•  Real-time  information  sharing  and  response  to 
calls

•  Longer  term  planning11.  Communication  and 
coordination,  as  the  need  arises,  with  other 
CSIRTS existing in Malta would also be necessary.

The structure12  and responsibilities of these functions 
is  subject  to  further  reference  and  alignment  to  the 
relevant European Union legal requirements13 as well 
as to further consultation.

ii.  Foster  the  coordination  to  protect  national 
critical information infrastructure

of 

response 

mechanisms 

preparedness, 

and  
Measures 
including  cooperation  and  ongoing  
recovery, 
coordination 
particularly  
necessary  to  protect  national  critical  information  
infrastructure.  It  is  thus  necessary  to  ensure  that  
such 
all  
stakeholders concerned14 is fostered. 

coordination 

between 

national 

are 

iii. Ensure clear delineation and communication 
of roles and responsibilities

resulting 

Cyber  related  roles  and  responsibilities  -  such  
as  those  identified  above  and  potentially  those  
arising  from  the  proposed  measures,  as  well  as  
those 
legal  
requirements15,  need 
to  be  clearly  delineated  
and  agreed  upon  accordingly.    Communication  
of 
the  
effective  coordination 
that  may  be  necessary  
between the effected stakeholders themselves.

their  establishment 

further  ensures 

relevant 

from 

EU 

iv.  Ensure  the  conduct  of  a  national  cyber  risk 
assessment exercise 

A  National  Cyber  Risk  Assessment  exercise  
shall  need  to  identify  the  major  national  cyber  
threats  and  risks,  assess  respective  impacts  and  

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

risk  mitigation 
accordingly.  The 

and  management  
suggest 
entails  
strategies 
all  
participation 
stakeholders 
to  be  
updated  on  a  regular  basis,  so  as  to  ensure  its  
currency with:

and 
involved16  and 

coordination 

it  needs 

between 

exercise 

• The cyber threat landscape
• Evolution in the adoption of existing and emerging  

       ICT.

One  key  deliverable  of  the  National  Cyber  Risk 
Assessment  is  a  strategic  plan  that    includes  
cooperation  and  communication  processes  needed 
to  ensure  prevention,  detection,  response,  repair 
and  recovery  (including  communication),  that  are 
modulated  according  to  the  alert  level  are  to  be 
ensured. 

Such processes also refer to national incident cyber 
handling  procedures  and  business  continuity  plans 
to  ensure  resilience.  Furthermore,  it  is  understood 
that such processes need to be subject to a schedule 
of regular testing and validation exercises17, with the 
resulting outcome (including lessons learnt) used as 
a basis for any related updates.

line  with 
v.  Ensure  necessary  measures 
individual cyber risks assessments by key Public 
and Private sector organisations       falling within 
the scope of related EU legal requirements

in 

conduct  of 

The 
a  National  Cyber  Risk  
Assessment  does  not  exclude  the  conduct  of  
individual  cyber 
risk  assessments  particularly  
by  the  public  and  private  sector  organisations  
falling  within 
legal  
requirements 
information  
security18.

the  scope  of 
on 
network 

related  EU 
and 

(EU)  2016/679  and  
Data  Protection  Regulation 
other  Directives  coming 
force  by  June  
2018  across  the  EU,  also  call  for  all  organisations  
to 
by  
organisations  to  understand  the  degree  of  threat  
imposed  on 
them  when  processing  personal  

assessments 

regular 

ensure 

into 

risk 

18

legislation  demands  a 

risk-based  
data.  The 
approach  with  the  development  of  appropriate 
controls.

vi.  Encourage  cyber  risk  assessments  by  other 
organisations    not  falling  within  the  scope  of 
Measure 1 (v)

individual 

The  emphasis  on 
risk  assessment  
made  to  specific  organisations  with  respect  to  
network  and  information  security,  in  Measure  1  (v)  
should 
other  
organisations  need  not  adopt  similar  activities.  
Indeed,  data  protection  legislation,  also  referred  
to 
to  all  
organisations processing personal data.

in  Measure  1 

is  applicable 

construe 

however 

that 

not 

(v) 

An  assessment  of  financial  risks  related  to  cyber-
related incidents could possibly also indicate a market 
in cyber insurance, which may in turn contribute to 
information  sharing  among  its  participants,  apart 
from  availability  of  financial  coverage  to  mitigate 
consequential losses. 

Ultimately, however, it needs to be borne in mind that 
cyber insurance coverage alone is not a panacea to 
cyber security threats.  It needs to be carried out with 
in  conjunction  with    consideration  and  applicability 
of  cyber  security  measures  in  line  with  the  risks 
assessed.

vii.  Consolidate 
Framework within the Public Sector

the 

Information  Security 

The Government of Malta Information Security Policy 
is  expected  to  come  into  force  in  the  near  future. 
It  is  based  upon  ISO  27001  Information  Security 
international standard and applies to all of the Public 
Sector. 

viii. Ensure classification of data within the Public 
Sector and encourage it within the private sector

The  classification  of  electronic  data  within  the 
Public  Sector  and  the  application  of  security 
controls  commensurate  to  the  security  marking 
assigned  is  one  area,  among  others,  referred  to 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

within the Information Security Policy, referred to in 
Measure  1  (vii).  This  aspect  is  a  critical  initial  step 
in  ensuring  effective  cyber  security,  also  keeping  in 
view  of  the  inherent  sensitivity  of  data  dealt  within 
the sector. Nonetheless, the classification of data as 
one  of  the  primary  tasks  to  be  undertaken  by  any 
organisation  (public  sector  or  otherwise)    is  one  of 
the key awareness targets that needs to be taken into 
account.

 
Internal security is crucial. 

“

 

Yet, it also needs to be 
borne in mind that threats to 
EU citizens are increasingly 
cross border and varied in 
nature. EU Member states, 
including Malta, can thus 
no longer succeed on their 

own. ”

19

2. Goal: Combat Cybercrime
i.  Establish  Forum  for 
Protection of Minors

Internet  Safety  and 

This  measure  is  referred  to  in  Digital  Malta,  and 
it  proposes  a  number  of  relevant  public  sector 
stakeholders  and  industry  representatives  as  the 
Forum’s members. The Forum aims to:

• Share knowledge
• Monitor developments
• Put forward policy ideas
• Represent Malta on European bodies working in  

 

this field

This  Forum  could  potentially  help  out  in  reviewing 
the  Cyber  security  strategy  itself  with  respect  to 
combating cybercrime activity.

ii.  Identify  gaps  and  strengthen  capability  to 
investigate and combat cybercrime

A  regular  assessment  of  present  state  cybercrime 
capability in Malta among all relevant law enforcement, 
investigative and judicial roles  and  any related action 
necessary is indeed a prerequisite in the light of the 
continuously evolving threat vector landscape.
Internal security is crucial. Yet, it also needs to be borne 
in  mind  that  threats  to  EU  citizens  are  increasingly 
cross border and varied in nature. EU Member states, 
including Malta, can thus no longer succeed on their 
own. The European Agenda on Security – the EU’s 
strategy to tackle security threats in the EU for period 
2015-202019 is intended to contribute in this respect. 
Cybercrime is one of the Agenda’s priorities for the 
years 2015-2020. 

The  Agenda  aims  to  strengthen  and  make  more 
effective the exchange of information and operational 
cooperation  between  Member  states,  EU  Agencies 
and the critical information infrastructure sector; by 
aiming to:

•  Reinforce  the  capacity  of  law  enforcement  
in  particular  
authorities 
through  the  Europol’s  European  Cybercrime  
Centre

in  Member  states, 

 
 
 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

•  Address obstacles to criminal investigations on  
cybercrime,  notably  with  respect  to  access  to  
evidence 
•  Prioritise 

implementation  of  existing  
information  

legislation  on  attacks  against 
systems and on combating child abuse.

the 

iii. Assess and consolidate on-line  reporting of   

cybercrime

 
 

 
 

 

The on-line mechanism is needed to report illicit online 
activity for the required action to be taken as well as 
to determine the extent of cybercrime. It entails: 
    •  The ability to track cybercrime at a national level 
    •  Ensuring further nation-wide related awareness,  
 
especially among citizens and small businesses.

It  is  also  recommended  to  ensure  that  a  strategic 
approach  on  the  applicability  of  online  services  
related  to  cybercrime  handling  is  taken,  so  as  to 
enhance effectiveness, whilst maximising the use of 
resources. 
Additionally,  the  ability  to  handle  cases  related  to 
cyber bullying (or any other form of cyber abuse) also 
needs to be ensured among online support personnel 
handling services pertaining to abuse. 

3. Goal: Strenghten National cyber defence
i.  Establish  a  collective  approach  for  sharing 
cyber security knowledge and intelligence

A collective approach, involving both the public and 
private sector, potentially facilitated through the use 
of ICT is needed to:

 • Allow  participants  from  across  sectors  and  
organisations to exchange information on cyber  
threats and to mutually strengthen response to  
cyber  threats,  vulnerabilities  and    incidents  
securely,  efficiently  and  effectively20,  whilst  
operating within  a framework that protects the  
confidentiality of the shared information.21  It may  
also  allow 
intra-business  sect  oral  
communication,  particularly  in  areas  where  
particular 
information  may  be  deemed  as  
of a highly sensitive nature to be shared with all  
participants

for 

•  Analyse  new  trends  and  identify  opportunities  

and emerging threats

•  Work to strengthen cyber security
•  Provide framework for sharing best practice22 
•  Potentially 

in  
information assurance and cyber defence across  
the private and public sector through schemes for  
certifying  related  competence  and  specialist  
training.

professionalism 

improve 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

ii.  Review  existing 
legislation  and  provide 
measures  through  legislation  and  regulation  to 
ensure relevance and effectiveness to the cyber 
world

This  measure  builds  upon  two  objectives  of  Digital 
Malta, as follows:

•  Objective    43  –  review  existing  legislation  to  
ensure relevance and effectiveness in the cyber  
world’

•  Objective  44  –  provide  measures  to  maintain  
privacy,  safety  and  security  while  surfing,  
transacting  and  operating  on-line.  Legislation  
will address several matters such as safeguarding  
intellectual  property  rights,  patents,  sensitive  
and personal information, cloud computing and  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

20

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

 
 
 
 

data  ownership,  contentious  content,  net  
neutrality, vendor lock-in and exit management  
strategies;  online  contracts  and 
license  
agreements.

The  measure  is  also  highly  relevant  taking  into 
consideration:

•  The  requirements  arising  from  the  European  
Agenda on Security, referred to in Measure 2.2.
•  Action  38  –  Digital  Single  Market  –  of  Digital  
Malta,  which  states  Government’s  intention  to  
maximise the benefits and opportunities deriving  
from  legislation  adopted  within  the  EU  such  
as  those  related  to  data  protection,  electronic  
identification and trust, etc

•  Relevant  EU  Directive  and  regulation  ,  notably  
among  others,    recent  EU  data  protection  
legislation and legal requirements pertaining to  
Network and Information Security

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Within  this  light,  the  notion  of  having  one  national 
legislation 
for  cyber  security,  merits  active 
consideration. It is understood that its effectiveness 
would need to be backed by: 

•  Prior multi-displinary wide national consultation
•  Consideration and alignment to existing national  
and EU legal requirements covering aspects of  
cyber security24  

 
 

•  A balance between incentives and sanctions
•  Promotion of related awareness and cooperation  
with the various stakeholders involved in working  
towards cyber resilience.

 
 
The legislation may be positioned in a way so as to 
allow  sectors  (regulated  or  otherwise)  to  adopt  any 
further measures as necessary.

iii.  Ensure  the  country’s  digital  resilience  to   
cyber  attack  as  well  as  the  capability  to  protect 
its interests 

As an independent sovereign state and as a member 
of  the  United  Nations  (UN),  Malta  has  the  right  to 
defend  its  own  territory  and  its  infrastructure  from 
acts of aggression from other states25. Cyber-space 
is no exception and Malta has the right and obligation 

21

to defend its cyber-space territory to ensure that the 
security  of  the  nation  is  maintained.Such  measure 
entails ensuring that the following are addressed:

•  Cyber-space defences
•  Structures to counter terrorist attacks
•  Ability and capacity to detect threats in cyber- 

 

 

 
 

space

•  Capability to disrupt attacks on the country from  

cyber-space

•  Active consideration of direction being taken at  
EU  level  on  areas  such  as  cyber  diplomacy26   
and on ways to counter hybrid threats27. 

“

 

Malta has the right and 

obligation to defend its 
cyber-space territory to 
ensure that the security of 

the nation is maintained. ”

iv. Conduct national cyber simulation exercises
Cyber simulation exercises are to be scheduled and 
conducted  from  time  to  time,  at  a  national  level. 
Such  measure  contributes  to  the  need  to  review 
the  ability  to  anticipate,  prepare  for,  identify  and 
attribute, combat hostile cyberspace acts. Apart from 
technical considerations, cyber simulation exercises 
should  also  assess  non-technical  areas  both  at  an 
operational, tactical as well as at a strategic level such 
as testing national and international coordination and 
any relevant Standard Operational Practices.

The  participation  of  key  public  and  private  sector 
stakeholders28 
is  crucial. 
The  participation  of  other  organisations  is  also 
encouraged.

in  such  exercises 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

4. Goal: Secure Cyberspace

current 

scenario 

regulation  and  voluntary  self-

i.  Establish 
commitment for guaranteeing cyber security
The 
cyber  
security  in  Malta  indicates  areas  of  regulation  and 
policy particularly within the local regulated industry 
sectors.  Focus  appears  to  be  mainly  on  policy 
frameworks covering the licensing approaches which 
seek to mitigate risk.

analysis 

of 

“

Interoperability is one 

 

means of broadening and 
strenghtening collaboration, 
establishing intelligence 
and improving situational 
awareness, all of which are 
essential for effective cyber 

security. ”

Whilst 
legislation  may  help,  Maltese  regulatory 
authorities may also need to address further emerging 
technology  such  as  cloud  computing  applicability, 
through regulation within their respective sectors. 

The    formulation  of  regulation  pertaining  to  cyber 
security would need to take into consideration, among 
others, the latest EU data protection legislation29 as 
well  as  of  legal  requirements  pertaining  to  network 
and information security, where applicable. 

Regulation  within  sectors  may  also 
include 
conformance  to  internationally  recognised  security 
standards  or  industry  led  cyber  security  related 
standards  or  practices,  with  the  aim  of  bolstering 
cyber  security  as  well  as  establishing  centres  of 
excellence within the sectors themselves. 

22

Such  alignment  may  also  call 
for  particular 
consideration,  in  terms  of  support,  to  organisations 
having  limited  or  constrained  resources  (including 
human and financial).
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  understood  that  legislation 
and regulation cannot necessarily cover all aspects 
of  cyber  security;  particularly  considering  potential 
financial and human resource constraints for robust 
cyber security. 

Voluntary self commitment is, thus, also key to cyber 
security. The notion of the applicability of a European 
security trust mark, applied also in a number of EU 
states  31may  encourage  voluntary  self  commitment 
and  may  therefore  be  one  item  to  explore  the 
possibility  of  its  use  locally.  Local  national  strategy 
may  already  serve  as  a  potential  opportunity  for 
further  consideration  in  fostering  self  commitment, 
such as:

•  e-Commerce Malta  which highlights  three pillars  

 

as its basis:

i.  Engendering trust in ecommerce
ii.  Transforming micro-enterprises
iii. Taking  Small  to  Medium  sized  Enterprises 
and industry to the next level; which specifically  
also refers to an audit-kit – through a Specialist 
advisory service (Measure 2) and the European 
trust-mark (Measure 9)

•  Digital Malta which refers to the Forum for the  
transformation  of  industries  through  ICT  that  
aims to raise awareness about how ICT can help  
industries transform themselves and to discuss  
items such as self-regulation.

 
 
 
 

Other potential opportunities which may be explored 
include  financial  incentives,  such  as  in  the  form  of 
grant schemes,  as a means to entice the applicability 
of necessary cyber security related measures.

ii.  Stimulate  use  of  interoperable  and  secure 
standards on the basis of good practice
Digital  Malta,  through  Action  42  –  Standards  and 
Good  Practice,  states  Government’s  intention  to 
collaborate with stakeholders to support and promote 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

National  and  EU  cross-border  interoperability,  ICT 
standards  based  on  industry  best  practices  and 
Green ICT.

Interoperability  is  one  means  of  broadening  and 
strenghtening collaboration, establishing intelligence 
and  improving  situational  awareness32,  all  of  which 
are  essential  for  effective  cyber  security33.  With 
respect to the notion of nationally and EU recognised 
interoperability,  which  also  effectively  promotes  the 
use of safe secure standards, Digital Malta states as 
one of its objectives, Government’s commitment to 
revise and revamp the current National Interoperability 
Framework including related policies34. 

The  implementation  of  internationally  recognised 
information  security  standard35  controls  within  the 
public  sector36  and  potentially  within  the  private 
sector    should  contribute  to  cyber  security  on  the 
local scenario. The applicability of such controls may 
serve as a good initial basis. 

However  consideration  of  industry  led  standards 
and guidance that put in place a series of measures 
specifically aimed to address cyber threats37 are also 
to be encouraged for use. This could form an integral 
part of what is proposed in Measure 4 (i).

In particular, special consideration needs to be given 
by operators and users of emerging technologies. In 
such areas, related standards and security controls, 
may still be in the very early stages of maturity and 
may thus pose cyber security vulnerability challenges 
for 
interoperability  which  need  to  be  carefully 
assessed.

iii.  Promote  robust  levels  of  cyber  security  in 
online public services

Such  measure  may  alleviate  concerns  expressed 
within  Euro  barometer  findings  with  respect  to 
Maltese accessing online services38. The applicability 
of  interoperable  and  secure  standards,  as  referred 
to  in  Measure  4  (ii),  may  potentially  contribute  for 
the  attainment  of  such  measure.It  also  calls  for  an 
emphasis to ensure security and privacy in the design 

23

A chain is only as 

“

 

strong as its weakest link. 
Unfortunately, within the 
realm of cyber security,  
weakest link could, more 
often than not, be traced 
to the human factor. 
The behavioural and 
educational aspect of cyber 
security cannot thus be 

discounted. ” 

of ICT products and services for Government as well 
as in other areas of application.

Additionally,  the  use  of  cloud  computing  services 
within  the  public  sector  needs  to  be  seen  to  in  the 
light of EU legal requirements pertaining to security of 
network and information systems39 as well as those 
pertaining  to  the  Data  Protection  Regulation  (EU) 
2016/679 and other Directives.

iv.  Consolidate  support  to  the  private  sector  on 
cyber security

Measure  4  (i)  outlines  how  cyber  security  can  be 
facilitated in the private sector. Apart from potential 
public  sector  driven 
incentives,  private  sector 
participation  in  awareness  and  advice  programmes 
as well as cyber related exercises to specific sectors 
may additionally help. 

For  example,  ways  may  potentially  be  sought  with 
business  service  providers  (e.g.  lawyers,  insurers) 
of  how  they  can  potentially  develop  services  to 
incentivise and help businesses manage and reduce 
risks40.

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

5. Goal: Cyber security Awareness and 
Education

on  traditional  modes  of  education  but  also  on 
experimentation of innovative ways of their conduct43.

i. Encourage cyber security education and training 

A  chain  is  only  as  strong  as  its  weakest  link. 
Unfortunately,  within  the  realm  of  cyber  security,  
weakest link could, more often than not, be traced to 
the  human  factor.  The  behavioural  and  educational 
aspect of cyber security cannot thus be discounted. 
It  is  therefore    of  tantamount  importance  to  ensure 
a  rigorous  and  ongoing  educational  and  training 
exercise that targets both the current  workforce as 
well as the younger student generation

This measure thus primarily entials: 

•  Further recognition of the need for cyber security  

 

 

 
 

skills and competencies

•  Academic and training programmes designed to  

consolidate cyber security expertise

•  The  review  of  existing  curricula  that  focusses  
on  cyber  security  along  with  ICT  and  media  
competencies.  

through 

educational 

Action 60 - Building national capacity in specialist 
skill  sets  -  of  Digital  Malta  states  Government’s 
commitment, 
institutions 
and  industry  to  support  the  creation  of  specialist 
educational  pathways,  addressing  labour  market 
requirements  and  to  develop  the  curriculum  and 
provide technical materials. Cyber security expertise 
also  needs  to  be  seen  within  the  context  of  such 
initiative. Specialist cyber-security related education 
and training is to be actively considered in areas such 
as those related to cybercrime41.

Cyber  security  related  training  and  certification 
programmes  are  to  be  further  encouraged,  as  an 
opportunity  to  effectively  increase  security  level42 
of  organisations  and  maintaining  such  increased 
level  of  security  in  the  long  term.  Prior  and  post 
assessment of such programmes may serve as one 
way of ensuring their effectiveness. 

However,  consideration  should  also  be  taken  that 
such  programmes  may  not  necessarily  focus  only 

24

From a younger generation perspective, Action 2 - 
Empowering  the  young  through  a  safer  Internet 
- of Digital Malta states that “Digital Citizenship will 
become  part  of  the  National  Education  Curriculum, 
to  equip  children  and  youths  with  the  abilities  to 
interact and use the Internet safely and intelligently. 
Parents  and  carers  will  be  involved  together  with 
educators  and  youth  workers.  This  action  will 
stimulate  the  production  of  creative  online  content, 
empower the younger generation and help create a 
safer  environment.  With  the  support  of  competent 
authorities this measure will help combat cyber child 
abuse and exploitation”.

Within  the  current  cyber  security  scenario,  there 
appear to be related awareness campaigns, as well 
as    curricular–related    plans  and  developments  in 
schools. 

The imparting of cyber security awareness in schools 
in  particular  calls  for  its  sustainability  in  the  long 
term,  also  keeping  in  view  of  related  European 
Union  direction  to  Member  States  with  respect  to 
teaching  online  safety  in  schools44.  It  also  calls  for 
consideration of a holistic perspective in the process, 
such as through: 

•  A focus on basic cyber hygiene45  and protection  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

of personal data

behind 

Information 

•  A  sound  understanding  by  students  of  the  
concepts 
and  
Communication  technologies  being  used  and  
their  potential  vulnerabilities  and  risks,  apart  
from  the  opportunities  that  they  offer46.  This  
includes  the  proper  handling  and  use  of  the  
technologies being applied for interaction

•  Ensuring cyber related training for all teachers
•  Ensuring  effective  engagement,  participation  
and support of all school management on cyber  
security education and awareness

•  Seeking 

further  ways 

to  enage  parents/ 
guardians  of  students  in  learning  on  cyber  
security related matters

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

“

It is highly recommended 

 

that a concerted, ongoing 
strategic approach is 
undertaken, potentially 
through a nationwide 
Communications strategy 
for cyber security; aimed 
at addressing the various 
strata of society, business 
and public sector along with 
their corresponding needs, 
expectations, and potential 

ICTs and concepts applied ” 

•  Ensuring  the  necessary  legal  safeguards  to  
protect both the student as well as the teaching  
profession on cyber related challenges such as  
cyber bullying.

 
 
 

Curricular developments and academic programmes 
aimed at establishing a cyber security focus47 is to be 
further encouraged, seeking further creative ways of 
instilling such education48 in the process.

ii.  Explore  possibility  of  establishing  a  Cyber 
Centre of Excellence
The  establishment  of  a  cyber  centre  of  excellence 
may serve as:

 
 

 
 
 

•  A form of implementation of Action 60 – Building  
national capacity in specialist skill sets of Digital  
Malta , refered to in the previous measure 

•  A training base for cyber security expertise. 
•  Having  a  maintained  comprehensive 

list  
of  professionals  certified  under  internationally  
recognised  certification  programs 
in  cyber  
security49 

•  A source of promotion of related best practice  

25

•  A  means  of  proposing  legislative  or  regulatory  
updates, based on relevant research or lessons  
learnt 

•  A potential agent for future economic growth in  

Malta within the cyber security domain

•  A  complementary  mechanism  to  a  collective  
approach for sharing cyber security knowledge  
and intelligence, proposed as Measure 3 (i).  

 
 

 

 
 

The  establishment  could  potentially  be  enabled 
through:

•  Agreement  of  overseas  cooperation  on  related  

 

 

matters  

•  Related EU supporting initiatives  
•  Inclusion of existing internationally certified local  

expertise in cyber security.

iii.  Ensure  relevant  education  and  training  to 
public sector staff and other stakeholders50 
Training and education on cyber security is one key 
priority within the public sector, especially given the 
sector’s wider extensive use of ICT and sensitive data, 
compared to other sectors. In any office environment 
it needs to be kept in view, that technology controls 
are not sufficient to protect data from related cyber 
security  threats.  The  controls  need  to  go  hand  in 
hand with human resource, awareness and employee 
guidance programs51.

The  development  of  cyber  security  expertise  within 
the  public  sector  is  another  key  area  that  merits 
particular  attention.  In  the  process,  it  also  needs 
to  be  ensured  that  a  comprehensive  list  of  public 
sector  professionals  certified  under  internationally 
recognised certification programs in cyber security is 
established and maintained52. Furthermore, it needs 
to be ensured that ICT personnel are trained so as to 
enable them to recognise cyber incidents, to detect 
anomalies in their ICT systems and to respond and to 
report them accordingly.

iv. Foster application of research and development 
on cyber security
Such  measure  aims  to  ensure  cyber  security  as 
among  key  research  priorities.  It  effectively  calls 
for encouragement and support for research in any 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

national  and  EU  research  projects  and  initiatives 
on cyber security. Essentially, it entails participation 
not only from Government but also from the private 
sector and the academia.

v. A Strategic, target-oriented national awareness 
and advice campaign

It is highly recommended that a concerted, ongoing 
strategic approach is undertaken, potentially through 
a  nationwide  Communications  strategy  for  cyber 
security53; aimed at addressing the various strata of 
society, business and public sector along with their 
corresponding  needs,  expectations,  and  potential 
ICTs and concepts applied54. 
Such an approach may ensure:

•  Avoiding 

potentially 
approaches to awareness campaigns

piecemeal, 

one-off  

•  No duplication of effort

•  Maximisation of cyber security related financial  

and human resources

•  Identification  and  engagement  of  all  potential  
sources  of  dissemination  of  the  awareness  
campaigns

•  Imparting  effective  awareness  and  knowledge  
on cyber security patterns and measures that is  
commensurate  to  the  specific  target  audience  
and to the medium used55

•  A measure of the extent of national awareness  

and understanding of cyber security over time

•  That  cyber  security  is  not  simply  a  concern  of  

ICT professionals.

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

Ultimately, the key factors that need to be borne in 
mind in the establishment of such campaign is:

•  Finding  the  right  way  to  raise  awareness,  

keeping in view of the target audience

to 

•  Ensuring motivation to learn and pay particular  
fake  
to  day  basis  
to  counter  social  engineering  

attention 
communications  on  a  day 
(particularly 
threats)

various 

signals 

of 

 

 
 
 
 

26

•  Ingraining a culture of cyber security awareness  
on the potential misuse, vulnerabilities and risks  
potentially  arising  from  the  ICTs  and  concepts  
applied  (particularly  those  emerging);  whilst  
embracing  the  opportunities  arising  from  their  
use

•  Imparting  the  key  message  that  it  is  ultimately  
in everyone’s interest and responsibility  to take  
the necessary relevant cyber security safeguards;  
keeping 
inter- 
connectedness of individuals and organisations  
alike in cyber-space.

in  view  of 

inherent 

the 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Most measures highlighted within Goals 4 and 5 of 
this strategy as well as any established national way of 
sharing related knowledge, experience and insight as 
referred to in Measure 3 (i)56  may potentially serve as 
key sources for the establishment and maintenance 
of such a concerted strategic campaign.

vi.  Encourage 
responsibility

‘cyber  hygiene’  and  personal 

information  on-line, 

Ultimately,  citizens  are  expected  to  apply  at  least 
some  form  of  basic  ‘cyber  hygiene’  in  using  ICT, 
such  as  through  careful  disposition  and  use  of 
personal 
installing  software 
updates and anti-virus software, using basic security 
controls such as strong passwords and, as much as 
possible,  seeking  to be more wary of any suspicious 
activity  related  to  their  personal  on-line  accounts. 
The national awareness campaign, as highlighted in 
Measure 5 (v), should help in reaching this objective. 

system  users 

Furthermore, the possibility of a national responsible 
disclosure  policy  framework  that  enables  well-
to 
intentioned 
inform 
Government,  businesses  or 
institutions  about 
detected  vulnerabilities  in  their  ICT  systems  or 
services may also be explored. The framework would 
need to establish the right parameters and conditions 
so as to ensure its effectiveness57.
 

safely 

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

6. Goal: National and International 
Cooperation

i.  Effective  cooperation  and  collaboration  on  
    cyber  security  on  a  national,  European  and  
     global basis

On a national level, most of the measures highlighted 
earlier  essentially  call  for  national  cooperation  and 
coordination. 

Ultimately, it needs to be 

“

 

borne in mind that mutual 
cooperation, openness and 
understanding is the success 

to effective cyber security ” 

Malta is no island in cyberspace. Hence, cooperation 
and  collaboration  on  cyber  security  needs  to  be 
sustained both locally as well as on a European and 
on a global level. A co-ordinated approach, among all 
local  key stakeholders in cyber security interacting 
locally and overseas  needs to be ensured so as to 
ensure  synergy  of  national  and  international  effort, 
knowledge and expertise within the domain. 

 
 
 

 
 

Information  and  Communication  Technologies   
within and across OSCE participating states of  
the related Permanent Council Decision60 

•  Any  other  cyber  security  related  initiatives    on  
a European Union and/or on a wider international  
context. 

Ultimately, it needs to be borne in mind that mutual 
cooperation,  openness  and  understanding  is  the 
success to effective cyber security61.

Thus, active consideration needs to be given to: 

•  Cyber related activities, such as those conducted  
by  the  European  Network  and  Information  
Security Agency (ENISA), which may potentially  
involve both local public as well as private sector  
organisations 

•  EU legal requirements such as those pertaining  
to  network  and  information  security58  which,  
among others, calls for a body responsible for  
coordinating  NIS  issues  and  for  acting  as  a  
single  point  of  contact 
for  cross-border  
cooperation  and  communication  at  EU  level,  
within each Member State

•  Activities  such  as  those  undertaken  by  the  
Council  of  the  European  Union  on  cyber- 
diplomacy59  which aim to foster increased global  
cyber capacity building, as well as international  
cooperation and judicial capacity on cybercrime

•  Confidence Building Measures (CBMS) proposed  
by  the  Permanent  Council  of  the  Organisation  
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)  
which  propose,  among  others,  measures  of  
mutual 
and  
collaboration  on  the  security  and  use  of  

communication, 

dialogue 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

27

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Part Three
The Strategy

10.  CONCLUSION

10.1 The Cyber Security Strategy Model Revisited

indicated 

in  Figure  2,  the  National  Cyber 
As 
Security Strategy, through its goals and subsequent 
measures,  shall  be  covering  areas  of  governance, 
legislation,  regulation  and  voluntary  commitment, 
risk management and education and awareness – all 
of  which  position  cyber  security  on  a  sustainable,  
long term path.

Policy

Legislation

Devising 
national cyber 
security policy 
and strategy 
that addresses 
the needs of 
the various 
stakeholders.

Creating 
effective legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
to support all 
aspects of the 
strategy.

Risk 
Management

Controlling 
risks through 
organisation, 
standards and 
technology.

Culture

Education

Fostering 
awareness to 
encourage a 
responsible 
cyber culture 
throughout 
society.

Building cyber 
skills into the 
workforce and 
leadership 
through 
effective 
education.

GOAL

MEASURE

Establish a 
governance 
framework 

1(i)

Establish the necessary 
key coordinating 
structures

1(ii) Foster the coordination 

to protect national critical 
information infrastructure
1(iii) Ensure clear  delineation 

and communication of 
roles and responsibilities

1(iv) Ensure the conduct of 

a national cyber risk 
assessment exercise

28

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Policy

Legislation

Devising 
national cyber 
security policy 
and strategy 
that addresses 
the needs of 
the various 
stakeholders.

Creating 
effective legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
to support all 
aspects of the 
strategy.

Risk 
Management

Controlling 
risks through 
organisation, 
standards and 
technology.

Culture

Education

Fostering 
awareness to 
encourage a 
responsible 
cyber culture 
throughout 
society.

Building cyber 
skills into the 
workforce and 
leadership 
through 
effective 
education.

GOAL

MEASURE

1(v) Ensure necessary 

measures in line with 
individual cyber risk 
assessments by key 
Public and Private 
sector orgnaisations 
falling within the scope 
of related EU legal 
requirements

1(vi) Encourage cyber risk 
assessments by other 
organisations not falling 
within the scope of 
Measure 1.5

1(vii) Consolidate the IS 

Framework within the 
public sector

1(viii) Ensure classification of 
data within the Public 
Sector and encourage it 
within  the private sector

2(i) Establish Forum for 
Internet safety and 
protection of minors
Identify gaps and 
strengthen capability to 
investigate and combat 
cybercrime

2(ii)

2(iii)

Assess and consolidate 
on-line mechanism to 
report cybercrime

Establish a 
governance 
framework

Combat 
cybercrime

29

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Policy

Legislation

Devising 
national cyber 
security policy 
and strategy 
that addresses 
the needs of 
the various 
stakeholders.

Creating 
effective legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
to support all 
aspects of the 
strategy.

Risk 
Management

Controlling 
risks through 
organisation, 
standards and 
technology.

Culture

Education

Fostering 
awareness to 
encourage a 
responsible 
cyber culture 
throughout 
society.

Building cyber 
skills into the 
workforce and 
leadership 
through 
effective 
education.

GOAL

MEASURE

3(i)

3(ii)

3(iii)

3(iv)

4(i)

4(ii)

4(iii)

4(iv)

5(i)

Establish a collective 
approach for sharing 
cyber security knowledge 
and intelligence

Review existing 
legislation and provide 
measures through 
legislation and regulation 
to ensure relevance and 
effectiveness to the cyber 
world
Ensure the country’s 
digital resilience to cyber 
attack as well as the 
capability to protect its 
interests
Conduct cyber defence 
exercises

Establish regulation 
and voluntary self 
commitment for 
guaranteeing cyber 
security
Stimulate use of 
interoperable and secure 
standards on the basis of 
good practice

Promote robust levels of 
cyber security in online 
public services
Consolidate support to 
the private sector on 
cyber security
Encourage cyber security 
education and training

Strengthen 
national 
cyber 
defence

Secure 
cyber-
space

Cyber 
Security 
Awareness 
and 
Education

30

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016Policy

Legislation

Devising 
national cyber 
security policy 
and strategy 
that addresses 
the needs of 
the various 
stakeholders.

Creating 
effective legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
to support all 
aspects of the 
strategy.

Risk 
Management

Controlling 
risks through 
organisation, 
standards and 
technology.

Culture

Education

Fostering 
awareness to 
encourage a 
responsible 
cyber culture 
throughout 
society.

Building cyber 
skills into the 
workforce and 
leadership 
through 
effective 
education.

GOAL

MEASURE

5(ii)

5(iii)

5(iv)

5(v)

5(vi)

6(i)

 Explore possibility 
of  a Cyber Centre of 
Excellence
Ensure relevant education 
and training to public 
sector staff and other 
stakeholders

Foster application 
of research and 
development on cyber 
security

A strategic, target-
oriented national 
awareness and advice 
campaign

Encourage ‘cyber 
hygiene’ and personal 
responsibility
Effective cooperation and 
collaboration on cyber 
security on a national, 
European and global 
basis

Cyber 
Security 
Awareness 
and 
Education

National and 
International 
cooperation

Figure 2 – Detailed proposed strategy through the Cyber Security Strategy Model

10.2 The Way Forward

The launch of the National Cyber Security Strategy is 
not an end in itself. It is the beginning of a continuum, 
starting with implementation that is in line with: 

•  Increased  awareness  and  recognition  on  a  
national scale of the importance to tackle cyber  
security  in  a  comprehensive  and  systemic  
manner

•  Related  ICT,  legislative,  regulatory,  social  and  

economic updates on a national scenario

•  Rapid  developments  within  the  cyber  threat  

landcape.

 
 
 

 

 

The  implementation  of  the  Strategy    is  expected 
to  involve  multiple  stakeholders  within  the  public 
and  the  private  sector  as  well  as  cooperation  and 
coordination  with  civil  society.  It  is  expected  to  be 
evaluated  on  a  periodic  basis,  based  upon  the 
progress registered from such implementation, along 
with  related  directional  developments  on  a  national 
and European Union front. The evaluation is expected 
to lead to maintenance and updates of the Strategy, 
leading to a subsequent new version, reflecting the 
maturity  undertaken  in  cyber  security  on  a  national 
scale since its initial launch. 

31

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016REFERENCES

BSA|  The  Software  Alliance  (www.bsa.org),  European  Union  Cybersecurity  Maturity  Dashboard  (2015)  A  Path  to  a  Secure  European 
Cyberspace

Council of the European Union (7 October 2015), EU Cyber Security Strategy: Roadmap Development, Brussels

Council  of  the  European  Union  (11  February  2015),  Council  Conclusions  on  Cyber  Diplomacy,  Outcome  of  Proceedings,  Brussels, 
6122/15

Council of the European Union (12 March 2015), Global Conference on Cyberspace 2015, The Hague Natherlands, 6181/3/5/15 REV 3 

Council  of  the  European  Union  (28  May  2015),  Non-Paper  on  Fostering  Cyber  Security  and  Cyber  Defence  in  Europe  by  means  of 
Responsible Disclosure Polices, Meeting Document, Brussels, DS 1340/15

Council of the European Union (18 December 2015), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning 
measures to ensure a high common level of network and information security across the Union, Examination of the final compromise text 
in view to agreement, Brussels 15229/2/15 REV 2

Council of the European Union (May, 2016), Improving cyber security across the EU, http//www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/cyber-
security [Accessed on 23/5/2016]

Cyber Security Raad (CSR) Nederland (2016) Cyber Security Council (CSR) Magazine 2016, Year 2, No. 2, January 2016, Special EU 
Edition

Digital Malta, National Digital Strategy 2014-2020 – Programme of Initiatives 2014, www.digitalmalta.gov.mt 

Dutton, J.(June 2015), Ten essential cyber security questions to ask your CISO, http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/ten-essential-cyber-
security-questions-to-ask-your-ciso/?utm_source=Email&utm_medium=Macro&utm_campaign=S01&utm_content=2015-06-22 

European Commission (May 2012), European Strategy for a Better Internet for Children, Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Brussels 2.2.2013, 
COM (2012) 196 final.

European  Commission,  Implementation  of  the  Digital  Agenda  for  Europe,  http://daeimplementation.eu/member_states.php?id_
pillar=45&id_country=18.

European  Commission  (July  2012),  Special  Eurobarometer  390  –  Cybersecurity  http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/
ebs_390_en.pd 

European Commission (November 2013), Special Eurobarometer 404 – Cybersecurity http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/
ebs_404_en.pdf 

European Commission (November 2013), Special Eurobarometer 423 – Cybersecurity, http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/
ebs_423_en.pdf 

European Commission (2013), Cyber security Strategy of the European Union, An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace, Brussels, 7.2.2013 
JOIN(2013)  1  final,  http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/eu-cybersecurity-plan-protect-open-internet-and-online-freedom-and-
opportunity-cyber-security

European Commission (28 January 2015) Data Protection Day 2015: Concluding the EU Data Protection Reform essential for the Digital 
Single Market, Press Release, http://europa.eu/rapid/press_release_MEMO-15-3802_en.htm

European  Commission  (April  2015),  Connecting  Europe  Facility,Digital  Service  Infrastructures  (DSI)  Maturity  Study,  Deloitte  for  the 
European Commission, DG Communications Networks, Content and Technology

European Commission (28 April 2015), European Agenda on Security: Questions and Answers, Strasbourg, Fact Sheet, http://europa.eu/
rapid/press-release_MEMO-15-4867_en.htm 

European Commission (6 May 2015), A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe, Communication from the Commission to the European 
Parliament,  The  Council,  The  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  of  the  Regions,  SWD(2015)  100  final,  http://ec.europa.eu/
priorities/digital-single-market/docs/dsm-communication_en.pdf 

European  Commission  (28  July  2015),  eGovernment  Benchmark  Report  2015  –  Malta,  https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/
news/egovernment-benchmark-report-2015-malta 

European  Network  and  Information  Security  Agency  (ENISA)  (2015),  ENISA  Threat  Landscape  2014,  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/
activities/risk-management/evolving-threat-environment/enisa-threat-landscape/enisa-threat-landscape-2014 

European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2012), National Cyber Security Strategies, Practical Guide on Development 
and Execution, Heraklion, Greece, https://www.enisa.europa.eu 

European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2012), National Cyber Security Strategies, https://www.enisa.europa.eu 

32

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016REFERENCES

Federal Chancellary of the Republic of Austria (2013), Austrian Cyber Security Strategy, Vienna, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/
Resilience-and-CIIP/national-cyber-security-strategies-ncsss/AT_NCSS.pdf .

Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre, (2014), Cyber Security Capability Maturity Model (CMM) - Pilot, Oxford Martin School, University 
of  Oxford,  http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/wks2015/uploads/proposal_background_paper/Cyber-Security-Capacity-Maturity-Model.
pdf

International  Telecommunications  Union  (ITU),  Cyber  Wellness  Profile  Malta  http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Documents/
Country_Profiles/Malta.pdf 

Malta  Communications  Authority  (MCA),  National  eCommerce  Strategy  (2014  -  2020),  https://www.mca.org.mt/general/national-
ecommerce-strategy-2014-2020 

Malta Information Technology Agency (MITA), MITA Strategy 2015-2017, Version 1.0, https://www.mita.gov.mt 

National  Coordinator  for  Security  and  Counterterrorism  -  The  Netherlands  (2013),  National  Cyber  Security  2  –  From  Awareness  to 
Capability,  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/national-cyber-security-strategies-ncsss/NCSS2Engelseversie.
pdf 

Parliamentary  Secretariat  for  Competitiveness  and  Economic  Growth,  Malta  Communications  Authority  (MCA),  eCommerce  Malta, 
National Strategy 2014-2020, www.mca.org.mt 

Parliamentary Secretariat for Competitiveness and Economic Growth, Malta Information Technology Agency (MITA), Malta Communications 
Authority (MCA), Digital Malta, National Digital Strategy 2014-2020, www.digitalmalta.gov.mt 

Puricelli, R.(2015), The Underestimated Social Engineering Threat in IT Security Governance and Management, ISACA Journal, 3,24-28

Ross, S.J. (2015), Frameworks of the World Unite, ISACA Journal, 3,4-6

White and Case (2015) EU-wide cybersecurity rules nearing final agreement, Client Alert, London, UK

van’t Hof, C (2016), Helpful Hackers: How the Dutch do Responsible Disclosure, Tek Tok Uitgeverij

33

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016ENDNOTES

1. 

shall be repealed by the Data Protection Regulation (EU) 2016/679, which shall come into force by June 2018. 

Particular reference is made to the: 
•  Directive  95/46/EC  and  the  Data  Protection  Act  (Chapter  440)  of  the  Laws  of  Malta,  –  Both  Directives  
 
•  Network  and  Information  Security  -  NIS  Directive  (i.e.  The  Directive  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  he  Council  
concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union) which is  
 
 
expected to enter into force in August 2016 for transposition into local legislation within 21 months.
https://www.mca.org.mt/general/national-ecommerce-strategy-2014-2020
Adapted from the definition cited by the Cyber security Strategy of the European Union. 
Ross(2015)
Puricelli (2015)
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre, (2014), Cyber Security Capability Maturity Model (CMM)- Pilot, Oxford Martin School,  
University of Oxford, http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/wks2015/uploads/proposal_background_paper/Cyber-Security-Capacity- 
Maturity-Model.pdf
Refer to Note 1.
Ibid.
Taking into particular consideration of the Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive. Reference is made to Note 1.

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
 
 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  A top level national CSIRT that acts as the key technical/operational function. Among the responsibilities of such CSIRT are:

•  Monitoring incidents at a national level
•  Providing early warning, alerts, announcements and dissemination of information to relevant stakeholders about risks and 
incidents
•  Providing dynamic risk and incident analysis and situational awareness
•  Establish cooperative relationships with the private sector
•  Facilitate cooperation through use of common or standardised practices for incident and risk handling procedures

11.  European Commission (2015), DSI Maturity Study, p.29
12.  Which  could  take  the  form  of  (i)  a  centralised  approach  –  whereby  a  national  authority  has  in-house  responsibilities  with  all  
authorities reporting to it; OR (ii) a decentralised approach whereby roles and responsibilities are spread across a variety of actors  
 
who coordinate together to share information and exchange on a voluntary basis OR (iii) a semi-centralised (hybrid) approach  
 
 
whereby a central ministry coordinates implementation of the strategy with designated authorities having the necessary roles and  
 
responsibilities over operators and other stakeholders  and who report to the central ministry on a periodic basis.
13.  Reference is made to Note 1.    
14.  Refers to Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) operators
15.  One of which specifically includes the Network and Information Security – NIS – Directive, referred to in Note 1.   
16.  Refers to CII operators, Critical Infrastructure (CI) operators, Digital service providers and other potential stakeholders
17.  Potentially enabled by National cyber simulation exercises as referred to in Measure 3.1
18.  Reference is particularly made to the NIS Directive, referred to in Note 1. 
19.  European Agenda on Security: Questions and Answers, Strasbourg, 28 April 2015 - European Commission-Fact Sheet.
20.  European Commission, Countering hybrid threats: EU Response – Cybersecurity, Presentation, Brussels, 19th February 2016
21.  One example of such an arrangement is the Cyber-security Information sharing Partnership, part of CERT-UK; www.cert.gov.uk  
 
22.  Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Euroope (OSCE), Decision No. 102, OSCE Confidence Building Measures to reduce  
 
the risks of conflict stemming from the use of ICTs, PCOEW6464, 10 March 2016, Confidence Buidling Measure No. 14. This CBM  
 
refers to best practices of responses to common security challenges stemming from the use of ICTs.
23.  Areas  that  could  potentially  be  looked  into  may  include  risk  assessment  and  apportioning  security  practices  to  risk  levels,  
 
24.  Reference is made in particular to Note 1.
25.  Article 2(4) of the UN states that  “All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the  
territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United  
 
Nation”. This Article prohibits any state from attacking another state however in Article 51 of the same charter states that “Nothing  
 
in  the  present  Charter  shall  impair  the  inherent  right  of  individual  or  collective  self  defence  if  an  armed  attack  occurs  against  
 
 
a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to maintain international peace and  
 
security.”
26.  Reference is made to ‘Developing a Joint EU diplomatic response against coercive cyber operations’, Council of the European  

information security planning, processes, roles and assesments of preparedness. 

cisp/

34

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016ENDNOTES

Union, Brussels , 24 February 2016  (Doc 5797/2/16)

February 2016’ Permanent Representation of Malta to the European Union.

that need to be undertaken to ensure conformance. 

overseas.

 
27.  Reference is made to ‘Report of the Expert-level consultation meeting with member states on countering hybrid threats held on 19  
 
28.  Refers to CII operators, CI operators, Digital Service providers and other potential stakeholders
29.  The preparation for the GDPR calls for a  review and assessment of number of organisational, procedural, communication steps  
 
30.  The latter aim may serve as good business opportunity, especially for export-oriented sectors, to strenghten their market share  
 
31.  For example Austria and the UK
32.  One of the action items of the EU Cyber Security Strategy specifically calls for work on further development of globally interoperable  
 
standards  and  their  promotion  for  their  wider  use  by  industry.  Reference  is  made  to  EU  Cyber  Security  Strategy:  Roadmap  
 
Development – Council of the EU, Brussels, 7/10/2015.
33.  This may imply, amongst others, the improvement of interoperability of national and international systems. Reference is made to  
measure  5  as  part  of  law  enforcement  legislation  and  policy  related  implementation  of  the  Information  Management  Strategy  
 
 
(Working Party on Information Exchange and Data Protection – Council of the EU) 
34.  Public consultation preliminary results on information and communication technologies published by the European Commission in  
early 2016, reveals cyber security as being one of the areas requiring common standards if completion of a single digital market is  
 
 
to be achieved.  
35.  Such as ISO 27001 
36.  Reference is made to Measure 1.7 
37.  Such as the UK’s Cyber Essentials Scheme, http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/cyber-essentials-scheme.aspx#.VaYNvLlBut8 
38.  The overall confidence to use the Internet for online services (e.g. banking, public services) has decreased from 74% in 2012 to  
73% to 2013 across the EU. A proportional increase is noted in 2014 in the level of concern expressed by EU respondents in  
 
having access to online services, through the Internet, as a result of cyber attacks.  In Malta’s case, the findings indicate an increase  
 
 
from 44% in 2013 to 61% in 2014. This could be potentially attributed to an increase in the proportion of the Maltese respondents,  
 
from 7% in 2013 to 10% in 2014 who complain of related incidents.
39.  Reference is particularly made to the NIS Directive, referred to in Note 1.
40.  Potential areas that can be seen to also relate to cyber insurance, due diligence to third party with which businesses may seek  
 
41. 
42. 
 
43.  For example apart from use of visual methods, rewards, social engagement and direct feedback during everyday working life;  
 
gamification  may  present  one  promising  method.  (Purcelli,  op.  cit,  p.27).  Other  possiblities  include  cybercrime  simulation  
workshops as another complementary means to induce awareness on the various forms of cybercrime, who is the likely target,  
 
what needs to be done to avoid falling a victim, and what action needs to be taken and to whom to refer to,  in case of fallling a  
 
 
victim.
44.  Reference  is  made  to  the  European  Strategy  for  a  Better  Internet  for  Children  -  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Brussels  
 
 
2.2.2013, COM (2012) 196 final.
45.  Such as effective password management
46.  The  increased focus on environmental concerns and measures within schools in recent years may serve as a potential model for a  
 
heightened awareness on cyber security and safety concerns and measures amongst the younger generation, which  may in turn  
 
expand further within their home environments.
47.  With special reference to secondary and tertiary level education
48.  Such as through special events, apart from teaching through games, particularly to the younger generation. Estonia for example  
 
49.  A  measure  that is particularly required within the public sector as a domain having a wider extensive use of ICT and sensitive data,  
 
50. 
51.  Puricelli, op.cit. This may be complemented by related policies, best practices and processes (including those on proper data  
 
52.  So as to augment and enhance needed cyber security knowledge and expertise within the sector
53.  A similar approach has been taken by the Netherlands and Austria

strategic relationships,etc
Including in roles such as those pertaing to law enforcement, prosecution services, the judiciary.
Including educating staff to understand what is harmful to an organisation and what can be done to prevent mistakes which may  
lead to data breaches.  

relative to other sectors 
In particular, CII operators, CI operators, Digital Service providers and other potential stakeholders

organises ‘Cyber olympics’ and specialised summer schools  

handling) applied within the context itself. 

35

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016ENDNOTES

experiences and concerns on a domestic level.

in the applicability of cloud computing or mobile computing within office environments. 

54.  For example, it may be appropriate to focus, among others, on cyber security related concerns and measures that may be taken  
 
55.  For example social media, TV, radio, etc
56.  Apart  from  regular  Euro  barometer  surveys  dealing  with  cyber  security  which  provide  a  significant  insight  on  cyber  security  
 
57.  Such policy is currently mainly applied by a number of organisations – European and  worldwide, and also by some EU member  
states such as the Netherlands. Such framework could be enabled through self-regulation, promotion and encouragement by  
 
 
government as well as the proper framework to ensure responsible vulnerability disclosure.
58.  Reference is made to the Network and Information Security - NIS - Directive 
59.  Reference is made to the Council Conclusions on Cyber Diplomacy (2015) and to the Global Conference on Cyberspace (2015) 
60.  Permanent Council Decision No. 1039 (26 April 2012) , whereby OSCE participating States, “decided to step up individual and  
collective efforts to address security of and in the use of ICTs in a comprehensive and cross-dimensional manner in accordance  
 
with  OSCE  commitments  and  cooperation  with  relevant  international  organisations...”.  This  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  number  
 
of Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) through Permanent Council Decision 1106 on December 3, 2013, followed by additional,  
 
complementary CBMs adopted through Permanent Council Decision No. 1202 on March 10, 2016.
 
61. 
It needs to be seen within a ‘win-win’ perspective including in those areas where business related competition plays a key role.

36

MALTA CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2016