Translation 

Approved 
by the Government Decision 
no. of 2013 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

NNAATTIIOONNAALL  SSTTRRAATTEEGGYY  

ffoorr  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  ssoocciieettyy  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  

““DDiiggiittaall  MMoollddoovvaa  22002200””  

I. INTRODUCTION 

1.  The  Republic  of  Moldova  achieved  significant  progress  in  the  implementation  of 
information society technologies, ICT contribution share to GDP in recent years has reached the 
level  of  almost  8-10%,  every  second  citizen  is  an  Internet  user,  more  than  half  of  households 
have  at  least  one  computer,  the  majority  of  connected  households  have  access  to  broadband 
Internet, and the country was placed among top 20 countries in the world according to  Internet 
access  speed,  the  biometric  passport,  the  ID  card  with  electronic  signature,  the  e-Statements 
system  and  digital  map  were  implemented,  country  joined  the  “Open  Government  Data” 
initiative, the “e-Transformation” Governance project is running, etc. However, in international 
classifications  the  country  is  not  placed  among  the  advanced  economies  in  this  field,  and  the 
level  and  speed  of  information  society  development  do  not  meet  the  current  international 
environment  requirements,  in  which  the  world  is  becoming  even  more  “hyperconnected”1 
(references  are  presented  in  the  Annex  no  2  to  the  National  Strategy  for  Information  Society 
Development “Digital Moldova 2020”) and more digitized. 

The  complex  picture  of  today's  digital  world  includes  smart  mobile  devices  and  remote 
collaborative tools, cloud computing and tremendous change of the users' behavior, especially of 
the  digital  natives  who  expect  services  to  be  available  anytime,  anywhere  and  through  any 
device. These expectations require governments and public institutions to be prepared to provide 
and use informational services anytime, anywhere and on any equipment in a safer and secured 
way with fewer resources. 

Advantages  of  digital 

individuals  could  benefit  as 
citizens/consumers are reduced in many countries, including the Republic of Moldova, because 
of  the  security  and  privacy  issues,  insufficient  access  to  the  Internet,  a  low  degree  of 
functionality, lack of required competences or service accessibility. 

technologies  of  which 

2.  Building  a  country’s  future  is  unthinkable  without  a  digital  strategy  that  shall  create 
opportunities  to  innovate  and  develop  based  on  ICT  technologies,  yet  contractors  and 
government  agencies  to  maximize  the  usage  of  government  data  services  for  the  citizens’ 
benefit.  The  European  Union  adopted  and  implements  „Digital  Agenda  for  Europe”  Strategy, 
adjusting  its  priorities  to  the  new  circumstances  (in  December  2012  defined  7  priorities). 
Countries  which  occupy  first  places  in  international  rankings  also  approved  digital  strategies 
aiming to ensure an accelerated development (USA, UK, Estonia, and Qatar, for example). 

3.  The  National  Strategy  for  Information  Society  Development  “Digital  Moldova  2020” 
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  Strategy)  is  aimed  to  create  conditions  through  minimum  state 
intervention but with maximum effect for information society development, focusing efforts on 
three pillars: 

[ Draft ]- 2 - 

1)  Pillar  I:  Access  and  infrastructure  –  improvement  of  connectivity  and  network 

access; 

2)  Pillar  II:  Digital  content  and  electronic  services-  promoting  digital  content  and 

generating services; 

3) Pillar II: - Capacities and utilization- strengthening literacy and digital skills to enable 

innovation and stimulate usage. 

These three dimensions have a major favorable impact on the following three components 

of society: 

a) communities/population, that shall enjoy more comfortable and better life; 

b) businesses, which shall increase the level of competitiveness; 

c)  governance,  which  shall  improve  their  performances  and  shall  provide  services  to  the 

citizens anytime, anywhere and on any terminal equipment. 

4.  The  Strategy  implementation  shall  be  based  on  core  principles  of  modern  information 
society building, especially on principles of recognition of authenticity and legality of data from 
electronic registers and information systems and of the electronically performed actions. 

5. Strategy is enclosed by an Action Plan for implementation of the National Strategy for 
Information Society Development  “Digital  Moldova 2020”  (annex to  this Strategy), which sets 
out  the  actions  and  programs  meant  to  achieve  the  general  objective  of  building  an  advanced 
Information Society and the economy based on knowledge, and the integrating horizontally the 
priorities as well. 

 
 

 
2.1. Progress 

II. CURRENT STATE OF THINGS 

6. Even if less than a half of 177 actions of the National Strategy for Information Society 
Action  Plan  „Electronic  Moldova”  (2005)  directives  were  fulfilled,  this  document  had  a  major 
role in creating a favorable framework or information society technologies development and for 
preparing the ground for next stages. The implementation of the Strategy and the eSEE Agenda 
provisions  resulted  in  tangible  outcomes.  During  2005-2011,  various  sources  allocations  for 
informatization increased substantially and reached approximately 5.36 billion lei.  

7. The penetration of Mobile telephony exceeded 119% (EU average – 128%)2, broadband 
Internet  at  fixed  locations  reached  a  penetration  level  of  11.72%  (EU  average  –  27.2%), 
broadband mobile Internet – modems/cards – 4.7% (EU average – 7.5%)3. 

More than a half of population are using the Internet, more than a half of households have 
at least one computer connected to Internet, half of the population read newspapers online, but 
only one out of 10 users accesses the government web site (www.gov.md) and only one out of 
20  users  has  accessed  at  least  one  electronic  public  service  in  the  past  12  months.  8  out  of  10 
Internet users access social networks4. 

8.  The  necessary  legislative  and  normative  framework  was  created,  which  currently 
includes  about  20  laws,  80  Government  decisions,  about  70  approved  conceptual  documents 
regarding  the  informational  systems  of  public  authorities,  more  than  20  general  purpose 
regulatory  acts  and  75  with  a  specific  purpose  issued  by  the  National  Regulatory  Agency  for 
Electronic  Communications  and  Information  Technology.  The  Institutional  framework  was 
improved through the creation of the Ministry of Information Technology and Communications 
and  of  the  specialized  institutions  such  as  the  Centre  for  Electronic  Governance  and  National 
Center  for  Personal  Data  Protection.  In  2011  the  Technological  Transformation  Strategic 
Program of governance “e-Transformation” was adopted, supported by the World Bank. 

[ Draft ]- 3 - 

9. The online fiscal declarations systems, biometric passport, automated biometric border 
crossing  systems  based  on  electronic  passports,  Moldova  digital  map,  mobile  digital  signature 
and online services as: e-Police Clearance Certificate, e-Licensing, etc. were implemented. The 
Interoperability framework based on the open standards and cloud computing based services  is 
actually in the process of implementation. 

10.  Despite  the  progress  in  a  number  of  indicators,  Moldova  is  placed  far  behind  the 

countries that are among the leaders in terms of implementation and use of ICT. 

In international  ranking  according to  the  level  of  ICT development  (IDI), Moldova ranks 
62nd  out  of  155  countries  (4th  position  among  CIS  countries)5 
and  at  the  e-Governance 
Development Index (e-GRI) ranks 69th out of 159 countries, advancing 11 positions compared to 
2010, but  it is  still on the last place  among the countries of Eastern Europe6. According to  the 
Global  Competitiveness  Report  2012-20137,  where,  according  to  the  Index  of  Internet 
penetration  in  schools  (KEI),  Moldova  is  placed  on  61st  position  out  of  144  countries.  In 
Training  Network  Index  (NRI)  the  Republic  of  Moldova  is  placed  on  78th  position  out  of  142 
countries (Picture 1). 
 

 

Picture 1. The Republic of Moldova in international rankings (2012) 

The source: MITC, http://www.mtic.gov.md/ 

 
Although the progress  dynamics of electronic  readiness is  quite impressive,  the Republic 
of  Moldova  falls  behind  as  compared  to  the  EU  Member  States  as  well  as  to  the  neighboring 
countries: Romania and Ukraine. 

The  success  of  the  Republic  of  Moldova  Information  Society  future  development  mainly 
depends on the country's ability to overcome the key obstacles that currently hampers its forward 
development. 

 
2.2. International decisions 

11. In 2010, the European Council and Parliament adopted the Digital Agenda for Europe 
as  a  part  of  the  Europe  2020  Strategy  for  boosting  digital  economy  and  tackling  societal 
challenges8 

by means of ICT. 

On  December  18,  2012,  the  European  Commission  adopted  new  priorities  for  digital 
economy and society. The growth rate registered by the digital economy is  seven times higher 
than the rest of the economy9, but this potential is currently dimmed by a fragmentation of policy 
framework at pan-European level. The adopted priorities are the result of an extensive review of 
the policies, and additionally outline the elements with the highest transformation potential of the 
initial version of the Digital Agenda for Europe 2010. 

Full  implementation  of  the  updated  Digital  Agenda  shall  require  the  European  GDP 
growth  of  5%  or  1500  Euro  per  capita  over  the  next  eight  years  by  increasing  the  ICT 
investments,  improving  the  computer  skills  levels  of  the  workforce,  facilitating  public  sector 
innovation and reforming the framework conditions for the Internet-based economy. 

[ Draft ]- 4 - 

12. The new priorities of the Digital Agenda for Europe are to: 

1) create a new stable regulatory framework in the field of broadband services; 

2) new infrastructures of digital public services through the Connecting Europe facility; 

3)  launch  the  Grand  Coalition  for  promoting  competences  and  create  jobs  in  the  digital 

domain; 

4) draw up proposals on a strategy and a cyber-security directive at the EU level; 

5) update the EU framework on copyrights; 

6) boost the "cloud computing" system based on the public sector purchasing power; 

7) launch a new industrial strategy in the electronic field. 
 
2.3. Programs, initiatives and important ongoing projects 
2.3.1.  Governance:  the  operational  e-Governance  Center  that  implements  the  “e-
Government Transformation” project – Strategic program of technological modernization of the 
governance;  Open  Government  Action  Plan  for  2012-2013  (Government  Decision  no.195  of 
04.04.2012), including: 

1) Common M-Cloud Government Technological Platform; 

2) Government Electronic Payment Service; 

3) Government Interoperability Platform; 

4) Paperless Government initiative - SIGEDIA; 

5) Government Platform for e-Business Reporting; 

6) Government platform for business permissive licenses; 

7) e-Acquisitions; 

8) e-Constructions; 

9) e-Justice; 

10) Digitization of Operational Support Systems for the Government; 

11) Government data storage infrastructure. 

2.3.2.  Customs  system:  The  development  strategy  of  the  Integrated  Customs  Information 

System for 2012-2016 years; 

2.3.3.  Health:  Pilot  healthcare  information  systems  for  widening  access  to  the  medical 

knowledge, patient records, patient monitoring systems and e-Health Strategic Program; 

2.3.4.  Social  protection:  Social  Assistance  Integrated  Information  System  for  improving 

access to the social assistance; 

2.3.5.  Education:  The  integration  of  ICT  in  education  for  improving  the  educational  and 
management process at the level of system, school and class; initiating the drawing up of the e-
Education Strategic Program; 

2.3.6.  Agriculture:  The  real  time  data  transfer  information  system  by  means  of  web  and 
mobile telephony solutions with following components: PACT (Platform for Early Warning and 
Communication) and AMIS (Agricultural Marketing Information System); 

2.3.7. Land register: The creation of National Geographic Information System. The digital 

map of the Republic of Moldova; 

2.3.8.  Culture:  The  National  Program  for  informatization  in  the  sphere  of  Culture  2012-

2020, “Novateca” program for modernization of public libraries; 

2.3.9. Science: Scientific heritage digitization; 

2.3.10. Sector competitiveness: The ICT Sector Competitiveness Strategy. 

2.3.11.  Electoral  processes:  the  drawing  up  and  implementation  of  the  State  automated 

information system “Elections”.  

[ Draft ]- 5 - 

 
2.4. SWOT analysis 

13.  The  generalization  of  analysis  on  the  addressed  dimensions  identifies  the  following 
advantages,  disadvantages,  opportunities  and  threats  in  the  development  of  the  Information 
Society in the Republic of Moldova: 

 

 

INFRASTRUCTURE AND ACCESS 

Advantages (Strengths) 

Disadvantages (Weaknesses) 

1) High speed of Internet access; 
2) High technological level and a high level of 
mobile electronic communications services 
accessibility; 
3) Relatively high level of electronic 
communications infrastructure development; 
4) The legal framework for electronic 
communications is mainly aligned to the 
European Union’ legal framework; 
5) The existence of institutional regulatory 
framework and of the growing regulatory 
capacities; 
6) Competition on mobile telephony sector and 
Internet ; 
7) Advantageous geographical location of the 
Republic of Moldova; 
 8) Mobile telephony and Internet access 
segment 
are developing quite fast and the majority of 
fixed Internet connections are made via 
broadband. 

1) Access gap between urban and rural areas; 
2) Broadband connectivity is not present on the entire territory at 
the required speed; 
3) Too high prices in relation to GDP/ per capita; 
4) Underdeveloped usage capacity of existing electronic 
communications infrastructure (lack of infrastructure in some 
localities); 
5) Low competition in local loop and broadband access to the 
copper loop/sub-loop services; 
6) The absence of Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNO); 
7) Misuse of the transit capacities throughout the territory of the 
country; 
8) Restricted access (mainly by prices) to the historical operator 
of the associated infrastructure (especially to the sewerage 
system); 
9) Associated infrastructure (pillars, sewerage system and other) 
is inadequately divided ; 
10) Outdated regulations of the construction industry regarding 
the electronic networks placement; 
11) Limited access to associated infrastructure and local loop, 
interconnection tariffs are not cost-oriented, historical operator 
tariffs non-rebalancing ; 
12) Low Broadband Internet penetration comparing to EU 
average. 

Opportunities 

Threat (risks) 

1) Legislative and regulatory framework 
improvement and its harmonization with EU 
regulations; 
2)  Fast  extension  of  Internet  use  in  the  society 
(more than a half of population use it); 
3) Republic of Moldova is a testing ground for 
new mobile communications technologies; 
4) Use of the digital dividend. 

1) Low level of the GDP; 
2) Crisis prolongation and decrease of investments capacities; 
3) Failing to recover investments in rural areas; 
4) Political evolutions; 
5) Corruption and bureaucracy; 
6) Continuation of political factor involvement in the operational 
management of the state institutions and enterprises; 
7) Violation of the radio frequency spectrum policy, of the 
National table of frequency band allocation (NTFBA) and 
National electronic numbering plan (NENP) by the 
Transnistrean region  

 

 

CONTENT AND SERVICES 

Advantages (Strengths) 

Disadvantages (weaknesses) 

1) The Government of the Republic of Moldova 
adopted the direction for EU integration, 
including alignment to EU standards in the ITC 
sector; 
2) Implementation of joint M-Cloud platform 
for e-Governance and implementation of the 
Interoperability Framework; 
3) Open Government Data Initiative; 
4) Launching of the mobile digital signature; 
5) Issuance of electronic ID card. 

1) Limited availability of local information content and of 
relevant 
public applications; 
2) Small number of electronic services and lack of local digital 
content; 
3) Legal and regulatory framework is not yet entirely adjusted to 
new realities of the digital era; 
4) Lack of the management framework of the digital content life 
cycle; 
5) The interoperability framework is still not functional; 

[ Draft ]- 6 - 

6) Existence of a unique electronic signature type – digital one; 
7) Low level of digital signature usage; 
8) Low number of services that accept online payments; 
9) Low population confidence in online payments; 
10) The Republic of Moldova has an economy mainly based on 
cash payments; 
11) Lack of measuring instruments for local digital content 
volume; 
12) Low ITC skills level of the public sector employees; 
13) Low level of ITC use by the population and business; 
14) Relatively small market for the digital content. 

Opportunities 

Threats (risks) 

1) Increase of the broadband connection 
coverage 
encourages content development; 
2) Improving high-tech image of the Republic 
of 
Moldova; 
3) The use of governmental cloud; 
4) An increasing number of worldwide 
guidelines of good practices; 
5) Opportunities of collaboration and first 
source information (UK, USA, Singapore, South 
Korea, etc.); 
6) Electronic commerce in development; 
7) Promotion of electronic payment instruments, 
including the payment of services rendered by 
the public services providers. 
 

1) Low GDP level; 
2) Ongoing economic crisis and remittances decline which can 
reduce the ability to pay for services; 
3) Natural endurance of officials to the change of working 
processes, including technological modernization; 
4) Public administration employees do not realize the 
opportunity of informatization policies of the working processes; 
5) Small and fragmented electronic commerce internal market; 
6) The increase of cybernetic crimes number reduces the users’ 
confidence; 
7) The massive use of cash boosts the shadow economy and 
fiscal evasion. 

 

CAPACITIES AND USE 

Advantages (Strengths) 

Disadvantages (weaknesses) 

1) Relatively high rate of workforce employed 
in knowledge-intensive sectors; 
2) Large number of ICT graduates; 
3) Multilingual human resources with a highly 
qualified potential. 

1) Low level of population digital literacy; 
2) Graduates of educational institutions have no appropriate 
practical skills to work in an information society; 
3) The deficit of qualified ICT teachers in schools; 
4) Low level of educational software supply of the educational 
institutions; 
5) Low level of open source software use; 
6) ICT curriculum is outdated and there is no institutionalized 
process for its regular updating; 
7) Nomenclature of vocational training areas of the staff training 
specialties in higher education institutions and the Qualification 
framework fails to satisfy existing market demand;  
8) Lack of normative framework for distance training; 
9) Low level of the ICT skills of public sector employees; 
10)  Lack  of  express  provision  in  normative  acts  concerning  the 
digital  skills  requirements  for  the  employment  in  a  public 
institution; 
11) Low level of ICT use by business and population; 
12) Lack of motivation mechanisms for teaching staffs of 
general, technical-vocational and higher education, in the 
widespread use of the ICT instruments in the teaching-learning-
evaluation process. 

Opportunities 

Threats 

1) Availability to provide assistance (including 
financial) by the International financial 
institutions/organisms; 
2) International scholarships available for 
talented young people; 
3) Collaboration and training opportunities for 

1) Low level of the GDP; 
2) Labor force emigration and brain drain; 
3) Manifestation of corruption in the education sector; 
4) Difficulties in the economic development of the country. 

[ Draft ]- 7 - 

specialist in the mostly advanced ICT and e- 
Governance countries (UK, USA, Singapore, 
South Korea, etc.); 
4) New Education Code is under development. 

 
The  strategic  approach  consists  of  using  advantages,  overcoming  weaknesses  by 

transforming opportunities into advantages and mitigating the identified risks and threats. 
 
 

III. DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEMS 

 

3.1. Unoptimized infrastructure and irregular access 

14. The main access and penetration indices:  

1) mobile telephony – 119,7% (covering – 99% of the territory / EU – 128%); 

2) fixed telephony – 33,87% / EU – 43%;  

3) broadband fixed Internet – 11,72% / EU-27,2%; 

4) Internet via mobile networks (modems/cards) – 4,7% / EU-7,5%;  

5) households broadband Internet connection – 35%; 

These indices confirm a substantial gap in comparison with the EU countries average. The 
difference is due to the investments which have been made in the redundant infrastructures with 
a low use of existing capacities. 

15.  The  limited  access  (especially  by  prices)  to  the  associated  infrastructure  (mainly  to 
ducts)  of  the  historical  operator  restricts  the  access  of  other  operators,  thus  installation  of  the 
overhead cables being a cheaper solution. In most cases associated infrastructure (pillars, ducts, 
etc.)  is  not  divided,  fact  that  leads  to  a  longer  investments  return  period  and  high  network 
maintenance  costs,  and  therefore  restrict  technological  development  opportunities  and  increase 
prices levels for the final users. 

A  long-run  solution  is  needed  to  streamline  the  existing  associated  administrative 
infrastructure  that  shall  be  proposed  based  on  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  options,  including  the 
separation of infrastructure entity from the retail service providers. 

16.  Although  the  Republic  of  Moldova  is  among  the  top  20  countries  in  the  world  by 
Internet access speed10, the broadband connectivity required to meet present and future needs of 
the  country  isn’t  available  throughout  the  entire  territory  of  the  country.  About  30%  of  rural 
areas still do not have broadband access. 

17.  Because  of  the  construction  industry  regulations  focused  on  a  single  provider  of 
electronic  communications 
set  distribution 
channels/networks  for  Internet  access  and  in  some  blocks  are  installed  a  significant  number  of 
cables, which deteriorates the interior and exterior aspect of the buildings. 

services,  apartment  buildings  have  not 

 
3.2.  Underdeveloped  local  digital  content  and  the  low  availability  of  electronic 

services 

18. According to the annual national survey 2012 “the perception, assimilation and support 
by  the  population  of  the  e-Government  transformation”,  conducted  in  November  2012  by  the 
Institute  for  Public  Policy  and  Magenta,  upon  the  request  of  the  Center  for  Electronic 
Governance:  16%  of  users  practice  electronic  commerce,  8%  use  Internet  banking  services. 
About 63% of the users download digital content, 33% use Internet  for education and training, 
16%  execute  procurement  and  command  of  some  services  provided  by  privet  institutions  and 
access  web  pages  of  the  central  public  institutions,  while  only  1  out  of  20  uses  Internet  for 
accessing electronic public services. 

[ Draft ]- 8 - 

19.  Digital  content  and  services  are  key  factors  that  offer  benefits  to  society  and  the 
economy  of  any  country  and  represent  a  major  source  of  potential  workplaces  and  economic 
growth. 

There  is  no  universally  accepted  definition  of  digital  content.  For  example,  one  of  them 
states  that  the  digital  content  is  any  information  that  is  available  on  the  Internet  (or  other 
networks)  to  be  reached  by  the  user,  including  web  pages,  images,  music,  audio  and  video 
documents,  books,  drivers  and  software  downloads,  and  reference  materials  for  education  and 
training11. 

This Strategy defines the digital content as any information in electronic format submitted 
to  the  following  processes:  creation,  collection,  management,  processing,  storage,  distribution, 
access, use and re-use, abolition. 

The most important content for the users is usually that which is in their native language 
and relevant to the communities in which they live and work. UNESCO has defined “the local 
content" as “the expression and communication of a community’s locally generated, owned and 
adapted,  knowledge  and  experience  that  is  relevant  to  the  community’s  situation”  (UNESCO, 
2001). 

20. The citizens of the Republic of Moldova face a shortage of local digital content and a 

low number of electronic services. 

Thus,  few  services  out  of  about  570  public  government  services  are  offered  through 
Internet (only 5 out of 12 online basic public services for citizens, and 6 out of 8 – for economic 
agents12). Starting from September 2012 to present, within the framework of the e-Government 
Transformation Project were launched e-Application for criminal record, e-Licensing (connected 
to  the  mobile  signature),  electronic  reporting  to  e-CNAM  and  e-CNAS  (connected  to  mobile 
signature),  e-DNC  (Normative  Documents  in  Constructions  www.ednc.gov.md),  SIA  “the  state 
register  of  public  acquisitions”  services.  At  the  same  time,  in  February  2013,  was  officially 
launched  the  M-Cloud  common  government  technology  platform,  the  digitization  of  the  Civil 
status  service  archive  is  in  the  process  of  implementation,  SIGEDI  is  implemented  in  9 
ministries. Recently the State Fiscal  Service and  Center for Electronic Governance through the 
medium of SE “Fiscservinform” optimized the process of submitting statements concerning the 
income tax for physical persons, connecting it to the mobile signature. Other 7 e-services should 
be  launched  during  2013  within  the  frameworks  of  the  projects  managed  by  the  Center  for 
Electronic Governance.  

21.  The  Republic  of  Moldova  demand  for  broadband  networks  was  caused  mainly  by 
downloading movies and music via data exchange systems peer-to-peer (Torrents) and by using 
Skype,  social  networks  “Odnoklassniki”,  “Facebook”,  “Netlog”,  “YouTube”  etc.  The  social 
network “Odnoklassniki.ru” is the most visited site among the Internet users of the Republic of 
Moldova13.  Accessing  mostly  foreign  information  resources,  the  users  of  the  Republic  of 
Moldova  outline  the  low  shortage  of  internal  resources.  In  order  to  generate  more  the  local 
digital  content,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  conditions  and  mechanisms  for  content  managers, 
including intensive use of open data opportunities. 

22.  Cultural  and  scientific  heritage  is  not  yet  digitalized.  The  national  program  of 
informatization  of  the  cultural  domain  for  2012-202014 
was  approved  only  in  2012.  Although, 
the  measures  to  digitize  the  values  of  other  areas  are  taken15,  assessment  actions  and 
interventions measures are required to speed up the process. 

23. The legal and regulatory framework is not yet completely adjusted to the new realities 
of  the  digital  environment,  especially  regarding  the  proportional  wide  use  of  new  information 
technologies and insuring an adequate level of intellectual property protection16. 

24.  The  Interoperability  Framework  Program  approved  by  the  Government  in  September 
201217  is  on  the  beginning  of  implementation  and  the  citizen  is  required  to  submit  copies  of  a 

[ Draft ]- 9 - 

given number of documents (identity acts, certificates, etc.)  – each time when requests services 
or concludes various acts, even if it is addressed repeatedly to the same public institution. This 
drives  to  time  mismanagement,  waste  of  paper  and  other  materials  and  therefore  unnecessary 
costs, negative environmental impact and inefficiency of the institutions’ activity. 

25.  There  is  no  digital  content  management  framework  during  its  life  cycle  that  would 
ensure  that  the  national  historic  content  and  the  newly  created  one  to  be  available,  accessible, 
distributed, understandable, used and improved. Providing simple access to this content requires 
a comprehensive framework that shall cover all management and decision aspects throughout the 
digital  lifecycle.  Enriching  the  content  increases  the  number  and  quality  of  services  meant  for 
citizens. 

26. The Republic of Moldova public institutions data are stored/handled in about 150 data 
centers, most of which do not correspond to the security conditions, durability and reliability and 
do not have enough qualified staff to keep them in good conditions. Besides the risks of losing 
information from  these centers, the annual  cost of their maintenance is  about 150 million  lei18, 
which indicates an inefficient expenditure of public money. 

27. Access to content and services through the electronic signature. Although the Law on 
electronic document and digital signature is into force since 2004, the digital signature is rarely 
used.  Nevertheless,  the  process  of  issuing  public  key  certificates  issued  by  the  SE.  “Center  of 
Special  Telecommunications”  over  the  last  period  increases,  these  may  be  used  in  all  existing 
electronic systems. . 

28. The Mobile Electronic Signature launched in September 2012 places Moldova among 
the top seven countries in the world that also implements such innovative technology and the use 
of this tool shall safely boost access to the available electronic services. The Electronic Identity 
Cards, which shall be implemented, shall facilitate the access to electronic services. If there are 
more  digital  identity  owners,  the  digital  identity  management  becomes  an  important  factor  for 
the functionality of infrastructure and access to digital content/services. 

29.  Although  37,7%  of  the  country's  Internet  user’s  make  on-line  purchases19,  these 
procurements  are  mainly  from  abroad,  even  with  the  existing  technological  infrastructure,  e- 
commerce  in  the  Republic  of  Moldova  is  still  undeveloped  because  of  the  low  number  of 
services that accept online payments. However, some abroad, popular e-commerce portals do not 
support  Moldova's  inclusion  in  the  list  of  countries  from  which  they  accept  Internet  payments 
and  send  goods  and  online  software20.  Republic  of  Moldova  remains  a  cash-based  economy 
(cards issued by the banks of the Republic of Moldova are mostly used for cash withdrawals – 87 
percent of card holders’ cash and 97,7 percent out of the total value of operations realized in the 
Republic  of  Moldova)21.  As  rated  by  the  World  Bank,  the  biggest  drawback  of  electronic 
payments is the lack of trust and comprehension shown by the society22. 

However, there is an increasing trend concerning the number of electronic shops, and on-
line  electronic  payment  instruments  are  deployed,  Law  no.114  from  18.05.2012  on  payment 
services  and  electronic  money  was  adopted23.  A  number  of  banks  have  established  Internet 
payment  mechanisms  for  services,  airline  tickets  commerce,  discount  cards,  books,  etc.24 
The 
official inclusion of the Republic of Moldova  in  the group Europe II was officially declared in 
august 2012, which abolished the previously existing restrictions and allowed not only sending 
but  also  receiving  payments,  thus,  the  citizens  of  the  Republic  of  Moldova  may  buy  products 
from online stores25. 

30.  Measuring  the  volume  of  digital  content  is  troublesome  because  of  the  lack  of  direct 
indicators.  The  empirical  research  of  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and 
Development  (OECD)26  shows  that  there  is  a  strong  correlation  between  the  network 
infrastructure development and the growth of the local content volume. The significant statistical 
correlation is evident by using different indirect measurements of local content, such as: number 

[ Draft ]- 10 - 

of  visible  top-level  domains  by  using  country  code  per  capita;  Wikipedia  articles  in  state 
language  per  capita,  blogs  per  capita,  and  Internet  Development  Indicators  (broadband 
penetration  rates,  autonomous  information  systems  per  capita,  international  bandwidth  per 
capita, number of IPv4 addresses per capita). In international reports27, the content accessibility 
rate  is  calculated  according  to  the  agreed  algorithms  and  countries  are  rated  according  to  the 
values of this indicator . 

The  Republic  of  Moldova's  position  is  quite  weak  in  terms  of  online  promotion.  The 
number of web-generic top-level  domains per 1000 people in  the Republic of  Moldova is  only 
2.0  units  compared  to  2.9  units/1000  in  the  CIS  and  22.3/1,000  in  Central  and  East  Europe 
(CEE)28. This speaks about a low presence of local companies and organizations on the Internet, 
which is a gap for promoting local digital content and domestic products. 

 
3.3. Low level of "digital literacy" and insufficient use 

31.  According  to  the  Global  IT  Report  2012,  in  terms  of  people’s  skills,  the  Republic  of 
Moldova was assessed with 5 points out of 7 possible (65th place out of 142). If in terms of the 
digital literacy the country is ranked 44th and in terms of education in mathematics and science is 
ranked 69th (4 points out of 7 possible)29, then by the educational system quality, the Republic of 
Moldova is ranked 102nd with 3.2 points out of 7 possible, which is among the last 40 countries 
included in the report30, which is a matter of concern. Only 14% of population aged between 35-
44 years and 10% of the population aged between 45 and 54 years are Internet users31. 

The Republic of Moldova, as well as all Europe, faces an increase of the ICT skills gap and 
a low level of the digital literacy. These drawbacks have consequences like the insufficient use 
of the benefits granted by Information Society and even the exclusion of many citizens from the 
ICT-based society and economy. On the other side, although the citizens have computers and are 
Internet users, many of them do not know even the ICT terminology32, not to mention the entire 
use of the benefits offered by the ICT. 

A  large  part  of  the  Republic  of  Moldova  population  does  not  possess  digital  knowledge 

and skills; this fact reduces the opportunities to participate in the global digital economy. 

32.  The  digital  literacy  of  the  population  starts  from  the  general  education  system  and 

mainly due to: 

1) Curriculum adjusted to the economic needs based on knowledge; 

2) Teaching staff trained in efficient application of ICT in the educational process; 

3) Integration of information technology in the didactic process; 

4) Creation of the digital educational contents, including education support throughout the 

life.  

33.  Even  though,  during  the  previous  years  have  been  undertaken  efforts  by  the 
Government in order to implement ICT in general education (800 computer classes in 1997, the 
"SALT"  program,  financial  resources  to  open  at  least  one  computer  class  in  every  school,  the 
broadband  Internet  access  and  procurement  of  didactic  software),  these  are  not  completely 
integrated into the didactic process. 

Although the equipping level of general  educational institutions  increased, there is a lack 
of  management,  maintenance  and  budgeting  for  computer  laboratories  and  the  majority  of  the 
proprietary  software  programs  are  not  licensed,  at  the  same  time  the  open  software  is  poorly 
used. Some sections of the ICT curriculum are outdated and there is no institutionalized process 
for its periodical updating. 

Graduates of educational institutions do not possess sufficient practical skills to work in an 

information society. 

There is a shortage of qualified staff: half of computer science teachers have education in 
the  exact  science  area  and  only  3  out  of  10  of  them  graduated  computer  science.  Most  of  the 

[ Draft ]- 11 - 

didactic  staffs  that  teach  computer  science  and  other  disciplines  have  never  attended  training 
courses  and  have  not  acquired  teaching  degrees.  A  lot  of  teachers  do  not  possess  general 
computer  skills  (email,  Internet,  etc.),  and  even  fewer  of  them  are  able  to  use  ICT  in  teaching 
process. School teachers of the main scholar disciplines (except those 140 schools equipped with 
educational  software)  have  no  educational  software  and  have  not  been  trained  to  handle  such 
software.  Although  there  is  an  increase  of  applications  using  ICT  in  school  and  university 
subjects, most of the school subjects have no dedicated educational software. 

The  most  skilled  in  ICT  teaching  are  not  drawn  to  higher  education  because  of 
uncompetitive  salaries,  lack  of  a  performance  based  management,  motivation  system  and 
professional development, and the education governance is confused (occupational standards are 
missing,  professional  formation  is  directed  by  supply  and  not  by  demand,  qualifications  are 
granted  by  the  educational  institutions  in  the  absence  of  an  explicit  legal  and  normative 
framework  that  would  ensure  the  involvement  of  companies  in  this  process,  educational 
institutions  do  not  respond  to  the  features  of  the  graduate’s  professional  paths  and  other. 
Nomenclature of the professional formation area and staff training specialties in higher education 
institution and in Qualification framework fail to satisfy the existing market demand. Evaluation 
systems  of  higher  education  institutions  performances  are  not  oriented  to  the  EQF  (European 
Qualification Framework). 

Internet admission system in the institutions of higher education is not implemented in the 
Republic  of  Moldova.  Although  some  universities  have  implemented  information  management 
systems  for  certain  processes  and  developed  electronic  courses,  not  having  approved  the 
regulatory  framework  for  distance  learning,  universities  do  not  apply  such  mechanisms. 
Electronic  educational  services  from  which  people  could  benefit  are  only  online  published 
lessons without the application of online evaluation mechanisms. 

There  is  a  huge  brain  drain  to  large  international  companies  from  this  field.  Through  the 
legislative  support  of  the  ICT  business  environment,  it  is  possible  to  encourage  large 
international companies to use ICT human resources directly in the Republic of Moldova and to 
encourage valuable professionals to remain in Moldova33. 

34. According to the International Communication Union (ITU) Report 201234, by the use 
of  sub-index,  Moldova  ranked  only  number  79,  although  it  has  achieved  some  progress 
regarding  indicators  that  form  this  sub-index  (adults’  digital  literacy  rate  –  98.5%,  population 
with  secondary  education  rate  –  88,0%,  and  the  rate  of  population  with  higher  education  – 
38,1%).  According  to  the  Global  IT  Report  2012,  the  level  of  ICT  use  is  also  low  –  only  3,2 
points  out  of  7  possible  (place  90th  out  of  142nd  )35.  The  lowest  level  of  use  is  observed  in 
business environment – 3,0 points out of 7  (120th out of 142nd), and governmental use is at 3,5 
points out of 7 (94th out of 142nd). By the level of e-participation Moldova was ranked 38 out of 
125 countries36. 

The Insufficient use is due to the small number of online services and low level of digital 
skills of the public institutions employees. Although the Academy of Public Administration uses 
Methodological Norms for ICT training and online training tools implemented with the support 
of UNDP, these instruments have not been used widely because there is no express provision in 
normative acts that would require digital skills for employment in a public institution. 

 
3.4. Increasing the danger of cybercrime and risk of low trust in networks and online 

services 

35. The more a society is computerized the more it is  exposed to  cybernetic attacks,  and 
the ensuring of cyberspace security should be a major concern of all stakeholders, especially at 
the 
level,  which  are  responsible  for  coherent  policy  development  and 
implementation in the field. 

institutional 

Cyber security means the state of normality resulted from application of a set of proactive 

[ Draft ]- 12 - 

and  reactive  measures  that  ensure  confidentiality,  integrity,  availability,  authenticity  and  non-
repudiation of e-information, public and private resources and services in cyberspace. 

Globality of cyberspace is able to increase the risks both for private and public sectors. 

Cyber threats are materialized through the exploitation of human, technical and procedural 

nature weaknesses, most often in: 

1) cyber-attacks against the infrastructure that maintain public functions or services of the 

information society which disruption/damage could be a threat to national security; 

2) unauthorized access to cyber infrastructure; 

3)  unauthorized  modification,  deletion  or  damage  of  information  data  or  illegal  access 

restriction to these data; 

4) cyber espionage; 

5) causing a loss of property, harassment and blackmail of individuals and legal entities, in 

the public and private sectors. 

The Origin of Hacks Report identifies 981 million hacking attempts worldwide during the 
third quarter of 2012, with an increase of 23 million compared with the number identified in the 
second quarter37. The first four top countries in the ranking of the hacker attacks’ origin are the 
USA, Russia, China and Ukraine. Romania was ranked 7th in this top. 

Attacks  may  be  politically  motivated,  as  proven  by  cyber-attacks  against  Estonia, 
Lithuania and Georgia38 
or electoral - attacks on Central Election Commission of the Republic of 
Moldova servers on parliamentary election day in 2010. Over 44 million cyber-attacks on Israel 
government  websites  were  registered  between  14  and  19  November  2012,  when  Israel  forces 
began an offensive in Gaza39. 

Being situated territorially between 2 of the top 10 countries, which generate cyber-attacks, 
Moldova  is  subjected  to  major  risks  of  new  forms  of  “cyber”  crime.  In  fact,  thanks  to  the 
Internet, we can say that all the countries are neighbors in the sense of cyber threats. 

36.  The  Republic  of  Moldova  has  ratified  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Cyber 
crime,  adopted  in  Budapest  on  November  23rd,  200140.  The  law  on  preventing  and  fighting 
cybercrime  was  implemented  and  adopted41,  it  regulates  the  legal  relations  on  preventing  and 
fighting  cyber  crimes;  the  protection  and  aid  delivery  to  service  providers  and  information 
systems users; the public administration collaboration with other representatives of civil society 
in  preventing  and  fighting  cybercrime;  the  cooperation  with  other  states,  international  and 
regional organizations. 

Currently,  in  the  Republic  of  Moldova  there  is  no  public  authority  directly  liable  and 
empowered with rights, functions and duties on cyber security. At this moment, there are several 
institutions  involved  in  this  process,  each  of  them  providing  coverage  for  this  issue  on  their 
business  segment.  Thus,  the  existing  gap  is  to  be  covered  by  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework in the field of cyber security. 

Being aware of  the risks and threats  to  which the  carried on  activities are exposed in  the 
cyberspace  and  of  the  means  to  prevent  and  counterattack  them  requires  an  effective 
communication and cooperation between specific stakeholders in this realm. 

From this view, there is a need to develop a culture of the cyber security of the information 
and  communications  systems  users,  which  are  often  poorly  informed  about  the  potential  risks, 
and solutions against them. 

37.  Nowadays,  the  Internet  has  become  an  important  information  infrastructure  for  the 
citizens and for the economy in general, that the ability to resist a multitude of new threats to IT 
systems  and  networks  is  important  for  users  to  feel  comfortable  and  safe  when  connecting 
online. Just as in the real world, the cybercrime cannot be tolerated. Up till now the Internet has 
proven  to  be  very  safe,  strong  and  reliable,  IT  networks  and  end-users  terminals  remain  to  be 
vulnerable  to  a  wide  range  of  new  threats:  in  recent  years  Unsolicited  electronic  messages 

[ Draft ]- 13 - 

 

(SPAM) disturbed to Internet e-mail traffic congestion - according to various statistics, from the 
total  amount  of  messages  in  circulation
-  80  to  98%  of  all  messages  are  unsolicited  electronic 
messages (SPAM)42 – spreading a multitude of viruses and malicious software. In the Republic 
of Moldova, for example, only during the period 17 May - 21 November 2012, within the total 
amount  of  electronic  messages  sent  to  the  central  public  administration  authorities,  only  about 
986,500 were legitimate messages, while more than about 8.5 million were spam messages that 
contained 874 detected viruses43. It follows that Moldova is in the same situation regarding spam 
as the entire Europe44. 

The  scourge  of  identity  theft  and  online  fraud  is  ongoing.  Attacks  are  becoming 
increasingly  sophisticated  (trojans,  botnets,  etc.)  and  more  difficult  to  identify  and  destroy:  a 
good example is the virus “Red October”45. Attacks are often motivated by financial purposes. 

Although there are technical means, nowadays there are no legally binding provisions for 
reporting  information  to  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (CERT-GOV-MD)46 
and  this 
entity has no special liabilities or sufficient capacity to meet the new challenges at the national 
level. According to the provisions of the objective nr.1.5.5 of the Individual Partnership Action 
Plan of the Republic of Moldova – NATO, approved by the Government Decision nr.746 from 
August 18, 2010, the CERT-GOV-MD is the unique point of access for the users of automated 
information systems of national importance. This shall ensure the consolidation of the authorities 
and institutions’ efforts for the attainment of an informed and reciprocally  coordinated reaction 
in the cyber security threats area. 
 
 

IV. VISION, GOALS AND PROGRAMS 

 

38.  Following  the  example  and  taking  into  account  the  priorities  of  the  European  Union 
and of the most developed countries in the digital field, the Republic of Moldova has formulated 
its own vision, goals and priority actions till 2020. 

 
4.1. VISION 

39.  The  Government,  business  environment  and  civil  society  agreed  on  the  following 

strategic visions: 

The  Republic  of  Moldova  is  to  become  a  country  with  an  advanced  information 
society  where  the  use  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT),  expanded 
access  to  modern  ICT  infrastructure,  rich  digital  content  and  advanced  informational 
services  drives  to  economic  competitiveness,  population  welfare  and  good  governance  of 
the country. 

For achieving this vision the state  shall undertake measures that  shall remove constraints 

and overcome identified challenges/constraints. 

This strategy is focused on three main policy directives/pillars of development: 

1)  expanding  access  and  connectivity  by  promoting  the  competition  in  the  broadband 

access networks and services; 

2) stimulating the creation/development of the digital content and electronic services; 

3) building capacities to use the advantages provided by ICT. 

In  order  to  achieve  the  strategic  vision,  general  and  specific  objectives,  basic  principles 
were established and were identified programs, initiatives and key measures for achieving them. 

 
4.2. GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND SPECIFIC GOALS 

40. General objective of the Strategy: 

Creating  favorable  conditions  for  development  and  wide  use  of  ICT’s  potential  by  the 

[ Draft ]- 14 - 

public institutions, businesses and individuals in order to help them achieve economic, social and 
cultural goals, for the benefit of everyone. 

4.2.1. Pillar nr.1: Expanding access and connectivity – an omnipresent optimized ICT 

infrastructure, with free, uniform and non-discriminatory access to everyone. 

41. General objective: Information and Communication infrastructure development and 

improving access for everyone.  

Specific objectives: 
1)  Internet access at a speed of at least 30 Mbps 

The  state  shall  establish  a  legal,  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  for  the 
development of an optimized info-communication infrastructure, which would meet the quality 
standards  at  data  transfer  speed  of  at  least  30  Mbps  covering  all  the  regions  with  services  at 
affordable prices. 

The following programs shall be developed and implemented: 

1.1) The fixed broadband networks development program for 2014-2020, that shall provide 

conditions for: 

a)  gradual  placement of  at  least  one  optical  fiber  network point within each locality  with 

Mayor’s Office; 

b) management and shared use of electronic communication networks including associated 

infrastructure through the development/adjustment of the legal and regulatory framework; 

c)  development  of  the  backbones  and  access  networks  through  infrastructure  sharing  and 

free access to properties. 

1.2) The Broadband Radio Access Networks Development Program for  2014-2020 years, 
which shall include the development/adjustment of the normative regulatory framework for radio 
frequency spectrum management: 

a)  development  of  a  legal  and  normative  framework  of  allocation  radio  frequencies 

spectrum limited resources by applying the technological neutrality principle; 

b) reallocation of 900-3600 MHz frequency bands through open contest using competitive 

selection procedure; 

c) issuance and allocation of the digital dividend (800 MHz frequency band). 

2) The transition to digital terrestrial television 

The  Government  shall  create  necessary  conditions  for  transition  until  June  15,  2015  to 
broadcast  digital  television  programs  through  digital  signal  and  to  cease  transmissions  through 
analog transmitters . 

The following program shall be developed and implemented: 

2.1)  The  transition  program  from  analogue  terrestrial  television  to  digital  television 

includes actions that are meant to ensure transition to digital television by June 15, 2015: 

a)  development  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  to  ensure  the  transition  from 

analogue 

terrestrial television to the digital one; 

b)  ensuring  socially  vulnerable  groups  with  receiving  equipment  for  digital  terrestrial 

television reception(STB); 

c)  promotion  of  the  High  Definition  (HD)  standards  for  national  radio  transmitters 

programs. 

4.2.2. Pillar nr.2: A rich digital content and available electronic public service. 

42. General objective: Setting favorable conditions for the development and use of national 
digital content and digitization of the existing national one, as well as for the implementation and 

[ Draft ]- 15 - 

use of electronic services. 

The  Republic  of  Moldova  has  a  rich  intangible  heritage  and  a  wide  knowledge  base  that 
should be identified, recorded and disseminated for the benefit of local  and foreign population. 
Without digitization, a large number of valuable contents shall remain unavailable even for the 
local population, not to mention the regional or global level. 

Various measurements show that  the developing countries  are more  frequently becoming 
significant  sources  of  content  and  their  share  in  global  content  creation  is  increasing47. 
Nowadays,  the  Republic  of  Moldova  is  able  to  earn  an  honorable  position  in  digital  content 
services. 

The  Government  shall  undertake  strong  action  in  order  to  improve  the  opportunities  of 
creating  and  promoting  the  digital  content  and  services  generated  in  the  Republic  of  Moldova, 
including the location services based on GIS (geographic information system). 

Specific objectives: 

1) Digital content is available, accessible, used and valued; 

2) 100 % of the central  public administration authorities integrated in the interoperability 

platform by 2020; 

3) Public services provided to citizens at the counter (window) are provided on the basis of 
a single document – ID card, including electronic, or through electronic or mobile identification, 
without submitting some additional documents or certificates. 

The following programs/documents shall be developed and implemented: 

1.1) The program „Creation, development and use of the digital content of the Republic of 

Moldova” 

The program shall include actions for: 

a)  Sorting  the  existent  informational  content  by  fields,  assessing  its  transformation  needs 
into digital format (content digitization), drawing up plans for content digitization by fields and 
providing access to this content; 

b)  adjustment  of  the  legal  and  institutional  framework  for  the  digitization  of  the  content, 
based on the identified constraints and including the budgeting of the content digitization actions 
in  the  Medium-Term  Budgetary  Framework  (MTBF)  and  adopt,  approve  and  implement  the 
major international standards, technical regulations in the field of digitization and online access 
to  content,  including  the  acceptance  of  the  automated  information  system  (AIS)  extracts  as 
electronic legally confirmed documents; 

c)  implementation  of  the  Government  Interoperability  Framework  and  Recommendations 
concerning  the  national  content/resources  interconnection  and  interoperability  (including 
catalogs,  classifiers,  identifiers,  metadata)  to  facilitate  the  creation  and  interoperability  of  the 
digital content; 

d) facilitating the creation via public private partnership (PPP) of data centers/local digital 
content  warehouses,  including  geospatial  data,  in  compliance  with  the  content  conservation 
management and effective time accessing standards and setting up Digital Content Register  for 
public access (which shall include orphaned content too).  

e) placing on the open data portal pages all public interest electronic information held by 
the  public  authorities  and  regulating  the  process  of  information  placement  and  update  that 
integrate digital content and procedures of digital content access and use; 

f)  diversification  of  the  content  and  its  adjustment  for  being  accessed  by  people  with 
special needs (the elderly, people with disabilities, vulnerable groups, people of different gender 
and culture); 

g)  elaborating  and  spreading  recommendations  concerning  children  and  adults  internet 

digital content accessing, also including through the existing hazards. 

[ Draft ]- 16 - 

1.2) The program of public services digitization 

The program shall include at least: 

a)  evaluation  of  the  existing  public  services  (cost,  content  and  volume)  with  the 
optimization  of  the  number  of  existing  public  services  and  processes  and  reengineering  the 
existing  business  processes  of  providing  public  services  with  their  typing,  standardizing  and 
development, the approval of public services digitization Plans in accordance with the priorities 
by  areas:  Health  Social  assistance,  Education,  Justice,  Agriculture,  Construction,  Cadastre, 
Transportation, Science, Culture, and so on; 

b)  the  development  of  the  legislative  and  normative  framework  in  the  area  of  providing 
and  accessing  electronic  public  service  (including  the  electronic  identity  management, 
implementation  of  the  minimum  standards  for  the  quality  of  public  services  and  system 
monitoring/evaluating  indicators  of  their  quality,  as  well  as  submission  of  complaints  against 
public services provided under any expectations and development of a transparent and balanced 
methodology on setting the charges for electronic public services; 

c)  developing  of  standard  solutions  for  local  public  authorities  regarding  Government  to 
Government  (G2G)  and  Government  to  Consumer  (G2C)  services,  using  the  common 
governmental technological platform; 

d) promoting the use of electronic payment mechanisms, including the payment of services 

provided by the public services providers.  

1.3)  The  documents  which  shall  regulate  the  implementation  of  electronic  ID  card,  and 

which shall touch: 

a) the Ministry of Information Technology and Communications tasks in this field: 

- ensure the drawing up of electronic ID card and simultaneous issuance with the existing 

ID card, upon request;  

-  ensure  the  creation,  implementation  and  development  of  the  digital  signature  means  in 

the electronic ID card;  

- designation of the State Enterprise “Centre for State Information Resources “Registru” as 
authorized  center  to  issue,  use  and  update  public  key  certificates  and  digital  signatures  at  ID 
documents preparation and issuance; 

-  development  and  approval  of  mechanism  for  using  electronic  ID  card  in  information 

resources and systems, and at the provision of services, including electronic services.  

b) the objectives of the State-owned  Enterprise “Center of Special Telecommunications”, 
which are to be implemented in accordance with the concluded contracts between this company 
and the State Enterprise “Centre for State Information Resources “Registru” upon preparing and 
issuing the electronic ID cards;  

1)  provide  monitoring  and  control  of  the  public  key  certificates  status  and  security  of 

electronic communications channels; 

2)  generate  confirmation  codes  for  certificates  issued  by  the  State-owned  Enterprise 

“Centre for State Information Resources “Registru”; 

3) ensure, jointly with the State-owned Enterprise “Centre for State Information Resources 
“Registru”  the  mutual  recognition  of  public  key  certificates  among  the  centers  for  public  key 
certification.  

4.2.3. Pillar nr.3: Building capacities to use ICT - a high usage of the ICT benefits for all 

members of the society. 

43.  General  objective:  Increasing  digital  literacy,  developing  digital  skills  and  digital 

inclusion 

The local content development and its distribution, as well as the use of e-services depend 
on a specific set of skills and tools. The Government shall periodically assess the various skills 

[ Draft ]- 17 - 

of the citizens, such as ICT skills, knowledge, abilities (and attitudes) that shall lead to a critical 
mass  of  skills  that  exist  at  the  local  level.  The  policy  measures  aimed  at  the  improvement  of 
education  in  the  ICT,  shall  cover  both  the  formal  education  system  as  well  as  the  lifelong 
training. 

Specific objectives: 

1) the graduates of the educational institutions have the necessary digital skills to activate 

in an information society; 

2)  the  public  sector  employees  possess  digital  skills  required  for  a  competitive 

management; 

3) appropriate conditions are created for social inclusion based on electronic services. 

The following programs shall be developed and implemented: 

1.1) “Digital literacy in general compulsory education” program 

The following actions shall be provided: 

a) assessing the general compulsory education ICT curriculum; 

b)  developing  the  digital  literacy  educational  standards  compatible  with  the  European 

practices; 

c) developing / updating the curriculum and electronic textbooks for general education; 

d)  compulsory  certification  of  ICT  skills  among  graduates  of  the  general  secondary  and 

vocational-technical education”; 

e)  testing  the  electronic  curricula  and  e-books  for  general  compulsory  education  and 

afterwards implement on a large scale curricula and e-books for general education; 

f) expanding the digital skills certification scheme in schools and universities. 

g) developing electronic courses in order to facilitate access to the studies and educational 

software; 

h) providing separate funds in the financial plans of educational institutions for purchasing 

equipment and software; 

i) creating virtual  libraries that shall  provide a  rich digital  treasure  to pupils and students 
and shall include both multimedia books developed and approved in the prescribed manner, and 
didactic supports developed by the most remarkable teachers- practitioners.  

1.2) Continuous training programs and digital inclusion “digital skills for all” 

There shall be provided the following below: 

a)  shall  update  the  continuous  training  programs,  reshaping  and  retraining  by  including  / 
adjusting  the  training  modules  and  performing  digital  skills  based  on  educational  standards 
similar to European ones; 

b) shall organize the ICT area training courses both in a traditional way and on the online 

platforms for teachers and trainers within the training programs; 

c) shall be developed regulatory and legal framework for distance learning; 

d) shall be ensured the development of courses in electronic format to facilitate access to 

education and inclusion; 

e) shall establish conditions for remote management training deployment, development and 
implementation  of  the  educational  applications  (software),  as  well  as  electronic  versions  of 
academic courses and shall provide access to these courses (electronic approval); 

f) universities shall implement anti-corruption practices based on the use of ICT measures 

in the assessment of training outcomes. 

g)  the  standards  for  ICT  skills  that  shall  adjust  the  study  process  to  the  relevant 
occupational  sphere  requirements  shall  be  developed  for  each  level  of  professional  training 
(secondary vocational, secondary specialized, higher education). 

[ Draft ]- 18 - 

1.3) The program "Access to equipment and software for the educational process" 

The following actions shall be provided: 

a)  provision  of  new  equipment,  purchased  by  the  educational  institutions  or  the  state 

budget, with legal system and educational software; 

b)  performance  of  measures  of  modernization/replacement  of  hardware  and  software 

included in the institutional development programs, at least once every three years; 

c)  establishment  of  a  mechanism  for  implementation  and  maintenance  of  ICT  equipment 

for learning process and educational management; 

d)  elaboration  of  schemes/options  and  programs  aimed  to  provide  customized  ICT 
equipment  (computers,  tablets,  etc.)  for  pupils,  students  and  teachers  and  adjustment  of  the 
regulatory framework for program implementation. 

2.1) The "digital literacy training for public employees" 

The following actions shall be provided: 

a)  development  of  occupational  standards  of  digital  competences 

for  public 
positions/public  employees  in  the  areas  of:  health  protection,  education,  social  assistance, 
agriculture, justice, transport, land register, science, culture, archives, etc. 

b)  development  of  modules  for  traditional  and  online  training  of  public  institutions 

employees according to specific use of ICT in order to fulfill professional responsibilities; 

c)  development  of  mechanisms  for  certifying  public  servants/employees  of  the  public 

institutions in view of the ICT use; 

d)  mandatory  minimal  requirements  for  the  recruitment  and  digital  literacy  of  the  public 

institutions servants/employees. 

3.1) The program of digital inclusion promotion  

The following actions shall be provided: 

a) programs for social inclusion shall include mandatory "Digital Inclusion" component; 

b)  training  stands  for  population  in  sectorial  electronic  services  shall  be  developed 
(ministries  shall  allocate  resources  and  develop  specific  electronic  guides  in  areas  of  Civil 
Status  Office,  National  House  for  Social  Insurance,  National  Company  of  Insurance  in 
Medicine, medical services, building services, etc.) and interactive electronic boards with demo 
modules, electronic terminals shall be installed in localities; 

c)  public  media  programs  shall  include  programs  promoting  and  training  people  to  use 

electronic services; 

d)  conditions  for  the  deployment  of  the  equipment  meant  to  facilitate  the  access  to 

electronic services for people with special needs shall be created; 

e)  standards  for  hardware  and  software  with  the  prospect  of  using  them  by  people  with 

special needs shall be implement. 

 
4.3. SECURED AND PROTECTED DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT 

44. Main objective: Establish conditions for increasing the security level and confidence in 

digital space 

Specific objectives: 

1)  Improve  the  cyber  security  level  of  the  national  critical  infrastructure  (public 
authorities/institutions,  electronic  communications  networks,  aqueducts,  energy  networks, 
transport networks, etc.); 

2) Increase the cyber security skills; 

3)  Raise  the  comprehension  level  of  the  digital  space  risks  and  of  measures  necessary  to 

ensure its cyber security; 

[ Draft ]- 19 - 

4) promote and develop international cooperation in cyber security. 

1.1) In order to achieve these objectives shall be developed a Cyber Security Action Plan, 

which shall provide: 

Improvement  the  level  of  cyber  security  of  the  national  critical  infrastructure  (public 
authorities/institutions,  electronic  communications  networks,  aqueducts,  energy  networks, 
transport networks, etc.), including: 

a) definition of national critical infrastructures that are to be protected from cyber-attacks, 
establishment  and  application  of  minimum  safety  requirements  for  national  critical 
infrastructure,  with  relevance  to  ensure  the  functioning  of  these  infrastructures,  including  the 
establishment and use of a National Cyber Security System; 

b)  amendment  and  harmonization  of  the  national  legal  framework  in  the  field  of  cyber 

security, and institutionalization of personal responsibility concerning cyber security; 

c)  stimulation  of  the  mutual  exchange  of  information  between  public  and  private  sectors 

regarding threats, weaknesses, risks and also cyber incidents and attacks; 

d)  strengthening  the  CERT-GOV-MD  team  (creating  the  national  level  CERT-GOV-MD 

structure/team); 

e) implementation of the electronic identity management for cyber security; 

2.1) Increase cyber security skills: 

a)  adequate  training  of  persons  working  in  cyber  security  and  widespread  promotion  of 

professional certification in the field; 

b)  inclusion  of  items  related  to  cyber  security  in  training  programs  and  professional 

development of the public and private sectors managers; 

c)  informing  and  training  employees  of  public  institutions  on  cyber  security  issues  and 

cyber risk reduction; 

d) elaboration of a User Guide, concerning minimum requirements for cyber security. 

3.1)  Raise  awareness  of  the  risks  of  the  digital  space  and  measures  that  are  necessary  to 

ensure cyber security: 

a) implementation of the national information campaign on the risks in the digital space 

and protective skills; 

b) inclusion in the public media broadcasting of the programs boosting and training people 

to use electronic services. 

4.1) Promote and develop international cooperation in cyber security: 

a)  conclusion  of  international  cooperation  agreements  in  order  to  improve  the  response 

capacity in the case of major cyber-attacks; 

b) participation in international programs aimed at cyber security; 

c)  promotion  of  national  cyber  security  interests  in  the  framework  of  international 

cooperation, of which the Republic of Moldova is a part. 
 
 

V. ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT AND COSTS 

 

45.  The  Strategy  implementation  shall  have  a  positive  impact  on  citizens,  business 
environment  and  government  and  shall  lead  to  the  accelerated  development  of  the  Information 
Society in the Republic of Moldova, improving the ICT inclusion into society, providing  a new 
quality of economic growth, based on knowledge, human capital, and shall improve the citizens’ 
quality of life 

The impact of the Strategy implementation shall occur in: 

1) streamlining the act of governance ; 

[ Draft ]- 20 - 

2) improving the services for population and business environment; 

3) diminishing corruption; 

4) increasing the economic competitiveness. 

Therefore,  the  large  scale  implementation  of  the  public  institutions  interoperability  shall 

cause a significant increase of productivity over time. 

A  10  percentage  points’  increase  of  the  digitization  level  reduces  the  unemployment  rate 
by 0.84% and contributes to a six-percentage points’ increase of the country's score in the Global 
Innovation Index. 

By 2020, the Republic of Moldova shall benefit from ICT solutions for all the components 
of the society (the population, the economy, the state). The use of ICT shall also contribute to a 
deeper  integration  into  the  global  economy,  promotion  of  its  own  information  products  and 
services all around the world and the citizens shall have a high level of wellbeing. 

46.  The  strategy  involves  the  allocation  of  a  significant  amount  of  financing  during  the 
entire  period  of  implementation  (2013-2020).  The  financial  costs  are  approximate  calculations 
developed during the actions planning phase, when an accurate assessment of the funding is not 
possible for justified reasons.  

During the development processes of programs and projects for the implementation of the 
Strategy  shall  be  attracted  internal  and  external  public  and  private  funds.  National  resources 
funds shall come from: 

1) the funds allocated /approved for the institutions involved in the implementation of the 

Strategy; 

2) the state programs for technological development and innovation area; 

3) the technological transfer projects with mandatory private sector co-financing; 

4) the public-private partnerships. 

Determination of priority actions and their financing by means of including in the strategic 
costs plan shall be done according to the institutional financing amount and expenditures ceiling 
set out by the in force Medium-Term Budget Framework, and the annual financing of the actions 
shall  be  carried  on  within  the  approved  national  budget  allocations  for  each  sector  and/or 
additional sources.  

As  appropriate,  when  it  is  required  the  achievement  of  mandatory  but  financially 

uncovered measures, additional funding sources identification is to be started. 

The "e-transformation" project, funded from the World Bank loan, shall continue to be 

implemented.  

For  further  funding  of  the  development  of  information  society  building  shall  be  attracted 
international funds, especially the European ones. The European integration potential in research 
and  innovation  shall  be  used  in  order  to  stimulate  country’s  economic  growth  by  attending  a 
series of EU funding programs. 

Opportunities  for  support  and  promotion  of  the  Information  Society  Technologies 
activities  offered  by  international  organizations  as  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for 
Europe  (UNECE),  United  National  Industrial  Development  Organization  (UNIDO),  United 
Nations  Development  Program  (UNDP),  European  Commission  Program  of  Technical 
Assistance and Information Exchange (TAIEX), European Commission Program of cooperation 
between  public  administrations  of  EU  Member  State  and  a  beneficiary  country  (TWINNING), 
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization (BSEC) and others shall be capitalized. 

[ Draft ]- 21 - 

 
 

 

VI. EXPECTED RESULTS AND PROGRESS INDICATORS 

47. Implementation of this strategy shall lead to the following measurable results: 

1) Ranking the Republic of Moldova among top 50 countries in the international rankings 
on:  ICT  Development  (ITU),  E-Governance  development  (UN),  Network  readiness  (World 
Economic  Forum),  the  level  of  the  knowledge-based  economy  development  (World  Bank 
Institute); 

2) All localities of the country shall have at least one point of access to broadband with a 

minimum speed of 30Mb/s; 

3) At least 60% of households shall be connected to broadband Internet; 

4) At least 75% of citizens shall be Internet users; 

5) 100% of public services which may be provided electronically shall be available online; 

6) 100% of archives, civil status records, cultural and scientific heritage shall be digitized 

and available; 

7) At least 80% of citizens shall be satisfied with the quality of provided services; 

8)  Public  services  shall  be  provided  under  the  ID  card,  including  electronic  or  through 

electronic or mobile identification; 

9) At least 70% of the population shall use electronic services; 

10) At least 60% of the population shall use digital signature; 

11) At least 20% of the population shall shop online; 

12) 100% of the population shall have access to digital terrestrial television. 

48.  The  expected  results  following  this  Strategy  implementation  shall  be  assessed 

according to the key progress indicators regarding the implemented objectives: 

1) Promotion of the Republic of Moldova in international rankings of the ICT field; 

2) Provision of the broadband and digital terrestrial television all over the country; 

3) The share of public institutions integrated into the interoperability platform; 

4) The percentage of households with computer and broadband internet access; 

5) The rate of digital content accessibility; 

6) The number of computers per 100 pupils; 

7) The rate of general compulsory education graduates possessing ICT skills; 

8) The share of public services available online from the total amount of services that can 

be provided electronically; 

9) The confidence degree in the reliability of the online requested service; 

10) The number of secured servers per 1 million inhabitants. 

 
 

 

VII. IMPLEMENTATION STAGES 

49. The strategy shall serve as a key document for coordinating the activities of all policy 
authorities, authorized in the Information Society development field. The implementation of the 
Strategy  shall  be 
relevant  ministries  and 
organizations/institutions,  but  also  with  the  active  participation  of  business  and  civil  society. 
Implementations shall occur in 3 stages: 

the  participation  of 

fulfilled  with 

the 

1)  The  organizational  stage,  adjusting  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  the  capacity 

building and launching programs (2013-2014); 

[ Draft ]- 22 - 

2)  The  stage  of  the  sustainable  development  of  infrastructure,  generation  and  intense 

digitization of content and services (2015-2017); 

3) The stage of total absorption of ICT by means of intensive use of the digital content and 

on-going e-services on the basis of infrastructure and legal and institutional instruments created 
during the first 2 stages.  
 
 

VIII. MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 

 

50. Monitoring 

The purpose of monitoring the Strategy is to: 

1)  supervise  the  way  the  Strategy  is  implemented,  the  level  of  achievement  of  the 
objectives  and  proposed  tasks,  and  the  need  to  revise  it  depending  on  the  evolution  of  internal 
and external factors; 

2)  improve  communication  environment  and  foster  the  exchange  of  experience  among 

institutions; 

3)  provide  transparency  and  dissemination  of  information  regarding  the  carried  out 

activities and the achieved results. 

Monitoring  shall  be  an  ongoing  process,,  the  completion  of  which  shall  be  the 
identification  of  the  intended  results  and  of  the  factors  that  hinder  the  achievement  of  the 
expected  results.  Thus,  monitoring  shall  help  to  optimize  the  implementation  process  and 
respectively,  shall  improve  the  way  the  products  are  delivered,  results  are  generated  and  the 
expected result is achieved. 

The monitoring and assessment  of the Strategy implementation  shall be accomplished by 
the  e-Transformation  Council,  the  technical  support  being  provided  by  the  Ministry  of 
Information  Technology  and  Communications.  The  Central  public  administration  authorities 
shall  submit  annually  to  the  Ministry  of  Information  Technology  and  Communications 
monitoring  reports  concerning  the  progress  of  planed  activities  and  implementation  obstacles. 
The Action Plan format shall be used during the reporting process.  

Monitoring  shall  be  based  on  the  performance  indicators  set  out  in  the  Action  Plan,  also 
using  the  information  from  the  “List  of  indicators  for  assessing  and  monitoring  the  e-
Development  in  the  Republic  of  Moldova”,  approved  by  an  Agreement  between  central  public 
administration  institutions  on  the  distribution  of  responsibilities  for  the  collection,  production 
and  dissemination  of  the  monitoring  indicators  for  building  the  Information  Society  in  the 
Republic of Moldova. On the basis of primary monitoring reports received from the authorities 
involved  in  the  Strategy  implementation,  the  Ministry  of  Information  Technology  and 
Communications shall annually draw up the consolidated report on the Strategy implementation, 
submitted  for  the  e-Transformation  Council  examination  until  the  1st  of  April  of  the  next 
reporting year. 

51. Assessment 

The assessment of the Strategy implementation shall be carried out at the end of each stage 
of  implementation  on  the  basis  of  the  Action  Plan  (Appendix  nr.1  of  the  hereby  Strategy)  and 
shall result in the intermediate Strategy implementation assessment report. 

The intermediate assessment report shall include information concerning the achievements 
and possible failures in  the process  of the Strategy implementation for the relevant  period, and 
the impact indicators. Thus, the factors that lead to success or failure of the achievement of the 
planned  actions  shall  be  identified  and  this  information  shall  be  used  for  the  further  activity 
planning. 

[ Draft ]- 23 - 

According to the assessment results, the Action Plan for the implementation of the Strategy 

shall be updated and modified at the end of each stage in accordance with the existing realities 
and budgetary planning for the next period. These amendments shall be proposed by the public 
authorities involved in the implementation process, and the Ministry of Information Technology 
and Communications shall be responsible for operating the necessary changes and finalizing the 
Action Plan. 

The  final  evaluation  report  of  the  Strategy  shall  be  drafted  after  the  end  of  its  final 

implementation stage, but not later than six months after the last year of implementation. 

Transparency  of  the  implementation  process  of  the  hereby  Strategy  shall  be  provided 
through  publication  on  the  Ministry  of  Information  Technology  and  Communications’  official 
website of the annual monitoring reports, intermediate assessment reports compiled at the end of 
each stage of implementation, and the final evaluation Report. 

The Ministry of Information Technology and Communications shall ensure a wide media 
coverage  of  the  implementation  process  of  the  hereby  Strategy  and  shall  provide  relevant 
information to their local and foreign partners. 

[ Draft ] 

 

- 24 - 

AACCTTIIOONN  PPLLAANN  

Appendix nr.1 

oonn  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  nnaattiioonnaall  ssttrraatteeggyy  ffoorr  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  ssoocciieettyy  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  

““DDiiggiittaall  MMoollddoovvaa  22002200””  

Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

Informational infrastructure development and improving access for everyone 

PILLAR 1.GENERAL OBJECTIVE: 

OUTCOME INDICATORS: 

All localities shall be provided with Internet access of at least 30 Mb/s (at least one point of optical fiber network ). 

The subscribers from connected areas shall have minimum speed of 5 Mb/s in 2014, 15 Mb/s in 2017 and 30 Mb/s in 2020. 

At least 60% of households shall be connected to broadband Internet. 

85% of localities shall have access to mobile broadband 

100% of new civil buildings, from 2018, shall be equipped with infrastructure access to electronic communications networks. 

80% of new backbone networks from urban localities shall be placed underground 
100% of population shall have the possibility to access digital terrestrial television 

1 The program “Development of Fixed broadband networks for 2014-2020 years”. Main actions: 

Internet access at the speed 
of at least 30 Mb/s 

1.1 Fixed broadband network 
development program for the 2014-
2020 years 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

 

 

a) Access networks development: 
Civil engineering-provision in 
buildings of spaces / special 
infrastructures and sewerage systems 
for access networks 
Ensuring the shared access to the 
user’s access network for providers 
that use the same technology. 

 
Ministry of Regional 
Development and 
Constructions 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Modernization and reuse of existing 
cable television networks for 
broadband access. 
b) Main networks development 
1.2 Develop a feasibility study 
regarding the opportunity of 
identification/creation of an operator 
for associated infrastructure 
management (sewage, pillars, etc.). 
1.3 Identification/creation (in case if 
feasibility) of an enterprise of 
management underground 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology, 
Infrastructure supplier 
 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology, 
Ministry of Regional 
Development and 
Constructions 
National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 
 
National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 

Institutions’ budget 

2014  Developed program 

 
Institutions’ budget 

 

 

2014  Developed and adjusted 

regulatory framework 

Institutions’ budget 

2014  Developed and adjusted 

regulatory framework 

Institutions’ budget 

2014-
2015 

Developed and adjusted 
normative framework 

 
Institutions’ budget , 
Development partners 
50 000 MDL 

 

2014 

 
Performed study 

Public Property Agency, Public 
Local Authorities 

Investors/shareholders’ 
sources 

2014 

Identified and created 
enterprise 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 25 - 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Regional 
Development and 
Constructions 

National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology,  
JSC “Moldtelecom” 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications,  
National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 

ducts/associated infrastructure. 
1.4 Evaluate the existing 
underground sewerage capacity and 
replacement of old or inefficient 
cables. 
1.5 Drafting normative documents 
for more efficient use of 
complementary/alternative 
infrastructure investments: 
a) building alternative infrastructure 
(roads, bridges, railway, sewerage, 
electricity pillars) - provisions 
concerning location of the 
infrastructure / reservation of space 
for electronic communications 
networks 
b) provisions regarding: 
- access for using alternative 
infrastructure for placing electronic 
communications networks. 
- sharing passive associated 
infrastructure (pillars, locations, 
electrical network, etc.) and existent 
active operators associated 
infrastructures (antennas, 
transmitters, generators, and so on). 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

Investors/shareholders’ 
sources 

2014  Developed networks 

mainly located 
underground  

Institutions’ budget 

2014-
2015 

Publishing information 
about new construction 
at the design stage for 
the potential 
participation of 
electronic 
communications 
providers and 
conditions for access to 
the alternative/ 
complementary 
infrastructure.  

2. The program “Development of bandwidth radio access networks for the years 2014-2020”. Main actions: 
Institutions’ budget 

2.1. Draw up/revise the Program 

National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 
National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

2014  Approved program 

Institutions’ budget 

2014  Approved normative 

framework  

Institutions’ budget 

2014  Approved regulatory 

framework 

National Regulatory Agency 
for Electronic Communications 
and Information Technology 
 

Institutions’ budget 

2014  Organized procedures 

Allocated digital 
dividend  

Institutions’ Budget 

2014  Approved Guidebook 

2.2. Draw up/adjust regulatory 
normative framework for radio 
frequency spectrum management.  
2.3. Develop regulatory framework 
for the allocation and technology 
licensing, reallocation of 900 - 3600 
MHz frequency bands. 

2.4 Issue and allocation of the digital 
dividend 
(800 MHz frequency band). 
2.5. Develop Guidebook on 
providing temporary mobile services 
to serve demonstrations and public 
events. 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
National Regulatory 
Agency for Electronic 
Communications and 
Information 
Technology 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
National Regulatory 
Agency for Electronic 
Communications and 
Information 
Technology 

 

 

3. The program “Transition from the analogue terrestrial to digital terrestrial television”. Main actions: 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 26 - 

Transition to digital 
terrestrial television 

3.1. Program Implementation and 
promotion: 

 

3.2. Develop legal framework to 
ensure the shift from analogue 
television to digital terrestrial one. 
3.3. Ensuring socially vulnerable 
groups with equipment to receive 
(STB) Digital terrestrial television 
signal. 
3.4. Promoting High Definition 
standards for national TV 
broadcasters 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Audiovisual Coordination 
Council, National Regulatory 
Agency for Electronic 
Communications and 
Information Technology 
Audiovisual Coordination 
Council, 

Ministry of Labor, Social 
Protection and Family, 
Ministry of Finance 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

 

PILLAR II: GENERAL OBIECTIV: 

Financing 
sources/cost 

 

Institutions’ budget 

National government 
budget / 
500 MDL*100 000 
people 
Institutions’ budget 

Dead-
lines 
2014 -
2015 

Progress Indicators 

Starting 15.06.2015 all 
TV transmitters are to 
work only in digital 
mode  

2014  Approved legal  
and regulations 
framework  
All households are 
provided with 
terrestrial digital TV 
reception equipment 

2015 -
2016 

2016  Adopted High 

Definition standards 

Creating favorable conditions for the development and use of national digital content and digitizing the existing national content, and implementation and use of electronic services 

Percentage of public services available online out of all services which may be provided online: 2015-30%, 2017-80%, 2020-100%. 

Percentage of public administration authorities integrated in the interoperability platform: 2015-50%, 2017-75%, 2020-100 %. 

OUTCOME INDICATORS: 

Percentage of population using digital signature: 2015-15%, 2017-35%, 2020-60%. 

Percentage of population using e-services 2015-20%, 2017-35%, 2020-70%. 

Percentage of people who view / download digital content: 2015-41%, 2017-46%, 2020-57%. 

Percentage of Internet users who are satisfied with the quality of public services offered electronically: 80%. 
100% of records, documents of civil status, cultural and scientific heritage shall be digitized and available; 

100% of public data shall be located in data centers complying with management, preservation and access standards of content over time; 

At least 70% of the population shall use electronic services; 

At least 20% of the population shall shop online; 

At least 80% of citizens shall be satisfied with the quality of provided services; 

The citizen shall get the desired public service only under the identity document, including electronic ID, and mobile or electronic identification, other information necessary for the service being 

100% of public service institutions shall be interconnected and shall meet the criteria of Interoperability Framework; 

4. The Program “Creation, development and capitalization of digital content in the Republic of Moldova”. Main actions: 

extracted from the digitized archives. 

Digital content is available, 
accessible, used and 
capitalized. 

4.1. Establishing the program  

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

 

 

 

4.2. Classification of existing 
information content by areas and 
assessment of its conversion needs 
into digital format (content 
digitization) 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

State Chancellery, 
Centre for Electronic 
Governance, 
Local public administration 
authorities, 
State Agency on Intellectual 
property 
State Chancellery, central and 
local public authorities, 
Academy of Science of 
Moldova 

Budget of the involved 
in institutions 

2014-
2015 

Program Project 
developed and 
submitted to the 
Government for 
approval 

Budget of the involved 
institutions, 
Development partners / 
12 million MDL for a 
single archive 

2014  Assessment reports on 

completed directives, 
identifying constraints 
and preliminary 
estimate the costs for 
each field. 

4.3. Adjustment of legal and 

Ministry of Information  State Chancellery, 

Institutions’ budget, 

2014- Normative acts drafts 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 27 - 

Technology and 
Communications 

Central and local public 
authorities 

institutional framework for the 
digitization of the content resulting 
from the identified constraints and its 
inclusion in the Medium Term 
Budgetary Framework (MTBF) of 
the budgeting actions of content 
transformation into digital format, 
including the acceptance of 
Automated Information System 
extracts as electronic legally 
confirming documents. 
4.4. Undertaking, approving and 
implementing international basic 
standards, technical regulations of 
the field of digitization and accessing 
the content online. 

4.5. Implementation of the 
Government Interoperability 
Framework and of the 
Recommendations on 
interconnection and interoperability 
of the content/native resources 
(including catalogs, classifiers, 
identifies, meta-data) to facilitate 
creation and interoperability of 
digital government content. 
4.6. Setting up conditions for 
establishing data centers / digital 
storages, including geospatial data, 
including public-private partnership 
respecting management, preservation 
and access standards of content over 
time. 

4.7. Setting up digital content 
Register for public access, which 
shall also include content which does 
not identify the author's work. 
4.8. Regulating the processes of 
placement, access, use and updating 
the information which constitutes 
digital content. 
4.9. Publishing all information of 
public interest in electronic format 

 

100% of the central public 
administration authorities 
integrated in the 
interoperability platform by 
the year 2020 

Wicket public services are 
provided under the ID, 
including electronic ID, and 
mobile or electronic 
identification, without the 
submission of additional 
documents 

 

Financing 
sources/cost 

donors/ 2.4 million 
MDL for a single 
service 

Dead-
lines 
2015 

Progress Indicators 

of legal framework 
modification developed 
and approved. 
Approved institutional 
framework. 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Institutions’ budget, 
donors/ 10 000 MDL 
for a single standard 

2014-
2020 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

State Chancellery, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
central and local public 
authorities, 
Center of Special 
Telecommunications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Center for Electronic 
Governance, 
Agency for land Relations and 
Cadastre, Central public 
authorities,  
Center of Special 
Telecommunications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Culture, 
State Agency on Intellectual 
Property 

Budget of e-
transformation project, 
central and public 
authorities budget / 
minimum 12 000 MDL 
for a single involved 
institution 

Budget of e-
transformation project, 
Central and public 
authorities budget, 
institutions through 
public-private 
partnership / 12 million 
MDL for a single data 
center 
Institutions’ budget  

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

State Chancellery, 

Institutions’ budget 

2016 

2014-
2020 

2014-
2020 

2014-
2015 

List of necessary 
standards  
Approved standards 
List of technical 
regulations developed 
and approved 
Approved technical 
regulations. 
 Rate of the State 
Automated Information 
System integrated in 
the interoperability 
platform. Rate of 
digital content out of 
the planned volume.  
Number of available 
electronic services 

Scenarios for phased 
migration of data from 
the existing points to 
the newly approved 
centers. 
Functional data centers. 
 

Created register 

Approved regulations 

Central and public 
authorities 

Public institutions 

Institutions’ 
budget 

2014-
2017 

Percentage of the 
public authorities that 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 28 - 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Ministry of Labor, 
Social Protection and 
Family 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

National Center for 
Personal Data 
Protection  

on open data portal by public 
authorities / institutions. 
4.10. Establish requirements of 
adjusting the content for being 
accessed by people with special 
needs (elders, disable persons, 
vulnerable, with gender or cultural 
differences). 
4.11. Promoting the use of open 
software and free tools for creation, 
dissemination and use of digital 
content 

4.12. Identifying and implementing 
monitoring mechanisms for 
statistical purpose of accessed 
national Web resources. 
4.13. Organization of seminars, 
workshops, dedicated contests to 
stimulate the creation, use and 
dissemination of digital content 
4.14. Develop and disseminate 
recommendations for children and 
adults for accessing digital content in 
the Internet space, including the 
existing risks 
4.15. Optimizing the number of 
public services , existing processes 
and re- engineering business – of the 
existing processes of granting public 
services and their standardization 
(front office) 

4.16. Develop and approve e-
strategies, programs / plans to 
digitize the internal processes of the 
public authorities/institutions, 
providing compliance with the 
Interoperability Framework, the 
following priority areas (back office) 
are: 
a)  Health 

b)  Social Assistance 

 

Central and local public 
authorities, institutions and 
companies that have digital 
content 

State Chancellery, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, Local public 
administration authorities, 
Center of Special 
Telecommunications 
National Bureau of Statistics 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

publish information 

National public budget, 
Budget of the involved 
institutions, 
Development partners 
assistance 

Institutions’ 
budget 

2015-
2020 

Number of applications 
for people with special 
needs 

2014 -
2017 

Number of free "plug-
in" applications for the 
use of public services 

Institution’s budget, 
donors 

2014 – 
2015 

Periodic reports with 
recommendations 

Central public authorities, 
institutions holding digital 
content 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2014 -
2020 

Number of yearly 
organized seminars 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Ministry of Internal Affairs 

Institutions budget, 
donors/12 000 MDL 
for a single 
recommendation 

2014  Developed and 

disseminated 
recommendations 

 

State Chancellery, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Central and local public 
authorities 

e-Transformation 
budget, 
Institutions budget, 
donors/ 
900 million MDL 

2014 -
2020 

Central Public 
Authority 

State Chancellery, Center for 
Electronic Governance 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 - 
2020 

Inventory report. 
Optimized and 
approved list of public 
services 
Percentage of business 
processes revised, 
typified and 
standardized. 
Approved plans  

Ministry of Health 

Ministry of Labor, 
Social Protection and 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014  Approved e-Health 

strategic program 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014  Approved e- Social 
Assistance strategic 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 29 - 

c)  Education 

Family 
Ministry of Education 

d)  Justice 

Ministry of Justice 

e)  Agriculture 

f)  Intelligent transport 

g)  Cadastre 

h)  Scientific content 

Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Industry 

Ministry of Transport 
and Road Infrastructure 

Agency for Land 
Relations and Cadastre 

Academy of Science of 
Moldova 

i)  Archives 

State Archive Service 

4.17. Developing the legal-normative 
framework in the field of providing 
and accessing electronic public 
services. 
4.18. Adopting the legal framework 
to facilitate the use of electronic 
signatures through the EU regulatory 
framework harmonization. 
4.19. Implementing the minimum 
quality standards for public services 
and system monitoring / evaluating 
indicators for their quality and the 
tools for submitting complaints 
against public services provided 
below any expectations. 
4.20. Develop a methodology for 
transparent and fair pricing of 
electronic public services  

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

State Chancellery 

State Chancellery 

4.21. Developing standard solutions 
for public authorities G2G and G2C 
services, using common 
governmental technological 

State Chancellery 

Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, Center for 
Electronic Governance 
State Chancellery, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, Central public 
authorities  
State Chancellery, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, Central public 
authorities 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, Center for 
Electronic Governance 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Ministry of Finance, 
Central public authorities  
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Center for Electronic 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

program  

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014  Approved e-Education 

strategic program 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014  Approved e-Justice 

strategic program  

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014  Approved e-

Agriculture strategic 
program  

2014  Approved “Intelligent 

transport” strategic 
program  

2014  Developed „e-
Cadastre” geo-
informational System 
Program  
 

 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 

 

Institutions’ budget, 
Development partners 

2014 - 
2017 

Institutions’ budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2020 

Drafts of law, 
Developed regulations  
(including electronic 
identity management) 
Adopted legal 
framework  

Institutions budget, 
Development partners / 
12 000 MDL for a 
single standard 

2014 - 
2020 

Approved and taken up 
standards 

Budget of e-
transformation project 

2014  Approved methodology 

Budget of e-
transformation project, 
Institutions budget, 
development partners  

2014  Number of developed 

standard solutions 

 

[ Draft ]- 30 - 

Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

platform. 

4.22. Promote the use of electronic 
payment mechanisms, including the 
payment of services provided by 
public service providers 

State Chancellery 

Governance, Center of Special 
Telecommunications 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, National bank, 
Center of Special 
Telecommunications 

4.23. Develop communication 
program for conducting media 
campaigns to promote public 
electronic services 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Ministry of Information 
technology and 
Communications, 
State Chancellery 

2014  Number of users of 
electronic payment 
mechanisms 

2014 -
2020 

Approved program 

Budget of the involved 
institutions, 
Development partners / 
minimum 12 000 MDL 
for a single service 
Institutions budget, 
Development partners / 
minimum 120 000 
MDL for a single 
campaign 
 

PILLAR III: GENERAL OBJECTIVE: 

Increase the digital literacy degree, the digital skills and digital inclusion development 

Share of compulsory education graduates having ICT skills: 2015-75%, 2020-100%. 

INDICATORI DE PROGRES: 

Share of secondary general and vocational-technical education graduates which obtained internationally recognized ICT certificates: 2015-20% 2020-40%”. 

Share of training programs graduates who build/rebuild ICT skills: 2015-80%, 2020-100%. 
Share of graduates who obtained national digital literacy certificates: 2015-80%, 2020-100%. 

Share/number of university programs provided electronically: 2015-40%, 2020-70%. 

Share of Universities that implemented online admission mechanism: 2015-10%, 2020-30%. 

Share/number of candidates admitted online to Universities: 2015-10%, 2020-30%. 

Teachers trained to apply ICT: 25%-2015, 45%-2017, 80%-2018. 

Share of Universities that implemented anti-corruption practices based on the use of ICT: 2015-80%, 2020-100%. 

Number/share of population using e-services: 2015-25%, 2020-50%. 

Number/share of curricular programs that include ICT: 2015-40%, 2020-90%. 
30% of the total number of computers upgraded/replaced annually in schools 

Share of training programs for civil servants which include ICT modules: 2015-50%, 2020-100%. 

Number/share of educational programs that include facilities for people with special needs: 2015-50%, 2020-100%. 

5. Digital education program in general compulsory education. Main actions: 

Graduates of educational 
institutions have digital skills 
that enable them to work in 
an information society 

 

 

5.1. Evaluating the "Informatica" 
curriculum for the compulsory 
general education and the level of 
digital literacy in secondary 
education segment (knowledge, 
skills, attitudes) 

5.2. Developing digital literacy 
educational standards compatible 
with European practices 

5.3. Developing / updating the 
curricula and electronic textbooks for 
general education (electronic 
curriculum, teaching and evaluation 
methodology). 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
National Association of Private 
ICT Companies, 
National center for personal 
data Protection 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
 National Association of 
Private ICT Companies 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
 National Association of 
Private ICT Companies 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners / 
120 000 MDL 

2014  Developed study 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 

Established standards 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2015 

Curricula and textbooks 
updated, completed and 
implemented under the 
trial program 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 31 - 

5.4. Testing electronic curricula and 
textbooks for the compulsory 
education 
5.5. Large-scale implementation of 
the curricula and electronic textbooks 
for general education 
5.6. Appling national digital skills 
certification system for graduates of 
compulsory education. Expanding 
digital skills certification scheme in 
schools 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education  

Ministry of Education 

 

 

 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Dead-
lines 
2016 -
2017 

 

Progress Indicators 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2017 -
2020 

Implemented electronic 
curricula and textbooks 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2015 

Implemented 
certification system  

6. Training program and digital inclusion „Digital skills for everyone”. Main actions: 

6.1. Updating training programs, 
retraining and requalifying by 
including / adjusting training 
modules and performing digital skills 
based on digital literacy education 
standards similar to European. 
6.2. Organizing digital literacy 
courses for teachers and trainers 
within the training programs. 
6.3. Developing legal regulatory 
framework on distance learning  

6.4. Developing electronic courses to 
facilitate access to education and 
inclusion. 

6.5. Creation and implementation of 
the remote training management 
systems. 
6.6. Develop and implement 
educational applications (software). 

6.7. Implementation of anti-
corruption practices based on ICT 
assessing learning outcomes. 
6.8. Developing electronic versions 
of university courses and assure 
access to these courses (Electronic 
approval) 
6.9. Supply educational institutions 
with equipment and legal system 
software and educational software. 

Ministry of Education 

Training institutions 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2015 

Methodological guides, 
training aids, 
evaluation tools 

Ministry of Education 

 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Universities 

Ministry of Education 

Universities 

Institutions budget, 
 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners / 
60 000 MDL for a 
single course 
Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Ministry of Education 

Universities 

Institutions budget 

Ministry of Education 

Universities 

Institutions budget 

Ministry of Education 

Universities 

Ministry of Education, 
Ministry of Finance 

Education Institutions 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners / 
60 000 MDL for a 
single institution 

2014 -
2020 

2014 

2014 -
2018 

2016 -
2018 

2014 -
2020 

2014-
2020 

 

 

Methodology and 
evaluation framework 
approved 
Legal regulatory 
framework approved by 
2014 
20 percent developed 
courses in 2014,  
40 percent in 2015,  
100 percent in 2020 
Implemented system 

Number of applications 
submitted.  
Number of virtual 
laboratories developed 
and used  
Number of courses 
whose results are 
assessed through ICTs 
Percentage of approved 
courses  
2013-2020 

Percentage share of the 
equipment with legal 
software in 2014, 2016, 
2020 – 100 percent 

 

 

[ Draft ]Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Finance 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 

Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 32 - 

Ministry of Education 

 

6.10. Provision in the financing plans 
of the educational institutions of 
different funds for the purchase of 
equipment and software. 
6.11. Enclose measures of 
modernization / replacement of 
computers and software in the 
strategic development programs at 
least once in three years 

6.12. Establishing a mechanism for 
ICT implementation and 
maintenance in education and 
educational management process 
6.13. Develop schemes/options and 
program for supplying pupils, 
students and teachers with 
customized ICT programs 
(computers, tablets, etc.). 

6.14. Adjusting the normative 
framework needed for program 
implementation 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education 

Ministry of Education, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, National 
Association of Private ICT 
Companies 
 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Dead-
lines 
2014 -
2020 

Progress Indicators 

Equipment and 
software purchased 

Institutions budget 

2015 -
2020 
2014 

Regulations budgeting 
norms for updated 
educational institutions 
by 2014 
Annual budgets 
approved 
Implemented 
mechanism 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners, 
Private ICT Companies 

2014  Developed program 
2018 

Implemented program 

Institutions budget 

2014 - 
2015 

Adjusted normative 
framework 

Public sector employees 
have necessary digital skills 
for a competitive governance 

7.1. Developing professional 
standards regarding digital skills for 
public services fields 

State Chancellery 

7. The "digital literacy training for public employees" program. Key actions: 

State Chancellery 

State Chancellery 

7.2. Develop training modules for 
civil servants in accordance with the 
specific ICT peculiarities to exercise 
professional obligations (organized 
courses, Academy of Public 
Administration curriculum, etc.). 
7.3. Application of certification 
mechanism for civil servants in using 
ICT. Introducing a Dashboard (Score 
Card) in ICT for the officials to 
accumulate credits for training and 
self-training. 
7.4. Adding in the recruitment of 
civil servants and individual 
performance evaluation of the 
mandatory requirements concerning 
ICT skills. 

Public Central Authorities, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, Public 
Administration Academy 
attached to the President of the 
Republic of Moldova  
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, Ministry of 
Education 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2015 

Approved standards 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2014 - 
2015 
2014  Methodological 

Developed, approved 
and lunched modules 

framework for updating 
the approved modules 

2014  Developed normative 

2014 -
2020 

framework 
Implemented 
Dashboard  

State Chancellery 

 

Institutions budget 

2014  Adjusted employment 

2015 

regulations and 
procedures  
Employment is based 
on new methodology 

 

8. Digital Inclusion Promotion Program. Key actions: 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

Appropriate conditions are 
created for social inclusion 
of electronic services 

8.1. Enclosing in the social inclusion 
programs the "digital inclusion" 
component 

Ministry of Labor, 
Social Protection and 
Family 

Central Public Authorities 

Financing 
sources/cost 

National public budget, 
Development partners 

- 33 - 

Central Public 
Authorities 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Central public 
authorities budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2020 

Dead-
lines 
2014  Number of social 

Progress Indicators 

programs with 
approved "Digital 
Inclusion" component  
Approved public 
authorities programs  
Planned budget 
resources 

disseminated electronic 
guides  
Budgeted resources 
reserved for promotion 
and training programs 

8.2. Broadcast training spots about 
electronic 
Services for population (sectorial 
ministries shall allocate resources 
and shall develop electronic guides 
by field – Civil status office, NSIH, 
NHIC, medical services, construction 
services, etc.). 
8.3. Installing interactive electronic 
boards in municipalities with demo 
modules - electronic terminal 
8.4. Add programs promoting and 
training people to use electronic 
services in public TV schedule. 

8.5. Creating mechanisms for 
implementing applications and 
equipment dedicated to electronic 
services access for people with 
special needs. 
8.6. Develop requirements / 
standards in terms of equipment and 
software to be used by people with 
special needs. 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Local authorities 

Central Public Authorities 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2015  Developed and 

Central Public 
Authorities 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2020 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, State 
Chancellery 
Ministry of Labor, Social 
Protection and Family 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2014 -
2015 

Subvention of the 
special equipment  

Ministry of Labor, Social 
Protection and Family 

Institutions budget, 
Development partners 

2015 

Requirements and 
special rules regarding 
electronic services and 
developed / 
purchased equipment 

Establishing conditions for increasing digital space security and trust 

IV. GENERAL OBJECTIVE: 

PROGRESS INDICATORS: 

Share of population that is aware of cyber risks: 50% by 2015, 65% by 2017, 80% by 2020. 

Share of employees of public institutions responsible for cyber security with certificates that state the professional training in this area: 20% by 2015, 40% by 2017, 80% by 2020. 

Share of institutions that use data protection systems: 70% by 2015, 85% by 2017, 100% by 2012. 

At least 70% of citizens shall feel secure in the digital environment. 

9. Action Plan for Republic of Moldova’s cyber security. Key actions: 

Increase cyber security of the 
national critical 
infrastructure (public 
authorities/institutions, 
electronic communication 
networks, aqueducts, 
installations and energy 
networks, transport networks 
etc.) 

 

9.1. Develop action plan on cyber 
security of the Republic of Moldova.  

9.2. Defining national critical 
infrastructure that is to be protected 

Information and 
Security Service, 
Center of Special 
Telecommunication 
(CERT-GOV-MD), 
Ministry of Information 
Technologies and 
Communications 
Information and 
Security Service 

Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Institutions budget 

2014 - 
2015 

Approved documents 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 

Institutions budget 

2014 

List of critical 
infrastructure 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

- 34 - 

from cyber attacks 

Increase cyber security 
abilities  

9.3. Establishment and 
operationalization of a national cyber 
security system 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9.4. Supplementing and harmonizing 
the national legislation in the area. 
Establish and enforce minimum 
security requirements for national 
critical infrastructure, but also 
maintaining its operability. 

9.5. Encouraging mutual exchange of 
information between public and 
private sector concerning threats, 
weaknesses, risks, cyber incidents 
and attacks. 
9.6. Training and informing public 
institutions employees on cyber 
security and cyber risks reduction 
matters. 

9.7. Establish and apply appropriate 
training requirements for persons 
operating in cyber security 
environment and wide spreading of 
professional certifications in the area. 

9.8. Enclose some cyber security 
elements in training and professional 
development programs of private and 
public sector managers. 
9.9. Draw up User's Guide on 
minimum cyber security insurance 
with the provisions to institutionalize 
individual responsibility for cyber 
security 
9.10. Develop procedures for 
accessing information and the audit 
checking the compliance of these 

Communications, 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
State Chancellery, Center for 
Electronic Governance 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
State Chancellery, Center for 
Electronic Governance 

Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
Ministry of Information 
technology and 
Communications, 
State Chancellery, 
Center of Special 
Telecommunications, Center 
for Electronic Governance 
Information and Security 
Service, Ministry of 
Information Technology and 
Communications, 
State Chancellery 
Information and Security 
Service, 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Technical University of 
Moldova, Ministry of 
Information Technology and 
Communications, 
Ministry of Education, 
Central and local public 
authorities  
Academy of Public 
Administration, Ministry of 
Education 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Center of Special 
Telecommunication 
(CERT-GOV-MD), 
Ministry of Information 
Technologies and 
Communications 
Information and 
Security Service 

Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD), Ministry of 
Internal Affairs 
Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD), Center for 
Electronic Governance 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD) 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2015  National operational 

security system. 

Institutions budget 

2014 - 
2015 

Coordinate minimum 
requirements 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

Institutions budget, 
donors /  
12 000 MDL for a 
single training 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2014 - 
2020 

2014  Mechanisms for 
encouraging the 
exchange of 
implemented 
information 
Number of prepared 
programs 
Number of instructional 
materials  
Number of trained 
employees 
Number of prepared 
programs 
Number of instructional 
materials  
Number of trained 
employees 

2014 - 
2020 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2014 – 
2020 

Number of modules 
enclosed in the training 
programs 

Institutions budget, 

2014  Drawn up Guideline 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Center for Electronic 
Governance, Special 
Telecommunication Center 

Institutions budget 

2014 - 
2018 

Developed and 
approved procedures 

[ Draft ]Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

- 35 - 

 

 

 

 

procedures 
9.11.Strengthening CERT-GOV-MD 
team 
(creating structure / national level 
CERT team) 

9.12. Develop and improve the Plan 
for M-cloud protective and security 
measures 

9.13. Providing electronic identity 
management for cyber security 

9.14. Providing personal data 
protection 

Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD), 
Information and 
Security Service,  
Ministry of Internal 
Affairs 
Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD) 
 
Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD), Center for 
Electronic Governance 
National center for 
personal data Protection 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

Dead-
lines 

2014 

Progress Indicators 

CERT-GOV-MD team 
improved capacities 

(CERT-GOV-MD) 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
State Chancellery 

Center for Electronic 
Governance 

e-Transformation 
budget 

2014-
2015 

Approved plan 
Developed measures 
according to the 
approved plan 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

Institutions budget, 
e-Transformation 
budget 

2014  All types of digital 

Central and local public 
authorities, 
Companies that manage 
personal data 

Budget of institutions, 
companies that manage 
personal data 

2014-
2020 

identities can be 
certainly used to access 
services. 

Assessing the 
compliance with the 
procedures established 
for personal data access  
Assure the access right 
to personal data  
Implemented liability 
agreement for personal 
data disclosure 
Budgeting campaigns 
Number of campaign 
organized. 
Percentage of Internet 
users who have 
installed software 
antivirus. 
Planned budget 
resources for promotion 
and training programs  

Increasing awareness of 
the digital space risks and 
the measures to ensure 
cyber security 

9.15. Making national awareness 
campaigns regarding digital space 
risks and protection skills 

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 

CERT-GOV-MD, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, 
Ministry of Internal Affairs 

Institutions budget, 
donors 

2014-
2020 

 

9.16. Inclusion in the public media 
programs promoting and training 
people to use electronic services. 

State Chancellery 

Promotion and 
development of 
international cooperation 
concerning cyber security 

9.17 Signing international 
cooperation agreements for 
improving the response capacity in 
the case of major cyber attacks 

Special 
Telecommunication 
Center  

 

 

9.18. Participation in international 
programs targeting cyber security 
area 

Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-

Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, 
Central and local public 
authorities 
Information and Security 
Service, 
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications 
Information and Security 
Service, 
Ministry of Information 

Institutions budget 

2014-
2020 

Institutions budget 

2014-
2020 

Number of signed 
agreements 

Institutions budget 

2014–
2020 

Number of performed 
programs 

[ Draft ]- 36 - 

Objectives 

Actions 

Responsible authorities 

Partners 

Financing 
sources/cost 

Dead-
lines 

Progress Indicators 

MD) 

9.19. Promoting national cyber 
security interests in international 
cooperation formats where the RM is 
a part of. 

Information and 
Security Service, 
Special 
Telecommunication 
Center (CERT-GOV-
MD) 

Technology and 
Communications, 
Center for Electronic 
Governance, Special 
Telecommunication Center  
Ministry of Information 
Technology and 
Communications, Center for 
Electronic Governance, Special 
Telecommunication Center  

Institutions budget 

2014-
2020 

Number of Moldova’s 
proposals accepted and 
included in 
international 
documents 

 

[ Draft ]- 37 - 

Appendix nr.2 
to the national Strategy for information 
society development „Digital Moldova - 2020” 

 
 
 

RREEFFEERREENNCCEE  MMAARRKKSS  

ffoorr  tthhee  ssoouurrcceess  ooff  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  uusseedd  iinn  tthhee  nnaattiioonnaall  

SSttrraatteeggyy  ffoorr  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  ssoocciieettyy  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  

,,,,DDiiggiittaall  MMoollddoovvaa  ––  22002200””  

 
 
1  Global IT Report 2012 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Global_IT Report_2012.pdf. 
2  European Mobile Industry Observatory, 2011. 
3  Source:  National  regulatory  Agency  for  Electronic  Communications  and  Information 

Technology. 

4  Source: Megenta Research, Institute of Public Policy, November 2012. 
5  Annual  report  of  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  on  monitoring  the  evolution  of 

information society at the global level „Measuring the Information Society 2012”. 

6  UN e-Government Survey 2012: e-Government for the People. 
7  World Economic Forum. The Global Competitiveness Report 2012-2013. 
8  Conclusions of the European Council 28/29 June 2011, conclusions 1/2 March 2012. 
9  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-12-1389_ro.htm . 
10  http://www.netindex.com/download/allcountries/ accessed on August 31, 2012. 
11  Source: http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/content . 
12  Decision of the Court of Accounts no. 12 dated on April 5, 2012  
13  Source: https://gemius.com/pl/news/2012-09-05/01 . 
14  Government Decision no.478 dated in June; 
15  For example, the Action Plan for implementation of e-Transformation Program provides for 2013 

digitization of up to 40% of Civil records. 

16  Copyright issues (in particular on licensing in the digital space, the term of copyright, etc.) in the 
new realities are targeted by the European Union; http://www.smartnews.ro/business/15931.htm  
17  Government Decision no 656 dated on September 5,.2012 “Concerning the approval of the pilot 

program on the Interoperability Framework” 

18  http://www.egov.md/index.php/ro/evenimente-noutati/968-raul-rikk-o-societate-informata-nu-

poate-exista-fara-securitate-cibernetica 

19  Gemius Study, August 2012 
20  For  example,  www.acrobat.com  does  not  accept  the  Republic  of  Moldova  online  payment 

services. 

21  www.bnm.org/md/payment_system , National bank of Moldova, 2011. 
22  FIRST Assistant project. Modernization of the payment system: Assessment Report and Action 

Plan on retail electronic payments, May 2012. 

23  Published on September 14, 2012. 

 

[ Draft ]- 38 - 

24  http://www.maib.md/ro/news/42940/ accessed on November 1, 2012. 
25  http://totul.md/ro/expertitem/1122.html,  accessed  on  Novembre  1,  2012.  It  is  to  be  mentioned 

that on January 25, 2013 is not solved yet. 

26  Report on the relationship between local content, Internet development and access prices. ISOC, 

OECD, UNESCO, 2011. 

27  For example, The Global Information Technology Report 2012. 
28  Global Innovation Index 2012 

http://www.globalinnovationindex.org/gii/main/fullreport/index.html  

29  The Global Information Technology Report 2012, pag.355. 
30  The Global Information Technology Report 2012, pag.354. 
31  Source:  Magenta  consulting.  http://prezi.com/-h5ucdggw2qf/serviciile-noi-in-mediul-on-line-

realitatea-utilizatorilor-de-internet-trenduri-stranietati-si-ritualuri-magenta-consulting  

32  Perception, assimilation and support by the population of the „e-governance transformation in the 

Republic of Moldova. Analytic report on the survey results, IPP, Magenta, November 2012. 

33  Some experts consider that this is not a problem – it is a natural process. The latest results of the 
IDIS  Viitorul  may  be  consulted  –  Brain  drain:  challenges,  consequences,  remedies,  Social 
Monitor no.3, 2010. 

34  Annual  report  of  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  on  monitoring  the  evolution  of 

information society at the global level „Measuring the Information Society 2012”. 

35  The Global Information Technology Report 2012, pag.252. 
36  The Global Innovation Index Report 2012, pag.261. 
37  http://www.nccgroup.com/en/news-events/news/hacking-attempts-to-exceed-one-

billion/#.UKMYYuOTtE0 

38  Source: A Digital Agenda for Europe 

http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/information_society/strategies/si0016_ro.htm . 
39  http://www.business24.ro/internet/securitate-it/milioane-de-hackeri-au-atacat-site-urile-

guvernului-israelian-in-ultimele-zile-1521870 . 

40  Law  no.6-XVI  dated  on  February  2,  2009  for  the  ratification  of  the  Council  of  Europe 

Convention on Cyber crime. 

41  Law no.20-XVI dated on February 3, 2009 on the prevention and fight against cyber crimes. 
42  European Network and Information Society Agency spam survey 2009 (January 2010). 
43  http://cert.gov.md/incidente/statisticaincidentelor.html  
44  Art.17  of  the  Law  no.284-XV  dated  on  July  22,  2004  on  electronic  commerce  forbids  sending 

commercial messages without a prior consent. 

45  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/9800946/Red-October-computer-virus-found.html 
46  Cyber  Security  Centre 

the  State  Enterprise  „Special 
Telecommunication  Centre”,  in  accordance  with  the  Government  Decision  no.  746  dated  on 
August  18,  2010  on  “the  approval  of  the  updated  Republic  of  Moldova  –  NATO  Individual 
Partnership  Action  Plan”.  The  Centre  provides  information  security  for  public  administration 
authorities  in  cyber  space  through  the  collection  and  analysis  of  information  related  to  cyber 
attacks, and undertakes urgent and efficient measures to protect information resources. 

(CERT)  was  created  within 

47  Source:  http://www.oecd.org/  Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 

(OECD). 

 

[ Draft ]