 

 

 

 

 

 
MONTENEGRO 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY 
STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013-2017 

 

Podgorica, July 2013 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
 

 

CONTENTS 
 

1. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................................. 3 

2. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................................... 5 

3. CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ..................................................................................................... 8 

3.1 METHOD OF MONITORING STARTEGY LIFE CYCLE .................................................................................. 9 

3.2 CHALLENGES, RISKS, THREATS TO CYBERSPACE SECURITY IN MONTENEGRO ...................................... 10 

4. INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK OF MONTENEGRO .......................................................... 14 

4.1. Analysis of Montenegrin and EU legislation ......................................................................................... 14 

4.2. Accountable institutions for Montenegrin Cyber Security System....................................................... 17 

5. MAIN OBJECTIVES OF CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO ..................................................... 20 

1)  Defining institutional and organisational structure in the field of cyber security in the country ... 20 

2)  Protection of critical information structures in Montenegro .......................................................... 20 

3) Strengthening capacities of state law enforcement authorities ......................................................... 21 

4) Incident Response ................................................................................................................................ 22 

5) The role of Ministry of Defence and Military of Montenegro in cyberspace ...................................... 23 

6) Public-private partnership ................................................................................................................... 24 

7) Raising public awareness and protection on the Internet ................................................................... 24 

ANNEX I:  ACTION PLAN FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION 2013-2015 ........................................................ 25 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

2 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 

Information  and  communications  technology  present  an  irreplaceable  part  of  modern  life. 

Integration of ICT in performing daily activities and tasks has become more and more evident, 

therefore,  threats  to  information  and  communications  infrastructure  that  may  threaten  the 

availability,  privacy  and  integrity  of  them,  may  also  affect  the  functioning  of  society  as  a 

whole. 

The  adoption  of  national  cyber  strategy  is  a  complex  task  given  the  different  aspects  and 

stakeholders  who  should  be  included  in  this  process.  Here  we  can  discuss  about  political, 

legislative,  economic,  military  and  similar  aspects  when  adopting  the  strategy,  as  well  as 

about integration of public and private sectors as infrastructure owners.   

Montenegro’s strategic objective is to build an integrated, functional and efficient cyberspace, 

in accordance with international standards and principles. 

Every country is obliged to protect their national information infrastructure, as well as their 

cyberspace that national domain is covering. 

In  order  to  respond  to  cyber  threats  from  the  environment,  which  are  constantly  changing, 

the country must have flexible and dynamic cyber security strategies. The cross border nature 

of threats makes it necessary for the countries to focus on strong international cooperation. 

Comprehensive national cyber security strategies make the first step in this direction.  

The  Strategy  should  have  clearly  defined  objectives  and  priorities,  and  the  practice  is  that 

they are defined within a period of 5 years. Along with text of the Strategy, which presents a 

vision  of  a  state  against  the  concept  of  cyber  security  and  its  guaranty,  the  corresponding 

annual action plans are also defined.   

Internet  and  information  and  communications  technology  that  the  Internet  is  based  on, 
present  a  vital  resource  for  socio-economic  growth  and  development  of  a  country.  As  more 
and more services have been offered via the Internet, there is a growing number of reported 
cyber  security  incidents,  the  attacks  known  as  distributed  denial  of  service  attacks  –  DDoS 
attacks, up to attacks on websites with the aim of unauthorised modification of their content. 
Special  type  of  threat  is  also  an  unauthorised  access  to  developed  information  systems  of 
state authorities and their databases. Cyber-attacks are also directed against infrastructure of 
Internet service providers (ISPs), however there is no coordinated response which would be 

 

3 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
conducted  through  safe  communication  channels  at  the  national  level  in  order  to  address 
such situations. 

One of the problems is the lack of necessary skills for successful defence from the incidents, as 

well as the need for amendments or for adopting new laws, under which it would be possible 

to successfully detect and prosecute people involved in any form of cybercrime. 

Another  important  problem  is  that  in  Montenegro  there  is  no  a  defined  way  to  monitor  or 

record the malicious traffic entering the country. There are no adequate monitoring systems 

installed  on  communication  nodes  (gateways)  towards  abroad  or  at  ISPs  level,  except  for 

detection and prevention of attacks directed towards denial of service (DoS-DDoS). 

Coordinated  construction  of  organisational,  institutional  and  management  capacities, 

improvement  of  laws  and  by-laws  are  important  items  of  information  security  existence  in 

Montenegro. 

Recognising its foreign policy priorities through full membership in NATO and EU, provision 

of mandated safety criteria at the national level has become priority of the entire information 

society of Montenegro. 

At the same time, economic and industrial espionage directed against the leading companies 
and  governments  is  getting  importance  with  development  and  progress  in  the  field  of 
information  technology.  Finally,  illegal  entry,  data  manipulation  and  destruction  of  critical 
resources also threaten integrity and resilience of critical infrastructure. 

In cyberspace, “malicious programmes in the  service of states” designate the present and in 

the future it will be one major threats to the national security of a country. 

The  above  mentioned  supports  the  fact  that  the  Internet  and  related  global  networks  have 

significantly increased the  global  dependence  on  ICT, but also the level  of potential damage  

that can be caused when the infrastructure is under attack. 

Information  Security  Strategy  relies  on  a  document  adopted  by  the  Government  of 

Montenegro,  titled  “Study  with  defined  responsibilities  of  state  authorities  in  their  fight 

against cyber (computer) crime”. 

Therefore,  the  adoption  of  Strategy  with  a  clear  vision  in  terms  of  implementing  specific 

activities in the field of cyber security is crucial. 

 

4 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
2. DEFINITIONS 
 

The analysis of Cyber Security Strategy in great number of countries has found that there is 

no  agreed  definition  of  terms  such  as:  information  security,  cyberspace,  cyber  security, 

cybercrime,  etc.  Whereas  some  strategies  define  these  terms  precisely  and  concisely,  for 

example, by closely linking them to computer systems, others have a more general approach 

and definitions include not only matters relating to computers and computer systems, but to 

any  other  factor  that  may  interact  with  them,  such  as  human  factor.  In  this  chapter  will  be 

presented definitions of specific terms existing in our country, which are also compliant with 

basic meaning of the terms in EU countries. 

“Cyber”  is  defined  as:  “anything  relating  to,  or  involving,  computers  or  computer  networks 

(such  as  Internet)”.  Cyberspace  is  more  than  Internet;  it  includes  not  only  hardware, 

software  and  information  systems,  but  also  the  people,  social  interaction  within  these 

networks. International Telecommunication Union (ITU) uses this term to describe “systems 

and  services  connected  either  directly  to  or  indirectly  to  the  Internet,  telecommunications 

and  computer  networks”.  International  Standardisation  Organisation  (ISO)  uses  a  slightly 

different  definition  of  the  term,  and  describes  “cyber”  as  “complex  environment  resulting 

from the interaction of people, software, and services on the Internet by means of technology 

devices and networks connected to it, which does not exist in any physical form”. Individually, 

each country, when formulating national strategy, uses  their own terms and definitions. For 

example, the United Kingdom defines cyberspace as “all forms of networked, digital activities; 

this includes the content of and actions conducted through digital networks”. 

Information  security  includes  the  state  of  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of 

information.  Information  security  is  focused  on  data  regardless  of  their  form:  electronic, 

printed and other forms of data. 

Computer  security  usually  seeks  to  ensure  availability  and  proper  functioning  of  the 

computer and computer system. 

The above-mentioned terms are often alternatively used, although they are related to slightly 

different aspects in the field of cyber security. 

 

 

5 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Internet  security  in  technical  context,  refers  to  “protection  of  Internet  service  and  related 

ICT systems and networks as extension of network security in organisations and homes, and 

to ensure the security purpose”. Internet security also provides availability and reliability of 

Internet service. However, in political context, Internet security is often equated with what is 

also  known  as  safe  use  of  the  Internet.  According  to  some  definitions,  Internet  security 

includes a global regime dealing with stability of Internet code and hardware, as well as with 

agreements  on  prosecuting  illegal  content.  Network  security  is  also  important  for  critical 

infrastructures that are often not directly connected to the Internet. 

Cyber security – International Standardisation  Organisation  (ISO) defines cyber  security as 

“preservation of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information in cyberspace”.  The 

Netherlands have offered a little broader definition: “freedom from danger or damage caused 

by  disruption,  failure  or  abuse  of  ICT  systems”  Danger  or  damage  caused  by  disruption, 

failure or abuse may consist of a limitation in the availability or reliability of ICT systems, a 

breach of the confidentiality stored in them, or damage to the integrity of the information. ITU 

also  defines  broadly  the  cyber  security:  “collection  of  tools,  policies,  security  concepts, 

security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, training, best practices, 

assurance  and  technologies  that  can  be  used  to  protect  the  cyber  environment  and 

organisation  and  user’s  assets.  Cyber  security  seeks  to  ensure  the  attainment  and 

maintenance of the security properties of the organisation and user’s assets against relevant 

security risks in the  cyber environment.  General security objectives comprise  the  following: 

availability; 

integrity,  which  may 

include  authenticity  and  non-repudiation;  and 

confidentiality”. 

Cyber defence is mainly used in military context, but it may be also related to criminal and 

espionage activities. 

NATO uses the following definition when referring to cyber defence “the ability to safeguard 

the delivery and management of services in an operational Communications and Information 

Systems (CIS) in response to potential and imminent as well as actual malicious actions that 

originate in cyberspace.” 

Cybercrime – or e-crime, or high-tech crime includes criminal activities in which computers 

and other IT equipment and computer network are subject, tool, target or place of crime.  

 

6 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Cyberspace  is  identified  as  environment  with  the  fastest  growing  crime  rate.  Over  the  last 

decade, most countries have identified the problem of cybercrime and accordingly passed and 

adopted adequate laws. In 1997, China identified as illegal activity “intrusion into computer 

information system”; in 2004 the Council of Europe adopted Convention on Cybercrime which 

has relatively high standards in the field of international cooperation and for the purpose of 

prosecuting cybercrime, it was signed by 51 countries. 

It is estimated that in 2011 appeared more than 400 million of different variations of viruses 

and on average 8 new “zero-day” exploits on a daily basis. This figure is an alarming fact. As 

the borders of legal prosecution are equal to borders of various states, strong need for close 

international cooperation has been identified. 

Cyber  terrorism  –  is  a  criminal  act  in  cyberspace  that  aims  to  intimidate  governments  or 

their citizens, with the aim to achieve political goals. NIPC (National Infrastructure Protection 

Center) defines cyber terrorism as “a criminal act perpetrated through computers resulting in 

violence,  death  and/or  destruction,  and  creating  terror  for  the  purpose  of  coercing  a 

government to change its policies”. 

Cyber espionage is defined as “the use of an agent in order to obtain information about plans 

or activities of foreign country or competitive company”. It is not uncommon that companies 

or governments are faced with attempts of unauthorised access to their computer systems via 

Internet. Many countries use espionage tools to encourage their economic development based 

on  advanced  technologies  of  other  nations.  ICT  present  foundation  of  development  and 

implementation  of  most  other  technologies  both  in  civilian  and  military  sectors,  and 

thereupon they have become primary target of espionage. 

Cyber  war  is  unspecified  and  controversial  term  that  has  no  official  or  generally  accepted 

definition. More than 30 countries have accepted the doctrine and announced development of 

a special programme of cyber war offensive mechanisms.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
3. CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
 

One  of  key  recommendations  of  international  bodies  (NATO,  ENISA)  is  that  the  strategy 

should be developed within the life cycle, which should include the following stages: 

1.  Development,  

2.  Implementation,  

3.  Evaluation and  

4.  Adaptation strategy.  

This  way  will  ensure  continued  progress  of  strategy,  procedures  and  products,  and  in 

accordance with changed circumstances in immediate and wider environment. 

Public authority or internal working group or Council on the national level should be defined 

as  strategy  implementation  coordinator,  and  should  also  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the 

overall strategy life cycle. The positive practice is that, on one hand, members of this body to 

be  persons  covering  public  or  private  function  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  have  advanced 

knowledge in the field of cyber protection and security, in order to have sufficient credibility 

and more efficiently provide implementation of identified strategic objectives. 

Successful  implementation  of  Cyber  Security  Strategy  requires  adequate  and  continued 

cooperation  of public  and private sector, i.e. stakeholders from one or the  other sector. The 

selected private entities should be part of development and implementation process because 

of probability that they are the owners of critical information infrastructure and service.   

Development  and  planning  of  national  cyber  crisis  plan  represents  an  important  factor  in 

general planning of a state’s cyber security. It should be realistic and accurate and  it should 

also take into account all possible stakeholders. This includes interaction of public and private 

sector. 

The Strategy should definitely include national risk assessment, which must be realistic, with 

a  view  to  more  efficient  strategy  implementation.  During  the  assessment,  it  is  necessary  to 

have a defined methodology, as well as approach that would provide considering all possible 

existing threats and risks. 

 

8 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Important  part  of  this  process 

is 

identification  and  definition  of  critical  national 

infrastructure, its threats and risks. These should be classified by degree of their impact, i.e. 

consequences that they would entail, as well as by the probability assessment of their actual 

occurrence. 

3.1 METHOD OF MONITORING STARTEGY LIFE CYCLE 

 

Along with constant engagement about the Strategy, which must follow the corresponding life 

cycle, here are indicated more specific activities that decision makers should implement:  

  Define a vision, scope, objectives and priorities; 

  Monitor risk assessments at the national level; 

  Consider the existing policies, regulations and capacities; 

  Develop clear management structure; 

 

Identify and engage stakeholders; 

  Establish confidential information exchange mechanisms; 

  Develop cyber security contingency plans; 

  Organise cyber security exercises; 

  Establish basic security requirements; 

  Establish incident reporting mechanisms; 

 

Increase public awareness of this issue; 

  Maintain the research and development cycle; 

  Strengthen education and training programmes; 

  Establish the ability to respond to incidents; 

  Respond to cybercrime; 

  Engage in international cooperation; 

  Establish public-private partnerships; 

  Balance between security and respect of privacy; 

  Conduct evaluations; 

  Coordinate national cyber security strategy. 

 

 

 

 

9 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
3.2 CHALLENGES, RISKS, THREATS TO CYBERSPACE SECURITY IN MONTENEGRO 
 

Research  on  the  use  of  information  and  communications  technology  in  Montenegro, 

conducted by the Statistical Office of Montenegro in 2012, provided the following results: 

Households: 

• 51.3% have access to personal computer (PC), 

• 33.6% of households use laptop 

• 93.3% have a mobile phone. 

In Montenegro, 55.0% of households surveyed said they had Internet access at home. Internet 

access  is  thereby  achieved  by  means  of  a  certain  device  such  as  personal  computer  (PC)  – 

75.3% of households and laptop – 52.0%. In addition to these devices, to access the Internet 

they  also  use  mobile  phones  –  24.2%,  handheld  computers  (palmtop,  PDA,  tablet),  game 

consoles (Play Station), etc. 

To the question "Have you in the last 12 months encountered any of the problems related to 

security while using the Internet for private purposes?", citizens responded as follows:  

 

 

 

To the question whether they use IT security software to protect their private computer and 

data kept in it (antivirus, anti-spam, firewall, etc.), the following results have been obtained: 

 

 

 

10 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

3,7% 

10,9% 

12,3% 

73,1% 

Yes

No

I do not know

I do not use private
copmuter

 

 
 

 

Business entities: 

In  Montenegro,  88.3%  of  companies  surveyed  stated  that  they  used  computers  in  their 

operations during January 2012. 

According  to  survey  results,  53.3%  of  the  companies  (who  used  computers  in  their 

operations)  allowed  their  employees  a  remote  access  to  e-mail  system,  documents  or 

company applications in January 2012. 

As  regards  to  the  Internet,  the  survey  showed  that  96.1%  of  companies  who  used  the 

computer,  had  access  to  the  Internet  in  January  2012.  This  represents  an increase  of  1%  in 

comparison to the previous year. Out of the companies that had access to the Internet, 53.1% 

responded that they had a Web Site/Home Page, in January 2012. 

To  the  question  about  the  employing  IT  professionals  in  January  2012,  only  20.8%  of 

companies  responded  that  they  employed  professionals  whose  main  job  is  information 

technology. 

In  Montenegro,  only  27.9%  of  companies  have  the  Rulebook  that  normatively  regulates 

information security issues. There is also a very small percentage of companies that conduct 

assessment of employees knowledge about information security measures, only 26.9%. 

 

 

 

11 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Key risks, challenges and threats to cyber security in Montenegro include the 

following: 

a.  Shortcomings  in  organization  of  cyber  protection  may  pose  a  threat  to 

national security of Montenegro; 

b.  Internet  in  Europe  and  in  our  close  environment  is  intensively  used  for 

criminal  purposes,  for  the  purposes  of  drug  trafficking,  money  laundering 

and  financial  frauds,  thereupon  Montenegro  is  not  and  will  not  be  spared 

from this threat; 

c.  ICT infrastructure, computer systems and users in Montenegro are exposed 

to  most  of  cyber  threats  and  attacks  that  affect  the  rest  of  the  world.  This 

includes  malicious  programmes,  electronic  frauds,  web  page  headline 

changes (Web Defacement) and e-mail "hacking"; 

d.  Undeveloped  cooperation  between  private  and  public  sector  in  the  field  of 

coordination of critical infrastructure security system; 

e.  The  absence  of  procedure  about  keeping  records  on  incident  situations  in 

cyberspace of Montenegro; 

f.  The absence of National Cyber Security Council with its functions: 

i.  Coordination of information security in Europe  

ii.  Identification of critical information infrastructure 

iii.  Review  of  the  legislative  framework  for  the  development  of 

operational cyber security. 

g.  Cyberspace  is  increasingly  used  for  organisation  and  media  propaganda  of 

extremist  and  radical  groups  who  by  this  way  promote  their  activities, 

recruit  new  members,  organize  terrorist  actions,  and  thus  pose  a  threat  to 

national security of Montenegro. 

h.  Piracy contributes to high rate of infection with computer viruses.  

 

 

12 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

i.  On-line  manipulations,  using  social  engineering  by  means  of  e-mail 

messages,  such  as  “Nigerian  419”  scam,  phishing,  go  hand  in  hand  with 

identity  theft  (illegal  knowledge  of  other  users’  accounts  and  passwords). 

This  situation  in  Montenegrin  cyberspace  is  worrying  and  problematic,  not 

only for Montenegro, but even wider. Montenegrin citizens have in the past 

been the target of frauds in which they even happened to lose a great sum of 

money; 

j. 

In the period from 2008 to 2013, the attackers have changed or taken control 

over several websites of Montenegrin institutions; 

k.  In  Montenegro,  in  the  past  period  there  have  been  several  attacks  on 

information  infrastructure,  Internet  service  providers  as  well  as  on  the 

banking sector; 

l. 

In  previous  years  there  has  been  observed  a  significant  number  of  cases 

where  the  attackers  took  control  over  the  user  profiles  of  Montenegrin 

citizens on social networks and  on behalf of the user entered inappropriate 

content, in order to compromise the profile owner. 

m.  From  the  addresses,  for  which  it  has  been  investigated  to  come  from 

Montenegro,  malicious  activity  has  been  reported,  including  the  spread  of 

SPAM, password-cracking attacks by using force (brute force), DDoS attacks, 

impersonation, and others; 

n.  In  Montenegro,  there  is  a  very  small  number  of  staff  who  have  highly 

specialized  knowledge  in  the  field  of  cyber  security,  i.e.  who  have  certain 

licenses  or  certificates 

from  this 

field  required  by  European  and 

international  standards.  At  the  University  of  Montenegro,  there  are  no 

faculties  or  faculty  departments that  cover  cyber security and  forensics, i.e. 

which  produce  human  resources  with  highly  specialized  knowledge  in  this 

field. 

13 

 

 

 

 

 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
4. INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK OF MONTENEGRO 

 

4.1. Analysis of Montenegrin and EU legislation 

 

Over  the  last  couple  of  years,  Montenegro  has  begun,  through  the  criminal  law  reforms,  to 

build  a  corresponding  legal  and  regulatory  framework  that  legally  prevents  any  kind  of 

accidental  or  deliberate  distortion  and  prevention  of  the  computer  system  functioning.  An 

appropriate legal framework represents a link between legal and IT areas, which will, by joint 

cooperation,  contribute  to  successful  clarification  of  the  case  in  the  field  of  computer  crime 

and punishing the perpetrators. 

In  Dubrovnik,  on  15th  February  2013,  Montenegro  signed  regional  Declaration  on  Strategic 

Priorities  against  Cybercrime,  which  identifies  strategic  priorities  in  the  fight  against 

cybercrime that this Strategy follows and continues to evolve. 

European  Convention  from  1959  on  the  provision  of  mutual  legal  assistance  in  criminal 

matters represents a predecessor of the Convention on Cybercrime, which has been adopted 

to serve as a framework to the states wishing to legally codify this kind of socially dangerous 

behaviour. 

The  Convention  on  Cybercrime  or  known  in  the  international  community  as  the  Budapest 

Convention,  was  adopted  on  21st  November  2001  by  the  Council  of  Europe,  and  is  effective 

from July 2004. 

The Convention was signed by 51 countries, from which six countries are not members of the 

Council  of  Europe  and  these  are  Australia,  the  Dominican  Republic,  Canada,  Japan,  South 

Africa and the USA. 

This  Convention  is  one  of  framework  conventions,  which  means  that  its  provisions  are  not 

directly applicable, but it is necessary that states implement these provisions in their own, i.e. 

national legislation. 

Montenegro adopted the Law on Ratification of the Convention on Cybercrime on 3rd March 

2010,  which  entered  into  force  on  1st  July  2010.  In  addition,  Montenegro  also  ratified  the 

Additional Protocol on Xenophobia and Racism (CETS 189)  along  with the  Convention  from 

 

14 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
3rd March 2010, which entered into force on 1st July 2010. Montenegro has signed and ratified 

the Convention on Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS 

201). 

Criminal  offenses  indicated  under  this  Convention  as  cybercrime  include  a  wide  range  of 

spreading  viruses,  unauthorized  access  to  a  computer  network  through  piracy  to 

pornography  and  intrusion  into  the  banking  systems,  abuse  of  credit  cards  and  all  other 

criminal  offences  in  which  computers  are  used.  Montenegrin  criminal  legislation  complies 

with the provisions of Budapest Convention. 

Budapest  convention  stipulates  that  national  legislations  in  their  criminal  codes  are  to 

provide punishment for offenses related to infringement of copyright and related rights, and 

liabilities assumed by the Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 

protection  by  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual  Property  Rights 

(TRIPS) and World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Copyright Treaty. Codification 

of  these  criminal  offenses  in  our  Criminal  Code  has  been  provided  in  provisions  related  to 

violation of moral rights of authors and performers, unauthorized use of copyright works and 

objects, unauthorized circumvention of protection measures intended to prevent violations of 

copyright and related rights, unauthorized removal or alteration of electronic information on 

copyright  and  related  right,  unauthorized  use  of  other’s  patent,  unauthorized  use  of  other’s 

design. 

The  Convention  also  includes  liability  of  legal  entities,  and  when  it  is  translated  into  our 

national legislation, then we can say that in 2007 Montenegro adopted the Law on liability of 

legal persons  for criminal  offenses.  Article 3  of this  Law stipulates  that legal  entities can be 

held accountable for all the criminal offences from the special section of the Criminal Code, as 

well as for all other criminal offenses prescribed by a special law, provided that the conditions 

for  liability  of  legal  entities  prescribed  by  the  Law  on  liability  of  legal  entities  for  criminal 

offenses have been met. 

Montenegro  ratified  the  Additional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  on  Cybercrime  and  the 

Protocol  involves  punishment  for  acts  of  racism  and  xenophobia,  which  are  made  by 

computer systems. This Protocol was ratified on 3rd March 2010 and entered into force on 

1st July 2010. The Protocol is implemented as a separate article of the Criminal Code, which 

involves instigation of national, racial and religious hatred. 

 

15 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
EU Council Framework Decision 2005/222/PUP or EURLex number 32005F0222 includes 

attacks  on  information  systems,  and  it  has  been  implemented  through  the  provisions  of 

Criminal Code. 

In  addition,  a  very  important  international  source  of  law  is  the  EU  Council  Framework 

Decision  32000D0375,  which  was  adopted  on  29th  May  2000.  It  includes  combating  child 

pornography  on  the  Internet  and  provides  a  number  of  specific  measures  on  the  aim  to 

prevent and combat production, processing, possession and distribution of child pornography 

material and on the aim of efficiency of investigation and of criminal prosecution of offenses 

from this field. Criminal Procedure Code of Montenegro provides measures for which we can 

say  to  partially  comply  with  this  Framework  Decision,  and  it  is  about  the  urgency  of  the 

proceedings when these works are concerned, exclusion of public for these offenses, provided 

that these are general provisions concerning procedures relating to minors.  

Procedural Law 

The  Convention  on  Cybercrime  also  involves  procedural  provisions  for  the  field  of 

cybercrime. The Convention recommends to States Parties to adopt all appropriate legislative 

and  other  measures  in  their  national  legislatures  in  order  to  establish  certain  powers  and 

procedures for the punishment of criminal offenses related to cybercrime. 

Montenegro  adopted  a  new  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  which  is  in  accordance  with 

international legal standards and fully or partially complied national procedural norms with 

certain  procedural  provisions  stipulated  by  Budapest  Convention.  Equally,  Convention 

Articles relating to evidentiary actions, secret surveillance measures and temporary seizure of 

objects and confiscation measures have been implemented in our criminal Procedure Code. 

Legislative framework 

Legal documents that form the  basis of the  functioning  and further development  of modern 

concept of information security in Montenegro: 

a) Law on Ratification of the Convention on Cybercrime 

b) Criminal Code 

c) Criminal Procedure Code 

d) Law on Information Security 

 

16 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

e) Law on the National Security Agency 

f) Law on Classified Information 

g) Electronic Signature Law 

h) Law on Electronic Communications 

i) Electronic Commerce Law 

 

 

Other important documents that need to be mentioned in this chapter: 

-  Study  with  defined  responsibilities  of  state  authorities  in  fight  against  cybercrime 

including assessment of the state condition and readiness in the area of cyber security 

-  Regulation on detailed conditions and method of implementing IT measures to protect 

classified information (1st July 2010) 

-  Regulation  on  detailed  conditions  and  method  of  implementing  measures  to  protect 

classified information (6th November 2010) 

-  Regulation on detailed conditions and method of implementing industrial measures to 

protect classified information (16th December 2010) 

-  Regulation  on  method  of  conducting  and  content  of 

internal  control  over 

implementation of measures to protect classified information (28th July 2010).  

 

4.2. Accountable institutions for Montenegrin Cyber Security System 

 

Within public administration, there must be a defined organizational hierarchy that will most 

efficiently and in a long-term sustainable manner ensure the appropriate security information 

management in Montenegro. 

 

 

 

 

17 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
The  following  institutions  have  been  identified  as  crucial  in  the  field  of  cyber  security  in 

Montenegro: 

 

  Ministry for Information Society and Telecommunications (National CIRT)  

  Ministry of Defence 

  Ministry of the Interior 

  Ministry of Justice 

  National Security Agency 

  Police Administration 

  Military of Montenegro 

  Directorate for the Protection of Classified Information 

  Universities of Montenegro 

 

National CIRT is a central point for coordination and exchange of information, cyber defense 

and elimination of the consequences of cyber security incidents for the area of Montenegro. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
 

Figure 1: Position of National CIRT in Cyber Security System of Montenegro 

 

 

Members  of  this  hierarchical  infrastructure  are  also  CIRTs  or  similar  organizational  bodies 

established  by  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs),  mobile  operators,  banks,  Post  Office  of 

Montenegro, EPCG and other companies that are interested or have significant impact on the 

functioning of national information infrastructure. 

CIRT has become a member of key international institutions that are relevant in the area of 

cyber  security,  such  as  FIRST  (Forum  of  Incident  Response  Security  Teams);  TRUSTED 

Introducer  (TERENA),  ITU-IMPACT  coalition.  Membership  in  this  organization  provides  for 

CIRT to connect with other CERT/CIRT teams from around the world.  

 

19 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
5. MAIN OBJECTIVES OF CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 
 

Cyber Security Strategy for Montenegro contains seven key areas: 

1)  Defining  institutional  and  organisational  structure  in  the  field  of  cyber 

security in the country 

  
Coordinated  construction  of  organizational,  institutional  and  management  capacities, 

improving  laws  and  regulations  are  important  items  of  information  security  existence  in 

Montenegro.  

The formation of National Cyber Security Council means providing umbrella organisation 

in  the  country  that  will  advise  the  Government  of  Montenegro  on  all  important  matters 

related to cybercrime. The Council will propose measures for harmonisation of legislative and 

administrative framework with a view to more efficiently fight against cybercrime. 

Council  members  are  representatives  of  key  institutions  identified  in  the  fight  against 

cybercrime. 

Key activities: 

  Establishment of National Cyber Security Council 

  Establishment of local CIRT teams  

 

2) Protection of critical information structures in Montenegro 

 

Due  to  constant  grow  of  the  number  of  services  that  state  authorities  and  private  sector 

provide  to  citizens  as  well  as  to  other  legal  entities,  it  is  necessary  to  define  a  critical 

information infrastructure in Montenegro and develop protection procedures.  

It is necessary to provide national cyber security and protect economic interests. Therefore, 

the Government needs to provide necessary structure and resources to ensure cyber security. 

 

 

20 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Key activities: 

  Definition and protection of critical information infrastructure 

  Strengthening the resilience of information systems to incidents 

  Perform analysis of threats to IT infrastructure 

 

3) Strengthening capacities of state law enforcement authorities 

 

Constant improvement of the sophistication level of cyber threats and attacks, as well as their 

methods and technics require continuous strengthening of administrative capacities of a state 

for the purpose of responding efficiently to a wide range of cyber threats.  

Computer crime (cybercrime) and electronic evidence material require a specialized response 

of criminal justice authorities. Law enforcement authorities and prosecution should be able to 

conduct  investigations  and  prosecute  offences  against  computer  data  and  systems,  offences 

committed  over  computers,  as  well  as  electronic  evidence  material  relating  to  any  criminal 

offence. 

Key activities: 

  Adopting  full  and  effective  legal  solutions  in  the  field  of  cybercrime,  which  meet  the 

requirements of human rights and the rule of law 

  Strengthening  of  specialised  unit  for  fight  against  cybercrime  within  the  Police 

Administration 

  Strengthening  of  specialised  unit  for  fight  against  cybercrime  within  the  Military  of 

Montenegro 

  Strengthening  the  capacity  of  National  Security  Agency  in  the  field  of  collecting, 

recording, analysing, storing and exchanging data from cyberspace, and in accordance 

with the Law on National Security Agency 

 

Improving capacities for digital forensics 

 

21 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

  Strengthening  the  capacity  of  prosecution  in  the  area  of  cybercrime  and  electronic 

evidence material 

  Support  the  training  of  judges,  prosecutors  and  law  enforcement  authorities  in  the 

field of computer crime 

  Promoting financial investigations and preventing fraud and money laundering on the 

Internet 

 

 

4) Incident Response 

 

By  establishing  the  National  CIRT  at  the  Ministry 

for 

Information  Society  and 

Telecommunications,  a  big  step  has  been  taken  towards  preventing  and  eliminating  cyber 

threats  that  affect  the  state  and  its  citizens.  In  cooperation  with  key  institutions  in 

Montenegro, CIRT is dealing with detection, monitoring and prevention of cyber attacks and 

cybercrime at the state level. CIRT represents a central point for coordinating prevention and 

protection against computer security incidents on the Internet and other IT security risk for 

the area of Montenegro. It is also possible to report incidents on the website www.cirt.me.  

In order to respond to incident situations in the best and most efficient possible manner, it is 

necessary  to  ensure  better  cooperation  and  free  information  exchange  between  key 

institutions  in  the  field  of  cyber  security.  This  primarily  relates  to  cooperation  of  key  state 

institutions  with  key  institutions  from  private  sector  (Internet  Service  Providers,  agent  for 

.me domain, mobile operators, banking sector, electric power, post office, etc.). 

Also,  given  that  cyber  attacks  are  unlimited  and  that  a  large  number  of  cyber  attacks  come 

from  other  countries,  it  is  necessary  to  establish  and  maintain  cooperation  with  relevant 

international  institutions  (FIRST,  Trusted  Introducer,  ITU-IMPACT,  etc.)  and  national 

CERT/CIRT teams from other countries. 

 

 

 

 

 

22 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Key activities: 

  Provide  through  National  Cyber  Security  Council  the  procedure  for  information 

exchange between state authorities and administration bodies 

  Provide trainings for employees who work in the field of cyber security within CIRT 

  Enhance cooperation with key institutions from private sector 

  Continue  with  activities  on  cooperation  of  national  CIRT  of  Montenegro  with  key 

international organisations and CERT/CIRT teams from other countries.    

 

5) The role of Ministry of Defence and Military of Montenegro in cyberspace 

 

Given  the  increasing  role  of  information  technology  in  military  operations,  and  the  need  to 

protect against malicious cyber activities, it is necessary to consider the role of the Ministry of 

Defence and the Military of Montenegro in protecting cyberspace of Montenegro. The impact 

of  cyber  security  in  military  domain  varies  from  country  to  country,  as  the  definition  of 

military cyber operations also varies. 

According to some NATO reports, about 120 countries develop military cyber capacities. 

Key activities: 

  Define the role of the Ministry of Defence and Military of Montenegro in cyberspace of 

Montenegro 

  Strengthen the capacity of Ministry of Defence and Military of Montenegro in the field 

of cyber defence  

  Establish cooperation in this field with international partners. 

 

 

 

 

23 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
6) Public-private partnership 

 

Major part of critical information infrastructure belongs to the private sector. Therefore, it is 

necessary  to  define  a  clear  cooperation  with  private  sector  in  the  field  of  cyber  security.  In 

particular, to define procedures on information exchange with: 

 

Internet providers 

  Agent for .me domain 

  Banking sector 

  Electric Power 

  Companies that host e-services in Montenegro  

 

7) Raising public awareness and protection on the Internet 

 

Ensuring safer Internet environment for citizens of Montenegro and training of users through 

raising awareness  of the  need for training need to be  done. Special focus should  be  on new 

generations,  as  well  as  on  end-users  of  the  Internet  and  continuous  introduction  of  new 

programmes  on  information  security  at  all  levels  of  education  with  a  view  to  use  advanced 

information systems. 

Key activities: 

  Organise projects and campaigns to promote safe use of the Internet with special focus 

on child protection on the Internet 

 

In cooperation with the Ministry of Education and universities in Montenegro, work on 

organizing special  programs  from the  area  of  cyber security with the aim of creating 

staff with highly specialized knowledge from this field 

  Efficient regional and international cooperation.  

 

24 

ANNEX I:  ACTION PLAN FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION 2013-2015 

 

NO. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

TASK 

DESCRIPTION 

RESPONSIBLE 
AUTHORITY 

DEADLINE 

 
Establish  National Cyber 
Security Council 
(information security) 

 
Establish local CIRT teams  
in key institutions to fight 
against cyber crime with a 
view to establish National 
CIRT infrastructure 
 

 
Definition and protection of 
critical information 
infrastructure 

 
Improve cooperation 
between state authorities 
and administration bodies 
 

 
Council  members  are  representatives  of  institutions  that  are 
identified as key in the field of cyber security.  
 
Government of Montenegro will appoint Council members upon 
recommendation of the Ministry for Information Society and 
Telecommunications (MIST). Responsibility of the Council will be 
activities from the domain of cyber security and INFOSEC. 
 
All  state  authorities  and  administration  bodies  who  maintain  a 
database  of  national  importance  or  manage  critical  part  of  IT 
infrastructure need to form local CIRT teams. 

MIST 
 

December 2013 

MIST 

March 2014 

 
Define  Methodology  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  identifying 
critical information infrastructure. 
It  is  necessary  to  define  critical  information  infrastructure  in 
Montenegro  and  develop  procedures  for  protection  to  ensure  its 
smooth operation. 
 
 
Provide  through  the  National  Cyber  Security  Council  the 
procedure for information exchange between state authorities and 
administration bodies 
 

MIST 
MD 
MI 
NCA 

September 2014 

 

May 2014 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 
Provide trainings for 
employees who work in the 
field of cyber security within 
national CIRT and local CIRT 
teams 
 

 
In  order  to  respond  to  incidents  in  the  best  and  most  efficient 
possible manner,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  vocational  training  of 
staff who work on resolving the incidents.  

MIST 

January – 
December 2014 

 
Provide through National Cyber Security Council the procedure for 
information  exchange  between  state  authorities  and  key 
institutions from private sector, in particular: 

 
Improve cooperation 
between public and private 
sector 

Internet providers 

 
  Agent for .me domain 
  Banking sector 
  Electric power 
  Companies that host e-services in Montenegro 

Depending  on  conducted  Analysis,  the  Council  will  define  the 
manner of cooperation with other entities. 
 
 
Due to constant grow of the number of services public and private 
sector provide to citizens as well as to other legal entities, we must 
strive  to  protect  cyberspace  of  Montenegro.  The  first  step  is 
analysis of cyber threats. 
 
 
Ensure safer Internet environment for citizens of Montenegro and 
training  of  users  through  raising  awareness  of  safe  use  of  the 
Internet. Special attention to be paid to campaigns and promotion 
of child protection on the Internet. 

 
Conduct cyber threat 
analysis in Montenegrin 
cyberspace 

 
Organise projects and 
campaigns to promote safe 
use of the Internet with 
special focus on child 
protection on the Internet 
 

MIST 
MD 
MI 
NCA 

MIST 
MD 
MI 
NCA 

July 2014 

December 2014 

MIST 

March 2014 

26 

 

5 

6 

7 

8 

 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO 

2013 
2017 

 

9 

Strengthen the specialised 
unit for fight against 
cybercrime within the Police 
Administration 

10 

Improve capacities for 
digital forensics 

11 

 
Strengthen capacities of the 
Ministry of Defence and 
Military of Montenegro in 
the field of cyber defence 
 

12 

Organise 
conferences/trainings on 
cyber security 

 
In  order  to  ensure  smooth  prosecution  of  offences  against 
computer  data  and  systems,  offences  committed  over  computers, 
it  is  necessary  to  improve  capacities  of  specialised  unit  for  fight 
against cybercrime within the Police Administration 
 
 
It  is  necessary  to  improve  capacities  of  the  Forensic  Centre  in 
Danilovgrad  to  ensure  adequate  collection  and  analysis  of 
electronic evidence material. 
 
 
Define the role of Ministry of Defence and Military of Montenegro 
in cyberspace of Montenegro 

MI 

By the end of 
2014 

MI 

September 2015 

MD, Military of 
Montenegro 

March 2015 

 
Provide  the  basis  for  organising  regional  conference/training  on 
cyber security on an annual basis. This provides for improvement 
of  regional  cooperation,  raise  of  awareness  and  promotion  of 
Montenegro  as  one  of  the  leading  countries  in  the  region  in  this 
field. 
 

MIST 
MD 
MI 
 

October 2015 

 

 

 

27 

