 

 

 

 
 
National Security Authority 
National Cyber Security Centre 
 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 

OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC 

FOR THE PERIOD FROM 2015 TO 2020 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
CONTENT 
Foreword ..................................................................................................................................................3 
Introduction ..............................................................................................................................................5 
Visions ......................................................................................................................................................7 
Principles ..................................................................................................................................................9 
Challenges ............................................................................................................................................. 11 
Main goals ............................................................................................................................................. 16 
Implementation ..................................................................................................................................... 21 
List of abbreviations .............................................................................................................................. 22 
Glossary ................................................................................................................................................. 23 
 
 
 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

2 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 
Foreword 
 
Human  actions  and  activities  are  increasingly  moving 
from the physical environment to cyberspace. Information and 
communication  technologies  have,  during  the  last  decade, 
changed  almost  every  aspect  of  our  lives  by  significantly 
facilitating communication or sharing and access to information 
and  services.  This  phenomenon,  however,  makes  our  society 
more  vulnerable  and  cyber  security  thus  becomes  one  of  the 
most important challenges that the state must respond to.  

Since  2011,  the  National  Security  Authority  has  been  operating  as  the  coordinator 
 
and national authority in the field of cyber security in the Czech Republic. During that period, 
we  have  achieved,  inter  alia,  two  important  milestones  identified  by  the  previous 
“Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic for the period of 2012 to 2015”:  adoption 
of  the  Act  on  Cyber  Security1  and  opening,  in  May  2014,  of  the  National  Cyber  Security 
Centre including a fully operational Government Computer Emergency Response Team for 
cyber security incidents handling. 

 
Other objectives set out in the above strategy can also be considered to have been 
met.  The  Czech  Republic  regularly  participates  in  several  international  cyber  security 
exercises,  has  successfully  launched  the  mapping  of  critical  information  infrastructure 
and  of  important  information  systems,  and  established  cooperation  with  stakeholders 
at both the national and international levels. It can therefore be concluded that the previous 
strategy  has  been  successfully  implemented  and  the  level  of  cyber  security  in  the  Czech 
Republic  has  significantly  increased  since  2012.  With  the  approaching  expiration  of  the 
“Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic for the period of 2012 to 2015” and having 
fulfilled all main objectives and tasks, the National Security Authority undertook to develop 
a  new  “National  Cyber  Security  Strategy  for  the  period  from  2015  to  2020”  which  would 
constitute a major breakthrough in the Czech Republic's approach to cyber security. 
                                                           
1 Act on Cyber Security and Change of Related  Acts (No. 181/2014 Coll.). 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
Compared to the previous strategy, we are now moving from the building of basic 
capacities necessary to guarantee an elementary level of cyber security towards its deeper 
and enhanced mode of development. 

 
Publishing  this  new  national  strategy,  we  define  the  Czech  Republic's  visions 
and priorities in the field of ensuring cyber security. The Czech Republic will face many cyber 
security threats and risks in the years to come and our networks and systems must always 
remain  stable  and  secure.  The  new  strategy  therefore  determines  how  to  achieve  such 
condition and identifies the ways and tools the Czech Republic shall use to reduce the risks 
and  to  mitigate  threats  arising  from  cyberspace  without  any  limitation  to  the  benefits 
derived from its use.   
 
Cyber  security  cannot  be  achieved  without  deep  mutual  trust  and  cooperation 
between  the  public  sector  and  the  rest  of  the  society.  Although  the  National  Security 
Authority of the Czech Republic has become the national authority for cyber security, this 
does  not  relieve  any  public  or  private  entity  including  individuals  of  their  overall 
responsibility and role in ensuring cyber security. Only by working together can we create 
a truly open and secure cyberspace where we all shall prosper. 
 
 
 

Dušan Navrátil 
Director 
 

 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Cyber  security  is  continuously  gaining  on  importance  and  already  represents  one 
of  the  determinative  factors  of  the  Czech  Republic’s  security  environment.  Cyber  security 
comprises  a  sum  of  organizational,  political,  legal,  technical,  and  educational  measures 
and  tools  aiming  to  provide  a  secure,  protected,  and  resilient  cyberspace  in  the  Czech 
Republic for the benefit of both public and private sectors, as well as for the general public. 
Cyber security helps to identify, evaluate, and resolve cyber threats, to reduce cyber risks and 
to  eliminate  impacts  of  cyber  attacks,  cyber  crime,  cyber  terrorism  and  cyber  espionage 
by  enhancing  confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability  of  data,  information  systems  and 
other elements of information and communication infrastructure. The main purpose of cyber 
security  is  protection  of  cyber  space  to  allow  the  individuals’  right  to  informational 
self-determination to be realized.  

Introduction 

Ensuring cyber security of a state constitutes one of the key challenges of the present 
day.  The  public  and  private  sectors'  dependence  on  information  and  communication 
technologies  becomes  ever  more  obvious.  Information  sharing  and  protection  are  crucial 
for  the  protection  of  security  and  economic  interests  of  the  state  and  its  citizens. 
Whilst  the  general  public  is  mostly  concerned  about  their  personal  data  abuse  or  afraid 
of 
losing  money  and  data,  cyber  security  as  such  encompasses  much  more. 
Major risks include cyber espionage (industrial, military, political, or other), ever more often 
carried  out  directly  by  governments  or  their  security  agencies,  organized  crime  in 
cyberspace,  hacktivism,  intentional  disinformation  campaigns  with  political  or  military 
objectives,  and  even  –  in  the  future  –  cyber  terrorism.  Beside  cyber  attacks,  frequently 
motivated  by  financial  benefit,  cyber  security  can  also  be  compromised  by  unintended 
disruptions of network security and integrity due to, for instance, human factor failures or 
natural disasters. 

 The state must be able to effectively react to all current and future challenges posed 
by  the  always  changing  threats  originating  in  the  dynamically  evolving  cyberspace, 
and thereby guarantee the latter’s security and reliability. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Due  to  the  open  and  publicly  accessible  nature  of  the  Internet  characterized  by 
absence of geographical borders, security and protection of cyberspace demand a proactive 
approach not only from the state, but also from its citizens. Although the state constantly 
builds and increases relevant national capacities, its efforts will not reach the necessary level 
of efficiency without cooperation with private sector and academia, nor without intensive 
international cooperation and, in particular, involvement of individuals. 

This National Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic for the period from 2015 
– 2020 (hereinafter “Strategy”) constitutesa fundamental conceptual document of the Czech 
Government for the given field, reflecting security interests and principles as defined in the 
Security Strategy of the Czech Republic.It shall serve as a base document for development of 
legislation,  policies  or  standards,  guidelines,  and  other  recommendations  related  to 
cyberspace protection and security. 

The Strategy follows the logical framework provided by the Methodology for Public 
Strategies Development and other relevant recommendations. The document first outlines 
the  Czech  Republic’s  vision  of  the  cyber  security  field  beyond  the  temporal  scope  of  the 
Strategy  (2015  –  2020)  and  defines  the  basic  principles  followed  by  the  state  in  view 
of ensuring its cyber security. The subsequent text identifies concrete challenges in the cyber 
security  field  faced  by  the  Czech  Republic  and  international  community  as  a  whole 
of which the Czech Republic forms part. Finally, main strategic goals are presented that must 
be  achieved  in  order  to  respond  to  those  challenges  and  which  shall  serve  as  a  basis  for 
a detailed Action Plan for the Cyber Security in the Czech Republic for the period from 2015 
to 2020 (hereinafter ‘Action Plan’). 
 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

6 

 

 

 

 
Visions 
•  The Czech Republic shall create conditions within cyberspace for a smoothly functioning 

  

 

 

 

information society.  

•  The Czech Republic shall aim at a continuous development of cyber security expertise 
and of capabilities to resist the newest cyber threats. At the same time, it shall support 
and develop the prevention and early warning capacities of the state security forces. 

•  The Czech Republic, as a modern Central European country and an active member of the 
European Union (EU), the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), the United Nations 
(UN)  and  other  international  organizations,  shall  aspire  to  play  a  leading  role  in  the 
cyber security field within its region and in Europe.  

•  The  Czech  Republic  shall  actively  support  its  international  partners  in  preventing  and 
solving  cyber  attacks, 
the  membership 
in  international  organizations  and  from  the  collective  defence  within  the  NATO, 
and promote security in other states. 

its  commitments  arising 

from 

fulfil 

•  The Czech Republic shall, through its membership in international organizations, actively 
promote cyber security and defence cooperation and dialogue among Central European 
countries.  

•  The  Czech  Republic  shall  effectively  secure  not  only  individual  elements  of  its  critical 
information  infrastructure  (hereinafter  “CII”),  but  also  ensure  the  overall  security 
of networks and cyberspace used by its population, which are essential to the latter’s 
economic and social interests. 

•  The Czech Republic shall particularly focus on securing industrial control systems 

included in the CII and within a few years shall become one of the leading nations in this 
area by virtue of the expertise and knowledge acquired. 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

•  The  Czech  Republic,  namely  GovCERT.CZ2,  shall  seek  to  build  trust  and  develop  an 
efficient cooperation model with the national CERT3, while at the same time functioning 
as  an  umbrella  authority  for  other  Czech  CERT/CSIRT  teams  and  promoting  creation 
and development of thereof within CII entities. 

•  The Czech Republic shall cooperate with private sector and academia in research and 
information  and  communication 

development  activities  concerning  security  of 
technologies.  

technologies  production, 

•  The  Czech  Republic  shall  strive  to  ensure  maximum  cyberspace  security.  In  parallel, 
it  shall  support  high 
research,  development,  and 
implementation,  thereby  contributing  to  technological  advancement  in  the  Czech 
Republic with a view to increasing its competitiveness and creating optimal conditions 
for local and international investments, to which a functional information infrastructure 
is crucial. 

•  The  Czech  Republic  shall  encourage  development  of  an  information  society  culture 
through awareness raising among its citizens and private sector subjects. They shall have 
free access to information society services and to information on responsible behaviour 
and  use  of  information  technologies.  The  citizens  shall  be  protected  from  malicious 
impacts of cyber attacks that could negatively affect quality of their lives and their trust 
in the state. 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
2 GovCERT.CZ is the government coordination unit for rapid reaction to cyber incidents (Government CERT- 
Computer Emergency Respponse Team) which is subordinated to the National Security Authority, namely the 
National Cyber Security Centre. 
3 National CERT is the national coordination unit for rapid reaction to cyber incidents (national CSIRT – 
Computer Security Incident Response Team), which performs its function on the basis of a Memorandum 
concluded with the National Security Authority. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

8 

 

 

 

 

 
Principles 
Protection of fundamental human rights and freedoms and of the democratic rule 
of law principles 

  

 

 

In ensuring cyber security, the Czech Republic abides by fundamental human rights, 
democratic  principles  and  values.  It  respects  the  Internet’s  open  and  neutral  character, 
safeguards  the  freedom  of  expression,  personal  data  protection  and  the  privacy  rights. 
It  therefore  strives  for  a  maximal  openness  in  access  to  information  and  for  a  minimal 
interference  in  individuals’  and  private  entities’  rights.  Protection  of  the  rights  pertaining 
to  informational  self-determination  constitutes one  of  the basic  principles  of the  National 
Security Authority’s (hereinafter “NSA”) activities in the cyber security field.  

Comprehensive approach to cyber security based on principles of subsidiarity 
and cooperation 
The Strategy follows the principle of indivisible security; the Czech Republic’s cyber 
 
security 
security. 
The Czech Republic therefore addresses its cyber security in a complex manner as a closely 
inter-related phenomenon. 

from  global,  namely  Euro-Atlantic  cyber 

indivisible 

thus 

is 

The NSA is the primary national authority for cyber security; as such it coordinates 
cyber  security  related  activities  and  provides  guidance  to  other  entities  concerned. 
The  NSA  decides  on  proposals  and  guidelines  for  prevention  and  solution  measures 
in respect of cyber security incidents and ongoing cyber attacks.  

Taking into account the complexity of cyber security and defence and with the aim 
of  facilitating  the  stakeholders’  cooperation,  promoting  synergies  of  their  efforts 
and  avoiding  unnecessary  duplications,  the  Czech  Republic  shall  apply  the  subsidiarity 
principle and coordinate activities at the national level4.  

 

                                                           
4  The subsidiarity principle also underlies the Act on Cyber Security which sets out responsibilities of a system 
administrator or operator in respect of system or network security and divides the cyberspace responsibilities 
between the government and national CERTs. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Trust building and cooperation among public and private sector, and civil society 

The  state  and  its  agencies  cannot  bear  the  sole  responsibility  for  cyber  security; 
an active cooperation of the Czech Republic's citizens, private legal persons and individual 
entrepreneurs is needed. 

Cyberspace and, particularly, a part of the CII are largely owned and operated by the 
private sector. The security policy for this area is therefore based on inclusive cooperation 
between  the  public  and  the  private  sectors,  civil  society,  as  well  as  with  academia. 
A  trustworthy  environment  enabling  cooperation  is  crucial.  Trust  among  the  state,  private 
subjects, and civil society in general is essential in order to provide cyber security efficiently. 
Due to the increasingly blurred lines between internal and external threats and risks, 
and  hence  between  internal  and  external  security,  the  Czech  Republic  shall  aim  at 
coordination of activities and enhance mutual trust among stakeholders both at the national 
and international levels. 

Cyber security capacity building 

Considering  the  society’s  substantial  reliance  on  information  and  communication 
technologies  and  the  constantly  changing  nature  of  cyber  threats  and  risks,  the  cyber 
security  of  the  Czech  Republic  depends  on  a  continuous  development  of  a  robust  and 
resilient information infrastructure, but also on the society as a whole. 

The Czech Republic therefore increases its investments in research and development 
in  the  cyber  security  field  (including  of  its  own  cyber  security  technologies),  as  well  as  in 
training and education of the end users, i.e. the Czech Republic's population. 

In the context of ensuring cyber security, the Czech Republic builds and continuously 
enhances  the  national  expert  capacities  and  reinforces  the  existing  structures  and 
cooperation  procedures  relied  on  to  fight  cybercrime.  Strengthening  cooperation between 
law enforcement bodies and agencies responsible for cyber security in the Czech Republic 
constitutes thus one of the priorities. 

 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
Challenges 
1. 

The Czech Republic as a potential test bed 

As a country using advanced security technologies employed also by other countries, 
the Czech Republic may be targeted as a test bed for a major attack on our allies or 
states  with  a  greater  strategic  importance  and  which  use  the  same  technologies, 
security mechanisms, and procedures.  

2. 

Lack of the public’s trust in the state 

The  public’s  trust  in  states  as  entities  ensuring  cyber  security  and  in  their  security 
structures  has  significantly  decreased  recently.  Without  trust  and  voluntary 
participation  of  the  Czech  citizens  and  the  private  sector,  however,  the  whole 
concept of cyber security loses its meaning.  

3. 

Increased  number  of  Internet  and  ICT  users  and  increased  criticality 
of technology failures 

The increasing number of Internet users (about 67% of Czech households are online5) 
and ICT users, together with the increasing ICT dependency of the public and private 
sectors  (97%  of  Czech  companies  are  online6)  carry  an  increased  criticality  of  such 
technologies'  potential  failure,  especially  when  CII  and  important  information 
systems (hereinafter “IIS”) are involved.  

4. 

Amount  of  mobile  malware  increasing  along  with  the  number  of  mobile 
devices users 

Few  smartphone  and  tablet  users  use  at  least  basic  security  tools  (e.g.  antivirus 
software). This gap is exploited by hackers, as the increasing amount of malware and 
number of attacks aimed at such devices show every year. 

                                                           
5 Czech Statistical Office, Information society in figures 2014, available at www.czso.cz. 
Data quoted for year 2013. 
6 EEIP independent study ‘Czech Internet Economy’ from 2013, available at www.studiespir.cz. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

11 

 

 

5. 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Possible information exfiltration through a hardware backdoor 

The  increasing  number  of  technology  users  and  providers  carries  the  risk  of 
‘backdoors’  intentionally  planted  into  the  hardware.  Those  may  subsequently 
be misused e.g. for strategic, personal, or sensitive data tracking and mining.  

6. 

Internet of Things 

While the  number of  online  devices  is  expanding,  most users  ignore  the necessary 
digital hygiene, i.e. how to behave online and how to secure the devices they use. 
The ‘Internet of Things’ concept amplifies this challenge: while traditional electronic 
devices  such  as  personal  computers  and  laptops  automatically  connote  antivirus 
software,  firewalls,  etc.,  it  is  not  so  with  other  smart  equipment  like  TV  sets, 
refrigerators  etc.,  users  of  which  often  do  not  even  know  how  to  secure 
its functioning.  

7. 

Security risks related to IPv4 to IPv6 transition 

The necessary transition from IPv4 to IPv6 protocol brings about new cyber security 
risks. These risks must be minimized in order to successfully implement and secure 
this protocol both at the public administration level and in private entities. 

8. 

Security  risks  related  to  the  electronisation  of  public  administration 
(eGovernment) 

The continuing digitalization of public administration in the Czech Republic aims to 
improve  its  functioning  and  its  relationship  with  the  public.  Nevertheless,  services 
and applications provided to citizens and private entities through eGovernment carry 
significant cyber risks. 

9. 

Insufficient security of small and medium enterprises  

There  is  a  growing  need  to  raise  awareness  of  best  practices  and  methods 
of information infrastructure protection and safe information processing in small and 
medium enterprises, thereby helping them deal with cyber attacks. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

They often fail to acknowledge their own value and their cyber security needs, while 
simultaneously  lacking  the  resources  and  know-how  necessary  to  address  them. 
Their  systems  and  data,  however,  may  present  the  same  criticality  as  those  of  big 
enterprises  or,  alternatively,  these  small  and  medium  enterprises  may  work  with 
critical data or systems as sub-contractors. 

10. 

Big data, new data storage environments 

Protection and security of data, especially of those of public interest (data relevant to 
CII and IIS) are crucial for the Czech Republic. The amount of data processed in both 
public and private sectors is growing and so is the need for their storage. New forms 
of data storage such as cloud storage have thus appeared. Nevertheless, the use of 
online  services  and  clouds  often  leads  to  non-transparent  security  solutions  of 
doubtful credibility.   

11. 

Protection  of  industrial  control  systems  and  of  information  systems 
in health sector 

Cyber  attacks  have  been  shifting  their  focus  from  direct  financial  benefit  towards 
industrial  cyber  espionage,  cyber  vandalism  and  identification  of  CII  and  IIS 
vulnerabilities.  The  attackers  focus  more  and  more  on  information  infrastructure 
elements  such  as  energy  supply  systems,  pipelines  or  information  systems  in  the 
health sector. A failure of such systems can have fatal consequences, yet they show 
high  heterogeneity  of  technical  solutions,  which  also  renders  any  ex  post  analysis 
technically difficult. 

12. 

Smart grids 

Smart  grids  constitute  a  potential  next  step  in  the  development  of  the  Czech 
Republic’s  energy  distribution  network.  These  technologies  may  improve  the 
reliability,  security  and  efficiency  of  energy  networks.  On  the  other  hand, 
digitalisation  of  these  formerly  passive  systems  implies  the  risk  of  the  network’s 
disruption by an attacker or interference with its users’ privacy.   

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

13. 

Increased ICT dependence of the state's defence forces 

Information  and  communication  technologies  are  increasingly  present  in  the  state 
defence forces' systems, networks as well as equipment proper (for instance, military 
vehicles  or  aircraft).  Vulnerabilities  of  these  technologies  and  the  danger  of  their 
disruption or destruction, including by a cyber attack, increase the risks of a negative 
impact  on  basic  defence  capabilities  of  the  forces  and  on  the  fulfilment  of 
commitments arising from the NATO and EU membership. The state defence forces 
must have the capability to effectively respond to threats coming from cyberspace 
and to proactively participate in elimination thereof. 

14. 

Increasingly sophisticated malware 

The  growing  sophistication  of  malware  and  of  attackers  themselves  significantly 
limits  the  options  for  attack  source  tracing,  i.e.  reverse  engineering  and  forensic 
analysis  (backtracking).  These  analytical  procedures  shall  form  part  of  training 
of cyber security experts. 

15. 

Botnets and DDoS/DoS attacks 

Botnets,  used  for  the  very  common  DDoS/DoS  attacks,  are  gaining  on  robustness, 
resilience  and  stealth.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  raise  awareness  of  defence 
possibilities with regard to DDoS/DoS attacks. 

16. 

Increase in cyber crime 

Due  to  the  open  and  anonymous  nature  of  the  Internet,  possibilities  of  trade 
in sensitive information, accessibility and even free purchasing of criminal activities 
continue  to  grow.  The  ongoing  expansion  of  information  technologies  into  the 
society’s  daily  life  and  functioning  also  results  in  a  swift  transition  of  numerous 
criminal activities into virtual space which provides the perpetrators with a rapid gain 
while significantly reducing the risk of prosecution. This phenomenon is enhanced by 
Internet's anonymity and spatial indefinability. All this allows for precisely targeted as 
well as mass and large surface attacks. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

14 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

17. 

Threats and risks related to use of online social networks 

The increasing numbers of social networks users lead to an increased risk of private 
data theft or even digital identity theft targeting both natural and legal persons. 

18. 

Low digital literacy of end users 

A substantial number of Internet users – both in the public sector and the general 
public  –  lack  a  basic  knowledge  on  common  computer  attack  methods  (especially 
phishing, fake e-shops etc.), which leads to thousands of the Czech Republic's citizens 
becoming victims of such attacks every year. 

19. 

Shortage of cyber security experts and the need for curricula reform 
The existing Czech education model in the cyber security field does not meet current 
needs and trends. It does not provide adequate knowledge to primary and secondary 
level  students,  or  enough  university  programs  that  would  produce  cyber  security 
experts. Yet, the demand for such experts is high. 

 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

15 

 

 
Main goals 

 

 

 

 

  

 

A.  Efficiency and enhancement of all relevant structures, processes, and of 

cooperation in ensuring cyber security 

•  To  develop  an  effective  cooperation  model  at  the  national  level  among  the  cyber 
security actors – CERT and CSIRT teams, CII subjects, etc. and reinforce their existing 
structures and processes. 

•  To develop a national incident handling procedure that will set a cooperation format, 

contain a communication matrix, a procedure protocol and define each actor’s role. 

•  To develop a risk assessment methodology at the state level. 
•  To maintain a consistent approach to the Czech Republic’s external positions on cyber 
security  issues  that  will  be  coordinated  with  other  departments  involved  in  cyber 
security.7  

•  To  reflect  in  an  appropriate  manner  the  continuous  development  of  cyber  threats 
reviewing  national  strategic  and  security  documents 

when  preparing  or 
(Security Strategy of the Czech Republic and others). 

                                                           
7 The specific procedure for coordination with other agencies involved shall be treated in the Action Plan. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

16 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

B.  Active international cooperation 
•  To engage actively in international discussion taking place in the fora, programes and 
initiatives  of  the  EU,  the  NATO,  the  UN,  the  Organization  for  the  Security  and 
Cooperation  in  Europe,  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  and  other 
international organizations. 

•  To  promote  cyber  security  and 

inter-state  dialogue  within 

the  Central 

European region. 

•  To establish and deepen bilateral cooperation with other states.  
•  To participate in and organize international exercises. 
•  To participate in and organize international trainings. 
•  To participate in creation of an efficient cooperation model and in confidence building 
among CERT and CSIRT teams at international level, international organizations and 
academia.  

•  To  contribute  to  fostering  an  international  consensus,  within  formal  and  informal 
structures, on legal regulations and behaviour in cyberspace, safeguarding of an open 
Internet, and human rights and freedoms. 
 

C.  Protection of national CII and IIS  
•  To  pursue  a  continuous  analysis  and  control  of  CII  and  IIS  security  in  the  Czech 

Republic based on a clearly defined protocol. 

•  To support creation of new CERT and CSIRT teams in the Czech Republic. 
•  To enhance, on a continuous basis, the CII and IIS networks’ resistance, integrity and 

trustworthiness. 

•  To  analyse  and  monitor,  on  a  continuous  basis,  the  threats  and  risks  in  the 

Czech Republic. 

•  To share, in an efficient manner, information among the state and CII and IIS subjects.  
•  To continue to increase technological capacities and capabilities of the National Cyber 
Security  Centre  (hereinafter  “NCSC”)  and  of  GovCERT.CZ  while  providing  their 
personnel with continuous training and education. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

17 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

•  To secure in a thorough and reliable manner a CII and IIS data storage environment to 

be established and managed by the state.  

•  To  perform  regular  testing  of  and  detect  errors  and  vulnerabilities  in  information 
systems  and  networks  used  by  the  state,  based  on  CII  and  IIS  penetration  testing 
principles. 

•  To  enhance,  on  a  continuous  basis,  technological  and  organizational  prerequisites 

for active countering (suppression) of cyber attacks.  

•  To  increase  national  capacities  for  active  cyber  defence  and  cyber  attack  counter-

measures. 

•  To train experts specialised in questions of active counter-measures in cyber security 

and cyber defence and in offensive approach to cyber security in general. 

•  To  develop  a  procedure  for  transition  from  the  state  of  cyber  emergency  declared 
pursuant to the Act on Cyber Security, to the states defined in Constitutional Act No. 
110/1998 Coll., On Security of the Czech Republic.  

 

D.  Cooperation with private sector 
•  To continue cooperation with private sector and raise general awareness of the NSA's 

activities in the cyber security field. 

•  To  create,  in  cooperation  with  private  sector,  uniform  security  norms,  standardize 

the cooperation and set an obligatory protection level for CII subjects.   

•  To  ensure,  in  cooperation  with  private  sector,  a  cyberspace  offering  a  reliable 
environment  for  information  sharing,  research  and  development  and  provide 
a secure information infrastructure stimulating entrepreneurship in order to support 
the competitiveness of all Czech companies and protect their investments. 

•  To  provide  education  and  raise  the  private  sector's  awareness  of  cyber  security. 
Provide  the  private  sector  with  guidance  on  how  to  behave  in  crisis  situations, 
particularly during cyber incidents but also in their day-to-day activities. 

•  To  build  trust  between  private  sector  and  the  state,  including  through  creation 
of a national platform/system for information sharing regarding threats, incidents and 
imminent dangers.  

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

E.  Research and development / Consumer trust 
•  To  participate  in  national  and  European  research  projects  and  activities  concerning 

cyber security.  

•  To  designate  the  NSA  as  the  main  point  of  contact  for  cyber  security  research. 
The NSA shall contribute to coordination of research activities in this field in order to 
avoid  duplications.  Cyber  security  research  will  thus focus  on  substantive  problems 
and on transfer of research outputs into practice.   

•  To cooperate with private sector and academia on development and implementation 
in  order  to  ensure  their  maximum  protection 

of  state  used  technologies 
and transparency. Test and evaluate the level of security of the technologies used. 

•  To  cooperate  with  private 

sector  and  academia  on 

research  projects 
(including  primary  and  experimental  research)  and  on  activities 
in  technical 
disciplines and social sciences, at the national, as well as European and international, 
transatlantic levels.  

•  To make research and development a national priority and thereby actively stimulate 

investments in this field. 

 

F.  Education, awareness raising and information society development 
•  To  raise  cyber  security  awareness  and  literacy  of  primary  and  secondary  school 
students, as well as among the large public, i.e. end users, through the intermediary 
of supporting initiatives, awareness campaigns, organizing public conferences etc. 

•  To modernize the existing primary and secondary school curricula and support new 

university study programs designed to produce cyber security experts.  

•  To  provide  relevant  education  and  training  to  public  administration  staff  involved, 

but not exclusively, in the field of cyber security and cybercrime. 
 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

19 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

G.  Support  to  the  Czech  Police  capabilities  for  cybercrime  investigation  and 

prosecution 

•  To reinforce the personnel of individual cybercrime police departments. 
•  To modernize technological equipment of specialized police departments.  
•  To establish direct and prompt cooperation links for the field of cybercrime between 

relevant national entities and other security forces. 

•  To support international cooperation in information sharing and training in the field 

of cybercrime.  

•  To provide professional education and training to police specialists. 
•  To  create  a  multidisciplinary  academic  environment  to  enhance  the  Czech  Police 

capacities in cybercrime prosecution. 

 

H.  Cyber  security 

legislation 

framework). 
Participation in creation and implementation of European and international 
regulations. 

(development  of 

legislative 

•  To create a comprehensible, effective, and adequate cyber security legislation based 

on systemic approach and taking into account the existing legislation. 

•  To participate actively in creation and implementation of European and international 

regulations.  

•  To assess, on a continuous basis, the effectiveness of cyber security legislation and its 
conformity to the latest findings in relevant technical disciplines and social sciences, 
and  regularly  update  and  amend  such  legislation  in  order  to  reflect  current 
requirements of a secure information society.  

•  To  support  cyber  security  related  education  of  the  judiciary  (ie.  Prosecutors 

or judges). 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

20 

 

 
 
Implementation 

 

 

 

  

 

Based  on  the  main  goals  of  the  Strategy  and  in  coordination  with  all  stakeholders 
involved, an Action Plan is prepared to define specific steps, responsibilities and deadlines 
for their fulfilment and auditing8.  

The  NSA  and  the  NCSC  as  its  specialized  department  shall  continuously  monitor, 
discuss,  and  evaluate,  in  cooperation  with  other  stakeholders,  the  levels  of  achievement 
of individual goals. It shall submit an annual “Report on the State of Cyber Security in the 
Czech  Republic”  to  which  information  on  fulfilment  of  the  Action  Plan  shall  be  annexed. 
The report shall inform the government and the general public on effectiveness of measures 
adopted and on progress in fulfilment of tasks defined by the Strategy. 

 

 

 

                                                           
8 The Action Plan is expected to be adopted by the Government of the Czech Republic during the second 
quarter of 2015. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

21 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 
Annexes 
Annex No. 1 
List of abbreviations 
CERT – Computer Emergency Response Team 

CSIRT – Computer Security Incident Response Team 

DDoS/DoS – Distributed Denial of Service / Denial of Service 

IPv4 – Internet Protocol version 4 

IPv6 – Internet Protocol version 6 

CII – Critical Information Infrastructure 

IIS – Important Information System  

NSA – National Security Authority 

NCSC – National Cyber Security Centre 

 

 

 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

22 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
Annex No. 2 
Glossary9 
Botnet  
Network of infected computers controlled remotely by a bot master which can thus access 
thousands  of  machines  at  the  same  time.  It  allows  illegal  activities  on  a  large  scale  – 
in particular, attacks such as DDoS and spam distribution. 

 

Cloud / Cloud storage 
Digital data storage model for online environment.  

DDoS / DoS attacks 
Attack techniques from many vectors on the internet services or pages, resulting in requests 
flooding or breakdown or non-functionality or unavailability of the system for other users.  

Forensic analysis  
Investigative  approach  to  digital  data,  which  aims  to  obtain  evidence  on  user’s  (attacker) 
activities.  

Hacktivism 
Hacking services use for social or political goals. 

Malware 
General  term  for  malicious  programs  including  computer  viruses,  Trojan  horses,  worms, 
spyware. 

Reverse engineering 
Reverse analysis of the malware in order to extract the design and functioning principles. 

Penetration testing  
Analysis of functions of a computer system and networks, with the objective of finding out 
weak spots in computer security so that these could be removed. 
 

                                                           
9 A more ample thesaurus for cyber security is available on the www.govcert.cz site. 

WWW.GovCERT.CZ 

23 

