FRENCH  
NatioNal  
digital security  
stRatEgy

France is fully committed to the digital transition. Boasting a highly 

connected population, buoyed by sustained growth in its digital economy, 
France draws on talents and strengths on the cutting edge of European and 
global innovation.

Yet, the digital universe is also a locale for competition and confrontation. 
Cyberspace has become a new domain for unfair competition and espionage, 
disinformation and propaganda, terrorism and criminality.

The ‘Actions to promote the digital Republic’ planned by the French 

government are intended to promote our values, our economy and protect 
our citizens. By reinforcing digital security, we favour the development of a 
cyberspace that provides a sustainable source of growth and opportunities for 
French companies, thus asserting our democratic values and safeguarding our 
citizens’ digital lives and personal data.

I have high ambitions in this regard. The national digital security strategy 
must be founded, in particular, on training and international cooperation. It 
must be supported by the entire national community: the government and the 
public sector at national and local levels, businesses, and, more broadly, all 
our countrymen. This is each and all of us’ concern.

Meeting the security challenges of the digital world is a key to our 

collective success. I hope that this national digital security strategy will launch 
a new dynamic that will simultaneously provide better protection and unfetter 
our energies.

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Manuel Valls
Prime minister

Courtesy translation. Foreword from Manuel Valls, Prime Minister of France,

French national digital security strategy

FRENCH NatioNal  
digital sECuRity  

stRatEgy

The digitalisation of French society 

is accelerating, with relentless 

growth in digital services, products 

and jobs. This has become a 

national issue. The digital transition 
favours innovation and growth, yet 
it simultaneously carries risks for 
the State, economic stakeholders 

and citizens. Cybercrime, espionage, 
propaganda, sabotage and excessive 

exploitation of personal data 

threaten digital trust and security, 

thus calling for a collective, 

coordinated response based on five 

strategic objectives.

#  Fundamental interests, defence and security of 
State  information  systems  and  critical  infrastruc-
tures, major cybersecurity crisis.

By developing autonomous strategic thinking, sup-
ported  by  world-class  technical  expertise,  France  will 
ensure  the  ongoing  defence  of  its  fundamental  inte-
rests  in  cyberspace.  In  parallel,  France  will  continue 
to reinforce the security of its critical networks and its 
resilience in case of a major cyberattack by expanding 
cooperation with private stakeholders at national and 
international levels.

# Digital trust, privacy, personal data, cybermale-

volence.

For  cyberspace  to  remain  safe  for  businesses  of 
all  sizes  and  for  individuals,  protective  measures  and 
remedial  actions  will  be  adopted.  Protection  will  be 
based on public authorities’ heightened vigilance regar-
ding the use of personal data and the development of a 
range of digital security products tailored to the gene-
ral public. Remedial actions will be structured around 
aid to victims of cybermalevolence, providing technical 
and legal assistance.

#  Awareness  raising,  initial  training,  continuing 

education.

Individuals still lack sufficient awareness of the risks 
associated with the digitalisation of society. This is why 
steps  will  be  taken  to  raise  the  awareness  of  school-
children and students. In addition, to meet increasing 
demands from the public and private sector regarding 
cybersecurity,  training  of  experts  in  this  domain  will 
be enhanced.

#  Environment  of  digital  technology  businesses, 
industrial policy, export and internationalisation.

The growth of digital markets worldwide, together 
with the associated security imperatives, constitutes an 
opportunity to differentiate French digital products and 
services that have a security level adapted to their uses. 
By supporting investment, innovation and exports, but 
also  via  public  procurement,  the  State  will  develop  a 
favourable  environment  for  French  companies  in  the 
digital sector offering secure products and services.

#  Europe, digital strategic autonomy, cyberspace 

stability.

The regulation of international relations in cybers-
pace has become a major issue. France, along with like-
minded Member States, will promote a road map for 
European digital strategic autonomy. France will also 
fortify its influence in international bodies and provi-
de support to the least-protected countries, with their 
consent,  to  build  their  cybersecurity  capabilities,  the-
reby contributing to the overall stability of cyberspace.

Digital  security  underpins  the  digital  Republic 
project. In this regard, the State plays a major role 
in elaborating this strategy and in launching a dy-
namic that must now be maintained by digital-sec-
tor  professionals,  public  and  private  decision-ma-
kers and citizens.

3

iNdEX

iNtRoduCtioN

Page 7

objECtivE 1

Fundamental interests, defence and security of State information systems  

and critical infrastructures, major cybersecurity crisis.

Page 13

objECtivE 2

Digital trust, privacy, personal data, cybermalevolence.

Page 19

objECtivE 3

Awareness raising, initial training, continuing education.

Page 25

objECtivE 4

Environment of digital technology businesses, industrial policy, export and internationalisation.

Page 29

objECtivE 5

Europe, digital strategic autonomy, cyberspace stability.

Page 37

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — iNtRoduCtioN

iNtRoduCtioN

France  is  going  through  its  digital  transition. 
Networks  are  omnipresent  in  the  functioning  of 
the  State,  economic  activity  and  the  daily  lives  of 
citizens. 

Digital  technology  engenders  new  uses,  new 
products and new services and is therefore a factor 
of  innovation.  It  leads  to  transformation  in  most 
trades.  It  transforms  sectors  of  activity  and  bu-
sinesses giving them more flexibility and competi-
tiveness.  Boosted  by  digital  support,  these  sectors 
are simultaneously more exposed to digital threats.  
Doing without digital technology or the lack of 
access to it results in a form of economic and social 
exclusion. Similarly, the sovereignty of a State that 
does not have the autonomy required in the digital 
sector would be threatened.

For  digital  technology  to  remain  an  area  of 
freedom, exchanges and growth, trust and security 
must be established and defended. Only through a 
collaborative and coordinated effort can this objec-
tive be attained.

*     *

*

An  initial  cybersecurity  strategy  was  developed  in 
France  in  early  2010  and  was  published  in  early  2011 
shortly after the discovery of a cyberattack, the inten-
tion of which was to spy on the economic and finance 
ministries. The attackers, who had been acting for se-
veral months, had taken control of the core of one of 
the ministerial networks and were regularly collecting 

political, economic and financial information.

This  type  of  cyberattack  targets  many  French  bu-
sinesses of all sizes in all sectors of activity. Businesses 
are also the target of all types of fraud such as malware 
infection that makes the business’ files unusable until a 
ransom is paid by means that are difficult to trace.

In  parallel,  computer  system  intrusions  aimed  at 
stealing  personal  information  (identity,  identification 
data on commercial websites and bank details) are on 
the rise. Most of the times, it concerns criminals com-
mitting  crimes  that  are  identical  to  those  known  in 
the material world such as theft, fraud and blackmail, 
but in an industrialised manner, with less risk of being 
identified and prosecuted. Organised crime has seized 
the opportunity provided by electronic communication 
networks. Their technical capabilities are increasing to 
the point where they are now capable of carrying out 
acts of sabotage or taking production tools hostage, for 
themselves or through subcontracting by hybridisation.
Harassment  campaigns  are  developing  on  social 
networks,  such  as  cases  of  fraud  victimisation  where-
by  gullible  subjects  are  persuaded  to  transfer  money 
abroad. 

The defacement of many websites, notably those be-
longing to territorial authorities, following the attacks 
of January 2015 and the cyberattack a few weeks later 
on a French international media have demonstrated the 
intention and ability of organised groups to cripple in-
formation system resources that support our daily lives.
What was recognised as «the state of threat» esta-
blished in 2010, therefore turned out to be accurate. At 
present, the threat is intensified by the increase in the 
capabilities of attackers, the proliferation of techniques 

7

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — iNtRoduCtioN

of  attack  and  the  development  of  organised  crime  in 
cyberspace.

But another type of challenge has arisen; that posed 
by  the  appropriation  of  digital  wealth  by  a  business 
oligopoly  using  their  dominant  position  to  interfere 
with the arrival of new businesses and to harness the 
added  value  of  this  budding  economy,  which  will  ex-
ploit data intended to invent new services, improve our 
daily lives or make public services more accessible. At 
the forefront of these data is our personal data; inclu-
ding those related to our privacy. Control of this mass 
of  data  opens  the  way  to  economic  destabilisation 
and  to  sophisticated  forms  of  propaganda  or  ways  to 
mislead people’s judgments and habits. In this respect, 
this threat is a matter for national defence and security, 
because of its national extent and strategic issues. 

tiated by the State’s services.

The ministries have become aware of the political 
and  technical  impact  of  information  technologies  on 
their missions and administration activity and are be-
coming equipped with coordinators in charge of digital 
issues and the security aspects thereof. A State Infor-
mation  Systems  Security  Policy  was  developed  and  is 
progressively being implemented.

In  the  coming  years  it  should  be  possible  to  reap 
the benefits of the measures taken and to extend the 
scope of public action and stakeholders. It must now be 
acknowledged and made known that the defence and 
security of digital technology depends on the national 
community and not only on the action of the State. 

*     *

*

*     *

*

In  light  of  these  risks,  which  unfortunately  are 
already established, much has already been accompli-
shed. 

As was announced in the 2008 French White Paper 
on  Defence  and  National  Security,  a  national  agency 
was created as of 2009 to address cyberattacks and to 
protect  the  State  information  systems  and  critical  in-
frastructures.

An industrial policy in favour of the national cyber-
security  industry  is  notably  supported  by  the  future 
investments programme and in the framework of the 
«Future industry» plan.

In  2013  the  French  Parliament  voted  for  the  mea-
sures recommended by the Government aimed at rein-
forcing  the  cybersecurity  of  operators  of  vital  impor-
tance and of those who participate in their most critical 
information systems.

France’s  positions  are  supported  within  all  inter-
national bodies, and notably the United Nations (UN) 
which  acknowledged  the  application  of  international 
law to cyberspace in 2013. In addition, bilateral opera-
tional  relations  with  several  countries  have  been  ini-

Up until the past few years, our defence and natio-
nal security depended on the expertise, behaviour and 
decisions of men and women with access to the most 
sophisticated,  protected  and  secret  installations  and 
equipment.  But  with  the  emergence  of  a  society  that 
is massively connected, this responsibility is now par-
tially shared by all French people. One connected ob-
ject or one service that is inadequately secured by its 
developers, negligence by one information systems’ se-
curity decision-maker, dangerous behaviour by one ser-
vice provider or by one employee who carelessly mixes 
private  life  and  professional  life  can  lead  to  losses  in 
availability, confidentiality or integrity of essential in-
formation, suspensions in activity and economic losses, 
industrial accidents and losses of human lives or eco-
logical  catastrophes  and  disturbances  in  public  order, 
capable of affecting the life of the entire nation.

In  fact,  never  has  the  stability  of  our  future,  sup-
ported  by  digital  technology,  been  so  dependent  on 
each person’s responsibilities and on the collective res-
ponsibilities of three communities of stakeholders.

The first community is responsible for recommen-
ding and implementing technologies, products and ser-
vices equipped with the level of security that is adap-

8

ted to the uses and capable of mitigating the identified 
risks.  The  main  stakeholders  in  this  community  are 
researchers, product and service inventors and integra-
tors,  cybersecurity  businesses,  electronic  communica-
tions network operators, internet service providers and 
remote data processing services. 

The second community is responsible for protecting 
the nation from digital pirates. Besides the implemen-
tation of cybersecurity policies, an aggressive policy to 
develop the required technical competences should be 
adopted, and an environment of trust should be esta-
blished that supports the society’s digital transforma-
tion by defending citizens, our values and our interests 
in cyberspace. This responsibility obliges the bearer to 
express his position in favour of qualified security solu-
tions and to promote national industry, also in relation 
to export. This community consists of elected officials, 
the  Government,  central  and  territorial  administra-
tions and trade unions.

The  third  community  is  responsible  for  using  the 
available services and technologies in a well thought-
out  manner,  making  rational  choices  and  avoiding 
high-risk  behaviours  in  actions  related  to  digital  life. 
This community consists of all users, companies’ mana-
gers, participants in civil society and citizens.  

These  are  synallagmatic  commitments  made  by 
each  stakeholder  that  enable  France  to  fully  benefit 
from the contributions of digital technology, transform 
the choices related to digital security into national com-
petitive advantages – which are often currently expe-
rienced as an economic and behavioural constraint – 
and to promote our values, products and services.

The  role  of  the  State  in  cyberspace  is  to  ensure 
France’s freedom of expression and action as well as the 
security of its critical infrastructures in case of a major 
cyberattack (objective 1), to protect the digital lives of 
citizens  and  businesses  and  combat  cybercriminality 
(objective 2), to ensure the education and training re-
quired for digital security (objective 3), to contribute to 
the development of an environment that is conducive to 
trust in digital technology (objective 4) and to promote 
cooperation between Member States of the European 
Union (EU) in a manner favourable to the emergence 

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — iNtRoduCtioN

of a European digital strategic autonomy, a long-term 
guarantor of a cyberspace that is more secure and res-
pectful of our values (objective 5).

9

FIVE

STRATEGIC
objECtivEs

1

FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS,  

DEFENCE AND SECURITY OF STATE 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND  
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES,  
MAJOR CYBERSECURITY CRISIS

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 1

 STAKES

France is the target of cyberattacks that da-

mage its fundamental interests.
Today, when an attacker targets the State, 
operators  of  vital  importance  or  strategic  bu-
sinesses, the aim is for long-term installation in the 
information  system  in  order  to  steal  confidential 
data (political, diplomatic, military, technological, 
economic, financial or commercial). In the future, 
an attacker could take control of connected objects, 
remotely interrupt an industrial activity or destroy 
its target. Since 2011, about one hundred major cy-
berattacks have been addressed, most often in com-
plete confidentiality, by competent administrations 
and service providers.

In parallel, the positions taken by France on the 
international scene, its military operations and cer-
tain  public  debates  are  followed  by  cyberattacks 
aimed  at  marking  public  opinion.  For  example, 
the  defacement  of  many  websites  after  the  terro-
rist  attacks  that  targeted  France  in  the  beginning 
of 2015 had a technically low but symbolically high 
impact  desired  by  the  attackers.  Similarly,  the  cy-
berattack  that  led  to  the  interruption  of  an  inter-
national French media was also aimed at making 
a strong impression and contributes to the radica-
lisation that leads to terrorist acts. This attack also 
demonstrated the capacity of attackers determined 
to disrupt the functioning of a highly symbolic in-
frastructure. 

For several years now many States have imple-
mented  their  political  will  and  considerable  hu-
man,  technical  and  financial  means  to  carry  out 
large-scale cyberspace operations against us.

Whether  they  are  known  through  publicly  dis-
closed documents or revealed during the treatment 
of cyberattacks, the excesses of such practices harm 
the credibility of some of these States on the inter-
national scene and destroy the trust that would be 
naturally attributed to their businesses’ digital pro-
ducts and services.

Therefore,  the  cyber  risk,  which  was  placed  in 

14

« the excesses of such practices harm 
the credibility of some of these States 
on the international scene and destroy 

the trust that would be naturally 
attributed to their businesses’  
digital products and services. »

third  position  for  major  threats  to  France  by  the 
2013 White Paper on Defence and National Security, 
is now reinforced and constitutes a major challenge 
facing France.

 OBJECTIVE

France will ensure the defence of its fundamen-
tal interests in cyberspace. It will reinforce the digi-
tal security of its critical infrastructures and do its 
utmost  to  ensure  that  of  its  essential  operators  to 
the economy.

 ORIENTATIONS
>  Having  the  scientific,  technical  and  industrial 

capabilities required to protect sovereign informa-
tion, ensure cybersecurity and develop a trustwor-
thy digital economy.

An Expert Panel for Digital Trust will be created, 
under  the  aegis  of  the  State  Secretariat  for  Digital 
Technology  and  the  National  Authority  for  the  Secu-
rity of Information Systems.

The Expert Panel for Digital Trust will very regu-
larly unite the competent administrations of the Prime 
Minister, the Ministries of National Education, Higher 
Education  and  Research,  Justice,  Defence,  Social  Af-
fairs, Health and Women’s Rights, Economy, Industry, 
and Digital Technology and the Ministry of the Inte-
rior, the General Commission for Investment, the Na-
tional Research Agency and the research organisations 
concerned. The panel can include stakeholders from the 

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 1

private sector and qualified key figures in their work.

The mission of this panel will notably be to identify 
the key technologies for which in-depth knowledge is 
required  for  cybersecurity  professions  and  in  general 
for the development of a trustworthy digital environ-
ment. It will evaluate the initial and continuing edu-
cation needs, will monitor Research and support its de-
velopment, participate in improving support for young 
PhD holders. In the field of digital technologies, it will 
contribute to setting the strategic goals of systems for 
financing and supporting research and industrial deve-
lopment. This work will be implemented in consistence 
with that of the structures that have already been es-
tablished such as the French Security Industries Sector 
Association (CoFIS).

In  general,  the  choice  of  major  private  stakehol-
ders  in  terms  of  economic  or  technological  model, 
which  are  sometimes  external  to  any  normalisation 
framework,  or  simply  certain  innovations  in  digital 
uses, can consolidate trust or incite mistrust. The Ex-
pert Panel for Digital Trust will organise technological 
and economic monitoring through which evolutions of 
digital  related  issues  can  be  anticipated.  If  necessary, 
adapted measures will be recommended to support or 
supervise these changes. These measures could, for exa-
mple, concern the protection of the Nation’s scientific 
and technical potential or the control of foreign invest-
ments in critical national businesses.

The  ministerial  coordinators  for  cyberspace  issues 
in collaboration with the General Secretary of Defence 
and National Security will come together in an Expert 
Panel Commission for the subjects that fall within its 
competence. 

This Expert Panel will also give an annual report to 

the Prime Minister on its activities.

>  Ensuring  active  monitoring  of  the  security  of 

technologies and uses for the State, businesses and 
citizens.

In  anticipation  of  major  technological  develop-
ments, such as the 5th generation of mobile telecommu-
nications (5G) or «software-defined networks», France 

will  remain  attentive  to  the  type  and  capabilities  of 
equipment and software installed within these electro-
nic communication networks, to protect the privacy of 
correspondences, that of its citizens and the resilience 
of these infrastructures, and will continue to adapt its 
regulatory framework to new emerging technologies.

The National Authority on Information Systems Se-
curity will regularly inform the ministries, businesses, 
territorial  authorities  and  citizens,  by  means  adapted 
to the target community, of factors that might present 
a danger in terms of digital use. These information will 
have been consolidated beforehand with the competent 
administrations.

> Accelerating the reinforcement of State Informa-

tion Systems Security.

Since  2010,  several  measures  have  been  taken  to 
raise the level of security of State information systems. 
A  State  Information  Systems  Security  Policy  (PSSIE) 
was developed, an inter-ministerial electronic commu-
nications  network  is  in  rapid  growth  and  the  roll-out 
of secured mobile terminals has been initiated. These 
measures,  like  those  aimed  at  producing  the  security 
equipment to protect sovereign information, mobilise 
human and budgetary resources. They will be pursued 
in order to provide to the Government and our military 
capabilities with the level of security adapted to long-
term preservation of France’s autonomy in making de-
cisions and taking action. 

The  application  of  the  State  Information  Systems 
Security Policy and the effectiveness of the measures 
adopted will be evaluated annually. An annual confi-
dential report will be transmitted to the Prime Minis-
ter and the Parliament will be informed by means of 
indicators.

With  the  same  objective  of  informing  the  Parlia-
ment, as of 2016, bills will have a section in their impact 
assessment dedicated to digital technology which will 
also  include  cybersecurity,  established  under  the  aus-
pices of the senior civil servants in charge of the qua-
lity of regulation. More broadly, senior civil servants in 
charge of the quality of regulation will ensure that the 

15

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 1

16

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 1

issues related to the reinforcement of the security of in-
formation systems is taken into account in the steering 
of the normative process.

> Preparing France and the multilateral organisa-
tions to which it belongs to face major cybersecurity 
crises.

Reinforcement of the security of the most sensitive 
information systems of operators of vital importance, 
which was announced in the 2013 White Paper on De-
fence and National Security, was the subject of legisla-
tive measures (Articles 21 and 22 of law n° 2013-1168 of 
18 December 2013). The work started with these opera-
tors will continue over the long term, notably by rou-
tine updating of regulatory texts. This work will be pro-
gressively extended, as is specified by the law, to public 
and private operators who participate in these sensitive 
information systems.

This choice made by France will have made it pos-
sible to actively participate in the development of the 
orientations  of  the  European  Directive  concerning 
measures  to  ensure  a  high  common  level  of  network 
and information systems security across the Union and 
to  anticipate  its  transposition.  At  the  right  moment, 
France will specify the operators who are essential to 
its economy according to the orientations of the Direc-
tive and will participate in the European initiatives in-
tended to reinforce their digital security. 

Over  time,  cybersecurity  crises  management  exer-
cises carried out at the national level will progressively 
concern the entire territory and vitally important acti-
vity sectors. The Ministry of Defence, in collaboration 
with  the  National  Authority  on  Information  Systems 
Security,  will  continue  to  implement  a  cyberdefence 
reserve for operational purposes to face major informa-
tion technology crises. 

In parallel, France will continue to contribute to the 
emergence of an environment of voluntary cooperation 
for cybernetic crisis management at the European level, 
by supporting the work of the European agency ENISA 
(European Union Agency for Network and Information 
Security) in particular.

It is up to the CERT-EU (Computer Emergency Res-
ponse Team of the European Union (EU) institutions, 
bodies and agencies) and to the NCIRC (Computer Inci-
dence Response Capability) within the North Atlantic 
Treaty  Organization  (NATO)  to  ensure  the  cyberde-
fence of their respective institutions. France, which is 
active  during  cybersecurity  crisis  management  exer-
cises  organised  by  these  organisations,  and  which  is 
highly represented in proceedings that orient EU and 
NATO choices concerning secured digital technologies, 
will continue to provide its support to these institutions 
and their members according to their respective com-
petences.

France will also contribute to reinforcing the cyber-
security of other international organisations to which it 
belongs, on a political and technical level, notably those 
hosted on the national territory that benefit from the 
national technical environment.

> Developing an autonomous way of thinking that 

is in line with our values.

The strategic choices made by France immediately 
after the Second World War led to the emergence of an 
autonomous way of thinking and the development of a 
doctrine that gave France a unique place on the inter-
national scene and today still permeates its diplomacy 
and the concepts behind the use of its armed forces.

Although digital technology fundamentally changes 
our societies, its impact on other realities such as those 
of sovereignty, national territory, currency or the fun-
damental interests of the Nation is yet to be measured 
and  the  organisation  and  means  of  public  action  to 
make the law apply to it or to ensure their protection 
must be reconsidered. A discussion, coordinated by the 
General  Secretary  of  Defence  and  National  Security, 
will be held to develop an intellectual corpus related to 
cyberspace.

17

2

DIGITAL TRUST, PRIVACY,  

PERSONAL DATA, CYBERMALEVOLENCE

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 2

 STAKES

Although  in  general  the  French  trust  in 

digital  technology,  they  are  wary  of  its 
impact on their daily lives and especial-
ly their personal lives. But despite being generally 
careful in the use and preservation of their personal 
data, they entrust them to platforms for which the 
conditions of use are one-sided to users’ detriment. 
The technique noted during certain cyberattacks 
against businesses or administrations also shows a 
real  difficulty  separating  private  and  professional 
life when using equipment and services. 

The  objective  of  cyberattacks  against  indivi-
duals is usually financial gain. By taking control of 
the  personal  equipment  used  (computers,  tablets, 
smartphones), usurping identity and stealing users’ 
banking  or  commercial  website  credentials,  star-
ting a friendly virtual relationship that ends with a 
request for a money transfer, or encoding data wit-
hout the user’s knowledge resulting in the payment 
of a ransom, racketeering is today widely practised 
by a criminal element that has become organised 
and increasingly efficient. 

While no special technique of attack is used, ha-
rassment, which is facilitated and amplified by elec-
tronic communication networks, is a digital aggres-
sion against people with results that are sometimes 
tragic.

Although  the  National  Cybersecurity  Agency 
(ANSSI)  is  the  identified  State  contact  in  case  of 
serious  cybersecurity  incidents  that  affect  the  ad-
ministrations  and  operators  of  vital  importance, 
there is far less clarity regarding the public offer for 
assistance  to  victims  of  cybermalevolence  for  the 
other  stakeholders,  whether  it  concerns  interme-
diate-sized enterprises, small and medium-sized en-
terprises, liberal professions, territorial authorities 
or individuals. 

Victims of cybermalevolent acts are encouraged 
to  file  a  complaint  with  the  police  or  gendarme-
rie  services  which  have  adapted  to  the  treatment 
of  such  disputes.  Nevertheless,  the  response  with 

20

which  they  are  provided  in  this  framework  is  fo-
cused on the identification of those suspected of the 
cybermalevolent  acts  and  on  the  commitment,  if 
applicable, to filing proceedings against these sus-
pects. Victims must be able to reach a service that 
is competent in the treatment of the cybersecurity 
incidents as these incidents are often the source of 
the cybermalevolent acts.

Digital  platforms,  including  social  networks, 
can shape opinion more insidiously and are often 
vectors  of  values  that  are  not  those  of  the  French 
Republic. In certain cases, they can be used for pur-
poses of disinformation and spreading propaganda 
to French citizens, in particular the youngest ones. 
The  opinions  that  are  disseminated  are  therefore 
against France’s fundamental interests and are an 
attack  on  defence  and  national  security  which  is 
sanctioned by law.

Another area of concern is the recent and simul-
taneous developments of new uses and new data sto-
rage and processing techniques which contribute to 
the emergence of risks of economic imbalance and 
attacks on individual and national security. For exa-
mple, the desire to introduce the free flow of data, 
including  personal  data  collected  by  connected 
objects, through commercial treaties, does not suc-
cessfully mask the intent to appropriate these data 
by  oligopolies  whose  values  and  practices  do  not 
correspond with the French or European concept of 
privacy or with its legal framework. Massive and il-
licit appropriation of certain types of personal data, 
for example, health-related data, can actually affect 
individual and collective security, or simply result 
in abusive commercial exploitation (resale to insu-

« Digital platforms, including social 
networks, can shape opinion more 
insidiously and are often vectors  

of values that are not those  
of the French Republic. »

« Digital technology development 

cannot be sustainable in a cyberspace 
where States do not respect the good 

practices required for a balanced digital 

transition that is beneficial  

to all nations »

rance companies, for example). 

Digital technology development cannot be sus-
tainable in a cyberspace where States do not respect 
the  good  practices  required  for  a  balanced  digital 
transition that is beneficial to all nations and where 
a few economic players monopolise the wealth that 
constitutes digital data, notably personal data, true 
resources for future generations.

 OBJECTIVE

France will develop cyberspace use that is in line 
with its values and will protect the digital lives of 
its  citizens.  It  will  increase  its  combat  against  cy-
bercrime and its assistance to victims of cybermale-
volence acts.

 ORIENTATIONS
> Advocating and defending our values on electro-

nic communication networks and in international 
proceedings.

Individual  rights  are  applicable  in  the  same  way 
«on-line» and «off-line». Cyberspace should therefore 
remain a place of free expression for all citizens, where 
abuses can only be prevented within the limits set by 
the law and in line with our international agreements. 
In international proceedings, France advocates this ap-
proach aimed at preserving a free and open cyberspace. 
It is the State’s responsibility to inform citizens of 
the risks of manipulation and propaganda techniques 
used by malicious players on the Internet. After the ter-
rorist attacks against France in January 2015, the Go-

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 2

vernment established an information platform on the 
risks related to Islamic radicalisation via the electronic 
communication networks : « Stop-djihadisme.gouv.fr ». 
This approach could be extended to respond to other 
phenomena of propaganda or destabilisation. The com-
petent defence and security services are responsible for 
detecting these phenomena and providing the Govern-
ment  with  recommendations  for  implementing  these 
measures.

>  Providing  local  assistance  to  victims  of  cyber-
malevolent acts.

Co-piloted by the Ministry of the Interior and the 
National  Agency  for  Information  Systems  Security, 
with the support of the Department of Justice, the Mi-
nistries of Finance and Public Accounts, Defence, Eco-
nomy and Industry, and Digital Technology, a national 
system will be established as of 2016 to provide assistan-
ce for victims of cybermalevolence. 

This system will also be aimed at increasing aware-
ness of the challenges of protecting digital privacy and 
of prevention which, on a local level, will be based on 
measures taken by prefects and State services. ANSSI’s 
territorial network, the regional economic intelligence 
delegates and the competent economic security depart-
ments of the Ministry of the Interior, the «digital tran-
sition» network and that of the Bank of France (which 
could in the long run, integrate a criterion related to 
the consideration of the cyber risk in its company lis-
ting)  will  participate  in  this  mission.  An  appeal  will 
be made to the Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
the Guild Chambers and in general all the professional 
networks. 

The system will have a legal form and an organisa-
tion that will enable it to benefit from the contribution 
of  economic  stakeholders  from  the  cybersecurity  sec-
tor; software editors, digital platforms and solution pro-
viders.  Thanks  to  the  technologies  implemented,  the 
system should provide victims with technical solutions 
supported by local stakeholders and facilitate adminis-
trative procedures, notably to encourage the lodging of 
complaints.

21

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 2

> Measuring cybercrime.

The inter-ministerial work initiated by the Ministry 
of the Interior since 2013 has led to the conclusion that 
there are currently no reliable statistics specifically re-
lated  to  digital  delinquency  or  cybercriminality  since 
most of the offences concerned are registered under a 
classification  that  does  not  take  into  account  this  di-
mension, which is currently absent from the reference 
systems used.

The absence of such statistics is detrimental to the 
elaboration by the public authorities  of policies conti-
nuously  reassessed  and  to  the  implementation  of  ade-
quate measures. This is why the Ministry of the Interior 
will implement new instruments to monitor the develop-
ment of cybercrime in order to guide public action. The 
National Delinquency and Penal Solutions Monitoring 
Agency will also contribute to it by dedicating a section 
of its work to the statistical examination of cybercrime. 
This section will integrate data transmitted by the Na-
tional  Authority  on  Information  Systems  Security  and 
by the system for the assistance of victims of cybermale-
volent acts, which have contributed to its elaboration.

> Protecting the digital lives, privacy and personal 

data of the French people.

With the prospect of the European Regulation on 
electronic identification (eIDAS - Electronic Identifica-
tion and Trust Services), France will equip itself with 
a  clear  road  map  for  digital  identity  delivered  by  the 
State. This road map will be established before the end 
of 2015 under the aegis of the Ministry of the Interior 
and Secretaries of State in charge of Digital Technolo-
gy and State Reform, supported by the Departments of 
the Prime Minister, and should include a section that 
will define a framework of reference to the benefit of 
the territorial authorities to use digital identity delive-
red by the State.

This road map will take into account the Govern-
ment’s digital strategy which provides for the roll-out 
of federated identity systems to enable the use of the 
same digital identity to authenticate the same person 
on different services. Thanks to these systems, digital 
identities can be provided by different entities as long 
as the third party responsible for managing the fede-
rated  identity  is  capable  of  determining  the  level  of 

22

trustworthiness associated with the identity.

Subject  to  compliance  with  the  security  require-
ments adapted to the uses and threats, these systems 
are intended to increase users’ trust in their digital wor-
ld and contribute to its smooth flow while minimising 
the risk of unwanted processing of their personal data. 
For more sensitive use, such as that which concerns de-
mocratic life or international exchanges related to the 
law, high levels of trustworthiness of the systems and 
services will be systematically enforced. These high le-
vels of trustworthiness will rely on the national indus-
trial make-up and the established security certification 
scheme.

France will protect its citizens’ privacy and personal 
data. The right to privacy and individual and collective 
control  of  personal  data  will  be  reaffirmed  whenever 
necessary and notably during commercial negotiations 
between States, whether bilateral or multilateral.

To  inform  the  French  people  on  the  use  made  of 
their  data  entrusted  to  digital  services,  an  identifica-
tion system adapted and shared with the participating 
States and consistent with the European work carried 
out in the framework of the European Regulation re-
lated to the protection of personal data will be establi-
shed during 2016. This identification system will make 
it  possible  to  view  the  essential  characteristics  and 
conditions of use for digital platforms and services or 
means of payment used.

>  Recommending  technical  solutions  aimed  at 
securing digital life and which are accessible to all 
businesses and the general public.

The competent State services will label securing so-
lutions for personal terminals. An identification system 
that is consistent with the one recommended above will 
enable users to be informed of the potential transmis-
sion of information to third parties in the framework 
of this protection. Once created, the system for the as-
sistance of victims of cybermalevolent acts mentioned 
above, as part of its mission of prevention, will advocate 
these systems to the public concerned. 

In addition, and since it was possible to initiate this 

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 2

by  the  future  investments  programme,  the  offer  of 
accessible  and  adapted  solutions  to  secure  the  digital 
lives of small and medium-sized enterprises will be sup-
ported.

Support  for  the  development  of  French  solutions 
will be provided as well as for the free software com-
munities that develop security solutions.

>  Reinforcing the operational mechanisms of le-
gal international mutual aid and universalising the 
principles  of  the  Budapest  Convention  on  Cyber-
crime.

The  Budapest  Convention,  which  was  adopted  in 
2001 in the framework of the Council of Europe, has 
become a reference instrument that enables States of 
the five continents to cooperate in the combat against 
cybercrime.  Ratified  by  46  States,  including  7  non-
members  of  the  Council  of  Europe,  this  instrument 
now unites 125 States for one reason or another (signa-
tories, States invited to become members, States recei-
ving technical assistance in view of future membership, 
States that have adapted their internal law to the model 
of the Convention). 

It  is  now  essential  to  universalise  and  consolidate 
the base of norms as well as the tool of cooperation that 
this text is composed of.

In  addition,  France  will  advocate  the  definition 
of  a  system  of  simplified  legal  cooperation  between 
Member States within the European Union in order to 
accelerate the transmission of data and put an end to 
illegal activities.

23

24

stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTION3

RAISING AWARENESS, INITIAL  
TRAINING, CONTINUING EDUCATION

25

stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTIONFrench nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 3

 STAKES

France is late in comparison to its partners 

in terms of raising the awareness of its po-
pulation  to  the  risks  associated  with  the 
use of digital technologies and in cybersecurity trai-
ning.  

In  general,  the  French  neglect  good  practices 

when using electronic communication networks. 

In  private  use  of  electronic  communication 
networks, children and adolescents confronted with 
unsuitable content, exposed to harassment or pre-
dation, are the primary victims. In order to break 
the silence and enable legal proceedings, the youn-
gest subjects should be taught how to proceed when 
they are victims of digital malevolence.  

Raising the awareness of everyone is a required 
prerequisite  for  elected  officials,  administrative  or 
business leaders to be able to take «cyber risk» into 
account  at  the  right  level  and  to  choose  measures 
capable of protecting the citizens whom they repre-
sent or the organisations that they run, in light of 
the threats of information or intellectual property 
theft, violation of personal data, or even exposure 
to breakdowns in activity and production accidents, 
with the technological or environmental impacts to 
which they are potentially exposed. 

Besides  raising  the  awareness  of  the  youngest 
subjects, training in digital technology professions 
should provide future professionals in the field with 
extensive information systems security skills, which 
remains currently absent from many higher educa-
tion programmes. 

In  addition,  the  content  and  number  of  initial 
training and higher education programmes for cy-
bersecurity professions do not meet the needs of bu-
sinesses and administrations.

26

 OBJECTIVE

France will raise children’s awareness of digital 
security and responsible cyberspace behaviours as 
of  school  age.  Initial  higher  education  and  conti-
nuing education will include a section dedicated to 
digital security adapted to the sector under consi-
deration.

 ORIENTATIONS
> Raising the awareness of all French people.

An ambitious awareness-raising programme for all 

French people should be initiated.

Under  the  command  of  the  Ministry  of  National 
Education,  Higher  Education  and  Research  and  the 
State Secretariat for Digital Technology, with the sup-
port of the Government’s Information Department and 
the National Agency for Information Systems Security, 
a call for a show of interest in the creation of educatio-
nal content for the general public will be launched.  

The Ministry of the Interior will continue the «In-
ternet Licence» operation which was initiated in 2014 
by  the  Gendarmerie  in  collaboration  with  a  private 
foundation, and taken over by the National Police since 
the beginning of 2015. This operation makes it possible 
to  raise  the  awareness  of  risks  and  to  give  advice  to 
more than 300,000 sixth-year students to protect their 
Internet browsing.

The visibility of the “A digital education for all” por-

tal of the CNIL will be reinforced.

The  associations  will  be  invited  to  develop  adver-
tising  campaign  projects  aimed  at  increasing  trust  in 
digital technology and which could become a part of a 
«great national cause».

>  Integrating  cybersecurity  awareness  into  all  
higher and continuing education programmes.

The Ministry of National Education, Higher Educa-
tion and Research, with the assistance of the University 
Presidents’ Conference, the Grandes Ecoles Conference 
and the competent administrations, will encourage the 
establishment  of  cybersecurity  awareness  correspon-
ding to the educational field in all initial higher educa-
tion programmes as of the start of the 2016 academic 
year.

The  Ministry  of  Social  Affairs  and  Employment, 
supported by the competent cybersecurity State admi-
nistrations, will initiate the consultations required for 
the organisations that provide continuing education to 
integrate cybersecurity issues adapted to the training 
in the curriculum as of 2016. 

Finally,  the  State  Secretariat  in  charge  of  Digital 
Technology, along with the ministries concerned and 
the support of ANSSI, will coordinate the initiation of 
the awareness programme for the professional catego-
ries in which an inculcation of cybersecurity issues is 
particularly necessary in relation to their societal res-
ponsibilities. These categories will be specified by the 
Strategic Committee for Digital Trust.

>  Integrating  cybersecurity  training  into  all  

higher  education  that  includes  some  information 
technology.

The «CyberÉdu» initiative launched in 2013 confir-
med that teachers involved in the higher education cur-
ricula for information technology professions are inte-
rested  in  the  subjects  related  to  information  systems 
security. This initiative should be reinforced.

The Ministry of National Education, Higher Educa-
tion and Research, with the assistance of the University 
Presidents’ Conference, the Grandes Ecoles Conference, 
the administrations and competent professional orga-
nisations, will ensure that information systems security 
training  adapted  to  the  field  and  which  covers  issues 
related to digital technology is provided in all initial hi-
gher education programmes as of the start of the 2016 
academic year. The priority should be to integrate these 

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 3

security elements in the existing courses and in a per-
tinent manner in the broader context of each field that 
is taught. It would be useful to base these steps on the 
educational contents being developed, in close collabo-
ration with the teaching community, in the framework 
of the CyberEdu project. 

The Ministry of Decentralisation and Public Service 
will ensure that training programmes for public service 
functions include elements of cybersecurity training. In 
collaboration with the Ministry of the Interior, it will 
ensure that the recruitment examination for the civil 
servants corps of information and communication sys-
tems engineers regulated by Decree n° 2015-576 of 27 
May 2015, as well as the training that will be provided 
for the members of the corps will have a cybersecurity 
section. 

In  light  of  a  growing  demand  from  our  partners, 
whenever  possible,  a  part  of  the  training  and  educa-
tion offer should be adapted to an international public, 
notably by providing programmes in the English lan-
guage.

> Recording and anticipating the initial and conti-

nuing education needs.

Under  the  aegis  of  the  Expert  Panel  for  Digital 
Trust, the short, medium and long-term initial training 
needs will be established in collaboration with all the 
stakeholders concerned in the administration and the 
private sector.

The professional trade unions will be called on to 
develop  and  implement  continuing  education  pro-
grammes  adapted  to  the  needs  of  employees  and  bu-
sinesses.

27

28

stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTION4

THE ENVIRONMENT OF DIGITAL 

TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES, INDUSTRIAL  
POLICY, EXPORT AND INTERNATIONALISATION

29

stratégie nationale pour la sécurité du numérique - INTRODUCTIONFrench nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

 STAKES

Cyberspace is under rapid growth. 100,000 

new objects connect to the Internet eve-
ry hour. Many French businesses partici-
pate in international shows and the success of the 
«French Tech» initiative for example, shows a real 
dynamism of French innovation in digital products 
and services. However, this reality should not hide 
a certain loss of control and real technological de-
pendence.

Large  equipment  that  ensures  the  functioning 
of  electronic  communication  networks  with  in-
frastructures  located  in  France,  is  often  designed, 
developed and managed from centres located out-
side  Europe.  The  same  goes  for  most  of  the  com-
munications  and  data  security  equipment  of  our 
operators of vital importance. The operation of an 
increasing  number  of  businesses  is  based  on  the 
use  of  applications  and  data  processing  hosted  in 
uncontrolled virtual spaces, supported by physical 
infrastructures located outside the national territo-
ry and not subject to European law. 

With  the  increase  in  the  number  of  connected 
objects or the concentration of on-line service plat-
forms in the hands of only a few stakeholders for 
example,  current  developments  both  in  techno-
logy and in economic models magnify this loss of 
control in the national cyberspace. In the event of 
an international crisis, access to entire sections of 
cyberspace could be contested. 

The answer to this issue of sovereignty requires 
first and foremost the maintenance of a strong and 
competitive national and European industry in the 
specialised field of cybersecurity products and ser-
vices.  In  general,  it  requires  the  development,  in 
France and Europe, of a digital equipment and ser-
vice offer that provides clients with the guarantees 
of security and trust adapted to the issues and uses. 
Users  do  not  have  the  means  to  ensure  the  le-
vel of security of digital objects and services them-
selves.  The  promotion  of  security  in  marketing 
arguments  by  suppliers  is  becoming  widespread 

30

« The development of an offer of 
cybersecurity products and services 
by national businesses in the digital 

technology sector should also 
be seen as an essential factor of 

competitiveness for these businesses. »

without, however, allowing for an objective evalua-
tion of the level of security actually achieved. The 
development of greater clarity in terms of security 
in the digital offer based on objective elements that 
can be verified by a third party, constitutes a major 
challenge for ensuring trust in the digital economy.
The  development  of  an  offer  of  cybersecurity 
products  and  services  by  national  businesses  in 
the  digital  technology  sector  should  also  be  seen 
as an essential factor of competitiveness for these 
businesses.  The  field  of  payment  methods  (smart 
cards, payment terminals, etc.) is the archetype of 
an economic sector in which an adapted level of se-
curity against threats which can be verified by third 
parties constitutes a first-line marketing argument. 
Several  national  businesses  hold  a  competitive  in-
ternational position in this sector that is largely due 
to the excellence that they were able to develop and 
demonstrate in the field of security. 

The  increase  in  cyber  threats  and  the  growing 
awareness of the reality of these threats will lead 
to making security an essential purchase criterion 
in many other sectors a few years from now. Acting 
now  to  improve  the  security  and  transparency  of 
the national offer for digital solutions also means 
preparing their future competitiveness.  

In 2015, the share of French businesses, and es-
pecially SMEs, that widely use digital technology is 
only within the average of the European countries. 
Catching up from behind should be accompanied by 
improved security of the digital lives of businesses 
starting  with  better  security  of  their  information 
systems.  This  is  essential  for  our  competitiveness 
and therefore our jobs.

The  challenge  for  French  businesses  is  to  re-
concile  the  search  for  productivity,  savings  and 

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

profitability with the use or development of digital 
products  and  services  that  do  not  endanger  their 
competitiveness or security, those of their partners 
or their clients.

Most digital equipment, objects and services that 
are currently available on the market do not have 
the level of data security that enables them to avoid 
an incident: data leakage, malfunction or break in 
service. For French businesses, ergonomics, the pro-
tection of personal data and the level of security of 
digital products and services that they develop and 
produce, in the short term should become a diffe-
rentiator, a competitive advantage for them and in 
return, for the nation. 

In  addition,  although  counterfeiting  does  not 
directly  fall  under  information  systems  security, 
counterfeit  cybersecurity  products  can  endanger 
the activity of organisations that purchase them.

In  terms  of  the  internationalisation  of  bu-
sinesses  and  export,  considering  the  environment 
of extreme international competition in which our 
partners  provide  solid  and  structured  support  to 
their industry, the State services should become sus-
tainably organised to support French cybersecurity 
businesses. 

The mobilisation and coordination of all the pu-
blic and private resources available are essential to 
increase  the  visibility  and  competitiveness  of  the 
French offer on an international level and to pool 
knowledge and feedback and thereby contribute to 

« For French businesses, ergonomics, 
the protection of personal data and the 
level of security of digital products and 
services that they develop and produce, 

in the short term should become a 

differentiator, a competitive advantage 

for them and in return,  

for the nation. »

the  sharing  of  information  between  the  different 
stakeholders in the field.

 OBJECTIVE

France  will  develop  an  environment  that  is  fa-
vourable to research and innovation and will make 
digital security a factor in competitiveness. It will 
support  the  development  of  the  economy  and  the 
international promotion of its digital products and 
services. It will ensure that digital products and ser-
vices with levels of ergonomics, trust and security 
adapted to the uses and cyber threats are available 
to its citizens, businesses and administrations.

 ORIENTATIONS
>  Developing and accentuating the national and 

European offer of security products and services.

In  collaboration  with  the  competent  administra-
tions of the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Digital 
Technology and the Ministry of Defence, in 2012 the 
National Agency for Information Systems Security ini-
tiated an industrial policy to develop the national fabric 
of businesses that develop cybersecurity products and 
services.

The  launch  of  the  New  Industrial  France  «cyber-
security»  plan  in  2013,  now  included  in  the  «Digi-
tal  Trust»  solution,  and  the  support  of  the  General 
Commission for Investment and of BpiFrance made it 
possible  to  organise  the  sector  and  issue  requests  for 
proposals  aimed  at  creating  an  offer  for  trustworthy 
equipment to detect cyberattacks, essentially for opera-
tors of vital importance, and secured mobile products 
for all businesses.

The State services will increase their efforts to qua-
lify  and  monitor  cybersecurity  products  and  services, 
and support the development of new security products 
that correspond to the changes in usage patterns. They 

31

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

32

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

will also support the enhancement and perpetuation of 
these offers through public contracting that chooses se-
curity products and services qualified at the right level, 
as well as by communication and educational measures 
for the private sector.

In  addition,  the  State  services  will  endeavour  to 
disseminate  the  results  of  research  and  development 
which  they  finance  for  high-level  security  equipment 
in order to raise the security level of products for bu-
sinesses and the general public. 

Finally,  France  will  endeavour  to  take  full  advan-
tage of leverage offered by the European Union to sup-
port, promote and defend French scientific, technolo-
gical and industrial competences in the cybersecurity 
fields. It will also discourage the EU from limiting itself 
to the role of consumer, and will incite it rather to stand 
out as an indispensable global stakeholder for the offer 
in this sector.

> Transferring acquired knowledge to the private 

sector to contribute to the handling of its cyberse-
curity.

For five years now France has equipped itself with 
the capacity to detect and respond to cyberattacks, as 
announced  in  the  2008  White  Paper  on  Defence  and 
National Security. Although this effort should be pur-
sued, notably by ANSSI, it is up to the private sector to 
ensure its own security in the field of information tech-
nology as is the case in other fields, since the State ser-
vices are only required to intervene in case of serious 
crisis. 

Supported  by  the  transfer  of  this  knowledge  ac-
quired  by  the  administrations  to  the  private  sector, 
labelling of competent and trustworthy service provi-
ders should enable the detection and treatment of the 
inevitable growth in the number of cyberattacks that 
businesses are subjected to.

>  Preparing a safer digital world through better 

anticipation of uses, adapted support and stakehol-
ders’ information.

For the next five years, the priority for the compe-
tent information systems security authorities should be 
anticipation and prevention. 

This  will  entail  ensuring  that  the  digital  products 
and  services  or  those  that  involve  digital  technology, 
which are designed, developed and produced in France, 
are among the safest in the world. To achieve this ob-
jective,  the  competent  authorities  should  direct  their 
communication efforts towards the public and private 
scientific community, and the innovation centres; com-
petitive clusters, technological research institutes, incu-
bators  and  «fab  labs»;  by  devoting  specific  means  to 
these areas as needed, as is the case with the Ministry 
of Defence, and more recently, the Ministry of the In-
terior. 

When  digital  products  and  services  store  personal 
data or are intended for the business sectors of vital im-
portance, the State services will provide the elements 
that  are  useful  for  risk  analysis  or  the  recommenda-
tions required to obtain the level of security that cor-
responds to the use of the product or the service being 
designed or developed. For uses that justify it, they will 
also contribute to establishing systems to independent-
ly  evaluate  the  level  of  security  and  trustworthiness 
of these products and services, and to providing their 
potential users with adapted guarantees through label-
ling. 

In parallel, the legal environment to accommodate 
new  products  and  services  should  be  anticipated.  For 
example,  the  imminent  arrival  of  autonomous  cars 
should  incite  the  regulator  to  prepare  the  conditions 
to ensure the security of their circulation. Cybersecu-
rity should be taken into account in the international 
working groups that define the framework and control 
technical procedures.  

For other types of products or services, an adapted 
identification  system  should  inform  the  consumer  of 
their essential digital features and notably the proces-
sing  of  the  data  that  is  collected.  For  certain  sectors 
such as the health sector, systematic labelling of digital 
products and services will be considered. 

France will endeavour to include other EU Member 
States in the implementation of these practices in order 

33

and optimised.

In addition, as is the case with «French Tech» crea-
tions, the collaborative initiatives generated by the pri-
vate sector and intended to assist SMEs and start-ups on 
an international level will be supported.

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

to create a zone of digital trust and security. The work 
initiated with Germany on cloud computing or secured 
messaging is moving in this direction.

>  Integrating the requirements for cybersecurity 
in public contracting and support.

For the protection of its sovereignty and notably the 
protection of its information concerning the national 
defence secret, France will preserve its financial and in-
dustrial capacity to develop solutions with the highest 
levels of security.

In general, the entire administration should set an 
example in public contracting by integrating the right 
level of security criteria in its choices of digital products 
and services.

Finally, as of 2016 any product or service that is em-
bedded  in  or  is  based  on  an  information  system  and 
wants to answer a call for tenders, a request for public 
projects,  or  be  eligible  for  public  funds,  will  benefit 
from a bonus factor if it is accompanied by a cybersecu-
rity risk analysis that corresponds to the intended use 
of the product or service.

>  Supporting  export  and  internationalisation  of 

the businesses in the sector.

To  support  the  economic  development  of  the  cy-
bersecurity  industrial  sector,  France  will  endeavour 
to  reinforce  the  visibility  and  competitiveness  of  the 
French offer worldwide and to facilitate access of SMEs 
and start-ups notably to the international markets.

Inter-ministerial  coordination  will  be  structured 
and  reinforced.  An  adapted  French  business  support 
organisation will be established in addition to the oc-
casional and often isolated measures that are currently 
led by the different ministries and State entities.  

Along with the possible creation of specific support 
systems  for  the  stakeholders  in  the  cybersecurity  sec-
tor,  the  conditions  for  access  to  the  existing  support 
systems, as well as their implementation methods will 
be clarified and optimised. The procedures to control 
exportations of cybersecurity solutions will be clarified 

34

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 4

35

5

EUROPE, DIGITAL STRATEGIC  

AUTONOMY, CYBERSPACE STABILITY

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 5

 STAKES

Cyberspace has become a major subject for 

negotiation  within  international  organi-
sations whose work now concerns the en-

tire digital field.

In 2013, the States acknowledged that far from 
being  a  space  without  rules,  cyberspace  was  go-
verned  by  existing international law.  Despite this, 
the  international  normative  framework  is  still 
being  debated,  which,  without  any  advancement 
in  negotiations,  could  harm  the  preservation  of  a 
stable  safe  cyberspace  that  is  compliant  with  the 
fundamental laws and is appropriate for the deve-
lopment  of  a  prosperous  trustworthy  economy  in 
the digital era. 

While an increasing number of countries are de-
claring themselves equipped with offensive capabi-
lities, the level of conflict between States is increa-
singly  being  expressed  in  cyberspace.  In  addition, 
the massive revelations of practices and espionage 
techniques carried out by major States or alliances 
of  States  against  other  States  (sometimes  allies), 
people and businesses, have increased the political 
mistrust of countries that are at the origin of these 
practices  and  technical  mistrust  of  their  products 
and  services.  These  revelations  also  contribute  to 
the proliferation of similar technical methods.

In  parallel,  groups  of  individuals  with  diverse 
motivations  and  supports,  mercenaries  recruited 
worldwide and associated according to the circums-
tances,  regularly  take  recourse  in  cyberattacks  to 
attempt to destabilise the governing authorities of 
many countries or businesses that symbolise them. 
In  addition,  terrorist  organisations  take  advan-
tage  of  the  audience  provided  by  social  networks 
to disseminate propaganda intended to attract vo-
lunteers and terrorise the populations. These diffe-
rent groups benefit from continuous media impact. 
On  the  economic  level,  the  trend  at  the  begin-
ning of the decade is being confirmed. A small nu-
mber of businesses supported by the States which 
enabled their development use their technological 

38

« Although it supports world growth, 

cyberspace has become a place  

of conflict and often unfair  

competition »

advance, their domination on the market and their 
financial capacities to pre-empt digital innovation. 
This privatisation of cyberspace to the benefit of a 
few  monopolies  condemns  the  other  stakeholders 
in digital technology to dependence and harnesses 
a share of the added value of digital technology that 
is too great for this situation to be bearable for the 
economies of the other countries. 

Although it supports world growth, cyberspace 
has  become  a  place  of  conflict  and  often  unfair 
competition, which until now has been one of low 
intensity in terms of information technology, and of 
political destabilisation and economic hegemony.

Europe has been able to identify these issues and 
through dialogue and regulations is trying to pro-
vide  ideas  and  solutions  that  are  more  respectful 
of  sustainable  digital  development,  both  in  terms 
of Internet governance and protection of personal 
data or cybersecurity of the operators who are es-
sential  to  the  economy.  Despite  having  adopted  a 
cybersecurity strategy in 2013, Europe is still strug-
gling to assert digital strategic autonomy and equip 
itself with the tools required to re-balance cybers-
pace in its favour, even though this subject is now 
on the agenda for many European centres for dis-
cussions and negotiations.

Because it shares common values with other EU 
Member  States,  France  and  these  Member  States 
should play a driving role in digital technology.  

France wants to participate in the digital trans-
formation  of  Europe  through  alliances.  Europe 
built itself in the past through an alliance based on 
raw materials. Digital Europe will build itself on al-
liances, trust and data control, the raw materials of 
the coming decades.

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 5

 OBJECTIVE

Along  with  voluntary  Member  States,  France 
will be the driving force behind European strategic 
autonomy. It will play an active role in the promo-
tion of a safe, stable and open cyberspace.

 ORIENTATIONS
> Establishing a road map for European strategic 

autonomy with voluntary Member States.

This  road  map,  which  is  open  to  the  European 
Union Member States, will determine the key factors of 
success of the short-term implementation of the policies 
that are adequate for the emergence of a European digi-
tal strategic autonomy, notably in terms of regulations, 
standardisation and certification, research and develop-
ment,  trust  in  digital  technology  —  while  respecting 
Member States’ sovereignty — the protection of priva-
cy and personal data conceived of as a public interest 
property.

Similarly, France will ensure that the international 
treaties negotiated in the name of Europe do not lead 

to technological or economic dependence of European 
stakeholders and to the alienation of the personal data 
of  its  citizens  or  sensitive  data  of  its  administrations, 
sources of destabilization of cyberspace. 

This  will  involve  making  Europe  the  digital  terri-
tory that is most respectful of the fundamental rights 
of  individuals  and  implementing  a  zone  of  trust  and 
economic  prosperity,  in  line  with  the  precursor  work 
between  France  and  Germany  on  Cloud  computing 
and  the  encrypted  exchange  of  e-mails  between  the 
two countries.

>  Reinforcing  French  presence  and  influence  in 

the international discussions on cybersecurity.

In  order  to  reinforce  trust  on  an  international  le-
vel and to explore new regulation mechanisms aimed 
at preventing conflicts in cyberspace, France will rein-
force its contact with all the parties directly involved 
who are willing to engage in dialogue on the issues of 
cybersecurity.

Participation  in  multilateral  negotiations  on  cy-
bersecurity  (UNO,  OSCE)  will  be  intensified  in  order 
to consolidate a global base of commitments to good 

39

French nATIOnAL DIGITAL SecUrITY STrATeGY — objECtivE 5

conduct  in  cyberspace  for  the  States,  in  compliance 
with international law. 

Bilateral contact will be reinforced, notably in the 
framework of inter-ministerial diplomatic dialogue on 
the  issues  concerning  cyberspace,  headed  by  the  Mi-
nistry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  International  Develop-
ment.

Finally, to assert its influence, France will increase 
its investment in more informal international forums 
in which the technical and academic communities and 
the political decision-makers come together to discuss 
the future balances.

> Contributing to the global stability of cyberspace 

by assisting voluntary countries to establish cyber-
security capabilities.

Digital transition, the bearer of political, social and 
economic  opportunities,  is  far  from  being  uniformly 
controlled  in  all  countries.  This  harms  the  security 
and development of States that are less protected, and 
weakens all digital environments on an international 
level. 

In order to contribute to a reliable and sustainable 
roll-out of digital technologies in all countries, and in 
particular the developing ones, France owes it to itself 
to  assist  in  reinforcing  the  capabilities  of  countries 
that would like to increase the resilience and security 
of their information systems, notably in terms of the 
protection  of  critical  infrastructures  and  the  combat 
against cybercrime. 

To ensure the durability and sustainability of pro-
jects  to  reinforce  capabilities,  France  will  preferably 
act through long-term trustworthy partnerships.  This 
action should also enable France to reinforce its own 
cybersecurity.

40

Text and illustrations Licence Ouverte/Open Licence (Etalab — V1)

Illustration credit : Marc Renaudin

