National Cyber Security 
Strategy 2

From awareness to capability2

Titel brochure hier invullen | 1 

Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport2  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

Foreword 

The digital domain has been a part of Dutch  society for 
more than two decades. During this period,  information 
and communications technology has proven to be an 
 important factor in productivity growth and  innovative 
power. The Netherlands is the European leader in 
 responding to technological trends and the  effective 
use of ICT tools and skills. The Netherlands is also 
an  international internet hub, has the world’s most 
 competitive internet market and has one of the highest 
number of internet users. 

Safeguarding digital security and freedom and 
 maintaining an open and innovative digital domain are 
preconditions for the proper functioning of our society. 
Therefore, we published the first National Cyber Security 
Strategy (NCSS1) in 2011. The purpose of the NCSS1 was 
to realise a secure, reliable and resilient digital domain 
through an integral cyber security approach based on 
public-private partnerships, as well as to seize the ensuing 
opportunities for society. 

Developments in the digital domain, both national and 
international, are taking place at a rapid rate. In recent 
years, the potential and actual impact of cyber  security 
threats have become clearer due to a number of highly 
 publicised incidents. These threats may not only  disrupt 
our digital infrastructure, but may also  compromise 
the integrity, availability and confidentiality of the 
 information we document, analyse and exchange in the 
digital domain. 

In order to be able to continue to respond to these 
threats, the Netherlands plans to further strengthen 
and extend their alliances with public and private 
parties, both national and international. This involves 
not viewing cyber security as an isolated element, but 
rather in correlation with human rights, internet freedom, 
privacy, social-economic benefits and innovation. The 
National Cyber Security Strategy 2 (NCSS2) explains this 
broader government vision on cyber security and states 
responsibilities and concrete steps. 

Furthermore, extensive consultations were held with the 
wider ICT community. At the request of the government, 
the Cyber Security Board, consisting of representatives 
from public and private parties as well as the world of 
academia, gave recommendations about the course of the 
new strategy.

With this strategy, the Netherlands wants to continue 
to be the world leader in the area of cyber security. 
 Fortunately, we do not have to start from scratch. The 
 Netherlands already has a solid digital  infrastructure 
and has many internet pioneers and innovative 
ICT  entrepreneurs who are active the world over. 
 Furthermore, the Netherlands has a proven talent in 
building coalitions: not only within its borders, but also 
in the area of international peace and security. Together, 
we can create a secure, free and profitable digital domain. 
Everyone will have to take responsibility for his or her own 
digital resilience and for society’s digital resilience. The 
government is taking the lead with this new strategy and 
will publish annual reports about the progress made.

About 130 parties, including public and private parties, 
knowledge institutions and social organisations, were 
involved in the drafting of this new cyber security strategy. 

The Minister of Security and Justice
I.W. Opstelten

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  3 

4  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

Table of contents

 

 

Foreword 

execuTive SuMMary 

The iMporTance oF cyber SecuriTy 

1 
1.1   Introduction 
1.2   Threats 
1.3   Challenges 

2  viSion 
2.1   Introduction: to a new approach and working method 
2.2   Security, freedom and social-economic benefits 
2.3   Clear roles, active participants 
2.4   International vision and use: an integrated approach 

 approach 

3 
3.1   Ambition and strategic goals 
3.2   The Netherlands is resilient to cyber attacks and  

protects its vital interests in the digital domain 

3.3   The Netherlands tackles cyber crime 
3.4   The Netherlands invests in secure ICT products and  

services that protect privacy 

3.5   The Netherlands builds coalitions for freedom,  

security and peace in the digital domain 

3.6   The Netherlands has sufficient cyber security  

knowledge and skills and invests in ICT innovation  
to attain cyber security objectives 

3.7   A joint effort 

 
 

annexe 1: 
2014-2016 action programme 

3

7

13
13
15
15

17
17
17
19
20

23
23

23
24

25

25

25
26

27

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  5 

‘We are moving from structures to 
coalitions in which all parties — national 
and international — are represented in 
order to achieve supported standards.’

6  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

Executive  
summary

For more than two decades, the digital domain1 
has been a part of Dutch society and it has made 
an important contribution to productivity growth 
and innovative power. The Netherlands has made 
substantial investments in the way in which it responds 
to technological trends and the effective use of ICT tools 
and skills. Partly for that reason, the Netherlands has 
become an international internet hub, with the world’s 
most competitive internet market and one of the highest 
number of internet users. As a result of this, the digital 
domain has become more intertwined with our daily 
lives. Having a secure digital domain is a precondition 
to making optimal use of the opportunities offered by 
digitisation to society.

 

 

Cyber security refers to efforts to prevent damage caused by 
disruptions to, breakdowns in or misuse of ICT and to repair 
damage if and when it has occurred. 

Such damage may consist of any or all of the following: 
reduced reliability of ICT, limited availability and violation of 
the confidentiality and/or integrity of information stored in the 
ICT systems.  

In recent years, we have gained more insight into 
the threats and vulnerabilities in the digital domain. 
According to the Cyber Security Assessment Netherlands 
(CSBN), the biggest threats come from other states and 
professional criminals. The threats from other states 
mostly concern the theft of confidential or  competition-
sensitive information (cyber espionage), while 
professional criminals mainly focus on digital fraud and 
theft of information. Due to the increased complexity of, 
dependence on and vulnerability of ICT-based products 
and services, our digital resilience to these and other 
cyber threats is currently still insufficient.

In addition to these threats, we are also facing other 
challenges in the digital domain. For instance, major 
international private parties have increased their 
influence in determining the rules in the digital domain, 
and the civil and military domains have become more 
intertwined. Furthermore, the international policy 
context of cyber security has become wider. Cyber 
security cannot be realised in isolation and therefore will 
have to be viewed in correlation with internet freedom, 
including freedom of speech and privacy, and social-
economic benefits, in terms of the economic and social 
opportunities digitisation offers. 

All these developments require us to now take the next 
step in the approach to cyber security, based on the 
following vision:

  Working with international partners, the Netherlands aims 

to create a secure and open digital domain, in which the 
opportunities for our society offered by digitisation are used 
to the full, threats are countered effectively and fundamental 
rights and values are protected. 

The table on the next page provides a rough idea of the 
step we will take with the NCSS2.

The correlation between security, freedom and social-
economic benefits proposed in the NCSS2 is a dynamic 
balance that is intended to be realised in a constantly 
open and pragmatic dialogue between all stakeholders, 
both national and international. For this, we need a 
clear governance model. The underlying fundamental 
principle is that the responsibilities that apply in the 
physical domain should also be taken in the digital 
domain. In order to bring the dialogue about cyber 
security between the various stakeholders to a new level 

1 

The digital domain is the conglomerate of ICT tools and services and comprises all entities that can be or are digitally linked. The domain comprises both permanent, 

temporary or local connections, as well as information, such as data and programme codes, located in this domain where geographical limitations do not apply.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  7 

ncSS1

ncSS2

Public-private partnership

Private-public participation 

Focus on structures 

Focus on networks / strategic coalitions

Formulation of multi-stakeholder model  

Clarifying the relationships between the various stakeholders 

Capacity-building in the Netherlands

Capacity-building both in the Netherlands and abroad

General approach: deploy wide capacity for resilience-increasing 
measures

Risk-based approach: balance between protection of interests, 
threat to interests and acceptable risks in society

Formulation of fundamental principles

Presentation of (policy) vision 

From ignorance to awareness

From awareness to capability2

of maturity, the following three management areas are 
of the utmost importance: (self) regulation, transparency 
and knowledge development. These themes have been 
included in this strategy in various forms.

The Netherlands also plans to promote the outlined 
integral approach on an international, involving all 
parties, which is aimed the correlation between security, 
freedom and social-economic benefits. 

The government will play a more active role in the digital 
domain. On the one hand, by increasing investments in 
the security of its own networks and services and, on the 
other hand, by bringing parties together and by taking 
action if the security of companies and private individuals 
or the latter’s privacy come under threat. Where 
necessary, the government will establish frameworks 
and standards, for instance when it comes to the security 
requirements of vital services and processes.  

Private individuals are expected to apply some form of 
‘cyber hygiene’ (basic security measures) and to take 
a certain amount of personal responsibility. For their 
part, the government and the business community 
will facilitate this by improving their digital skils and 
by emphasising their duty of care with respect to their 
clients. This also includes offering secure ICT products 
and services. Companies and government bodies have 
to be accountable for their responsibility in this respect 
and practise transparency about which cyber security 
measures they take and about how they handle user 
data. It is the government’s goal to enable citizens and 
businesses to digitally and safely handle their affairs with 
the government by 2017.

The Netherlands wants to play a prominent role in 
the search for new coalitions for defence, diplomacy 
and development in which all parties involved are 
represented, in order to reach internationally accepted 
standards related to actions in the digital domain.  
Therefore, the Netherlands works actively towards 
international cooperation and will take up a clear position 
as cyber security mediator and hub. 

Based on the vision, the government aims to realise the 
following ambitions:

The Netherlands is a leader in cyber security: 
–  Dutch society knows how to make safe, optimal use of the 

advantages of digitisation. 

–  Dutch businesses and the research community are pioneers in 

‘security by design’ and ‘privacy by design’. 

–  Together with its international partners, the Netherlands 

is part of a progressive coalition that seeks to protect 
fundamental rights and values in the digital domain.

The realisation of these ambitions will be detailed on the 
basis of the following strategic objectives which serve as 
a guideline to the 2014-206 action programme. 

2  Not all parties in the Netherlands are sufficiently aware of cyber security. We will have to continue to give it our attention.

8  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

Security

Government

ncSS2

transparancy
knowledge

(self)regulation

Freedom 

business

private 

individuals

Social-economic benefits

Annual progress reports will be drawn up and the action 
programme will be updated when necessary.

1.  The Netherlands is resilient to cyber attacks and 
 protects its vital interests in the digital domain.

2.  The Netherlands tackles cyber crime. 
3.  The Netherlands invests in secure ICT products and 

services that protect privacy.

4.  The Netherlands builds coalitions for freedom, security 

and peace in the digital domain.

5.  The Netherlands has sufficient cyber security 

 knowledge and skills and invests in ICT innovation 
to attain cyber security objectives. 

The following themes are central elements of the 
objectives:

1  Risk analyses, security requirements and information 

sharing within critical infrastructure sectors

Within the framework of the protection of critical 
infrastructure, the government, working with vital 
parties, identifies critical ICT-dependent systems, 
services and processes. These efforts are linked 
to a programme that will establish basic security 
requirements on the basis of risk analyses.

2  More active approach to cyber espionage
The Dutch government is committed to raising 
awareness among citizens, businesses, organisation 

and government bodies about information security and 
privacy. The government also ensures that the issue is 
prioritised within the intelligence and security services, 
which will be given the tools to better document cyber 
threats and investigate and combat advanced attacks. 
To this end, the intelligence and security services have 
combined their cyber capabilities in the Joint Sigint Cyber 
Unit (JSCU).

3  Feasibility study on separate vital network
An exploratory study is conducted to determine whether 
it is possible and useful, from both a technical and 
organisational perspective, to create a separate ICT 
network for public and private vital processes. A separate 
network widens the range of options for safeguarding 
the continuity of vital processes. It also makes it possible 
to set up private, cloud-based data storage, thus 
strengthening the privacy and integrity of the data in 
storage or in the cloud concerned.

4  Enhancing civil-military cooperation
Civil and military domains within the digital domain 
have become more intertwined. Therefore, options for 
deploying the digital capabilities of the Netherlands 
Defence organisation on a national level in preventing 
and countering attacks on the civil infrastructure will be 
detailed. The central question is how to optimally share 
knowledge and expertise between civil parties and the 
Defence organisation.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  9 

A PPP taskforce on cyber security education is set up 
which will focus on giving advice about cyber security 
education. 

10  Encouraging innovation in cyber security
There is a need for more coordination of supply and 
demand, which can be achieved by linking innovation 
initiatives to leading sector policy. In addition, the 
government, the business community and the world of 
academia will launch a cyber security innovation platform 
where start-ups, established companies, students and 
researchers can connect, inspire one another and attune 
research supply and demand. The PPP implementation 
of the second edition of the National Cyber Security 
Research Agenda (NCSRA) will also contribute to this 
development.

5   Strengthening the National Cyber Security Centre
The position of the National Cyber Security Centre 
(NCSC) is bolstered by means of a stronger structure 
for confidential information-sharing and analysis. 
Furthermore, the NCSC assumes the role of expert 
authority, providing advice to private and public parties 
involved, both when asked and at its own initiative.  
Finally, based on its own detection capability and its 
triage role in crises, the NCSC develops into Security 
Operations Centre (SOC)3 in addition to its role as a 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT). 

6  International approach to cyber crime: updating and 

strengthening legislation (including the Criminal 
Code).

There is a need for effective, swift and efficient 
investigation of cyber crime in accordance with clear 
rules. Scarce capabilities have to be targetedly deployed 
among vulnerable sectors and groups. The Netherlands 
assumes a vanguard role in harmonising legislation 
governing international investigations, for instance in 
the Council of Europe. The Netherlands will also work to 
strengthen and expand international partnerships like 
EC3, at Europol. 

7  Supported standards, ‘security by design’ and ‘privacy 

by design’

Together with private sector partners, the government 
works to develop standards that can be used to protect 
and improve the security of ICT products and services. 

8  Cyber diplomacy: hub for expertise for conflict 

 prevention

The Netherlands aims to develop a hub for expertise 
on international law and cyber security. The goal of the 
hub for expertise is to promote the peaceful use of the 
digital domain. To this end, the Netherlands combines 
knowledge from existing centres. The centre brings 
together international experts and policymakers, 
diplomats, military personnel and NGOs. 

9  Taskforce on cyber security education
To enlarge the pool of cyber security experts and enhance 
users’ proficiency with cyber security, the business 
community and the government join forces to improve 
the quality and breadth of ICT education at all academic 
levels (primary, secondary and professional education). 

3 

In addition to response, SOC comprises other aspects from the cyber security chain, such as awareness, resilience, detection, alerting, reporting and crisis management.

10  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

We are taking the step from being aware 
to being capable. Expertise development, 
transparency and (self-) regulation are 
essential means to realise this. 

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  11 

More products and services are being 
connected with each other and with the 
internet. How safe is this and what does 
it mean for our privacy?

12  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

1  The importance of 
 

cyber security

The risks associated with ICT use have become 
increasingly clear in recent years due to a number of 
highly publicised incidents6. The advent of cloud services, 
mobile services and innovative, ICT-based applications 
nearly always usher in new vulnerabilities.  

 

 

Cyber security refers to efforts to prevent damage caused by 
disruptions to, breakdowns in or misuse of ICT and to repair 
damage if and when it has occurred. 

Such damage may consist of any or all of the following: 
reduced reliability of ICT, limited availability and violation of 
the confidentiality and/or integrity of information stored in the 
ICT systems.  

Increasing the Netherlands’ digital resilience cannot 
be achieved by the government alone, as the ICT 
infrastructure itself and knowledge about this 
infrastructure is largely in the hands of national and 
international private parties. Therefore, cyber security 
is the sum of joint efforts of government bodies, the 
business community, organisations and citizens, both on 
a national and international level. Just like in the physical 
world, 100% security in the digital domain can never be 
achieved.

1.1 inTroducTion
The digital domain4 has become more intertwined 
with our daily lives. Citizens, government bodies and 
businesses are using digital applications for online 
interactions, transactions, more efficient collaboration, 
communication and entertainment. More equipment 
with integrated ICT services is connected to the internet: 
computers and telephones, but also cars, thermostats 
and medical equipment. This increasing digitisation is 
not only for ease, efficiency and pleasure, but is also an 
important drive behind innovation and economic growth.

Key indicators of internet use in the netherlands5
– 
–  The Netherlands has the most competitive internet 

In 2012, the Netherlands had 1.2 million internet users.

market and the second highest percentage of computers 
per household in the world (94% of all households).
–  The Dutch are pioneers in using innovative, digital 
services: 95% of Dutch youth use social media; the 
Netherlands is the front runner in online banking in 
Europe, and in 2012, circa 10 million Dutch people 
shopped online. 

–  The turnover of the Dutch ICT sector amounted to 

29.8 billion euros in 2011, which is 5% of the GDP.

–  The ICT sector in the Netherlands is the most innovative 

– 

in the world. More than two-thirds of Dutch ICT 
businesses conducted research or other innovative 
activities in the period between 2008 and 2010.
In fact, the Netherlands functions as the digital gateway 
to Europe. Together with Germany and the United 
Kingdom, the Netherlands is responsible for 18% of 
worldwide internet traffic, owing to the three major 
internet hubs in Amsterdam, Berlin and London.

4 

The digital domain is the conglomerate of ICT tools and services and comprises all entities that can be or are digitally linked. 

The domain comprises both permanent, temporary or local connections, as well as information, such as data and programme 

codes, located in this domain where geographical limitations do not apply.

ICT Knowledge and Economy 2012, Statistics Netherlands.

For instance: the DigiNotar incident, a hacked municipal waste water system and the Pobelka botnet.

5 

6 

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  13 

Relation of the NCSS2 to strategic policy documents: 
The NCSS2 follows on from the insights and 
recommendations arising from the following strategic 
policy documents:

–  The National Security Strategy (NV Strategy) is aimed 

at preventing the compromise of vital national 
interests that may lead to social disruption.7 Both in 
2010 (cyber conflict) and in 2012 (cyber espionage), 
cyber security scenarios were included in the NV 
Strategy. 

–  The International Security Strategy8is aimed at actions 

taken by the Netherlands abroad and in cooperation 
with other countries to secure its interests. Cyber 
security is an important theme in this strategy, which 
is best acted on in collaboration with our European 
and international partners. 

–  The Defence Cyber Strategy9 is aimed at the role 

of the Netherlands armed forces in the digital 
domain. An important element in this strategy is 
that it acknowledges that military and civil, public 
and private, national and international actors have 
become more intertwined.

– 

In its Digital Agenda10, the Dutch government focuses 
on ICT being able to contribute to the country’s 
economic growth. In the Digital Agenda, the 
government formulates its ambitions for using ICT to 
further growth and prosperity, including the required 
preconditions, for having an open, reliable and swift 
infrastructure and for having sufficient ICT knowledge 
and making sufficient use of such expertise.

–  The information security awareness strategy11 for 

government administrators and managers. With the 
Taskforce on Management, Information Security 
and Services, the government pursues an active 
awareness policy to get the government’s information 
security at the desired level. This is not only an 
important precondition for the implementation 
of the government’s plans concerning the concept 
of the digital government 2017, but also in view of 
the Government-Wide Implementation Agenda for 
eGovernment Services until 2015 (i-NUP), in which a 
basic infrastructure will be realised.

–  The ePrivacy Letter12 describes preconditions for 
a sound protection of personal details privacy, in 
particular in the relationships between citizens and 
businesses.

–  The EU Cyber Security Strategy13, which was launched 

in 2013 is an important step towards a secure digital 
environment in Europe. The Dutch NCSS2 is in line 
with the fundamental principles of the EU Cyber 
Security Strategy, based on which the Netherlands is 
taking new steps.

– 

In the autumn of 2013, a medium-term vision on the 
telecommunications market was presented to the 
House of Representatives. The starting point of the 
vision is that the telecommunications market cannot 
be viewed as being separate from developments 
on the internet and that public values such as 
reliability and openness have to be reviewed by the 
telecommunications market in light of the broader 
context of internet economics. 

7 

8 

The five vital interests are: territorial security, physical security, economic security, ecological security, and social and political stability.

International Security Strategy, 21 June 2013

9  Defense Cyber Strategy, House of Representatives 2011 – 2013, 33 321, no. 1

10  Letter to Parliament ‘Digital Agenda.nl’, House of Representatives 2010 – 2011, 29 515, no. 331

11  Vision letter on the digital government, House of Representatives 2012 – 2013, 26 643, no. 280

12  Government view on e-privacy: on the road to justified trust. 24 May 2013

13  The EU Cyber Security Strategy ‘Protection of an open and free internet and opportunities in the digital world’ (February 2013) and associated draft 

directives: Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to ensure a high common level of network and 

information security across the Union (February 2013).

14  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

1.2 ThreaTS
In July 2013, the third Cyber Security Assessment 
Netherlands (CSBN) was published. The findings from this 
edition of the CSBN14 are an important source for a risk-
approach15 to cyber security. The CSBN shows that the 
biggest threats come from other states and professional 
criminals. 

States form a threat particularly in the form of theft 
of confidential or competition-sensitive information 
(digital espionage) of businesses, government bodies 
and citizens. Several states have made substantial 
investments in cyber capabilities and therefore have 
highly advanced equipment at their disposal. These 
states’ digital espionage activities are likely to be 
widespread, and many of these activities are currently 
undetected.

Professional criminals also continue to pose a substantial 
threat. Digital fraud and theft of information are the two 
most common crimes among professional criminals. 
Citizens, businesses and governments alike regularly 
fall victim to botnets and ransomware. Furthermore, 
a criminal cyber services sector, through which  ‘cyber-
crime-as-a-service’ is made commercially available, has 
expressly become visible. Access to such remedies has 
become cheaper and more low threshold for criminals. 

Despite the fact that good initiatives and measures 
have been taken to increase resilience to and 
awareness of such crimes, also based on the NCSS, 
society’s vulnerability is still on the increase. At many 
organisations, digital resilience is still below par. 
Relatively simple yet important technical basic measures, 
like the timely updating of systems or password 
policies, are often not implemented. Furthermore, 
many organisations are struggling with legacy systems. 
Replacing these outdated systems, on which often a vital 
part of an organisation’s information provision facilities 
depend, is a complex and expensive problem. 

1.3 challenGeS
Future developments in cyber security are hard to 
predict. However, a clear picture can be painted of the 
challenges which currently and in the long-term influence 
the security and openness of the digital domain:

–  The Internet of Things (everything is connected to the internet) 
and hyperconnectivity (everything is connected to each other) 
promotes innovation and results in usability. At the 
same time, it raises the question of whether or not 
digitally linked products and services are actually safe 
and what the implications may be for privacy.

–  The amount of data available in digital form is only increasing; 
as will the interest in acquiring such data. Governments 
and businesses, increasingly working with large data 
files, which are also increasingly stored in the cloud, are 
faced with increased risks. 

– 

–  The playing field in the digital domain is not only determined by 
states, but also by major private market parties. Governance 
in the digital domain is therefore complex and cannot 
always be solved in traditional forums, as it requires a 
multi-stakeholder approach. This applies to security 
standards as well as to the protection of fundamental 
rights and values.
In the cyber domain, we see an increasingly interwovenness 
of civil and military domains due to substantial mutual 
 dependence on similar ICT systems and application and the 
complex attribution issue. When it comes to the Dutch 
contingent deployed abroad, we have to take into 
 consideration that civil targets in the Netherlands may 
be subject to cyber attacks. Furthermore, in case of 
large-scale attacks, the Defence organisation’s cyber 
capabilities may be called upon to protect the vital 
national civil infrastructure. In view of the above, clear 
parameters for strengthened cooperation in the digital 
domain are needed.

–  The increased complexity and dependence on ICT-based 
 products and services require a higher level of expertise. 
This both concerns the level of expertise of average 
internet users and sufficiently-qualified experts. The 
Netherlands is expected to have a shortage of 6,800 IT 
workers in 2017.16

14  The NCSC publishes the CSBN each year and is produced in close cooperation with public and private parties. 

15  The risks desribed are determined based on three correlated factors: interests, threats and resilience.

16  Based on estimations of Nederland ICT.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  15 

Cyber security cannot be achieved in 
isolation and will have to be 
approached in correlation with subjects 
like fundamental rights, values and 
social-economic benefits. 

16  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

2  Vision 

  Working with international partners, the Netherlands aims 

to create a secure and open digital domain, in which the 
opportunities for our society offered by digitisation are used 
to the full, threats are countered effectively and fundamental 
rights and values are protected. 

2.1 inTroducTion: To a new approach and 
 worKinG MeThod
In 2011, we published the first National Cyber Security 
Strategy (NCSS1). A lot has happened since then. The 
partners within the National Cyber Security Centre have 
succeeded in gaining a better insight into threats. The 
third Cyber Security Assessment Netherlands has made 
a more focused approach possible. Furthermore, the 
international implementation has gained importance. 
Agreements about cooperation, standards of conduct 
and standards will have to be made in a European, and 
wider international, context. The international policy 
context has also become wider. Cyber security cannot be 
achieved in isolation and will have to be approached in 
correlation with subjects like fundamental rights, values 

and social-economic benefits. All these developments 
require us to now take the next step in the approach to 
cyber security, 

The table below provides a rough idea of the step we will 
take with the NCSS2.

2.2 SecuriTy, FreedoM and Social-econoMic 
beneFiTS
Cyber security measures require a tailor-made approach. 
This is shaped in three ways. Firstly, by tailoring measures 
to the problem they are intended to solve (risk-based), 
secondly, by always viewing cyber security in correlation 
with social-economic benefits, more specifically the 
economic and social opportunities digitisation offers and 
thirdly, by guaranteeing fundamental rights and values. 
This correlation between security, freedom and social-
economic benefits is a dynamic balance that is intended 
to be realised in a constantly open and pragmatic 
dialogue between all stakeholders, both national and 
international. 

ncSS1

ncSS2

Public-private partnership

Private-public participation 

Focus on structures 

Focus on networks / strategic coalitions

Formulation of multi-stakeholder model  

Clarifying the relationships between the various stakeholders 

Capacity-building in the Netherlands

Capacity-building both in the Netherlands and abroad

General approach: deploy wide capacity for resilience-increasing 
measures

Risk-based approach: balance between protection of interests, 
threat to interests and acceptable risks in society

Formulation of fundamental principles

Presentation of (policy) vision 

From ignorance to awareness

From awareness to capability17

17  Not all parties in the Netherlands are sufficiently aware of cyber security. We will have to continue to give it our attention.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  17 

Security

Government

ncSS2

transparancy
knowledge

(self)regulation

Freedom 

business

private 

individuals

Social-economic benefits

2.2.1. SECURITy
Cyber security concerns ICT security and the security 
of information stored in ICT systems. Disruptions to 
ICT-based services and processes may have major social 
consequences, and a disruption to vital services and 
processes may even lead to social unrest. Protecting 
personal information, state secrets and other sensitive 
information is vital for ensuring the trust parties have in 
the digital domain.  

Processing personal information and the protection of 
privacy is subject to strict standards and supervision, 
partly based on European legislation. Recent revelations 
about secret activities of states aimed at acquiring 
information underline the importance of raising 
awareness about information security among all 
stakeholders, as well as the necessity to increase our 
critical infastructures resilience to such activities.

A wide approach by the entire ICT security chain is 
required to reach the desired level of security18. It 
starts with having insight into the threats and a sound 
preventative approach, but it also requires parties to 
adopt an effective response strategy. This also means 
that criminals in the digital domain will have to be 
successfully stopped. There is a need for clarification 
regarding the role of the police service as well as for 
updated options and powers to realise an effective 
investigation and prosecution.

2.2.2 FREEDOM
Protecting fundamental rights and values requires many 
parties to make an effort and preferably takes place 
in a national and international context. The proposed 
approach entails the development of international 
standards. In addition to governments, an important 
role can be played by private sector parties and social 
organisations. The Netherlands is promoting this 
approach internationally, at the United Nations, during 
international cyberspace conferences, like the ones 
held in London, Budapest and Seoul, in other  multi-
stakeholder settings like the Internet Governance Forum, 
by promoting the principles of cyber security as published 
by the World Economic Forum, and in developing trust-
inspiring measures between states, like the Organisation 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

A good example of the multi-stakeholder approach is 
the Freedom Online Coalition which was initiated by 
the Netherlands and of which 21 countries have become 
a member and who jointly form a powerful lobby. The 
Netherlands aims to promote the growth of this coalition. 
We now have to take it a step further and have the 
starting points we developed become an integral part of 
meetings about cyber security standards, and incorporate 
them into the design of new and innovative products and 
services.

18  The security chain comprises: pro-action, prevention, preparing, repression and after-care (repair).

18  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

 2.2.3 SOCIAL-ECONOMIC BENEFITS
The innovative power of farther-reaching digitisation 
is an important stimulus for social-economic benefits. 
Social-economic benefits both concerns economic 
growth and the options digitisation offers society, for 
instance in the form of education applications, options 
for maintaining social contacts, but also improved 
government facilities. The government’s goal of enabling 
citizens and businesses to digitally handle their affairs 
with the government by 2017 will make an extra impact 
in the realisation of iGovernment.19 This will only enhance 
the social importance of iGovernment. Security and cyber 
security measures are therefore vital and require making 
some necessary investments.

Organisations have increasingly realised that by 
investing in cyber security, they can prevent major costs 
and a damaged reputation. This strategy is aimed at 
encouraging Dutch companies viewing cyber security as a 
competitive advantage.

Critical consumers have started to attach more and 
more importance to security and privacy, which is an 
opportunity for Dutch companies to invest in innovative 
products and services that take these things into account 
in the design stages. The government intends to play 
a stimulating role in this development by means of 
including cyber security requirements in its purchase 
conditions.  

2.3 clear roleS, acTive parTicipanTS
The digital domain comprises an abundance of parties 
and actors who have become increasingly connected 
to each other and dependent on each other. In order 
to be able to act safely in the digital domain, which is 
characterised by a great (chain) dependence between 
the parties, it is important for citizens, organisations 
and government bodies to actively participate (‘do 
democracy’20), based on a clear allocation of roles 
and a great degree of transparency. The underlying 
fundamental principle is that the responsibilities that 
apply in the physical domain should also be taken in the 
digital domain. How these roles relate to one another 
will become clear in the future. The direction in which the 
actors are moving is explained here. 

2.3.1 THE INTERVENING GOVERNMENT: FACILITATE, 
 PROTECT AND CONTROL
Security is one of the government’s core tasks, and 
this also applies to the digital domain. Countering 
cyber crime and cyber espionage and the prevention of 
social disruption caused by cyber incidents therefore 
are important priorities for the government. The 
starting points are a risk-based approach, strengthened 
cooperation and setting the right example by investing in 
the security of its own networks and services. 

In addition, the government is responsible for the 
online security and privacy and citizens. The protection 
of valuable and personal information of citizens and 
businesses and tackling cyber crime therefore remain 
the focal points. In May 2013, the government’s vision 
on e-privacy was published. The aim is to enable citizens 
to better control their personal information through the 
inclusion of the requirement of consent. Organisations 
are obliged to carefully, transparently and legally handle 
any information issued by citizens, and citizens should be 
able to call organisation to account.

Finally, the government has a duty to promote and 
facilitate initiatives aimed at increasing cyber security. 

If required, the government also acts in a controlling 
manner, which may include determining regulations 
and standards, for instance for the vital sectors. In 
consultation with the vital sectors, the government is 
establishing cyber security requirements where this 
has not been already done. Existing sectoral regulatory 
authorities will have to widen their scope, if they have not 
already done so, to also include cyber security, in which 
overlap should be prevented.

As an expert authority, the NCSC gives advice, both when 
asked and at its own initiative, when major vulnerabilities 
are detected or in the event of (imminent) crisis 
situations. It is then up to the organisations themselves 
to implement the recommendations, or to be transparent 
about their reasons for not doing so. This is particularly 
important when it concerns government bodies, also 
with respect to the regulatory authorities and/or line 
ministries. 

19  Vision letter on the digital government 2017, 23 May 2013, reference number 2013-0000306907

20  Government standpoint on the promotion of a vital society, the ‘do democracy’, Parliamentary Papers II, 2012-2013, 33400-VII no. 79

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  19 

2.3.2 THE COMPETENT CITIzEN: CyBER HyGIENE AND 
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITy
Citizens are expected to apply some form of basic ‘cyber 
hygiene’ and skills in using ICT, like surfing the web. 
This includes carefully using personal information, 
installing updates, using good passwords and balancing 
functionality and cyber security. The government 
works to increase the digital resilience of government, 
citizens and the business world. It aims to achieve this by 
means of awareness campaigns, strengthening digital 
skills, research and innovation and supporting social 
organisations and initiatives in the context of the ‘do 
democracy’. A policy that supports responsible disclosure 
and removes obstacles also fits in with this context. This 
also enables conscious and involved citizens to safely 
inform government bodies, businesses and institutions 
about detected vulnerabilities in their ICT security. 

2.3.3 RESPONSIBLE BUSINESSES: DUTy OF CARE AND 
 ACCOUNTABILITy
Citizens can no longer be expected to completely 
understand and assess the security and privacy aspects of 
ever more complex ICT services and -products, as offered 
by major international players. This clearly leaves room 
for ICT suppliers and producers. Security by design and 
privacy by design should more than currently be standard 
design principles.  

Providers of ICT networks and services or other ICT-
based services have a specific responsibility (duty of care) 
with respect to their clients. The substantiation of this 
responsibility must preferably be achieved by means of 
self-regulation. An example is the fight against botnets, 
in which Internet Service Providers (ISPs) play a vital role.

The dependencies in the digital domain are also 
expressed in the chain of producers, providers and 
clients. These mutual dependencies will have to be 
discussed by the chain partners in order to conclude 
joint agreements about minimum requirements, 
interoperability and reliable information-sharing. This 
also makes it possible to strengthen the security of the 
entire chain. Insurance companies can play a major role in 
insuring residual risks.

2.3.4 (SELF) REGULATION, TRANSPARENCy AND 
 KNOWLEDGE DEVELOPMENT AS CONTROL MECHANISMS
The Netherlands is working to realise an active 
participation of citizens, businesses and government in 

21  This is also called the 3D approach.

20  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

the digital domain in the context of an ever increasing 
mutual dependence between these actors and a complex 
environment in which a balance between security, 
freedom and social-economic benefits is constantly 
pursued.

This means that steps have to be taken from unaware 
via aware to capable. In order to make this movement 
towards a new level of cyber security maturity possible, 
the following three management areas are of the 
utmost importance: (self) regulation, transparency and 
knowledge development. These themes have been 
included in this strategy in various forms. (Self) regulation 
concerns the development of standards but also concepts 
like the duty of care. Transparency is a precondition for 
strenghtening trust between the actors. Examples of 
transparency are clear reports about measures taken by 
the government and the business world to improve cyber 
security and privacy measures. Knowledge development 
in the broadest sense of the word (awareness, education, 
innovation) is necessary to ensure that all actors can 
take their responsibility and optimally benefit from the 
opportunities offered by digitisation.

2.4 inTernaTional viSion and uSe: an inTeGraTed 
approach
As an open economy, the Netherlands benefits from a 
stable and freely accessible digital domain. In view of the 
fact that cyber security and international cooperation 
are inextricably linked, the Netherlands will promote its 
integral public-private cyber security approach outside 
its own borders. The approach developed in which 
defence, diplomacy and development come together in 
international missions to increase stability in the area 
concerned (crisis management and nation building) is 
the inspiration for the integral Dutch use of the digital 
domain21. 

The Netherlands wants to play a prominent role in the 
search for new coalitions in which all parties involved are 
represented in order to reach internationally accepted 
standards related to actions in the digital domain. 
To this end, the Netherlands works actively towards 
international cooperation and takes up a clear position 
as cyber security mediator and hub. 

2.4.1 DEFENCE
Defence in the digital domain not only concerns military 
capabilities, but also the wide civil range of capabilities 

2.4.2 DIPLOMACy
The Netherlands attaches great importance to 
mechanisms that ensure stability in the digital domain. 
We do this by investing in formal and informal alliances, 
within and outside of Europe, globally and in multi-
stakeholder settings. Therefore, with its position in 
the area of international law, the Netherlands wants 
to contribute to the discussions about the application 
of legal rules in the digital domain. In addition, cyber 
diplomacy instruments will have to be defined. This may 
be in the form of so-called trust-inspiring measures, 
‘rules of the road’, or standards of conduct.22 With The 
Hague as the city of international peace and security, the 
Netherlands aims to develop into an ‘international centre 
of cyber diplomacy’ where diplomats, policymakers and 
cyber experts come together.

2.4.3 DEVELOPMENT
Threats in the digital domain transcend boundaries. 
Therefore, the Netherlands can benefit from countries 
being able to counter such threats. The NCSC focuses on 
strengthening CERT capabilities in countries that request 
its support in this matter.

The Netherlands also supports capability building in the 
EU by means of, among other things, the implementation 
of the EU Cyber Security Strategy. The associated 
objective is to create a basic level of security and a level 
playing field. Promoting the cyber security approach in 
a European framework will be an important issue during 
the Netherlands’ EU presidency in 2016. Particular themes 
promoted by the Netherands in a European context, 
in addition to the forementioned strenghtened CERT 
cooperation, are:
–  Maintaining open standards, content and 

interoperability of the internet

–  Promoting innovation of secure ICT products (security 

by design) 

–  Security requirements for new and existing (embedded) 

ICT.

of intelligence and security services, the police service, 
national cyber security centres and businesses with 
their own response capabilities. This is a complex 
whole in which good agreements and coordination 
are preconditions, both national and international. 
Strengthened civil-military cooperation is therefore 
necessary.

In order to safeguard the deployability of the Netherlands 
armed forces and to increase the effectiveness of the 
armed forces, the Defence organisation is increasing its 
digital resilience and is developing its own capabilities to 
conduct cyber operations within the applicable statutory 
parameters. This concerns both the capability to protect 
its networks and systems from attacks and the capability 
to take offensive measures. The Defence organisation’s 
digital capabilities can be deployed nation-wide at the 
request of civil authorities. These capabilities will also 
be deployed in international operations, both as part of 
our own capabilities and for the benefit of strengthening 
or building the capabilities of local authorities. In doing 
so, the capabilities of the armed forces contribute to the 
integrated approach proposed by the Netherlands. 

NATO may play an important role as a facilitator, 
including promoting national capability build-up, 
improved information exchange and interoperability and 
public-private cooperation. The Netherlands also strives 
to participate in exercises and to strengthen EU-NATO 
cooperation, in which the overlap of capabilities should 
be avoided.

Cooperation in the area of defence in an EU context 
will be mostly aimed at crisis management, pan-
European exercises and the effective investigation and 
prosecution of cyber crime. In an international context, 
the Netherlands continues to promote the importance of 
a broader ratification of the Convention on Cybercrime 
of the Council of Europe (Budapest Convention). A good 
cooperation between national Computer Emergency 
Response Teams (CERTs) is of vital importance for swift 
actions and an early detection of threats, vulnerabilities 
and incidents. In the Netherlands, the NCSC fulfils 
this role. A further expansion and strengthening of 
existing alliances like the EGC and FIRST is a priority 
for the Netherlands. Flexibility and mutual trust are of 
paramount importance in these alliances.

22  The starting point for the Netherlands in this context are the UN’s Manifesto and the Geneva and The Hague Conventions.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  21 

Proficient users and a sufficient number 
of cyber security professionals are 
necessary for making optimal use of the 
opportunities offered by digitisation and 
for being resilient to the ever more 
advanced threats.

22  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

3  Approach 

The Dutch vision on cyber security is translated into 
a concrete approach, and is described in this chapter. 
Section 3.1 states the Dutch ambitions in the area of cyber 
security and the strategic objectives that support cyber 
security. Sections 3.2 up to and including 3.6 clarify the 
NCSS2 objectives, and the most important focal points 
are clarified per objective. The action programme is 
included in Annexe 1. The action programme states the 
action items that are implemented in the NCSS2 context.

3.1 aMbiTion and STraTeGic GoalS
Based on the vision, the government aims to realise the 
following ambitions:

The Netherlands is a leader in cyber security: 
–  Dutch society knows how to make safe, optimal use of the 

advantages of digitisation. 

–  Dutch businesses and the research community are pioneers 

in ‘security by design’ and ‘privacy by design’. 

–  Together with its international partners, the Netherlands 

is part of a progressive coalition that seeks to protect 
fundamental rights and values in the digital domain.

The realisation of these ambitions is given shape based 
on the strategic objectives below. These objectives are 
the central themes of the 2014-2016 action programme. 
Annual progress reports will be drawn up and the action 
programme is updated when necessary.

1.  The Netherlands is resilient to cyber attacks and 
protects its vital interests in the digital domain.

2.  The Netherlands tackles cyber crime. 
3.  The Netherlands invests in secure ICT products and 

services that protect privacy.

4.  The Netherlands builds coalitions for freedom, 

security and peace in the digital domain.

5.  The Netherlands has sufficient cyber security 

knowledge and skills and invests in ICT innovation 
to attain cyber security objectives. 

3.2 The neTherlandS iS reSilienT To cyber 
 aTTacKS and proTecTS iTS viTal inTereSTS in  
The diGiTal doMain
Our critical infrastructure increasingly depends on ICT 
systems. Disruptions to these systems or a violation 
of the confidentiality of information stored in such 
 systems by states and criminals have a major impact. It 
may even lead to social disruption. There is an increased 
interwovenness of military and civil dimensions, public 
and private dimensions, and national and international 
dimensions in the digital domain. For instance, national 
security may be threatened by a large-scale cyber attack 
on one or more private organisations23. The speed with 
which such attacks can occur and develop requires a 
swift, coordinated and flexible response and an early 
involvement of the most important parties involved.

Therefore, it is of major importance that we gain more 
 insight into the critical processes and services, and in the 
risks they may run. It is similarly important to critically 
view the underlying ICT chain structure and ‘legacy’ 
systems. Based on this risk-based approach, we will 
increase the resilience of vital services and processes and 
work to an effective joint public-private and civil-military 
response, and with the help of our international partners. 

sharing within critical infrastructure sectors

1  Risk analyses, security requirements and information
 
Within the framework of the protection of critical 
infrastructure, the government, working with vital 
parties, will identify critical ICT-dependent systems, 
services and processes. These efforts are linked 
to a programme that will establish basic security 
requirements on the basis of risk analyses.

In addition, a training programme for response to 
large-scale ICT incidents is set up. In cooperation with 
its partners, the National Cyber Security Centre sets 
up a national detection and response network for the 
central government and other vital sectors. Provided with 
safeguards related to confidentiality and privacy, these 

23  Highly-publicised digital attacks that have caused major damage or that could have been substantially disruptive, such as DigiNotar in the Netherlands, Stuxnet in Iran 

and the cyber attack on Aramco in Saudi Arabia, were not aimed at military targets, but at strategic civil targets.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  23 

networks will work to a real-time analysis and sharing 
of threat information. 

2  More active approach to cyber espionage
The Dutch government is committed to raising 
awareness among citizens, businesses, organisation 
and government bodies about information security 
and privacy. This means that awareness campaigns will 
partly focus on increasing knowledge and insight into 
the risks of cyber espionage. On the other hand, the 
government also ensures that the issue is prioritised 
within the intelligence and security services, which are 
given the tools to better document cyber threats and 
investigate and combat advanced attacks. To this end, 
the intelligence and security services have combined their 
cyber capabilities in the Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU). 
Furthermore, the government will prioritise a better 
protection of data citizens share with the government 
and being more transparent about data management. 

3  Feasibility study on separate vital network
An exploratory study is conducted to determine whether 
it is possible and useful, from both a technical and 
organisational perspective, to create a separate ICT 
network for public and private vital processes. A separate 
network widens the range of options for safeguarding 
the continuity of vital processes. It also makes it possible 
to set up private, cloud-based data storage, thus 
strengthening the privacy and integrity of the data in 
storage or in the cloud concerned.

4  Enhancing civil-military cooperation
Digital means increasingly form an integral part of 
military actions. In order to safeguard the deployability 
of the Netherlands armed forces and to increase 
the effectiveness of the armed forces, the Defence 
organisation is increasing its digital resilience and 
is developing its own capabilities to conduct cyber 
operations . Civil and military domains within the digital 
domain have become more intertwined. Therefore, 
options for deploying the digital capabilities of the 
Netherlands Defence organisation on a national level 
in preventing and countering attacks on the civil 
infrastructure will be detailed. The central question 
is how to optimally share knowledge and expertise 
between civil parties and the Defence organisation.

5  Strengthening the National Cyber Security Centre
In a short period of time, the NCSC has developed into the 

key entity in the public-private cyber security network. 
At the same time and in part due to the large number of 
incidents, expectations regarding the role of the NCSC 
have grown. In order to give shape to this, the position 
of the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) is bolstered 
by means of a stronger structure for confidential 
information-sharing and analysis. Furthermore, in its 
capacity as the expert authority, the NCSC provides 
advice to private and public parties involved, both when 
asked and at its own initiative. Finally, based on its own 
detection capability and its triage role in crises, the NCSC 
is developing into a Security Operations Centre (SOC), in 
addition to its role as a Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT)24.

3.3 The neTherlandS TacKleS cyber criMe 
Cyber crime is a frequently occurring and increasing 
threat for all citizens and organisations in the digital 
domain. In order to offer adequate protection from cyber 
crime, the Netherlands will prioritise the fight against 
cyber crime by means of strengthening the current 
capabilities in the area of investigation and prosecution. 
Updated legislation, a close cooperation and informa-
tion-exchange between the various players involved is 
of the utmost importance. The Netherlands will actively 
pursue national and international alliances, for instance 
in an EU framework, and deepen such alliances to achieve 
an all-encompassing and bold approach to cyber crime. 

6  International approach to cyber crime: updating and 

strengthening legislation (including the Criminal 
Code).

There is a need for effective, swift and efficient 
investigation of cyber crime in accordance with clear 
rules. Scarce capabilities have to be targetedly deployed 
among vulnerable sectors and groups. The Netherlands 
will assume a vanguard role in harmonising legislation 
governing international investigations, for instance in 
the Council of Europe. The Netherlands will also work to 
strengthen and expand international partnerships like 
the European Cyber Crime Centre EC3, at Europol. This 
international cooperation will also eventually include, 
in the long term, a detailed form of arbitration between 
countries when they are not satisfied with the assistance 
offered by the investigation process. The Netherlands 
actively participates in international meetings and related 
activities, such as the Committee of Contracting States of 
the Council of Europe, the Convention on Cybercrime, the 
‘EU policy cycle on organised crime’, and the discussions 

24 

 In addition to response, SOC comprises other aspects from the cyber security chain, such as awareness, resilience, detection, alerting, reporting and crisis management.

24  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

within UNODC about a UN treaty in the area of cyber 
crime. In the Netherlands itself, a bill is being passed that 
will bestow more powers on the police service and the 
Public Prosecution Service in investigating cyber crime in 
the digital domain.

3.4 The neTherlandS inveSTS in Secure icT 
 producTS and ServiceS ThaT proTecT privacy
An increasing amount of ICT-based products and services 
are linked to public networks, such as the internet, which 
for its part is linked to other products and services. This 
development offers many advantages, but also introduces 
new security risks. In the physical domain, it is customary 
to set security and quality requirements to products and 
services before they are marketed. However, in the digital 
domain, this is not common practice yet. For instance, 
the impact and side-effects of ICT products or services 
such as online investments or online shopping are hardly 
included in deliberations of whether or not to use them. 
Security and privacy requirements help organisations and 
citizens with protecting themselves against security risks. 
The government’s digital service provision should set an 
example. 

Innovation, security and privacy in the design phase 
of products and services can not only be successfully 
combined, but they can also support these products and 
services in distinguishing them from the competition. 
The efforts of the government and the business world 
should therefore be focused on making this rewarding. 
Cooperation with international partners is an essential 
element in this process. 

7  Supported standards, ‘security by design’ and ‘privacy 

by design’

Together with private sector partners, the government is 
working to develop standards that can be used to protect 
and improve the security of ICT products and services. To 
this end, the government in an international context will 
also enter into a dialogue with relevant private parties 
and will act in a framework-developing and standards-
developing fashion to protect the privacy and security 
of users. Wherever possible, this also takes place in a 
European or wider international context, and a link is 
being sought with existing international standards and 
good practices25. By including standards in tendering 
requirements stimulates the government to implement it 
as a ‘launching customer’. 

3.5 The neTherlandS buildS coaliTionS For 
 FreedoM, SecuriTy and peace in The diGiTal 
doMain
The Netherlands benefits from a stable, free and accessible 
digital domain and therefore wants to continue to play 
a leading role in the protection of this domain. With The 
Hague as the city of peace and security, the Netherlands 
aims to develop standards in a multi-stakeholder 
context and to protect fundamental rights and values in 
cyberspace. Furthermore, the Netherlands in cooperation 
with its international partners will work to preventing 
and fighting conflicts in the digital domain. Effectively 
responding to these conflicts is not only limited to the 
digital domain, but also requires an integrated approach, 
as is the case with other security threats. Use of traditional 
elements such as diplomacy, imposing sanctions, 
capability building and Defence capabilities have to be 
adjusted to the specific character of the digital domain. 
In light of this objective, cyber capabilities that fit in with 
the 3D approach  (Development, Diplomacy, Defence) are 
being developed.

8  Cyber diplomacy: hub for expertise for conflict 

 prevention

The Netherlands aims to develop a hub for expertise on 
international law and cyber security in order to  promote 
the peaceful use of the digital domain. To this end, 
the Netherlands combines knowledge from existing 
centres. The centre brings together international experts 
and policymakers, diplomats, military personnel and 
NGOs. This creates a network that brings together 
multidisciplinary knowledge about subjects such as 
international standards for conflict prevention, civil-
military cooperation and non-proliferation of cyber 
weapons in the digital domain. The network also 
contributes to discussions about this subject. This forms 
the basis for a series of multi-stakeholder, high-level 
meetings.

3.6 The neTherlandS haS SuFFicienT cyber 
 SecuriTy KnowledGe and SKillS and inveSTS 
in icT innovaTion To aTTain cyber SecuriTy 
 obJecTiveS 
Until now, cyber security has been underexposed in 
education. Proficient users and sufficient cyber security 
professionals are necessary for making optimal use of 
the opportunities offered by digitisation and for being 
resilient to the ever more advanced threats. Cyber 

25 

In Dutch society, the Forum and Standardisation Authority promote interoperability and the application of open standards through a list of recommended and 

 compulsory standards for the (semi) public sector.

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  25 

security professionals are also needed to design and 
build the cyber security solutions of the future. The 
Netherlands has plenty of talented IT workers. However, 
their skills need to be honed as early as secondary 
school and then continued in top degree programmes 
in senior secondary vocational education, at a university 
of applied sciences or in university education. For this 
reason, the Netherlands has opted for a wide approach, 
ranging from primary education to higher education, 
and from work-based training to university, and from 
the board room to the coal face. In addition to education 
and training, awareness campaigns remain important. 
In order to be able to take the step from being aware to 
becoming capable, these campaigns will be used in a 
more targeted manner and more attention will be paid to 
the perspectives for action of the target group. 

An excellent cyber security knowledge infrastructure not 
only works in support of our society’s resilience, it also 
offers opportunities for developing expertise and for 
finding niches. This requires an attractive research and 
education climate to be created in which cyber security 
plays a prominent role. A multidisciplinary approach 
in which the non-technical sub-areas are also included 
is needed to promote cyber security innovation. The 
innovative products and services that are developed in 
this manner will help the Netherlands with anticipating 
swift technological and other developments in the digital 
domain. Dutch design (in security) can also become a 
quality mark for security and privacy in ICT products and 
services, thereby contributing to economic growth. 

9  Taskforce on cyber security education
To enlarge the pool of cyber security experts and enhance 
users’ proficiency with cyber security, the business 
community and the government have joined forces to 
improve the quality and breadth of ICT education at all 
academic levels (primary, secondary and professional 
education). A PPP taskforce on cyber security education 
will be set up which will focus on giving advice about the 
cyber security curriculum, in relation to the certification of 
information security experts and the further development 
of learning modules, among other things. For the time 
being, connections are being sought with current initiatives 
regarding information sciences education and the 
Technology Pact 2020. 

able to anticipate them is a vital element. Innovation 
arises where creative people and experts meet. This 
alone, however, is not enough. There is a need for more 
coordination of supply and demand, which can be 
achieved by linking26 innovation initiatives to leading 
sector policy. In addition, the government, the business 
community and the world of academia will launch a 
cyber security innovation platform where start-ups, 
established companies, students and researchers can 
connect and inspire one another. In organising a follow-
up to the SBIT research programme in 2012-2013, the 
government contributes to this. The farther-reaching PPP 
implementation of the second edition of the National 
Cyber Security Research Agenda (NCSRA) will also 
contribute to this development.

3.7 a JoinT eFForT
The government and the Netherlands have big ambitions 
in the area of cyber security and comprise a broader 
long-term vision. This vision reflects the importance 
of and opportunities offered by ICT to our society 
and our economy, as well as the current threats and 
risks.  A joint effort made by all parties involved is 
required, in which each of the parties is expected to 
take own responsibility.  Therefore, the government has 
invited many organisations from government bodies 
and the business world to help with developing the 
strategy.  Unfortunately, financial means are limited due 
to the current economic climate.

In the present strategy, the long-term ambition has 
been given shape in the 2014-2016 action programme 
(see also Annexe 1), which is detailed within the scope 
of the regular departmental budgets and the partners’ 
budgets. Entirely in line with the move initiated by the 
action programme, the government will implement the 
broader strategy through participation, reprioritisation, 
smart coalitions and an integrated approach, which in its 
entirety will respond to increased problems that threaten 
our prosperity and wellbeing. The long-term ambition 
also shows that realising a secure digital domain – also 
in the long term – is by no means an ambition that is 
free of obligations. This ambition is given more shape 
in the future action programmes and will have to fall 
within the scope of the financial parameters that will be 
in place at that time. Therefore, the details regarding the 
implementation of the actions stated in the annexes take 
place in consultation and/or cooperation with private 
parties and the government bodies involved.

10  Encouraging innovation in cyber security
Technological developments in the digital domain are 
taking place at an alarming rate. This means that being 
26  Such as the National Cyber Security Research Agenda (NCSRA) and The Hague Security Delta (HSD).

26  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

Annexe 1: 
2014-2016 action 
programme

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  27 

objective 1:
The Netherlands is resilient to cyber attacks and protects its 
vital interests in the digital domain

action

who27

when

1.  Cyber security is included in the vital infrastructure approach. 
An element of this approach will be periodically listing which 
ICT-dependent systems, services and processes are vital. This 
is linked to a resilience-enhancing programme and public-
private crisis exercises.

2.  Developing a system of supported open (technological) 
standards and minimum requirements for increasing the 
digital security of vital processes. Where possible, an alliance 
with existing national and international standards and best 
practices is pursued. 

In consultation with line mi-
nistries, vital sectors (including 
regional authorities)

2014 and beyond

Line ministries, NCSC, vital 
sectors

2014

3.  Encouraging that privacy and security by design are included 

All ministries

2014-2016

in the tendering processes of products and services for the 
government.

4.  Conducting an exploratory study into a separate ICT network 

for (public-private) vital processes. 

Security and Justice, line mi-
nistries

2014

5.  Building and expanding a national detection and response 

network. 

Security and Justice, Defence, 
public and private partners

2013 and beyond

6.  Strengthening the digital resilience of the Dutch defence 

Defence

2014-2015

systems as well as increasing the capability to conduct cyber 
operations. 

7.  Committing local governments to a strengthened approach 

to information security. 

8.  Formulating responsibilites and documenting procedures 
(including upscaling) in case of organisation-transcending 
incidents that are not crises.

Interior and Kingdom Relati-
ons (Taskforce BID) 

Interior and Kingdom Relati-
ons, Security and Justice, intel-
ligence and security services, 
local authorities

9.  Strengthening research and analysis capabilities to gain more 

insight into threats and risks in the digital domain.

Intelligence and security servi-
ces, NCSC, police service

10.  Strengthening of NCSC, among other things, through the de-
velopment of a Cyber Security Operations Center, in addition 
to its role as a CERT.

NCSC, intelligence and security 
services, vital sectors

2014

2015

2014

2014

27 

In compliance with existing responsibilities.

28  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

11.  Mapping out risks of legacy systems in vital processes and 

services.

Security and Justice, Interior 
and Kingdom Relations

12.  Strengthening of existing sectoral regulatory authorities by 

including cyber security requirements (and avoiding overlap).

Sectoral regulatory authorities 
and line ministries

13.  Exploring accreditation options of companies that can be 

called upon as ‘digital fire brigades’. 

Security & Justice/NCSC and 
vital sectors

14.  Setting up a cyber reservists database.

Defence

15.  Setting up a Defence Cyber Command for overall coordina-

Defence

tion and readiness of cyber capabilities.

2014

2015

2015

2013

2014

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  29 

objective 2: 
The Netherlands tackles cyber crime

action

who

when

16.  Updating and strengthening (international) criminal 

Security and Justice

 legislation (including the Computer Crime Act III).

2014-2016  
(Computer Crime Act 
 completed in 2014)

17.  Improving cooperation with Europol’s EC3 by exchanging 

Security and Justice 

2014-2016

knowledge and personnel.

18.  Include the strengthening of investigation and prosecution of 
cyber crime as a subject in the discussion about new National 
Priorities (the current subjects lapse on 1 January 2015).

Security and Justice, Public 
Prosecution Service, police 
service

19.  Strengthening the fight against cyber crime in the financial 

sector through cooperation.

Security and Justice, DNB, 
Public Prosecution  Service, 
police service, Fiscal 
 Intelligence and Investigation  
Service, NVB, bank sector as 
a whole

2014

2014 

20.  The number of international investigations will be expanded 

to 20 in 2014.

Security and Justice, Public 
Prosecution Service and 
police service

2014

21.  Supervising the link to the investigation and prosecution 

services in the digitisation of crime.

Security and Justice Inspec-
torate 

2014

22.  Strengthening the intake and registration process of cyber 

Police service

2014-2016

crimes reported to the police.

30  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

objective 3: 
The Netherlands invests in secure ICT products and services 
that protect privacy

action

who

when

23.  Improving and/or developing standards, in an international 

Line ministries and partners

2014 and beyond

context where possible, that are used to promote the security 
and privacy of ICT products and services. 

24.  Launching awareness campaigns, such as Alert Online, in 

which privacy also plays a part. 

Security and Justice, Dutch 
DPA, Electronic Commerce 
Platform Netherlands

2014-2016

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  31 

objective 4: 
The Netherlands builds coalitions for freedom, security and 
peace in the digital domain

action

25.  Giving shape to cyber diplomacy and in cooperation 
with  international partners developing standards and 
 trust-inspiring measures to counter conflict escalation in the 
digital domain.

26.  Setting up a hub for expertise in the area of international law 

and cyber security with the purpose of promoting  conflict 
prevention in the digital domain. A series of high-level 
 meetings will be organised as part of this.

27.  Continue to be the international leader in the area of internet 
freedom, for instance through the Freedom Online  Coalition 
(FOC), and working to establish a powerful European 
 approach to privacy protection and fundamental rights and 
values with respect to third countries.

who

Foreign Affairs, Security and 
Justice

when

2014-2016

Foreign Affairs, Security and 
Justice

2014-2015

Foreign Affairs, Interior and 
Kingdom Relations, Security 
and Justice

2014 and beyond

28.  The Dutch government will increase its participation in 

 multi-stakeholder events such as the Cyberspace Conferences 
and the IGF.

Economic Affairs, Foreign 
 Affairs, Security and Justice

2014

29.  The Netherlands works to develop cyber security capability in 

third countries through bilateral or regional initiatives. 

Foreign Affairs, Defence, Secu-
rity and Justice

2014-2016 

30.  Detailing options for national deployment of digital 

Defence

2014

 capabilities of Defence at the request of civil authorities.

32  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

objective 5: 
The Netherlands has sufficient cyber security knowledge 
and skills and invests in ICT innovation to attain cyber 
 security objectives

action

31.  A PPP taskforce on cyber security education will be set up 

which will focus on giving advice about the cyber secu-
rity  curriculum. This includes certification and the further 
 development of learning modules.

who

Security and Justice Economic 
Affairs, Research, Education 
and Science 

32.  For the time being, connections are being sought with current 

initiatives regarding information sciences education and the 
Technology Pact 2020. 

Research, Education and 
 Science

33.  Realising more work placement opportunities and technical 

traineeships in cyber security in the public sector.

Security and Justice and 
 Interior and Kingdom 
 Relations

when

2014

2015

2015

34.  NL Agency and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific 
Research (NWO), as a follow-up to the 2012-2013 tender, 
will issue new tenders to the value of about € 6 million, to 
be roughly evenly distributed over an SBIR programme and 
long-term research.

Economic Affairs, NWO 
 (co-financed by line ministries)

2014-2015

35.  Developing Cyber Defence training and education 

Defence

2014

 programmes with private parties and Regional Training 
 Centres.

36.  Drawing up a plan in order to better meet research needs in 

the business world through ‘scientists on the job’. 

37.  Launching a cyber security platform for start-ups and 

 established companies, students and researchers.

2013, 2014

NWO/ Netherlands 
 Organisation for  Applied 
 Scientific Research in 
 cooperation with the business 
community

Economic Affairs, Security 
and Justice and the business 
 community

2015

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  33 

34  |  National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability

National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) 2    From awareness to capability  |  35 

This is a publication of the national coordinator  
for Security and counterterrorism

Visiting address 
Turfmarkt 147 
2511 DP Den Haag 

Postal address
Postbus 20301 
2500 EH Den Haag

T  (070) 751 50 50 
E  info@nctv.minvenj.nl
I  www.nctv.nl

