THE DEFENCE CYBER STRATEGY

 

 

 

 

> Retouradres Postbus 20701 2500 ES Den Haag 
> Return address: P.O. Box 20701 2500 ES The Hague 

de Voorzitter van de Tweede Kamer 
der Staten-Generaal 
Plein 2 
2511 CR Den Haag 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 
of the States-General 
Plein 2 
2511 CR The Hague 
Netherlands 

Datum 
Betreft 

27 juni 2012 
Defensie strategie voor het opereren in het digitale domein 

Date 
Concerns  Defence strategy for operating in cyberspace 

27 June 2012 

 
 
 
Het digitale domein is, naast het land, de lucht, de zee en de ruimte, inmiddels 
 
het vijfde domein voor militair optreden. Dit domein en de toepassing van digitale 
middelen als wapen of inlichtingenmiddel zijn onmiskenbaar sterk in ontwikkeling. 
The digital domain or cyberspace has developed into the fifth domain for military 
Digitale middelen zullen in toenemende mate integraal deel uitmaken van het 
operations, along with air, sea, land and space. This domain and the use of digital 
militaire optreden. De afhankelijkheid van digitale middelen leidt daarentegen ook 
assets as weapons or intelligence instruments are without a doubt evolving 
tot kwetsbaarheden die urgente aandacht behoeven. De Nederlandse krijgsmacht 
strongly. Digital assets will increasingly become an integral part of military 
trekt hier de noodzakelijke gevolgen uit en wil in het digitale domein de 
operations. At the same time, the growing dependence on digital assets also 
vooraanstaande rol spelen die bij ons land past. Om de inzetbaarheid van de 
creates vulnerabilities that require urgent attention. The Netherlands armed 
krijgsmacht te waarborgen en haar effectiviteit te verhogen, versterkt Defensie 
de komende jaren haar digitale weerbaarheid en ontwikkelt zij het vermogen om 
forces have drawn the necessary conclusions from these facts and wish to play a 
cyber operations uit te voeren. 
leading role in cyberspace. In order to safeguard the deployability of the armed 
 
forces and increase their effectiveness, the Defence organisation will enhance its 
Tegen deze achtergrond doe ik u hierbij de Defensie strategie voor het opereren 
cyber resilience in the years to come and develop capabilities to conduct cyber 
in het digitale domein toekomen: de Defensie Cyber Strategie. Zij geeft op een 
operations. 
voortvarende manier uitwerking aan de in de beleidsbrief ‘Defensie na de 
 
kredietcrisis’ van 8 april 2011 (Kamerstuk 32 733, nr. 1) opgenomen 
The presentation of the Defence strategy for operations in cyberspace, the 
cyberintensivering en aan het defensiedeel in de Nationale Cyber Security 
Defence Cyber Strategy, marks an important step in this process. This strategy 
Strategie (Kamerstuk 26643, nr. 174).  De strategie is aangekondigd in de 
elaborates on the policy plans for cyberspace set out in the policy letter ‘The 
kabinetsreactie op het advies over ‘digitale oorlogvoering’ van de Adviesraad voor 
Defence organisation after the credit crunch’ of 8 April 2011 (Parliamentary 
Internationale Vraagstukken (AIV) en de Commissie van Advies inzake 
Volkenrechtelijke Vraagstukken (CAVV) (Kamerstuk 33 000-X, nr. 79).  
Document 32 733, no. 1) and of the Defence-related part of the National Cyber 
 
Security Strategy (Parliamentary Document 26 643, no. 174). The strategy was 
De Defensie Cyber Strategie geeft de komende jaren richting, samenhang en 
announced in the government’s response to the advisory report on cyber warfare 
focus aan de integrale aanpak voor de ontwikkeling van het militaire vermogen in 
from the Advisory Council on International Affairs and the Advisory Committee on 
het digitale domein. Zij is daardoor van wezenlijk belang voor de toekomstige 
Issues of Public International Law (Parliamentary Document 33 000-X, no. 79).  
effectiviteit en relevantie van onze krijgsmacht. 
 
 
The Defence Cyber Strategy will provide direction, coherence and focus for a 
DE MINISTER VAN DEFENSIE 
comprehensive approach to developing military capabilities in cyberspace in the 
 
coming years. It is therefore essential to the future effectiveness and relevance of 
 
our armed forces. 
 
drs. J.S.J. Hillen 
 
 
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Hans Hillen 
 
 

 
 

 

 Page 1 of 12 
 

3

 

 

 
 
Ministerie van Defensie 
Netherlands Ministry of 
 
Defence 
Plein 4 
 
MPC 58 B 
Plein 4 
Postbus 20701 
MPC 58 B 
2500 ES Den Haag 
P.O. Box 20701 
www.defensie.nl 
2500 ES The Hague 
 
 
Netherlands 
 
www.defensie.nl 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
Onze referentie 
 
BS2012021117 
 
 
 
Afschrift aan 
Our reference 
de Voorzitter van de Eerste  
BS2012021117 
Kamer der Staten-Generaal 
Binnenhof 22 
 
2513 AA Den Haag 
C.C. 
 
The Speaker of the Senate 
Bij beantwoording datum, 
Binnenhof 22 
onze referentie en betreft 
2513 AA The Hague 
vermelden. 
 
Please refer to the date, our 
reference and subject when 
replying. 

 

 

4

Introduction

The digital domain or cyberspace1 is the fifth domain for military operations, along with 
air, sea, land and space. This domain and the use of digital assets as weapons or 
intelligence instruments are without a doubt evolving rapidly. Digital assets will 
increasingly become an integral part of military operations and lead to modernisation. At 
the same time, the growing dependency on digital assets also creates vulnerabilities 
which require urgent attention. A large-scale cyber attack could have an enormous impact 
on society. As is the case with terror attacks, cyber attacks can cause great upheaval and 
widespread social disruption. Within the military domain, the infrastructure and weapon 
systems can be affected in such a way that an effective defence is no longer possible. The 
Netherlands armed forces have drawn the necessary conclusions from this and aspire to 
fulfil their military role in cyberspace, too.

The three core tasks of the Defence organisation are leading for the armed forces’ efforts 
in cyberspace.2 The armed forces must therefore be capable of taking action against 
digital threats to our society or to the international rule of law. There is an increasing 
overlap between the first and the third core tasks. However, because the principles and 
the procedures for the deployment of the armed forces differ for each of the core tasks, 
the distinction between them continues to be important. Political-constitutional relations 
apply equally in cyberspace. Deployment of the armed forces for international operations 
therefore takes place on the basis of a government mandate, while deployment for 
national operations occurs, in principle, in response to a request for assistance to civil 
authorities (usually by the Minister of Security and Justice).

In order to safeguard the deployability of the Netherlands armed forces and increase their 
effectiveness, the Defence organisation will enhance its cyber resilience and develop 
capabilities to conduct cyber operations. The Defence Cyber Strategy will provide 
direction, coherence and focus for a comprehensive approach to developing military 
capabilities in cyberspace in the coming years. This strategy elaborates on the policy plans 
for cyberspace set out in the policy letter ‘The Defence organisation after the credit 
crunch’ (Parliamentary Document 32 733, no. 1) and of the Defence-related part of the 
National Cyber Security Strategy (Parliamentary Document 26 643, no. 174).

The armed forces wish to make optimal use of the possibilities afforded by developments 
in cyber technology. This technology is already being used on a large scale in the Defence 
organisation and enables the armed forces to perform their tasks more effectively and 
more efficiently. For instance, virtually all weapon systems depend to a large degree on 
the use of IT components. Command & control systems and logistic support also rely 
heavily on digital systems. In addition, the armed forces’ information position and 
situational awareness are significantly enhanced by the use of digital assets. Digital 
networks and systems, including weapon systems and measurement and control 
systems, as well as the information contained by these systems, have become of vital 
importance to the armed forces.

1  There is currently no international agreement on 
the definition of the term “cyberspace”. For the 
purposes of this strategy, “cyberspace” is 
understood to cover all entities that are or may 
potentially be connected digitally. The domain 
includes permanent connections as well as 
temporary or local connections, and in all cases 
relates in some way to the data (source code, 
information, etc) present in this domain.

2  The Defence organisation’s three core tasks are:
-  Protecting the integrity of national and Alliance 

territory, including the Caribbean part of the 
Kingdom;

-  Promoting stability and the international rule of 

law;

-  Supporting civil authorities in upholding the law, 

providing disaster relief and humanitarian 
assistance, both nationally and internationally.
  Reliability is understood to mean availability, 

integrity and exclusivity.

5

The dependence of the armed forces on digital technology, however, also makes them 
vulnerable. It is crucial for the Defence organisation to safeguard the reliability3 of its own 
networks, systems and information and to take measures to prevent the theft of 
information. The Defence organisation must remain vigilant and invest in high-quality 
assets and knowledge to keep the protection against cyber attacks at the required level. It 
is also essential that the Defence organisation develop a clear understanding of the 
threats it faces in cyberspace in order to protect itself effectively.

Since the digital systems of our (potential) opponents are also vulnerable, cyberspace can 
also be used for military operations against opponents or for strengthening our own 
intelligence position. The Defence organisation therefore explicitly considers digital 
assets as operational capabilities, i.e. as weapons or as intelligence assets, which must be 
incorporated in the operational capabilities of the armed forces as a whole. This concerns 
the protection of our own networks, systems and information during deployment, the 
deployment of offensive capabilities and the gathering of mission-related intelligence 
using digital technology. Since intensive use is made of IT assets throughout the Defence 
organisation, far-reaching joint cooperation is required. 

Given the multifaceted and complex character of cyberspace and in order to utilise the 
Defence organisation’s scarce assets optimally, all activities connected with military 
operations in cyberspace should be centrally controlled and coordinated. The speed at 
which developments in cyberspace occur places high demands on the Defence 
organisation’s adaptability and innovative strength. It must be able to rapidly implement 
new technologies and complete short innovation cycles in cyberspace. The dynamics and 
complexity of cyberspace require constant development of knowledge, expertise, skills 
and techniques, as well as constant adjustment of modi operandi in cyberspace. 

Given the interconnectivity within cyberspace and the dependence on similar technology, 
a comprehensive approach is called for at both the national and international level. The 
traditional divisions between military and civilian, public and private, and national and 
international actors are less clear-cut in cyberspace. National security can, for instance, be 
jeopardised by a large-scale attack on a private organisation. To defend against such 
attacks, cooperation between different parties is necessary, including the affected 
organisation itself, the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), the intelligence services, 
the criminal investigation services and, in certain cases, also the armed forces.

3  Reliability is understood to mean availability, 

integrity and exclusivity.

6

Focal Points

Given all of the above, the Defence Cyber Strategy has six focal points on the basis of 

which the Defence organisation will endeavour to realise its objectives in cyberspace:

1.  adopting a comprehensive approach;
2.  strengthening the cyber defence of the Defence organisation (defensive element);
3.  developing the military capability to conduct cyber operations (offensive element);
4.  strengthening the intelligence position in cyberspace(intelligence element); 
5.  strengthening the knowledge position and the innovative strength of the Defence 

organisation in cyberspace, including the recruitment and retention of qualified 
personnel (adaptive and innovative elements);
intensifying cooperation, both nationally and internationally (cooperation element).

6. 

7

The development of the cyber threat 

to the Defence organisation

As a result of its intensive use of high-quality (satellite) communication, informa-
tion, sensor, navigation, logistics and weapon systems, the Netherlands Defence 
organisation is dependent on reliable internal and external networks and on digital 
technology. It is therefore vulnerable to digital attacks.

Various countries now have offensive cyber capabilities for military use at their 
disposal or are in the process of developing such capabilities. But non-state actors 
can also pose a threat to our armed forces, by disrupting our systems and our 
information management systems. In modern conflicts, the distinction between 
combatants and non-combatants is becoming blurred and areas of operations are 
increasingly less clearly defined. The actions of opponents will frequently take a 
digital form and will probably more often extend to the homefront.

The biggest threat to Defence in cyberspace in the medium term is presented by 
sophisticated and complex digital offensive capabilities directed against a specific 
military target. Such an attack could potentially severely limit the armed forces’ 
freedom of action. A lack of knowledge about and insight into the possibilities for 
conducting cyber attacks constitutes a real risk to the armed forces.

Already, armed forces and industry involved in the development and production of 
sophisticated military technology are incessantly confronted with – attempted – 
digital attacks and espionage activities. The strategic and economic value of 
information in this field is great. Furthermore, the Defence organisation will have to 
be alert from an early stage to clandestine introduction of vulnerable spots 
(“backdoors”) in information and communication systems. This risk is growing due 
to the complexity of systems and the quantity of their components. Intelligence 
services will probably not shrink from tampering with equipment to be supplied to 
potential opponents. 

8

Focal point 1:  
a comprehensive approach 

The point of departure is that Defence cyber capabilities form an important and viable 
addition to existing military capabilities. The strength of cyber assets lies in the possibili-
ties they offer in supporting and reinforcing operational capabilities in all domains. Cyber 
assets strengthen the armed forces’ actions for all military functions: logistics, command 
& control, intelligence, force protection, manoeuvre and firepower. The Defence Cyber 
Strategy is therefore based on a comprehensive approach, both in terms of the suppor-
ting processes (force generation, operational support, sustainment) and in terms of 
operational deployment (both independent and as part of operations of other units, 
possibly under civilian command).
 
Military operations will increasingly involve the use of operational cyber capabilities, 
mainly in support of the armed forces’ regular operations, but also as a weapon in its own 
right. Operational cyber capabilities must become an integral part of the overall military 
capability of the Netherlands armed forces. The Defence organisation must therefore 
invest substantially in strengthening its cyber capabilities. The Defence organisation will 
not, however, establish a separate Service for operations in cyberspace. In 2014, the 
relevant cyber capabilities will be incorporated within the joint Defence Cyber Command 
which will come under the single-service management of the Royal Netherlands Army.

An operational cyber capability encompasses all knowledge and assets necessary to 
predict, influence or obstruct the actions of opponents during operational deployment 
using digital technology, and to protect against similar operations conducted by oppo-
nents. This is done by infiltrating computers, computer networks, weapon and sensor 
systems and software in order to collect information and intelligence and to influence 
systems. An operational cyber capability thus encompasses deployable defensive, 
offensive and intelligence elements. 

In planning and preparing for operations, all aspects relevant to cyberspace are taken into 
account. Cyberspace thus forms an integral element of the joint operational planning 
process. In this process, attention is given to the potential influence of cyberspace on the 
mission as well as to the effects that can be achieved by deploying cyber capabilities. The 
operational commander therefore has his own capabilities at his disposal and can call 
upon the intelligence capability to gather and process cyber information and make it 
available for the decision-making process in a timely fashion. This relates to both the 
threat against friendly networks and systems and the possibilities for exploiting vulnera-
bilities of the opponent. Good situational awareness in cyberspace is part of the com-
mander’s total situational awareness. 

It is essential for operations in cyberspace that the mandate allow for this, and the Rules 
of Engagement must therefore stipulate how offensive cyber capabilities may be 
deployed. 

9

Focal point 2:  
Defensive

Networks and systems are vulnerable to attacks and disruptions, both from outside and 
from within. Defence against these threats entails the protection of networks, monitoring 
and analysing data traffic, detecting digital attacks, and responding to them. 
 
The Defence organisation is, of course, responsible for protecting its own networks and 
systems. It must be prepared for and capable of protecting itself against cyber threats so 
as to guarantee the deployability of the armed forces. The Defence organisation must 
therefore be familiar with potential threats in cyberspace and the vulnerabilities of its 
own networks and systems. The Defence organisation will therefore conduct a risk 
analysis on the basis of which the necessary minimum protection measures will be 
determined. There must be a balance between the measures to be taken and their 
practicability, and a comprehensive set of security measures must be implemented 
(including in the personnel, physical and information security domains). For networks and 
systems in which highly classified information is processed and stored, a more stringent 
security regime will be required. Unauthorised access to these networks and systems 
could cause – very – serious harm to the Defence organisation, to the Netherlands 
government and its services and to our Allies. For networks and systems containing only 
unclassified information or information with a low level of classification, a set of more 
limited security measures will suffice.

It must be assumed that a persistent and technologically sophisticated opponent will 
nonetheless be capable of compromising networks and systems or parts thereof. Setting 
up an all-encompassing cyber defence is virtually impossible and, what is more, 
unaffordable. As much flexibility as possible must therefore be built into both the 
(passive) protection of our own cyber infrastructure and the active response to any attack. 
The priority must lie with the protection of information and information exchange. In 
addition, systems must be resilient by being able to respond quickly to attacks and to 
adapt themselves in order to keep functioning.

The most important vulnerability leading to the (potential) loss or compromise of 
information is caused by inadvertent actions by personnel, such as incompetent or 
careless use of IT assets. All Defence personnel must therefore be aware of the risks 
associated with the use of digital assets. Cyber security awareness will therefore become 
an integrated part of all Defence training courses. Defence personnel must also be trained 
in working under conditions where they temporarily have no access to (all) functions of 
networks and systems.
 
The Defence organisation will continuously improve the security of its networks and 
systems. This policy is to be implemented by the Joint Information Management 
Command which is expected to be operational by early 2013. The Joint Information 
Management Command will develop and implement adequate and high-quality security 
measures and ensure the protection of all networks and systems. Illegal and non-
standard use will be detected. The Defence Computer Emergency Response Team 
(DefCERT) monitors the security of systems and networks, taking account of current 

10

threat levels. DefCERT, which is to become part of the Joint Information Management 
Command, is tasked with identifying and analysing risks to and vulnerabilities of the main 
Defence networks, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and with advising the Defence 
organisation on the security measures that should be taken. DefCERT must also have 
good cyber situational awareness at its disposal. To this end, DefCERT will work together 
closely with the other components of the Joint Information Management Command and 
with the Defence Intelligence and Security Service. Outside the Defence organisation, 
there will be cooperation with the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), NATO, other 
CERTs and with companies possessing specific knowledge or resources. This cooperation 
may concern the exchange of information as well as personnel support and other types of 
assistance in the event of emergencies.

The available defensive cyber capabilities must be capable of protecting the Defence 
organisation’s IT infrastructure as well as the weapon and sensor systems it uses. Those 
capabilities will be used by the Joint Information Management Command to protect the 
Defence organisation’s generic networks and systems, and by the Defence Cyber 
Command to protect operational networks and systems during deployment. The Defence 
organisation will also enhance the reliability of weapon and sensor systems by improving 
insight into digital vulnerabilities and by tightening supervision of the development, 
supply chain and use of IT components. Special attention will be paid to cyber defence in 
the procurement of both software and hardware. When procuring or developing new 
systems, potential risks pertaining to the reliability of those systems must be taken into 
account right from the outset. These risks must then be mitigated, if possible, with the 
help of security requirements and/or security measures.

11

Focal point 3: 
Offensive

Offensive cyber capabilities are capabilities aimed at influencing or disabling the actions 
of an opponent. The Defence organisation must have sufficient knowledge and 
capabilities at its disposal to be able to conduct offensive operations in cyberspace, with a 
view to conducting an effective defence and to support operations.

This concerns the development of complex and high-tech assets and methods, including 
the relevant expertise, that are specifically aimed at increasing our own military capability. 
A cyber attack on an air defence system may thus increase the effectiveness of an air 
attack while reducing the risk of collateral damage. 

An offensive cyber capability can be a force multiplier and thus increase the armed forces’ 
effectiveness. By developing a robust cyber capability, the Netherlands can play an 
important role within NATO in this respect. 

Internationally, the development of offensive operational cyber capabilities is still in its 
infancy. A great deal is still unclear about the nature of these capabilities, the possibilities 
they may offer and the effects they can achieve. Offensive cyber capabilities are 
distinguished from conventional military capabilities in that they can often be used only 
once and generally have a limited service life. High-quality cyber capabilities hardly bear 
comparison with generally known, relatively easy-to-use and widespread methods of 
attack. They are complex assets and developing them requires a high level of knowledge, 
making them costly and time-consuming. The fact that the opponent may at any time 
discover his own vulnerabilities and address them means that achievement of the desired 
effects cannot be guaranteed. 

In developing offensive operational capabilities, optimal use will be made of the expertise 
and assets of the Defence Intelligence & Security Service (DISS). Given the scarcity of 
qualified personnel, both the expertise and the assets must be deployed as efficiently as 
possible and duplication of efforts in asset development in the Defence organisation 
must be avoided. Optimal use must therefore be made of the expertise, assets and 
contacts of the DISS to enable the development and deployment of offensive assets by 
the Chief of Defence (CHOD). The CHOD may deploy these offensive assets in a military 
operation on the basis of a mandate from the government, leaving intact, as required by 
law, the division between the tasks and responsibilities of the CHOD and the DISS. In 
addition, offensive assets can be deployed to prevent or stop a cyber attack and to 
guarantee our own freedom of action in military operations in cyberspace (‘active 
defence’). The Defence Cyber Command will ensure the deployment readiness of 
offensive cyber capabilities. The Cyber Task Force will formulate a doctrine for operations 
in cyberspace, develop deployment scenarios, and describe the effects and consequences 
of offensive assets in more detail. This will be done with the help of tests, training and 
exercises. 

12

Focal point 4: 
Intelligence

The rapidly increasing influence of cyberspace and the increased intertwinement of 
systems have greatly expanded the possibilities for information-gathering. Having a 
high-quality intelligence position in cyberspace is a precondition both to protecting our 
own infrastructure and to conducting operations. The Defence organisation needs to 
have a clear insight into the cyber threats it may be exposed to in order to be able to 
protect itself effectively against those threats. This requires knowledge of the technical 
threat itself as well as insight into the possibilities and intentions of – potential – oppo-
nents and attackers. The DISS therefore needs to have the intelligence capabilities to 
acquire and analyse this information and to report on it in a timely fashion. Furthermore, 
the DISS must have the capability to disrupt and stop the intelligence activities of others. 
The DISS’ intelligence activities in cyberspace are, of course, conducted within the 
parameters of the law.

In the coming years, the DISS will expand its capability for the covert gathering of 
information in cyberspace. This includes infiltration of computers and networks to 
acquire data, mapping out relevant sections of cyberspace, monitoring vital networks, 
and gaining a profound understanding of the functioning of and technology behind 
offensive cyber assets. The gathered information will be used for early-warning intelli-
gence products, the composition of a cyber threat picture, enhancing the intelligence 
production in general, and conducting counterintelligence activities. Cyber intelligence 
capabilities cannot be regarded in isolation from intelligence capabilities such as signals 
intelligence (SIGINT), human intelligence (HUMINT) and the DISS’ existing counterintel-
ligence capability. A decisive factor for the effectiveness of operations is the combined 
deployment of scarce expertise and assets. With that in mind, the DISS and the GISS 
(General Intelligence and Security Service) are intensifying their cooperation in the areas 
of cyber and SIGINT by establishing a joint SIGINT-Cyber Unit. The establishment of this 
unit should further improve the effectiveness of the national cyber intelligence capability. 
The DISS will also contribute to the further development of the National Cyber Security 
Assessment which is being formulated under the responsibility of the National 
Coordinator for Counterterrorism and Security of the Ministry of Security and Justice. 

A complex challenge in the cyber context is the attribution of attacks and attempted 
attacks. If it is not possible to identify the origin, perpetrator and objective of an attack, 
the possibilities for responding effectively are limited. By using all intelligence sources at 
its disposal as well as forensic investigation, the DISS will improve the possibilities for 
attribution and cooperate closely with the Joint Information Management Command, the 
GISS, the Netherlands Forensic Institute and the criminal investigation services (the 
National Police Services Agency and the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee). In addition, 
intensive confidential international cooperation is often essential for being able to 
eventually establish the identity of the attacker and take effective protective measures.

13

Focal point 5:  
Adaptive and Innovative

The speed at which developments in cyberspace occur places high demands on the 
Defence organisation’s adaptability and innovative strength. It must be able to rapidly 
implement new technologies and complete short innovation cycles in cyberspace. The 
dynamics and complexity of cyberspace require constant adaptation of the initial 
requirements for knowledge, expertise, skills and techniques, and the modi operandi. 

The Defence organisation must possess the necessary knowledge to follow relevant 
developments and to respond to them quickly and effectively. It invests in people, 
technology, research and development so as to be able to procure or develop and 
implement the necessary cyber capabilities in a timely fashion. The Defence Cyber 
Expertise Centre (DCEC) is to become the central entity for the promotion of knowledge 
development, knowledge retention and knowledge dissemination. The DCEC must bring 
the knowledge of the Defence organisation in the field of cyber operations up to a high 
level and maintain that level. It is aimed at both knowledge development (including 
research & development and concept development and experimentation) and the 
transfer of knowledge (exercise, training and instruction) within the Defence organisation. 
The DCEC will cooperate closely with knowledge institutes, such as the Netherlands 
Organisation of Applied Scientific Research (TNO).

In order to permanently improve the security of networks and systems, the Defence 
organisation must be able to respond quickly and effectively to new developments, to 
test new techniques at an early stage and to work together closely with the business and 
science communities. Tendering and procurement procedures for cyber-related materiel 
and services are to be set up in such a way that the hybrid and changeable character of 
this domain can be tackled proactively while, at the same time, guaranteeing the 
reliability of assets and operating processes. In cyberspace, the private sector is the driver 
of innovation, including in the areas of security and protection of the IT infrastructure. 
The Defence organisation should therefore make optimal use of this innovative strength. 
The Defence organisation’s sourcing policy can make a contribution in this regard.

For the benefit of research and development, but also for the purposes of training and 
exercise, the Defence organisation will obtain a cyber laboratory and testing 
environment. This cyber lab will be available for use by the various elements of the 
Defence organisation and also by partners. These elements can be situated at various 
physical locations and connected from a distance.

A particular challenge for the Defence organisation is to recruit and retain qualified 
personnel who are also able to perform in a military environment. The required military 
personnel capacity will be realised partly through the recruitment of cyber reserve 
personnel. In order to acquire and retain the required knowledge, competence and skills 
for the organisation, particular attention will be given to personnel policy and training. 
For example, specific career patterns will be developed to embed and further develop the 
knowledge and expertise of Defence personnel in the field of cyber. Exchange of 
personnel may be promoted by cooperating with the NCSC, criminal investigation 
services and the business community. This ensures that personnel can gain the required 
experience and at the same time provides them with an interesting career perspective.

14

Additional research is required into the impact of cyber assets as an operational capability 
and the threat they pose to the armed forces - technically, legally and in terms of the 
potential disruption of processes. The Defence organisation will seek to link up with 
research being carried out in the Netherlands and internationally. It will also carry out 
research independently. In 2014, a chair in cyber defence and cyber operations will be 
established at the Netherlands Defence Academy.

15

Focal point 6: 
Cooperation

Cyber security depends on the ability of countries and organisations to protect 
cyberspace, individually and collectively. Cyberspace is by definition an area where both 
public and private, civilian and military, and national and international actors act 
simultaneously and are mutually dependent. In addition, the techniques used by 
attackers are largely similar and designed to exploit generic vulnerabilities of networks 
and systems. A joint approach to cyber threats is therefore required in order to increase 
cyber security in a sustainable manner. 

At home
As part of the National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS), the Defence organisation needs to 
work closely together with both public and private parties. To this end, the Defence 
organisation is represented in the Cyber Security Council and participates in the NCSC. 

As manager of high-grade digital networks and systems, the Defence organisation is an 
important partner with specific knowledge and capabilities. On the basis of the Defence 
organisation’s third core task, it can make this knowledge and these capabilities available 
to civil authorities on request. Following a formal request and approval in accordance 
with the legal basis for assistance or the regulations for providing support, measures can 
be taken under the authority of the party making the request. The manner in which 
capabilities are to be made available for cyber operations is being worked out in greater 
detail. Furthermore, there are grounds to consider whether cyber assets of the Defence 
organisation can be brought into the interdepartmental administrative agreements 
concerning specific guaranteed availability of the armed forces as part of the 
Intensification of Civil-Military Cooperation policy. The capabilities of the Defence 
organisation will have to contribute to improving the security and reliability of the entire 
Dutch cyberspace.

When organising a comprehensive approach, it is important for roles, tasks and responsi-
bilities to be clear. It is essential to be able to bring large-scale digital disruptions under 
control rapidly and effectively, in joint consultation. In this context, at the initiative of the 
National Coordinator for Counterterrorism and Security, the current national crisis 
management structure will be reviewed. The Defence organisation will contribute to this 
review. 

Cooperation with public-sector partners, universities and the private sector is also needed 
in the areas of research and development, training and personnel. Different parties are 
confronted with the same challenges, such as limited budgets and scarcity of qualified 
personnel. New possibilities for strategic cooperation must be investigated. The Defence 
organisation contributes to the National Cyber Security Research Agenda and, as part of 
the government’s policy regarding the private sector, to the priority status given to cyber 
security by the high-tech industry. Within the same framework, the Defence organisation 
will work together closely with other ministries, knowledge institutes and the private 
sector. With regard to the development of resources and capabilities, alliances will be 
sought with the private sector. 

16

Abroad
At the international level, the Defence organisation seeks cooperation with countries that 
aspire to a similar level of ambition and approach and operate at a similar level as the 
Netherlands. The initial purpose of cooperation is the exchange of knowledge. At a later 
stage, the possibilities for the joint development of assets and techniques and the 
collective establishment of capabilities will be looked into. 

For the Netherlands Defence organisation, NATO is the primary partner for cooperation in 
strengthening cyber defence. In that context, the Defence organisation contributes 
actively to the development and implementation of NATO policy. As was emphasised 
during the Chicago summit of May 2012, NATO will improve the protection of its own 
networks and systems, as well as those of allies that are crucial to the functioning of 
NATO. The Netherlands also endorses NATO’s ambition to strengthen its members’ 
combined capabilities for intelligence analysis. It is unlikely that collective cyber capabili-
ties will be developed under the aegis of NATO. The Alliance will, however, have to 
develop a vision on the deployment of cyber capabilities in NATO operations. 

The Defence organisation also supports the EU’s efforts to put in place a comprehensive 
Internet security strategy. It is important for the Defence organisation that the EU and 
NATO keep working together intensively to enhance member states’ abilities to defend 
themselves. To this end, the exchange of information in this field between the two 
organisations must be increased. 

In conclusion

17

The focal points in the strategy set out in this document must ensure that the armed 
forces will be able to operate effectively and efficiently in cyberspace. By investing in 
cyber defence and operational capabilities, the Netherlands will be able to maintain 
high-quality and high-tech armed forces that can be deployed flexibly and perform their 
tasks in every domain. The House of Representatives will be informed of the progress 
made in implementing this strategy in the Defence budget and the annual report. In 2016, 
a policy assessment will be carried out. 

18

This brochure is a publication of:
The ministry of Defense
Central Staff
 
September 2012 

