Appendix 1 

 

 

NEW ZEALAND’S 

 

 

 

 

 

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 

 

 

June 2011 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MED1186216 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
© New Zealand Government 
7 June 2011 
ISBN: 978-0-478-38200-6 
www.med.govt.nz/cyberstrategy 

MED1186216 

MED11   

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Foreword from the Minister 

The  Internet  and  digital  technologies  are  transforming  the 

global economy and connecting people as never before.  New 

Zealand  citizens,  businesses  and  the  Government  are  readily 

embracing the many advantages that these technologies offer.   

Everyday  activities  such  as  banking,  shopping  and  accessing 

government  services  are  increasingly  being  carried  out  online 

whenever  and  wherever  it  is  convenient  for  people  to  do  so.   

New  Zealand  businesses  are  using  the  Internet  and  other 

digital  technologies  to  access  new  markets,  drive  process 

efficiencies and improve their service delivery.   

 

The  Government’s  Ultra-Fast  Broadband  and  Rural  Broadband  initiatives  will  help  New 

Zealanders maximise the benefits of the Internet by providing significantly faster broadband. 

At the same time, our increasing use of the Internet and other digital technologies increases our 

vulnerability  to  cyber  threats.    Criminals  are  increasingly  using  cyber  space  to  gain  access  to 

personal  information,  steal  businesses’  intellectual  property,  and  gain  knowledge  of  sensitive 

government-held information for financial or political gain or other malicious purposes.  National 

borders present no barrier.   

New  Zealand’s  Cyber  Security  Strategy  is  the  Government’s  response  to  the  growing  cyber 

threat.  The Strategy builds on existing government and non-government efforts to improve New 

Zealand’s cyber security.  It brings forward targeted initiatives aimed at improving cyber security 

for individuals, businesses, critical national infrastructure and government.   

The  Strategy  reflects  the  fact  that  an  improved  New  Zealand  cyber  security  response  is  a 

shared  responsibility.    Government  will  continue  to  partner  with  industry  and  non-government 

organisations to ensure the initiatives outlined in the Strategy are delivered in the most effective 

and efficient way. 

Meeting  the  evolving  cyber  threat  requires  ongoing  vigilance  and  flexibility  to  respond  to  the 

changing environment.  I am confident we can work together to meet this challenge. 

 

Hon Steven Joyce 
Minister for Communications and Information Technology 

MED1186216 

MED11   

1 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Introduction 

A  well-functioning  cyber  space  provides  important 

benefits for New Zealanders.  The Internet and digital 

technologies  enable  New  Zealanders  to  have  global 

access  to  products  and  services  and  reduce  our 

geographical isolation by connecting us with the rest of 

the world.   

Access  to  greater  internet  bandwidth  and  wireless 

technology  –  in  particular  mobile  devices  such  as 

smart  phones  –  is  transforming  how  New  Zealanders 

access the Internet and how business is transacted in 

New  Zealand.  Convenient,  high-speed  access  to 

information and services is increasingly in demand.  

 

Our  critical  national 

infrastructure  providers, 

including 

the  banking  and 

finance, 

telecommunications,  transportation  and  energy  sectors,  and  other  businesses,  are  more  and 

more reliant on digital systems. 

Government  agencies  utilise  the  Internet,  digital  document  management  systems  and  shared 

online  platforms  in  their  day-to-day  business.    Increasingly,  New  Zealanders  are  accessing 

government  services  online,  to  complete  tasks  such  as  submitting  tax  returns  and  making 

applications for passport renewals and student loans.    

Internet Usage 

•  At least 75% of New Zealanders have access to the Internet at home.1 

•  Over 70% of New Zealand Internet subscribers have access to broadband.2 

•  77% of New Zealand businesses use Internet banking and 50% of rural businesses buy goods 

and services online.3 

With  our  ever-increasing  use  of,  and  reliance  on,  the  Internet  and  digital  technologies  comes 

increased exposure, and vulnerability, to cyber threats.   

Cyber  attacks  are  becoming  more  advanced  and  sophisticated. 

Incidents 

reported 

internationally  suggest  that  attacks  are  increasingly  targeted  at  intellectual  property  and  other 

proprietary  information  held  by  businesses,  as  well  as  at  individuals.    Many  attackers  are 

coordinated, well-funded, and investing heavily in new ways to exploit the digital environment. 

                                            
1 Statistics New Zealand Household Use of ICT Survey – 2009. 
2 As above. 
3 MYOB Business Monitor Internet survey – 2011. 

MED1186216 

MED11   

2 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

An Increasing and Evolving Global Threat 

•  In 2010 alone, one third of all malware in existence was developed.4   

•  2010 has been marked by some of the most high-profile, targeted attacks that the cyber 

industry has ever witnessed.5 

•  There was an upward trend in Trojan botnet activity during 2010, which has gained momentum 

despite increasing coordinated efforts to shut down botnet activity.6 

•  “Spear phishing”, a more targeted phishing technique using information gained from other 

sources to give a veneer of authenticity, grew in prevalence in 2010.7 

The Role of Government 

New  Zealand  is  not  immune  from  cyber  attacks.    A  successful  targeted  cyber  attack  could 

disrupt  our  critical  services,  negatively  impact  our  economy  and,  potentially,  threaten  our 

national  security.    Cyber  attacks  can  interfere  with  the  production  and  delivery  of  essential 

goods and services or result in the theft of intellectual property or personal information.  

New Zealand’s cyber security response must meet the challenging nature of the increasing and 

evolving cyber security threat.  New Zealand needs to ensure its cyber security activities are as 

coordinated and effective as possible to be able to identify and mitigate emerging cyber threats. 

The  Government  has  a  responsibility  to  protect  its  own  systems  and  assist  critical  national 

infrastructure  providers  to  ensure  New  Zealanders  and  New  Zealand  businesses  can  access 

government and other essential services.   

The Government also has a role in helping to provide a safe digital environment for businesses 

and individuals to operate in.  This includes helping New Zealanders and businesses to be more 

aware  of  cyber  threats,  and  how  to  take  measures  to  protect  themselves,  and  establishing 

appropriate organisational and legal frameworks.    

Government units have already been established to tackle issues such as scams, spam, identity 

theft,  electronic  crime  and  critical  national  infrastructure  protection.    The  Government  also 

provides  support  to  NetSafe,  an  independent  non-profit  organisation,  to  deliver  cyber  safety 

education and awareness programmes in schools.   

The Government is actively working with New Zealand’s international security partners on cyber 

security  issues  and  is  currently  reviewing  New  Zealand’s  legal  framework  in  relation  to  the 

growing issue of international cyber crime.    

                                            
4 PandaLabs Annual Security Report – 2010. 
5 IBM X-Force Trend and Risk Report – 2010. 
6 As above. 
7 As above. 

MED1186216 

MED11   

3 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Cyber Security Threats 

The  threat  to  New  Zealanders  and  the  New  Zealand 

economy from cyber intrusions is real and growing. 

New  Zealanders  are  already  targets  of  common  cyber 

threats, such as malware, scams and identity theft.   

Attackers  exploit  vulnerabilities  in  software,  hardware 

and user behaviour.  They take advantage of people who 

fail  to  follow  basic  cyber  security  practices,  such  as 

regularly  updating 

their  passwords,  updating 

their 

antivirus software and using protected wireless networks. 

 

Once attackers have access to a computer or network, they can steal or distort the information 

stored on it, corrupt its operations or program it to attack other computers and systems.    

Unprotected home computers that are infected with malware can be used as a resource to build 

botnets.  Botnets  harness  the  computing  power  of  thousands  or  even  millions  of  individual 

computers to launch remote attacks on information and communications networks, commercial 

systems and government websites with the aim of denying the legitimate use of the service.    

The Threat to New Zealand 

•  70% of New Zealand adults have been the targets of some form of cyber crime8, with the most 

common complaints being computer scams, fraud and viruses/malware.9 

•  New Zealanders are frequently the targets of international scams and fraud attempts, losing up 

to $500 million due to scams annually.10 

•  International data suggests 133,000 New Zealanders per annum are victims of identity fraud 

(the majority of cases having a cyber element), with around one third falling victim to identity 
theft and two thirds falling victim to credit or bank card fraud.11 

•  A recent survey showed that 54% of New Zealanders feel they know little or nothing at all about 

computer security risks and solutions.12 

•  59% of New Zealanders do not secure their mobile phones, PDAs or smart phones by using, 

and regularly changing, a password or PIN.13 

 

                                            
8  Norton Cybercrime Report 2010: The Human Impact. 
9  New Zealand Police – 2011. 
10 Ministry of Consumer Affairs – 2010.  
11 Department of Internal Affairs – 2010. 
12 AVG/NetSafe Survey – March 2011. 
13 Unisys Security Index – 2010. 

MED1186216 

4 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Cyber crime 

Criminals  operating  in  cyber  space  are  often  well-organised  and  well-funded.    They  are 

constantly  targeting  home  users,  businesses  and  government  systems.    Organised  criminals 

are  involved  in  activities  such  as  identity  theft,  selling  fake  goods  and  services  and  trading 

information with other criminals such as stolen credit card details, passwords and malware.    

Criminals are finding  increasingly sophisticated  ways to gain access to  information  online. For 

example,  as  the  popularity  of  social  networking  sites  increases,  criminals  are  exploiting 
opportunities  to  use  these  sites  to  access  individuals’  personal  information14.    In  addition  to 

obtaining  personal  information,  cyber  criminals  also  seek  to  obtain  intellectual  property  and 

government-held information for financial gain.  

Social Networking Targets 

•  Cyber criminals are increasingly using social networking sites to lure victims to websites that 

attempt to push malware or launch an attack on the victim’s computer.15 

•  Attackers exploit the profile information available on social networking sites (e.g. birth dates, 

phone numbers, employment details and other information) to mount targeted attacks.16 

Cyber Espionage  

Some  of  the  most  advanced  and  persistent  cyber  attacks  on  governments  and  critical 

infrastructure  worldwide  are  thought  to  originate  from  foreign  military  and  intelligence  services 

or  organised  criminal  groups.    Media  organisations  around  the  world  are  reporting  attacks  on 

government  systems,  national  infrastructure  and  businesses  that  have  resulted  in  access  to 

commercially sensitive information, intellectual property and state or trade secrets.   

Hacktivism  

There  has  also  been  a  global  increase  in  ‘hactivism’.    Hacktivists  seek  to  gain  control  over 

computer  systems  or  websites  to  manipulate  them  to  promote  a  cause,  make  a  political 

statement or disrupt services, for example, by overloading websites with botnet attacks, which 

can deny or prevent the legitimate use of the service.  

Terrorist use of the Internet 

Terrorists  recognise  the  growing  worldwide  dependence  on  cyber  systems  and  may  seek  to 

take advantage of the vulnerabilities that exist.  It is likely that terrorists will continue to develop 

their cyber capability and use of the Internet to support recruitment and fundraising activities.    

                                            
14 Sophos Security Treat Report – 2010. 
15 Symantec Internet Security Threat Report: Trends for 2010. 
16 As above. 

MED1186216 

5 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

New Zealand’s Response 

New  Zealand’s  Cyber  Security  Strategy  outlines  the  Government’s  response  to  the  growing 

cyber  threat.    The  Strategy  highlights  initiatives  for  individuals,  businesses  and  government  to 

strengthen New Zealand’s cyber security position.    

The key objectives of the Strategy are to: 

 

 

raise  the  cyber  security  awareness  and  understanding  of  individuals  and  small 

businesses;  

improve the level of cyber security across government; and 

  build  strategic  relationships  to  improve  cyber  security  for  critical  national  infrastructure 

and other businesses. 

The  Government  has  appointed  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Development  as  the  lead  policy 

agency responsible for coordinating cyber security policy and implementing this Strategy. 

A Partnership Approach  

Improving cyber security is a shared responsibility.  In developing this Strategy, the Government 

has  sought  input  from  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  across  government,  industry,  non-

government organisations and academia.   

The  Government  will  continue  to  build  partnerships  and  work  with  these  stakeholders  to 

implement the initiatives outlined in the Strategy and to explore further opportunities to enhance 

New Zealand’s cyber security response.   

Internationally,  the  Government  will  continue  to  collaborate  with  security  and  trade  partners  to 

ensure New Zealand contributes effectively to global cyber security initiatives. 

Priority Areas and Key Initiatives 

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy has three priority areas: 

1. 

Increasing Awareness and Online Security 

2.  Protecting Government Systems and Information 

3. 

Incident Response and Planning 

The  Strategy  identifies  key  initiatives,  and  longer-term  initiatives,  under  these  priority  areas.  

Implementation of the key initiatives will begin in 2011.   

MED1186216 

6 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Priority 1 – Increasing Awareness and Online Security 

. 

Individuals  and  businesses  have  a 

responsibility  and  interest  to  ensure 

they carry out their activities in cyber 

space  as  safely  as  possible.    The 

Government  has  a  role  in  helping  to 

enable a safe cyber environment and 

helping  New 

Zealanders 

and 

businesses  to  access  the  tools  and 

information  they  need  to  operate  as 

securely as possible in cyber space.   

 

The  Government  is  working  with  industry  and  non-government  organisations,  such  as 

NetSafe,  on  initiatives  to  improve  access  to  cyber  security  information  and  advice.    The 

Government is also working with industry and non-government organisations on initiatives to 

raise  the  cyber  security  awareness  of  individuals  and  small  businesses  and  to  increase 

understanding of cyber security threats.     

The Government will seek the views of Internet Service Providers and other organisations on 

measures to address problems such as infected computers and botnets.   

Key initiatives: 

  Partner with industry and non-government organisations, such as NetSafe, to: 

–  centralise cyber security information and resources for ease of access; and   

–  deliver a coordinated cyber safety awareness-raising programme.    

Longer-term initiative: 

  Progress work with Internet Service Providers to develop appropriate solutions to 

address cyber security issues, such as infected computers and botnets. 

 

 

MED1186216 

 7 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Priority 2 – Protecting Government Systems and 
Information 

. 

The Government has a responsibility to 

protect  the  personal  and  commercial 

information entrusted to it by its citizens 

and  businesses 

from  harmful  or 

unauthorised  use.    Nationally  sensitive 

material must also be protected.   

 

As  a  priority,  the  Government  will  establish  a  National  Cyber  Security  Centre  within  the 

Government Communications Security Bureau.   

The  National  Cyber  Security  Centre  will  build  on  existing  cyber  security  and  information 

assurance  capabilities  to  provide  enhanced  protection  of  government  systems  and 

information against advanced and persistent threats.    

The Government will also take steps to enhance cyber security practices within government 

agencies.     

Key initiatives: 

  Establish a National Cyber Security Centre within the Government Communications 

Security Bureau. 

 

Implement steps to improve cyber security practices in government agencies.    

 

 

 

 

 

 

MED1186216 

8 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Priority 3 – Incident Response and Planning 

.  

In  light  of  the  global  growth  in  significant  cyber  security 

incidents,  emergency  preparedness 

is 

increasingly 

important.  The Government will revise its cyber incident 

response  plan  to  ensure  New  Zealand  is  prepared  to 

respond to the evolving and increasing cyber threats.  

Through  the  establishment  of  a  National  Cyber  Security 

Centre,  the  Government  will  build  on  New  Zealand’s 

existing cyber security capability to plan for and respond 

to  cyber  incidents.    The  National  Cyber  Security  Centre 

will absorb the current functions of the Centre for Critical 

Infrastructure Protection (CCIP). 

The  preparedness  of  New  Zealand  businesses 

to 

respond  to  cyber  attacks  is  critical  to  New  Zealand’s 

cyber  resilience.    As  new  and  more  sophisticated 

malware and attack tools are developed, it is increasingly 

important  for  businesses  to  have  measures  in  place  to 

identify, assess and respond to incidents and threats.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Government will work with critical national infrastructure providers and other businesses 

to support them to further develop their cyber security responses.  This will include assessing 

the need for a New Zealand Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT).   

Key initiatives: 

  Establish a National Cyber Security Centre, which will absorb the functions of the 

CCIP. 

  Revise the Government’s national cyber incident response plan.  

  Expand work with industry, including critical national infrastructure providers and 

businesses to support them to review their cyber security responses. 

Longer-term initiatives: 

  Work with interested parties to determine the need for a New Zealand CERT. 

 

 

MED1186216 

9 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Other Initiatives 

.  

Research  and  development  is  a  key  component  in 

improving  New  Zealand’s  response  to  cyber  security 

threats.  Increasingly, organisations are seeking to hire the 

services of people with specialist cyber security skills and 

knowledge.   

The  Government  will  work  with  industry,  universities  and 

other  educational  and  training  institutions  to  determine 

appropriate  solutions  for  meeting  the  demand  for  cyber 

security  qualifications, 

training  and 

research  and 

development.   

The  Government  will  also  work  with  industry,  academia, 

government  agencies  and  other  relevant  organisations  to 

explore  further  opportunities  to  enhance  New  Zealand’s 

cyber security response. 

Maintaining  an  appropriate 

legal  environment  and 

ensuring  international  cooperation  on  cyber  crime  is 

important.    The  Government  is  working  with  international 

partners to improve co-operation on cyber crime.  As part 

of  an  all-of-government  response  to  organised  crime,  the 

Government  is  considering  New  Zealand’s  alignment  to 

the standards set out in the Council of Europe Convention 

on Cybercrime.     

 

Longer-term initiatives: 

  Work with educational and training institutions to determine an appropriate solution to 

meet the need for cyber security professionals in New Zealand. 

  Work with international partners on initiatives to combat cyber crime and determine 

New Zealand’s alignment with the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime. 

 

 

MED1186216 

10 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Government and Partnering Organisations 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Centre for Critical Infrastructure 
Protection – supports critical national 
infrastructure providers to improve 
protection against cyber threats. 

www.ccip.govt.nz 

NetSafe – provides cyber safety advice to 
individuals, families, schools and 
businesses to promote safety online. 

www.netsafe.org.nz 

New Zealand Police – investigates and 
provides advice on electronic crime and 
computer related offending.  

www.police.govt.nz 

Ministry of Consumer Affairs – provides 
information and advice on how consumers 
can protect themselves and report scams. 

www.consumeraffairs.govt.nz 

Ministry of Education – supports NetSafe 
to provide cyber safety programmes for use 
in schools. 

www.minedu.govt.nz 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
– New Zealand's voice overseas 
contributing to the security and well-being 
of all New Zealanders. 

www.mfat.govt.nz 

The ORB – a simple and secure way to 
report online incidents which may break 
New Zealand law or breach legislation. 

www.theorb.org.nz    

New Zealand Security Intelligence 
Service – provides advice to Government 
about matters relating to domestic security.  

www.security.govt.nz   

 

Ministry of Economic Development 
– the lead agency responsible for cyber 
security policy in New Zealand and 
implementing this Strategy. 

www.med.govt.nz 

 

 

Department of Internal Affairs 
– coordinates cross-government ICT 
initiatives and has units dedicated to 
addressing cyber issues such as spam 
and identity fraud.  

www.dia.govt.nz 

 

 

Government Communications 
Security Bureau – assists government 
agencies to protect their electronic 
information resources and 
communications systems.  
www.gcsb.govt.nz 

 

MED1186216 

 11 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Glossary of Terms 

Botnet 
A  network  of  compromised  computers  running  malicious  programmes  under  a  command  and 
control infrastructure. 

Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT)  
Typically  an  operational  team  or  centre  that  provides  advice  and  mitigations  against  cyber 
attacks for businesses, government and individuals. 

Critical national infrastructure  
A  term  used  by  governments  to  describe  assets  that  are  essential  for  the  functioning  of  a 
society  and  economy  (e.g.  electricity  generation,  gas  production,  telecommunications,  water 
supply etc.). 

Cyber attack  
An  attempt  to  undermine  or  compromise  the  function  of  a  computer-based  system,  access 
information, or attempt to track the online movements of individuals without their permission. 

Cyber crime (or computer crime) 
Any crime where information and communications technology is: 

1.  used as a tool in the commission of an offence 

2. 

the target of an offence 

3.  a storage device in the commission of an offence.   

In New Zealand some of the most common examples of cyber crime include fraud, identity theft 
and organised crime. 

Cyber security  
The practice of making the networks that constitute cyber space as secure as possible against 
intrusions,  maintaining  confidentiality,  availability  and  integrity  of  information,  detecting 
intrusions and incidents that do occur, and responding to and recovering from them. 

Cyber space  
The global network of interdependent information technology infrastructures, 
telecommunications networks and computer processing systems in which online communication 
takes place. 

Hacking  
An  attempt  by  an  unauthorised  person,  whether  successful  or  not,  to  access  an  information 
system, usually for malicious purposes. 

Identity Fraud  
Any  offence  involving  the  misuse  of  a  personal  identity.    The  majority  of  identity  crime  is 
committed with the help of computers. 

 

 

MED1186216 

12 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

Intellectual Property 
Includes a diverse range of commercially valuable assets including patents for new inventions, 
trade marks for marketing goods and services and copyright works like photographs, prototype 
drawings, literature  and music.  In  business terms, intellectual property means that proprietary 
knowledge – a key component of business success – is protected. 

Internet Service Provider (ISP)  
An organisation that provides access to the Internet, commonly using copper, wireless or fibre 
connections. 

Malware  
Malicious  software  or  potentially  unwanted  software  installed  without  informed  user  consent, 
generally covering a range of software programmes designed to attack, or prevent the intended 
use of information and communications networks. 

Phishing  
A form of Internet fraud that aims to steal valuable information such as credit card details, user 
IDs and passwords by tricking the user into giving the attacker the confidential information. 

Scams  
Deceptive, uninvited contacts or promises designed to trick people into giving away their money 
or your personal information. 

Social engineering  
The  practice  of  obtaining  otherwise  secure  information  by  tricking,  exploiting  human  traits  of 
trust and helpfulness, or manipulation of legitimate users. 

Spam  
The  use  of  electronic  messaging  systems  (including  most  broadcast  media,  digital  delivery 
systems) to send unsolicited bulk messages indiscriminately.  The most widely recognised form 
of spam is email spam. 

Trojan 
A  computer  program  that  disguises  itself  as  a  useful  software  application,  whereas  its  true 
purpose is to carry out and run a hidden, harmful transmission of material across a network. 

Virus  
A  self-replicating  program  that  spreads  to  other  users  by  inserting  copies  of  itself  into  other 
executable code or documents. 

Glossary Sources: 

Centre for Critical Infrastructure Protection. 

Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand. 

New Zealand Police Electronic Crime Strategy to 2010. 

Microsoft Security Intelligence Report – January to June 2009. 

Ministry of Consumer Affairs – 2010. 

MED1186216 

13 

N e w   Z e a l a n d ’ s   C y b e r   S e c u r i t y   S t r a t e g y  

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MED1186216 

www.med.govt.nz/cyberstrategy 

