	  

	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  	  

	  

	  

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 

	  
	  

	  

FOREWORD BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER 

 

 
The emergence of cyberspace, a virtual global domain, is increasingly impacting almost every aspect 
of our lives. The domain is transforming our economy and security posture more than ever before, 
creating opportunities for innovations and the means to improve general welfare of the citizens. It  is 
transforming  many countries’ growth, dismantling barriers to commerce, and allowing 
people across the globe to communicate, collaborate and exchange ideas.   
 
However, behind this increasing dependence on cyberspace lies new risks that threaten 
the national economy and security. Sensitive data, networks and systems that we now trust 
can be compromised or impaired, in a fashion that detection or defence can be hard, 
thus undermining our confidence in a connected economy. 
 
The Federal government is not unmindful of the diversity of implications of the nation’s risk exposure 
in cyberspace, hence we have put in place cohesive measures towards addressing national risks 
effectively now and in the immediate future. Furthermore, the government has recognized that 
for Nigeria and its citizens to continue to benefit from the full potential of information 
and communication technology revolution, we must take the cyber-risks seriously. It is 
on this premise that we  are  determined to confront the  threats, uphold and  support 
the openness of the cyberspace as  well as balance security with respect to  privacy 
and fundamental rights. If  we fail to  prepare now and  act  appropriately, we  may be 
faced with future challenges that will be more complex to manage. 
 
In this context, government has developed a National Cybersecurity Strategy as cohesive national 
measures  towards  addressing  the  challenges.  These  measures  contain  strategic  initiatives  and 
programs  that  are  aligned  with  the  national  doctrines,  principles,  vision,  goals  and  objectives  as 
enshrined in the National Cybersecurity Policy. The strategy recognizes three key approaches to 
a  successful  national  cybersecurity  engagement:  public  private  sector  partnership;  stakeholders’ 
collaborations and international cooperation. 
 
Our  commitment  is  to  ensure  continuity  of  government  in  the  advent  of  cyber  threat 
emergency,  safeguard  critical 
infrastructure,  and  nurture  national 
cybersecurity readiness through the engagement of all stakeholders.  

information 

It  is  in  the  light  of  the  above  that  my  office,  in  collaboration  with  other  agencies  of 
	  

the  stakeholders  drawn 

government  and  key  actors  from  the  private  sector  are  championing  the  urgent 
need  for  comprehensive  national  cybersecurity  programmes. It is my hope that the 
synergy  already  developed  between 
from  different 
backgrounds will be  sustained  through  all  the  implementation  stages.  My  office  will 
continue  to  explore  common  grounds  around  which  we  can  sustain 
this 
collaboration  on cybersecurity for the common good of our country. 
  
We  shall  keep  all  channels  open  for  close  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the 
implementation of this policy, which shall be due for comprehensive review in another 
five years. My office shall facilitate regular collation of feedback from stakeholders that 
will enhance periodic review of the process.  

I  therefore  wish  to  express  my  appreciation  to  the  cross  section  of  contributors  and 
stakeholders, including professional bodies, corporate leaders and captains of industry 
who  have  contributed  to  our  efforts  towards  creating  an  enduring  safer  digital 
environment for our dear country. 

 
 
M. S. DASUKI CFR. 
National Security Adviser 
 

December 2014. 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

FOREWORD BY NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER………………………………………….…….... 

TABLE OF CONTENT…………………………………………………………………………….……… 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY………………………………………………………………………..………. 

 

Chapter One: 

AN OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 

1.1. 
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………..…… 
1.2.  National Cybersecurity Vision…………………………………………………………… 
1.3.  The Aim of National Cybersecurity Strategy………………………………………….... 
1.4.  Cyberspace Within the Context of National Prosperity & Opportunities…………..…. 
1.5.  Cyber-Risk within the Context of National Security & Economic Impact ……….....… 
1.6.  Cybersecurity within the context of National Security Strategy…………………..…… 

 

Chapter Two:  

UNDERSTANDING NATIONAL CYBER-RISK EXPOSURE 

2.1    
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………….…. 
2.2       Cyber-threat Landscape & Impacts……………………………………………….…… 
2.3       Imperative of a National Vulnerability Assessment…………………………………. 
2.4       Gauging Impacts and Opportunities………………………………………………….. 
 

Chapter Three:  

NATIONAL READINESS STRATEGY 

3.1 
National Cybersecurity Policy Direction…………………………………………….... 
3.2.  Necessity of a National Cybersecurity Strategy……………………………….…….. 
3.3.  Objectives of National Cybersecurity Strategy……………………………….……....  
Scope of National Cybersecurity Strategy…………………………………….……... 
3.4 
Approach, Guiding Principles, & National Priorities…………………………………. 
3.5 
3.6 
Governance Strategy……………………………………………………………….…... 
  
	  
Chapter Four:  
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK INITIATIVES 
  
4.1 
4.2  
4.3 
4.4 
 

Objectives…………………………………………………………………………….…. 
Approach…………………………………………………………………………….….. 
Initiatives…………………………………………………………………………….….. 
Special Areas of Focus ………………………………………………………….…… 

	  

 

 

 

 

Chapter Five:  
 
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY 
 
 
Purpose……………………………………………………………………………………. 
5.1 
Establishing National CERT…………………………………………………………….. 
5.2  
Implementation Approach……………………………………………………………….. 
5.3 
5.4 
Preventive Strategy………………………………………………………………………. 
5.5   Detection Strategy………………………………………………………………………... 
Response Strategy……………………………………………………………………….. 
5.6 
Cooperation and Partnership……………………………………………………………. 
5.7 
5.8 
Capacity Building…………………………………………………………………………. 
5.9       National Digital Forensic Mechanism…………………………………………………... 
 
 
Chapter Six:  
 
STRATEGY ON CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES PROTECTION  
 
6.1       Introduction……………………………………………………………………………..…. 
6.2 
Vision of CIIPR……………………………………………………………………….…… 
6.3  Mission of CIIPR………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.4 
Strategic Objectives……………………………………………………………………… 
6.5       Strategic Imperatives to Achieve Aims and Objectives……………………………… 
6.6 
Initiative 1………………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.7 
Initiative 2………………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.8       Initiative 3………………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.9       Initiative 4………………………………………………………………………………….. 
6.10     Success Criteria and Review of CIIP Strategy……………………………………..…. 
 
 
Chapter Seven:  
 
STRATEGY ON ASSURANCE & MONITORING 
 
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………  
7.1 
Strategic Objective…………………………………………………………………………  
7.2 
The Cybersecurity Assurance Context………………………………………………….. 
7.3 
7.4 
Focal Points………………………………………………………………………………… 
7.5       Strategy………………………………………………………………...…………………... 
 
 
Chapter Eight:  

  

 NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY SKILL & MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT 

Introduction………………………………………………………………………………... 
Objectives…………………………………………………………………………………. 
Scope……………………………………………………………………………………… 
Initiatives……………………………………………………………...…………………… 
Roadmap for Nigeria Cybersecurity Industry……………………...…………………...  
Institutional Framework………………………………………………………...…………	  

8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6  
	  	  
 
 

	  

Introduction………………………………………………………………………………....  
Rationale for COAEP…………………………………………………………………..…. 
Objectives…………………………………………………………………………….….…  
Strategic Approach…………………………………………………………………….….. 
Strategy ……………………………………………………………………………………. 
Operational Measures…………………………………………………………………….. 
National Security Response Measures…………………………………………...…….. 

Chapter Nine:  
 
STRATEGY ON ONLINE CHILD ABUSE & EXPLOITATIONS 
 
9:1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
9.6 
9.7 
 
 
Chapter Ten:  
 
STRATEGY ON PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP  
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………..….….  
10.1 
10.2  The Imperative of PPP framework for NCSS………………………………………..…. 
10.3  Public-Private Sector Partnership Management Strategy……………………....….… 
 
 
Chapter Eleven:  

STRATEGY ON NATIONAL INTERNET SAFETY 

11.1 
Introduction………………………………………………………………………….….…. 
11.2  National Internet Safety Initiative……………………………………………………….. 
11.3  Objective……………………………………………………………………………….….. 
11.4  Scope……………………………………………………………………………….……... 
Initiative………………………………………………………………………………..…... 
11.5 
11.6 
Importance Of Nisi to NCCC…………………………………………………….…….... 

Sources of Cyber-threat 
Initiatives Pyramid 
Data Protection and Privacy 
Data Protection Impact Point 
Four Pillars of Critical Infrastructure Protection [adapted from ITU’s A Generic  
National Framework for Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP)] 
The Cybersecurity Assurance context -It shows the logical environment within which the Cybersecurity 
Assurance mechanism will operate and monitor. 
 The proposed linear build-up process coordination through Special Purpose Vehicle  

FIGURES 

Figure 1:  
Figure 2; 
Figure 3: 
Figure 4: 
Figure 5: 

Figure 6:  

Figure 7: 

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

 

The economy of a modern Nigeria is anchored and sustained on two major infrastructural 
landscape  (i.e.  Physical  and  Digital)  working  together  to  sustain  critical  and  non-critical 
sectors  of  the  economy  in  Government,  Manufacturing,  Dams,  Defence,  Chemical 
Sector  {Oil  and  Gas},  Power  and  Energy,  Commercial  Facilities,  Financial  Services, 
Food and Agro-allied, Emergency Services Transportation Systems, Public Health and 
Healthcare  Sector,  Water  and  Waste  Water  systems.  Digital  infrastructure  is  the 
National  Information  Infrastructure  (NII)  component  that  permeates  the  physical 
infrastructural 
function  seamlessly,  endlessly  and 
sustainably.  The NII is the backbone of the nation’s active presence in cyberspace. 
Significant  disruption  of  its  operation  will  undermine  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and 
availability  of  essential  national  services,  which  will  be  inimical  to  national  economy 
and security. 

landscape  supporting 

it 

to 

In comparison with other industrial and commercial entities, the Internet has been with 
us  for  a  relatively  short  period  of  time.  It  has  been  responsible  for  the  most 
revolutionary  and  rapid  changes  to  the  way  we  communicate,  undertake  business, 
perform  job  functions  as  well  as  boost  our  military  strategies.  We  have  seen  the 
examples in the home schooling, social media and cloud computing rising on the tails 
of the Internet phenomenon.  

The  Internet  has  given  the  phrase  “global  village”  an  appropriate  meaning,  this  is 
driven home with the illustration that an individual in Nigeria can immediately set up an 
online conference call and chat with group of people on the other side of the planet in 
real-time.  The majority of users of the Internet conduct their activities in a legitimate 
and above board manner, while on the other side of the internet there are individuals, 
organisations, foreign intelligence agencies and state sponsored actors that have used 
the very benefits of the internet, i.e. its speed, global presence and openness, to carry 
out criminal activities that can cause havoc to those that are not aware, prepared or 
equipped to deal with such undertakings. 

This document therefore examines the strategic imperative of a national cybersecurity. 
It highlights various strategies that will be used to implement the measures outlined in 
the new National Cybersecurity Policy. 

	  

These include the following: 

•  The  development  and  implementation  of  appropriate  legal  framework,  with 
initiatives that will allow for the identification and prosecution of cybercrimes that 
impact  Nigeria  regardless  of  whether  they  originate  within  Nigeria  or  are 
launched  from  outside  of  the  country.  It  encompasses  training  the  judiciary, 
security  and  law  enforcement  agencies,  seeking  international  co-operation, 
public  and  private  sector  co-operation  and  public  awareness  programmes.  It 
also  introduces  a  special  focus  on  data  protection,  privacy  and  lawful 
interception. 
 

•  Establishment of a National Incidents Management Strategy which outlines the 
commissioning  of  a  National  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (CERT) 
and  introduces  the  roadmap  for  implementing  Detective,  Preventative  and 
Response capabilities to deal with cybercrime activities. 
 

•  The strategy for Protecting Critical information Infrastructures including shared 
responsibility between government and owner operators of critical infrastructure. 
It also highlights the ways in which early warning, detection, reaction and crisis 
management  will  be  assessed,  developed  and  implemented  to  provide  a 
proactive readiness to react to and deal with threats towards Nigeria’s Critical 
Infrastructures.  
 

•  The strategy seeks to ensure the development of information security assurance 
and  monitoring  plan.  It  includes  a  new  national  mechanism  on  cybersecurity 
assurance,  adoption  of  fit  for  purpose  standards  for  Governance,  Risk  and 
Control,  Core  Assurance  Capabilities,  National  Enterprise  Architecture 
Framework. It also endorses the adoption of application security testing as well 
as the adoption of a Balanced Scorecard Framework for cybersecurity. 

•  The  introduction  of  a  sustainable  strategy  to  develop,  maintain  and  ensure 
Nigerians  are  informed  and  equipped  to  deal  with  cybersecurity  events  by 
establishing a mechanism for Cybersecurity Skill and Manpower Development 
initiatives.  These  initiatives  will  be  driven  through  public-private  partnership.  It 
introduces  a  model  for  certification  of  individuals  to  ensure  quality  of 
competence in the field of cybersecurity relevant to the nation.  

	  

 

•  The strategy for protecting Nigerian Children from Online Child Exploitation and 
Sexual Abuse includes initiatives, such as the national awareness programmes 
through  multi-stakeholder  engagement,  and  international  cooperation  in  the 
countermeasures. 
 

•  The Strategy on Public-Private Partnership highlights the need for interagency 
collaboration  with  private  sector.  It  engages  the  framework  for  a  public  and 
private partnership in developing a cohesive response to mitigating cyber-risk. 

In  conclusion,  The  National  Internet  Safety  initiative  is  aimed  at  providing  general 
public awareness, education, and advocacy through multi-stakeholders’ engagement, 
development  of  local  tools,  training  software  and  applications  in  Internet  safety  and 
security  readiness.  It  provides  mechanism  for  gauging  the  nation’s  cyber  security 
posture.   

 

December 2014. 

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

 
                   

CHAPTER ONE 

 

AN OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 
Introduction: 

1.1   
 

1.1.1  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  (NCSS)  is  the  nation’s  readiness  strategy  to 
provide cohesive measures and strategic actions towards assuring security and 
protection  of 
in  cyberspace,  safeguarding  critical 
information infrastructure, building and nurturing trusted cyber-community.  
 

the  country  presence 

1.1.2  The  NCSS  comprises  of  short,  medium  and  long  term  mitigation  strategies 
covering  all  national  priorities,  addressing  the  nation’s  cyber  risk  exposure. 
Specific key cyber threats worldwide inimical to National interest are identified. 
Such as; 

i.  Cybercrime 
ii.  Cyber-terrorism  
iii.  Cyber conflict 
iv.  Cyber espionage 
v.  Child online abuse and exploitation.  

 

1.1.3  These threats have significant capability to damage the integrity of the nation, 
infrastructure  operations,  undermine 

information 

disruption  of  critical 
government operations and national security.  
 

1.1.4  The NCSS articulates, coordinates and guides the country in the implementation 
of National Cybersecurity Policy and cohesive counter-threat measures for the 
protection, security and defence of National Cyberspace.  

 

1.1.5  The  Strategy  provides  various  initiatives  for  the  focused  areas  and  national 
mechanisms  for  developing  and  implementing  Legal  &  Policy  Measures, 
National  Incident  Management,  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection, 
Cybersecurity  Assurance  Framework,  Manpower  Development,  Child  Online 

	  

Abuse  &  Exploitation,  National  Internet  Safety,  Public  Awareness,  Multi-
Stakeholder Partnership and Global Cooperation on Cybersecurity.    

 

1.2.  National Cybersecurity Vision: 

 

  

The  National  Cybersecurity  Policy  has  set  out  a  clear  purpose,  direction  and 
outcome of the country’s engagement in cybersecurity.  
 
What is the Nigeria Cybersecurity Vision? 
 
A  safe,  secured,  vibrant,  resilient  and 
that  provide 
opportunities for its citizenry, safeguard national assets and interests, promote 
peaceful  interactions  and  proactive  engagement  in  cyberspace  for  national 
prosperity – Culled from National Cybersecurity Policy 2014 
 
 

trusted  community 

1.3.  The Aim of National Cybersecurity Strategy: 

The  aim  of  the  NCSS  is  to  provide  a  cohesive  roadmap,  initiatives,  and 
implementation mechanism for achieving the national vision on cybersecurity.  
 

1.4   Cyberspace Within the Context of National Prosperity & Opportunities: 

1.4.1   Cyberspace offers excellent platforms and opportunities for securing and growing 

the nation’s economy.  

1.4.2   Every citizen that is connected to cyberspace through the internet is immeasurably 

impacted and empowered for actions.  

1.4.3 

In  the  next  few  years,  Nigeria  will  become  a  broadband  economy  where  every 
individual  and  corporate  citizens  will  have  unhindered  wholesome  access  to  the 
internet. 

1.4.4  Cyberspace  will  become  the  mainstream  for  national  integration  and  digital 
economy empowerment. It is a knowledge driven space with massive capacity to 
bridge gaps in mobility, commerce, innovations, education, poverty reduction, and 
economic empowerment.  

	  

1.4.5  What is the Cyberspace? 

 
Cyberspace  is  an  interdependent  network  of  critical  and  non-critical  national 
information  infrastructures,  convergence  of  interconnected  information  and 
communication  resources  through  the  use  of  information  and  communication 
technologies.  It  encompasses  all  forms  of  digital  engagements,  interactions, 
socializations  and  transactional  activities;  contents,  contacts  and  resources 
deployed 
from  National 
Cybersecurity Policy 2014   
 

interconnected  networks.  –  Culled 

through 

1.4.6  Why is Cyberspace important to the National Government? 

 
 
It has been established that we have the contemporary four (4) domains of land, 
Sea, Air and Space, Nigeria recognizes Cyberspace as the fifth (5th) domain for 
driving critical national functions such as economic development, commerce 
and 
interactions,  medical  and  health,  government 
operations, national security and defense.  

transactions,  social 

 

1.5        Impact of Cyber-Risk on National security and the Economy 

1.5.1  The nation’s digital economic existence relies on the effective functioning of digital 
infrastructure. In Cyberspace, the country is not isolated but interconnected to other 
countries and active actors within cyberspace through interdependent networks of 
information  infrastructures.  Thus,  the  country  is  exposed  to  predictable  and 
unpredictable risks.  

1.5.2  Just as we have actors with legitimate intentions so also exist other actors with 
illegitimate and malicious intentions. Within the global network of networks there 
are  critical  structural  flaws  which  can  be  exploited  for  criminal  intents  and 
purposes  against  the  country  to  compromise  the  confidentiality,  integrity, 
availability  and  accessibility  of  the  nation  information  systems  and  critical 
information infrastructure.  

 

	  

1.5.3  Vulnerabilities  exist  within  cyberspace  that  can  be  used  to  exploit  national 
economic interest and constitute threats to National Security. For instance, recent 
compromise  of  some  government  websites,  growing  underground  cybercrime 
industry,  emergence  of  activism  through  online  backdoors,  fraudulent  practices, 
incidence  of  online  exploitation  of  the  young  segment  of  the  population,  gross 
abuse of the social media for waging malicious campaign against the state, conflict 
and violence perpetuated through internet, economic sabotage through distributive 
denial  of  critical  services,  coordinated  cyber  espionage,  malicious  intrusion  into 
computer systems and other digital devices, cyber piracy and stealing of intellectual 
assets, cyber-terrorism, online financial crime and money laundering, distribution of 
offensive contents and child abuse materials and hosts of other malignant activities 
committed through cyberspace are all inimical to the wellbeing of the country. The 
economic impact is destructive to any nation.  

1.6       Cybersecurity within the context of National Security Strategy: 

Providing  security  for  the  critical  information  infrastructure  and  other  critical 
components  of  information  system  within  the  current  state  of  affairs  is  a  huge 
national challenge.  

National Security needs the infusion of a cohesive framework on cybersecurity to 
provide holistic approach to the current and future security landscape, because the 
nation security and economic terrain is fast paced and is moving towards a digitally 
enabled and mobile terrain.  

State  and  non-state  actors  involved  in  cyber-crimes  are  adequately  equipped 
with sophisticated cyber tools to cause damage with unprecedented dimension. 

The  security  inclusion  of  cyberspace  domain  will  help  the  country  prepare  and 
response to such security threat and help address the country’s weakness in her 
own  digital  vulnerability,  as  well  as  strengthening  our  ability 
to  provide 
countermeasures  in  partnership  with  other  legitimate  state  and  non-state  actors. 
This is the strategic rationale for the development of National Cybersecurity Policy 
and  the  context  within  which  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  is  articulated  for 
national security readiness. 

 

 

	  

CHAPTER TWO 

UNDERSTANDING NATIONAL CYBER-RISK EXPOSURE 

2.1 

Introduction 

 

In  line  with  the  national  doctrine  on  cyber-risk  exposure  as  reflected  in  the 
National  Cybersecurity  Policy  document,  the  country  presence  in  cyberspace 
exposes it to a new dimension of risk. Therefore, development of the country’s 
Cybersecurity Strategy is approached from examining security risk exposure of 
the whole country.  

What Is Cyber-risk? 

Cyber  risk  is  the  possibility  that  a  threat  and  vulnerability  exists  within  the 
nation’s  cyberspace  inimical  to  the  security  and  safety  of  information  systems 
and  associated  infrastructures.  Furthermore,  it  is  the  possibility  that  the  threat 
will  exploit  a  vulnerability to  breach  the safety and  security of  an  information 
system and or information networks or infrastructure. 

National cyber-risk has two (2) major components:  

i.  Cyber-threat  
ii.  Vulnerability   

 

2.2   Cyber-threat Landscape & Impacts: 

 

2.2.1  Cyber threat is the possibility of a malicious attempt to damage or disrupt the 	  

operations of a vulnerable computer network and information system. 	  

 

2.2.2  The nature and the dimension of the impact of cyber-threat are diverse and it 
involves  a  threat  actor  who  performs  a  pre-mediated  attack  or  exploit 
circumstances  of  an  accident.  A  threat  actor  is  engaged  by  a  threat  source 
either  clandestinely  or  tactically.  A  threat  source  initiates  a  desire  to  breach 
access to critical information or security controls with the purpose of benefiting 
from the breach, for example for financial gain or competitive advantage in the 
case of industry cyber espionage. 	  

	  

Sources of Cyber-threat	  

Organized	  
Criminal	  
Syndicates	  
Foreign	  
States	  

Terrorists	  &	  
Extremist	  
Group	  

Sources	  of	  

Cyber-­‐Threat	  

 

NCSS Fig. 1

Hackctivists	  	  
Corporate	  
Insiders	  

 

	  	  	  

	  

2.2.3  Cyber  threat  is  escalated  to  cyber-attack  by  a  threat  actor  where  a 
deliberate  effort  is  initiated  to  exploit  the  vulnerability  of  computer  systems, 
information  and  communication  networks,  and  internet  driven  processes  for 
criminal intent and malicious purpose.  
 

2.2.4   It usually involves the use of malicious codes to alter digital codes, logic or 
data,  resulting 
the 
confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability  of  data  and  lead  to  manipulation  of 
information systems and internetwork infrastructure.  
 

in  disruptive  consequences 

that  can  compromise 

2.2.5  Cyber-attacks  may  lead  to  the  following  consequences:  Identity  theft,  fraud, 
extortion,  Malware,  pharming,  phishing,  spamming,  spoofing,  spyware, 
Trojans  and  viruses,  manipulation  of  hardware,  denial-of-service  and 
distributed  denial-of-service  attacks,  breach  of  access,  password  sniffing, 
system  infiltration,  website  defacement,  private  and  public  web  browser 
exploits, instant messaging and social media abuse, and intellectual property 
theft.  
 
 

2.2.6  Economic Impact of Cybercrime 

 
•  Recently,  a  total  of  $388billion  USD  was  estimated  as  the  approximate 
total financial loss to cybercrime in more 24 countries in the last six years. 
•  The  global  black  market  in  marijuana,  cocaine  and  heroin  combined 
($288bn) and approaching the value of all global drug trafficking ($411bn). 
•  At $388bn, cybercrime is more than 100 times the annual expenditure of 

UNICEF ($3.65 billion).1 

•  Physical crime are becoming digital. More criminals that were involved in 
traditional  crimes  are  moving  towards  the  Internet.  They  know  that  it’s 
easier, more profitable and the probability of being caught is lower  
 
 
 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  	  

•  Nigerian  financial  consumer  loss  to  Cybercrime  in  2010  stood  at 

N2,146,666,345,014.75 ($13,547,910,034.80) to cybercrime in 20122 
 

• 
  

2.2.7  Cyber threat landscape is diverse and diffusely driven by state and non-state 
actors. 

State Actor:  

The  State  Actors  are  established  and  well  organised  to  carry  out  the  most 
sophisticated  threat  in  the  cyberspace  with  the  goal  of  exploiting  computers 
and  information  and  communication  networks  to  gather  intelligence  on 
government, military, industrial and economic targets, and opponents of their 
Regimes. They gathered intelligence data and information which can be used 
for  spreading  falsehood  and  disrupting  critical  services.  Sometimes  they 
install  hidden  malicious  software  on  a  system  can  be  adapted  to  suit  an 
attacker’s changing objectives, lying hidden within the system in readiness for 
exploitation during times of increased tension or conflict. 

Non State Actors:  
 
Organized  and  unorganized  criminals  operating  in  the  underground 
economy  exploiting  weakness  in  individual,  corporate  and  government 
systems  and  information  infrastructure.  They  used  different  technology  and 
psychology  method  to  manipulate  users  and  engage  highly  sophisticated 
cyber tools to infect, hijack, control and extract value information for criminal 
purpose.  Financial motivation is usually the driven force of this particular non-
state  actor.  They  inflict  huge  financial  damage  on  their  victims.  Their  action 
damage country reputation and inflict huge collateral damage on the country 
financial system.  
 
Terrorists  and  extremist  engage  resources  of  cyberspace  to  perpetuate 
against 
recruitment, 
indoctrination, raising of fund activists and distribution of extremist contents. 
They  are  active  attackers  and  constitute  one  of  the  major  threat  to  national 
security.   
 

communication, 

falsehood, 

the 

government; 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  Economic	  Cost	  of	  Cyber	  Crime	  in	  Nigeria	  by	  Gbenga	  Sesan,	  Babatope	  Soremi	  and	  Bankole	  Oluwafemi	  as	  part	  of	  the	  output	  for	  the	  Cyber	  
Stewards	  Network	  Project	  of	  The	  Citizen	  Lab,	  Munik	  School	  of	  Global	  Affairs.	  University	  of	  Toronto	  and	  Supported	  	  by	  international	  
development	  research	  centre.(IDRC)	  

	  

	  

Activist  with  unwholesome  pattern  of  obtaining  information  used  against 
established  authorities.  They  operate  through  social  media  and  vulnerable 
backdoors, usually connecting with an insider with passive attack tendency.  

 

2.2.8  The National Cybersecurity Policy document has identified and classified five 
(5)  major  cyber  threats  as  inimical  to  the  national  security  strategy.  These 
threats  have  significant  capability  to  cause  considerable  damage  to  the 
integrity of the country’s economy.  
 

2.2.9  The  underlying  ideology  of  this  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  is  to  proffer 
relevant  strategic  frameworks  and  mechanisms  for  addressing  these  cyber-
threats, securing the nation in the advent of cyber-attack, while preparing the 
nation for a proactive engagement towards building and nurturing a safe and 
secure cyberspace where trust and confidence are hallmark of Nigeria cyber-
community. 
 
 

2.3 

Imperative of a National Vulnerability Assessment  
 

2.3.1  Vulnerability is the structural weaknesses of the nation’s information systems 
and  critical  information  infrastructure  ranging  from  technical  flaws,  porous 
measures, to human negligence. 

2.3.2  The  NCSS  requires  that  national  vulnerability  assessment  be  conducted 
towards  determining  weaknesses 
information  systems, 
websites, networks, data handling processes and vulnerabilities existing in the 
nation’s critical information infrastructure.  

in  government 

2.3.3  The  national  vulnerability  assessment  helps  the  government  appreciate  the 
level  of  her  unpreparedness,  the  need  to  safeguard  huge  investments  in 
information systems and communication infrastructure and commitment made 
to global partners National ICT developmental goals.  

2.3.4  There  are  efforts  aimed  at  addressing  some  of  these  challenges  at  the 
sectorial levels. However, NCSS is laying a foundation for the coordination of 
the country cyber-ecosystem with a unified framework on cybersecurity.  

	  

2.3.5  The ultimate goal is to build a collective counter-measures mechanisms that 
will facilitate the country’s capability in addressing the huge vulnerability gaps 
among the states information systems, critical information infrastructure, and 
protection of our presence in cyberspace. 

 

2.4  Gauging the Impacts and Opportunities 
2.4.1  There  are  many  advantages  associated  with  the  implementation  of  the 
national Cybersecurity strategy. Building and nurturing trust and confidence in 
the  use  of  national 
information  and 
communication technology is crucial to the socio-economic well-being of the 
citizenry, therefore it is important to secure our nation in cyberspace thereby 
infusing high level of confidence and trust in the nation digital economy. 

information  systems  and  critical 

 
2.4.2  The  nation  depends  on  the  functioning  of  information  and  communication 
technology  and  the  operation  of  critical  information  infrastructures.  Our 
interactions, 
trading  and  e-commerce, 
financial  services,  mission  critical  services  are  relying  on  the  confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information flowing through these infrastructures. 

transportation,  communication, 

 
2.4.3  National enterprise security architecture is further enhanced with the inclusion 
of cybersecurity strategy. A new and holistic National Security Architecture will 
emerge  by  integrating  physical  and  cyber  security  as  countermeasures 
against external threat, thus consolidate the country readiness capability.  

 

2.4.4   The country’s emerging opportunities as a result of her trusted presence in 

cyberspace are inclusive of the following;  
 
• 

innovations,  wholesome 

resilient  digital  economy,  stimulating 

 A 
engagement, development and inflow of foreign direct investment. 
 

•  An  opportunity  to  exploit  cyberspace  to  advance  the  country’s  military 

capability in engaging external threat, conflict, violence and terrorism. 

	  

•  Nigeria’s  readiness  to  defend  her  citizens,  safeguarding  operations  of 
critical information infrastructures and extra-territorial jurisdiction in time of 
unpredictable cyber-attack, ensures continuity of critical operations amidst 
adversaries.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

CHAPTER THREE 

NATIONAL READINESS STRATEGY 

 

3.1  National Cybersecurity Policy Direction 

3.1.1  The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  defines  the  nation’s  readiness  to 
safeguard  and  prepare  the  whole  Nation  in  advance  for  global  economic 
competitiveness in cyberspace.  It also addresses willingness to empower the 
nation  in  building  a  comprehensive,  coherent,  structural  and  procedural 
capabilities at strategic and tactical levels in mitigating cyber risks.  

3.1.2  The  strategy  involves  engagement  of  government  and  non-government 
actors,  employing  multi-stakeholder’s  principles  of  approach,  inclusive  of  all 
participatory  and  partnerships  of  government, 
industry  and  other 
stakeholders. 

3.1.3  The critical success factor of NCSS is hinged on comprehensive mobilization, 
engagement  and  coordination  of  critical  components  towards  securing  our 
presence in cyberspace and protecting critical information infrastructures. 

3.1.4  The  direction  of  the  policy  of  government  on  cybersecurity  is  in  agreement 

with regional and global direction on securing cyberspace.  

3.1.5 The paramount focus of the cybersecurity strategy is addressing our cyber risk 
exposure,  protection  of  our  national  critical 
infrastructure, 
exploiting cyberspace opportunities for national security and economic goals, 
and  the  enthronement  of  a  trusted  cyber  community  remain  a  paramount 
focus of the National Cybersecurity Strategy.    

information 

 

 
3.2.  Necessity of a National Cybersecurity Strategy 
 
3.2.1  The  multi-dimensional  nature  of  the  evolving  security  threats  is  moving  the 

current National Security Strategy beyond the traditional scope.  

 

	  

3.2.2  The  nature  of  the  current  security  threats  such  as  cybercrime,  violence, 
conflict  and  terrorism  increasingly  exploits  the  openness  and  borderless 
nature of cyberspace. This constitutes a threat to our growing dependence on 
cyberspace.   

 
3.2.3  Government  is  leading  a  coherent  national  response  towards  reducing  the 
impact  and  escalation  of  cyber  threats  in  a  manner  that  safeguards  the 
nation’s  presence  and  guarantee  trust  and  confidence  in  our  connected 
economy.  

 
3.3.  Objectives of National Cybersecurity Strategy  
 
3.3.1  The Strategy aims are to set out a national roadmap with various coordinated 
mechanisms;  harness  implementation  framework;  and  actions  that  will 
guarantee  attainment  of 
the  National  vision,  mission  and  goals  on 
Cybersecurity as captured in the National Cybersecurity Policy.  
 

3.3.2  Therefore, the Strategy is needed to achieve the following specific objectives: 

 

i.  A  comprehensive  cybercrime 

legislation  and  cyber-threat  counter 
measures that are nationally adoptable, regionally and globally relevant in 
the context of securing   the nation’s cyberspace.  
 

ii.  Provision  of  measures  that  protect  critical  information  infrastructure,  as 
through  cybersecurity 

well  as  reducing  our  national  vulnerabilities 
assurance framework.   

iii. 

To articulate an effective computer emergency response capability. 

iv.  National  mechanisms  on  capacity  building,  public  awareness,  skills 
empowerment  is  necessary  to  help  strengthen  our  capability  so  as  to 
respond promptly and effectively to cyber-attacks. 

 

 

 

	  

v.  A 

trusted  mechanism 

for  engaging  national  multi-stakeholder  and 

international partners towards collectively addressing cyber threats. 
To deter and protect government from all forms of cyber-attacks.  

To coordinate cybersecurity initiatives at all levels of government in the 
country. 

To build national capabilities against cyber threats with coherent 
cooperation through public- private sector partnership and multi-
stakeholder engagement. 

To promote national vision on cybersecurity through awareness, 
partnership through shared responsibilities and a trusted community of 
stakeholders. 

To  promote  coordination,  cooperation  and  collaboration  of  regional  and 
global stakeholders on cybersecurity. 

 
3.3.2  The  Strategy  is  further  aligned  with  National  Security  Strategy  and  other 
relevant  government  documents  most  especially  National  ICT  policy  and 
National broadband plan. 

 
3.3.3  The  Strategy  defines  the  basis  for  a  coordinated  national  and  globally 
compatible  framework  for  action,  cooperation  and  approach  to  protecting 
national critical information infrastructure against cyber threats.  

 
3.4  Scope of National Cybersecurity Strategy 
  

 
The scope of the national cybersecurity strategy covers the areas of national 
priorities as well as general framework for partnership and international multi-
stakeholder cooperation on cybersecurity. 

 

 
3.5  Approach, Guiding Principles & National Priorities   

  
The  NCSS  approach  involves  coordination  of  the  nation’s  cybersecurity 
constituents  and  public-private  partnership  which  are  consistent  with  the 
objectives  and  the  guiding  principles  as  encapsulated  in  the  National 
Cybersecurity Policy. 

 

 
3.6  Governance Strategy  
 
3.6.1  The  implementation  of  the  provision  of  the  strategy  will  be  coordinated 
through  the  Office  of  National  Security  Adviser  in  collaboration  with  other 
relevant government agencies.  

vi. 

vii. 

viii. 

 

 

ix. 

x. 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

and  has  recommended 
cybersecurity 

 
3.6.4   The  sustainability  and  critical  success  factor  of  this  governance  model  is 
anchored on public-private sector partnership, multi-stakeholder engagement 
as well as regional and international cooperation.   

3.6.2  The  central  coordination  model  will  operate  in  synergy  with  federated 

structures toward achieving comprehensive measures on cybersecurity. 

 
3.6.3   Central coordination model is adopted in line with international best practices 
for  cooperation  on 

the  global 

framework 

in 

 

 

 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
	   
 

	  

 

CHAPTER FOUR 

 

LEGAL FRAMEWORK INITIATIVES 

 
 
4.1 Objective 
 
4.1.1  The  objective  of  the  Cyber  Security  Legal  Framework  is  to  identify  the 
strategy  required  to  ensure  areas  defined  in  the  Cyber  security  Policy  are 
implemented,  managed,  sustained  and  effective  in  combating  cybercrime  in 
Nigeria.  
 

4.1.2  To achieve this aim, a number of immediate and long term legal framework 
initiatives  will  need  to  be  developed,  agreed,  funded  and  rolled  out  to 
accomplish success. 

 
4.2  Approach 
 

•  The approach takes the form of referencing aspects of the Legal Framework 
in  the  cyber  security  policy  with  a  view  to  prescribing  the  initiatives  that  will 
allow for the implementation of each of the detailed areas. 

 

Cyber	  CrimeLegal	  
Framework	  
Judicial	  Review	  
International	  Cooperation	  
Public	  Private	  Sector	  Collaboration	  
Raising	  Awareness	  	  

 

NCSS Fig 2 Initiatives Pyramid 

 
4.3 Initiatives: 
 
4.3.1  Initiave1: Enacting Fit for Purpose Cybercrime Legislation 
 

	  

•  As prescribed in the cyber security policy, fit for purpose legislation will need 

to be enacted and implemented to combat cybercrime.  
 

•  The main focus of this initiative will entail a root and branch review of Nigeria’s 

current and draft cybercrime legislations.  
 

•  The  objective    of  this  exercise  will  be  to  identify  any  gaps  between  what  is 
currently available and what has been proposed in the Cyber security  policy 
with  a  view  to  updating  any  omissions  or  redundancies  so  that  when  the 
legislation is enacted , it will be adequately  effective , workable and flexible 
enough to deter and prosecute cybercrime activities 
 

•  This initiative supports a strategy to enact a number of separate and distinct 
legislations that will make up the cybercrime legislative framework as opposed 
to a single legislation that has the banner of cybercrime legislation.  
 

•  To the barest  minimum, the following legislations will need to be included in 
the  new  cybercrime  framework:  Anti-Spam,  Child  Online  Protection,  Child 
Pornography,  Cookies,  Computer  Misuse,  Cyber  Blackmail,  Cyber  bullying 
and  Harassment,  Cyber  Espionage,  Cyber  Terrorism,  Digital  Evidence  and 
Preservation,  Data  Protection,  Data  Retention,  Hacktivism;  Identity  Theft, 
Information  Security,  Intellectual  Property  Rights,  Lawful  Interception,  Online 
Fraud,  Privacy,  tribalism  and  Xenophobia,  Software  Piracy,  Security  Breach 
Notifications, Unauthorized System Interference etc. 

•  Aligned to the review and enactment of the cybercrime legislative framework 
is the need to put in place measures to keep the laws up to date and effective. 
 

•  The strategy to achieve this will include the establishment of a Cyber Crime 
Legislative Review Committee (CCLRC) whose purview will be to advise the 
National  Security  Advisor,  Legislature  and  regulatory  bodies  on  aspects  of 
legislations  that  needs  to  be  amended  to  ensure  current  legislations  do  not 
become redundant, unenforceable and ineffective. 

 

	  

•  This  is  an  immediate  initiative  and  needs  to  be  given  special  priority  as  it 
forms  the  bedrock  of  the  applicability,  enforceability  and  prosecution  of 
individuals and organisations that breach key segments of the National Cyber 
Security policy. 

 
 
4.3.2   Initiative 2.  
 

Preparing and Revamping the Judiciary for Cybercrime Legislations 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Nigeria’s  current  judicial  environment  is  not  adequately  equipped  to  handle 
sophisticated  cybercrime  cases.  In  order  to  ensure  the  new  cybercrime 
legislations are effective in the prosecution of alleged cybercrimes, when they 
are brought before the courts, it is the strategic objective of NCSS to ensure 
the Nigerian Court system is equipped to handle cybercrime cases.  

• 

In fulfilling this strategy, the following initiatives will be undertaken 

a)  Capacity building for Judges and lawyers on the new cybercrime laws 
b)  Courts will be equipped to handle digital forensic evidence 
c)  Provide law enforcement agencies with the processes and procedures for 

investigating cybercrime activities. 

d)  Capacity  building  for  law  enforcement  and  security  agencies  on  digital 

forensic capability. 

•  This  will  be  achieved  by  developing  a  home  grown  fit  for  purpose  certified 
programme  of  training  courses,  capacity  building,  awareness  programmes 
and materials for current Nigerian judges and lawyers. 
 

•  The  strategy  will  also  include  the  incision  of  new  cybercrime  legislation 
courses in institutes of higher learning so that newly qualified lawyers have a 
basic understanding of Nigeria’s cybercrime framework. 

•  This will be a long term and on-going initiative. 

 
 
4.3.3  Initiative 3: International Co-operation 
 

•  To ensure our cybercrime laws are effective and internationally harmonised, 
the legal strategy is to adopt the provisions of the convention on cybercrime to 
enable effective cross border law enforcement. 

	  

•  This will allow for the following:  

 

International harmonisation of our legislations 

I. 
II.  Collation of all existing conventions and bilateral agreements 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI.  Opportunity  for  Nigeria  to  make  a  contribution  to  how  cyberspace  is 

International cooperation to combat cybercrime 
 wider investigatory capability 
 Capacity Building and knowledge sharing 

governed through international instruments of law. 

 
International co-operation will also include becoming a member of recognised 
bodies such as: 
 

•  The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) 
•  Cybercrime Convention 
• 

Interpol 

 
It is envisaged that the processes to engage with international bodies will start 
to be defined with the objective of implementing and achieving within the next 
12 months. 
 
This is an immediate initiative 

 
 
4.3.4     Initiative 4: Public/Private Sector Collaboration 
 

•  Recognizing  that  cybercrime  can  impact  both  private  and  public  sector 
environments,  the  legal  strategy  is  to  adopt  processes  for  both  public  and 
private sector collaboration in combating cybercrime.  
 

•  As  an  example  relationships  between  Communication  Service  Providers  in 
assisting  law  enforcement  agencies  in  preserving  communications  data  for 
specified  periods  as  dictated  by  the  Data  Retention  legislations  will  be 
encouraged and forged.  
 
 

•  This will also extend to financial institutions in ensuring they retain customer 

records according to specified time lines. 

•  The strategy will also entail providing specific guidelines on how to meet these 

requirements. 

 

 

	  

•  A key part of the public/private sector collaborative strategy will be to put in 
place  measures  to  reduce  reliance  on  foreign  controlled  networks  to  store 
personal information of Nigeria Citizens.  
 

•  This will have the impact of reducing the risk footprint as well as the potential 

for such data to be compromised and used to the detriment of Nigerians 

 

•  This is an immediate and ongoing initiative 

 
4.3.5  Initiative 5: Raising Awareness 
 

•  While  implementing  cybercrime  legislations  are  paramount  in  combating 
cybercrime,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  making  citizens  aware  of  the  threats  and 
vulnerabilities  that  can  accrue  to  them  when  they  use  the  internet,  is  a 
measure that can be used to reduce the likelihood of them being victims of 
cybercrime. 
 

•  Raising  awareness  of  the  new  laws  through  high  profile  campaigns  is  an 
initiative  that  will  be  used  to  make  criminals  aware  of  the  consequences  of 
being in breach of these legislations once they are enacted. 

• 

It  is  also  part  of  the  strategy  to  socialise  these  new  laws  to  the  wider 
international community. 

 

 

•  This is an immediate initiative 

 
4.4  Special Areas of Focus:  
 
4.4.1   Data Protection, Privacy and Lawful Interception. 
 

•  Personal 

Information  has  economic  and  political  value.  The 

recent 
identification  of  Nigeria  as  a  MINT  (i.e.  Malaysia,  Indonesia,  Nigeria  and 
Turkey) country not only raises its profile in monetary and economic terms, it 
also raises the risk of infrastructure and systems containing Nigerian citizens 
data  being  targeted  by  unscrupulous  individuals,  organisations  and  nation 
states,  leading  to  data  loss,  leakage  as  well  as  confidentiality,  integrity  and 
availability compromise. 
 

•  The  recent  revelations  of  American  whistle-blower  Edward  Snowden  has 
significantly  raised  awareness  of  the  need  for  nations  to  put  in  place 
appropriate  measures  to  protect  the  personal  information,  and  privacy  of  its 
citizens. 

 

	  

•  The revelations also identified the need to protect and secure communications 
of not only high ranking government and high profile individuals from mobile 
phone tapping but also ordinary individuals from their everyday non-criminal 
conversations being intercepted and analysed by law enforcement agencies, 
organisations and foreign countries. 

•  To  protect  and  legislate  for  criminal  activities  against  Nigerian  Citizens  data 
and their communications special emphasis will be given to the development 
and roll out of Data Protection and Privacy laws in Nigeria. 

NCSS Fig 3   Data Protection and Privacy 

 

•  The objective of this initiative will be to ensure individuals and organisations 
are  aware  of  their  responsibilities  when  handling  and  processing  personal 
information.  
 
It will also allow them to be aware of what constitutes unacceptable and illegal 
behaviour  in  relation  to  the  use  of  such  information  and  communication 
streams. 

• 

•  The legislative, technical and policy initiatives to fulfil this aim will consist of 

the following: 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

	  

i.  Developing  and  enacting  fit  for  purpose  Data  Protection  and  Privacy 

laws. 
 

ii.  Defining  minimum  policy  and  standards  requirements  for  handling 

personal information 

iii.  Defining data Protection requirements for outsourcing initiatives. 

iv.  Deploying an effective and transparent Lawful Interception regime. 

v.  Deploying  appropriate  and  workable  data  retention  periods  to  assist 

law enforcement agencies in their investigations. 

 

 

vi.  Defining  Data  Protection  Requirements  for  safeguarding  Nigerian 

Citizens details on government systems 

 
vii.  Defining  minimum  technical  measures  that  need  to  be  in  place  to 

safeguard against personal information compromise 

 
viii. 

Identifying where Nigerian Citizens Data details are held and if systems 
held on are appropriately protected 

 

 

 

ix. 

Identifying Data Leakage Areas with view to reducing risk 

x.  Developing and implementing fit for purpose guidelines 

their 
Liaison  with  Communication  service  providers 
customers with advice on how to protect themselves from cybercriminal 
activities 

to  provide 

Liaison with both private and public sector commercial organisations to 
help them understand the measures they need to take to reduce their 
risks to data protection and privacy breaches 

xi. 

 
xii. 

 

 

 

	  

xiii. 

Liaising  with  NCC  ,  NITDA,  Central  Bank  ,  Judiciary  and  Military  to 
drive  data  protection 
in  Telecoms,  Finance  and,  government 
institutions and Judiciary 

 
xiv.  Establishment of a new regulatory body for adjudicating and providing 

guidelines on Data Protection, Privacy and Lawful Interception 

 
xv.  Reduce reliance on foreign-hosted cloud services for storing personal 

data of Nigerian Citizens. 
Long-term  strategy  is  to  Partner  with  Nigerian  Service  providers  to 
develop capabilities to provide local cloud service capabilities. 

xvi. 

 

 

NCSS Fig 4: Data Protection Impact Point 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

CHAPTER FIVE 
 

 

NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY 

5.1  Purpose: 
 
5.1.1  The  strategy  on  incident  management  is  designed  to  effectively  deter  and 
respond  to  cyber  threats  and  cybercrime  that  will  leverage  on  an  efficient 
emergency readiness and coordination capability.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

5.1.2  The strategy will also facilitate, promote and strengthen national commitments 

to regional and global partnerships and cooperation on cybersecurity. 

 
5.2   Establishing National CERT:  
 
5.2.1  The Nigerian Computer Emergency Team (ngCERT) shall be established to 

ensure efficient response to security incidents within our cyberspace. 
 

5.2.2  An effective computer emergency response capability is essential to monitor 

and deter threats that can exploit information system vulnerabilities.  
 

5.2.3  The  Nigerian  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (ngCERT)  will  be 
functions  and 

through  which 

framework 

its 

empowered  by  a 
legal 
responsibilities are defined. 
 

5.2.4  However,  where  existing  laws  are  inadequate,  a  review  or  new  legislative 
processes  should  commence  to  address  legal  vacuum  that  will  hinder 
operations of the national CERT. 

 
5.2.5  The  harmonized  laws  should  clearly  mandate  it  to  function  as  of  one  the 
strategic  components  of  the  central  coordinating  center  for  all  computer 
security  incident  management  within  our  national  cyberspace.  Additionally, 
incident classification will be the sole role of the Cyber Emergency Monitoring 
System (CEMS) administered and managed by ngCERT.  
 

5.2.6  Additionally,  incident  classification  will  be  the  sole  role  of  the  Cyber 
Emergency  Monitoring  System  (CEMS)  administered  and  managed  by 
ngCERT.  

 
5.3        Implementation Approach 
 

5.3.1  A  National  Incident  Response  Plan  (NIRP)  will  be  formulated  to  achieve  a 
coordinated  emergency  response  protocols.  It  will  govern  both  the  national 
and sectorial CERTs 
 

5.3.2  The  plan  will  set  out  clear  definitions  and  procedures  for  incident  response 

that will focus on incident classification and its severance.  
 

5.3.3  In addition, incident classification will be the sole role of the Cyber Emergency 

Monitoring System (CEMS) administered and managed by ngCERT. 

5.3.4  CEMS  will  classify  threats  that  constitute  a  national-level  cyber  incident 
requiring  ngCERT  involvement  and  the  triggering  of  incident  response 
protocols.  
 
Initiative 1:  Preventive Strategy 

5.4  

5.4.1  All key national information infrastructures shall have a preventive mechanism 

for network monitoring system integrated into CEMS. 

	  

5.4.2    The preventive strategy will primarily be implemented by CEMS for analysis 

and detection as well as alert notification.  

5.4.3   CEMS operational procedure will define the baseline security monitoring for 
broad  detection  of  malicious  or  anomalous  network  activity  within  our 
cyberspace and specify specialized security monitoring for critical assets and 
critical  processes  within  the  context  of  the  National  Critical  Information 
Infrastructure Protection Plan (NCIIPP). 

 

 

5.5   Initiative 2: Detection Strategy 

5.5.1   The  Cyber  Emergency  Monitoring  System  (CEMS)  will  serve  as  the  main                     

provider of data   analysis and reporting to other key detection and response 
partners across the incident management ecosystem. 

 

5.5.2  Its  key  focus  is  to  consistently  monitor  indicators  within  the  nation’s  cyber 
space  in  order  to  detect  potential  threats  and  classify  them  according  to  its 
severance level determined. This can serve as an alert to the trigger the next 
chain of activity in the response protocols. 
 
Initiative 3 Response Strategy: 

5.6  

5.6.1   After  an  incident  is  detected  and  validated  by  the  CEMS,  direct  and   
coordinated action will be implemented immediately to ensure that appropriate 
actions  to  stop  an  on-going  incident  occur  at  the  right  time  on  the  right 
cybersecurity priorities.  

5.6.2  The action plan will require identifying the scope and scale of the incident in 
order  to  activate  the  relevant  countermeasures  procedures  as  outlined  in 
NIRP to mitigate damages. 

                    Investigating  cybercrime  incident  requires  a  strict  evidence  preservation 
procedures  showing  appropriate  evidence  handling  procedure  and 

	  

established chain of custody.  

Therefore, it is necessary for incident handlers to take appropriated measures 
in  order  to  preserve  any  artefacts  that  could  be  of  evidential  value  by 
recording,  reviewing  and  resolving  security  incidents  with  the  established 
incident management processes as define in the NIRP. Additionally, ngCERT 
is expected to document all such report as will be required to be submitted by 
all  monitored  information  infrastructure  custodians  in  order  to  evaluate  the 
effectiveness of response plan through lessons learned. 

 

5.7  Cooperation and Partnership 

5.7.2  The  ngCERT  under  the  framework  of  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinating 
Center  will  coordinate  activities  of  other  sectorial  CERT  and  facilitates 
cooperation  and  partnership  of  all  cybersecurity  stakeholders,  including 
international and multilateral organizations.  
 

5.7.3  It is imperative to note that, sharing of action noteworthy information about 
new threats and vulnerabilities with partners by ngCERT will avail them the 
security status of the national cyberspace and the need to protect it 

 

5.7.4  NgCERT also will enable both government and private sector actors through 
stimulated exercises to support stakeholders understand their roles during a 
crisis  and  better  prepare  for  incident  response  scenarios.  This  will  test 
incident  response  capabilities  and  processes  created  to  communicate, 
collaborate, and restore services in the event of an incident. 

5.8   Capacity Building 

5.8.2  To sustain an optimal incident response readiness capability, technical and 
procedural  capacity  building  will  be  instituted  for  both  law  enforcement  as 
well as judicial officers to build their expertise and facilitate understanding of 
the dynamics of cybercrime.  

	  

5.8.3  Training will focus on methods of handling digital evidence to ensure that it 

preserves its evidential weight and thus admissibility in Court.  

5.9 National Digital Forensic Mechanism 
 
 
5.9.1 The National Cybersecurity Coordinating Center shall develop a framework 

for the setting up of a National Digital Forensic Laboratory as a core unit 
under the coordination of NCCC.  

 
5.9.2 The implementation and coordination of digital forensic technical and 

management guidelines will help develop guide for the law enforcement and 
security agency engagement in digital forensic investigation, analysis, 
interpretation and reconstruction of e-crime scene. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
6.1 

Introduction  

CHAPTER SIX 

STRATEGY ON CRITICAL INFORMATION 

INFRASTRUCTURES PROTECTION & RESILIENCE 

6.1.1  This  Strategy  articulates  the  various  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  (CII) 
protection and resilience activities the Government undertakes, ranging from 
how  it  engages  with  business,  government  (international  and  domestic)  as 
well as other stakeholders. 

6.1.2  This  Strategy  presents  the  Government’s  approach  to  Critical  Information 

Infrastructure Protection and Resilience (CIIPR). 
 

6.1.3  It  also  acknowledges 

that  CIIPR 

is  a  shared  responsibility  across 

governments, the owners and operators of critical infrastructure. 

 
 
6.2  Vision of CIIPR 

•  To  ensure  continued  operation  of  CII  in  the  face  of  all  hazards,  as  this 
infrastructure  supports  national  defense  and  security,  and 

critical 
underpins our economic prosperity and social wellbeing.  

	  

 

6.3  Mission of CIIPR 

•  To  harness  all  relevant  stakeholder’s  CIIPR  Programs  into  a  national 
holistic agenda capable of supporting the country’s national security and 
ensure provision of essential services. 
 

6.4  Strategic Objectives 

i.  Assess  threats  to,  vulnerabilities  of,  and  consequences  to  critical 
risk 

intelligent  and 

information-led, 

infrastructure 
management approach. 

through  an 

ii.  Secure  CII  against  physical,  human  and  cyber  threats  through 

sustainable efforts to reduce risk. 

iii.  Enhance  CII  resilience  by  reducing 

impact  of  unforeseen  and 
unexpected incidents through advance planning and mitigation efforts, 
as  well  as  effective  responses  aimed  at    saving  lives  and  ensuring  
rapid recovery of essential services;  

 

 

iv. 

v. 

information  across 

the  CII  community 

to  build 
 Share  relevant 
awareness  and  enable  a  coordinated  risk-  informed  decision  making, 
while  promoting  a  learning  and  adaptation  during  and  after  exercises 
and incidents impacting on CII.  
 
These  objectives  will  be  supported  by  regular  developments  of  more 
specific  priorities  by  key  critical  infrastructure  partnerships  related  to 
risk management and capability enhancement. 
 

vi.  Based  on  the  vision,  mission,  and  goals,  the  critical  infrastructure 
community will work together to set specific national priorities. National 
priorities will be set considering resource availability, progress already 
made,  known  capability  gaps,  and  emerging  trends  and  risks  in 
cybersecurity.  
 

	  

vii.  National  priorities  will  drive  implementation  and  will  be  supplemented 
by sector, regional, and corporate priorities. Performance measures will 
be  set  based  on  the  goals  and  priorities  of  each  sector,  regional  or 
national Government.  
 
The National Annual Preparedness Report will include measurements 
of progress that will help derive a common understanding of the state 
of critical infrastructure security and resilient efforts. 

viii. 

 

 

6.5  STRATEGIC IMPERATIVES TO ACHIEVE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 

6.5.1  The Government recognizes the importance of critical infrastructure, including 
those parts that provide essential services for everyday life (such as energy, 
food,  water,  transport,  communications,  health  and  banking  and  finance).  A 
disruption to critical infrastructure could have a range of serious implications 
for business, governments and our social wellbeing. 

Initiative 1: Operate an effective business-government partnership with    
critical infrastructure owners and operators. 

•  A significant proportion of the nation’s critical infrastructure is privately 

owned or operated on a commercial basis.  
 

•  A  business-government  partnership  will  be  established  to  help  build 
confidence  and  reliability  for  the  continued  operation  of  critical 
infrastructure that supports national security, economic prosperity, and 
social and community wellbeing.  
 
It  is  important  that  the  business-government  partnership  offers  value 
and mutual benefit to the parties involved. 

• 

 

6.6 

 

	  

6.6.1   Necessity  for  Trust  Information  Sharing  Network  (TISN)  Activity  for 

NCIIPP 

 

	  

•  There will be need for the establishment of a TISN for National Critical 

Information Infrastructure Protection Plan (NCIIPP). 
 

•  This  network  will  comprise  of  relevant  private  sector  and  government 
representatives,  to  raise  the  awareness  of  risks  to  critical  information 
infrastructure, share information and techniques required to assess and 
mitigate  risks,  and  build  resilience  capacity  within  entities  in  the 
network.  

•  Working  with  the  TISN,  the  private  sector  is  able  to  bring  issues  to 
government  that  are  seen  as  impediments  to  achieving  critical 
information infrastructure protect.  
 

•  The  TISN  will  be  the  most  visible  component  of  the  public-private 
partnership  and  will  provide  an  important  mechanism  to  foster 
cooperation between public- private stakeholders on mutually important 
issues. 
 

impediments 

•  The  TISN  will  raise  awareness  on  critical  infrastructure  issues, 
including  potential 
to  achieving  CIP.  Government 
agencies  directly  involved  in  CIP  are  able  to  better  represent 
stakeholder interests in the various machineries of government that are 
used to develop and implement Government policy and act as critical 
infrastructure advocates in the broader policy debate.  

•  Accordingly,  Government  agencies  that  have  a  role  in  implementing 
the  CIP  Strategy  are  able  to  influence  or  shape  government  policy 
initiatives  that  have  impact  on  critical  infrastructure  organizations  and 
their ability to achieve CIP. 

 

 

 

6.6.2  Trusted Information Sharing Network Initiative (TISN) 

•  The TISN will be established in the Office of the National Security Adviser 
as  an  exclusive  forum  in  which  the  owners  and  operators  of  critical 
infrastructure  work  come  together  and  share  information  on  threats  and 
vulnerabilities as well as develop strategies and solutions to mitigate risk 
to the nation’s CII.  
 

•  TISN  members  include  owners  and  operators  of  critical  infrastructure, 
Federal,  State  and  local  government  agency  representatives  as  well  as 
departments and agencies of government.  

•  The  TISN,  through  its  Sector  and  Expert  Advisory  Groups,  will  promote 
infrastructure protection to owners and operators as well as promote the 
need for investment in resilient and reliable infrastructure. 

 

6.6.3  Sector Groups 

•  Sector Groups form the bridge between government and the individual 

owners and operators of Nigeria’s critical infrastructure.  
 

•  Their purpose is to assist owners and operators to share information on 
issues  relating  to  generic  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  to  identify 
appropriate measures and strategies to mitigate risk.  

 

6.6.4  Sector Specific Plans 

•  There  will  be  sector  specific  plans  for  each  sector  which  will  highlight 
sector  level  performance  objectives  and  feedback  to  the  coordinating 
agency  of  government  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  managing  the 
sector.  
 

•  For  example,  the  sector  specific  plan  for  the  Information  Technology 
Sector will be coordinated and managed by the Ministry of Information and 
Communication  Technology.  In  collaboration  with  other  stakeholders 

	  

(public  and  private  sector  partners),  this  Ministry  will  develop  and 
implement a Sector-Specific Plan (SSP) to enable assessment of national, 
cross  sector  critical  infrastructure  protection  and  resilience  plan.  (Please 
see  appendices  pages  for  a  sample  approach  to  implementing  sector 
specific plan and program). 

 
 
 
 
 
•  Sector  specific  plan  will  be  developed  for  other  critical  infrastructure 

sectors including but not limited to: 
 

Communications Sector 

Manufacturing Sector 

Defence Sector 

Power and Energy Sector 

Financial Services Sector 

Government Facilities Sector 

Dams Sector 

Chemical Sector 

Commercial Facilities Sector 

Food and Agriculture Sector 

Emergency Services Sector 

Transportation Systems Sector 

Public Health and Healthcare Sector 

Water & Waste Water systems 

Information Technology Sector 

 

 

6.7   

Initiative  2:  Identifying  and  Evaluating  Potential  Critical  information 
Infrastructure 

6.7.1  Identification 

•  There will be national, sectorial and organizational approach in identifying and 

refining actual and potential critical information infrastructure.  
 

•  The National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Unit of the Office of 
NSA  (NCIIPU)  will  work  with  other  government  agencies,  owners  and 

	  

operators  of  critical  infrastructure  to  ensure  an  on-going  identification  of 
critical information infrastructure. 
 

•  Due to infrastructure investment and expansion, advent of new technologies, 
interdependence  of  systems  and 

population  growth  and 
technologies, identification process will be subject to continual review. 

increasing 

.  

 

 

 

6.7.2  Evaluation 

•  After  the  identification  of  potential  critical  components  of  information 
infrastructure, there will be the need for the evaluation to understand the 
mode of operation and estimate its risk levels and criticality.  
 

•  The evaluation process relies on the cooperation of infrastructure owners 
and  operators.  Having  an  understanding  of  the  estimated  risk  and 
criticality  levels  is  important  for  the  government.  However,  this  does  not 
replace  the  owner’s  responsibility  to  develop  a  robust  risk  management 
program to safeguard their assets from known and unknown threats.  

6.8 

Initiative 3: Enhancing Strategic Readiness of Infrastructure Owners and 
Operators 

•  A  key  component  of  the  NCIIPP  is  to  sensitize  owners  and  operators  to 
adopt best practices in their approach to planning and preparedness. This 
will  ensure  a  structured,  logical  and  rigorous  approach  on  the  most 
appropriate  steps  to  take  in  order  to  prevent,  detect,  react  and  recover 
from any incident of potential disruptive value.  
 

	  

•  Strategic 

vulnerabilities  and 
programmes including risks from acts of terrorism. 

readiness  will  enable  owners  and  operators 

identify 
interdependencies  as  well  as  plan  redundancy 

It is suggested that owners and operators consider the following approach 
in  their  preparedness  towards  enhancing  the  strategic  readiness  for 
protection of critical information infrastructure. 

i.  Prevention and Early Warning Strategy 
ii.  Detection Strategy 
iii.  Reaction Strategy  
iv.  Crisis Management Strategy 

READINESS APPROACH TO NCIIPP 

Prevention and Early 
Warning Strategy 

Goal:  Ensure  CII  are  less  vulnerable  to  disruptions  and 
impairment duration is short and limited in proportion.  

 

Approach:  Periodic  dissemination  of  guidelines  and  best 
practices on specific threats using the TSIN framework 

Detection Strategy 

 

Goal:  Discover  and  detect  emerging  threats  on  a  timely 
basis 

Approach:  NCIIPU 
in  collaboration  with  ngCERT  will 
identify and detect new forms of technical an non-technical 
attacks  

Reaction Strategy  

Goal: Identification and correction of causes of disruption.  

 

Approach:  NCIIPU 
in  collaboration  with  ngCERT  will 
maintain  a  24/7  incident  reporting  service.  Furthermore, 
distribution  of  incident  report  and  reaction  among  TISN 
members  to  share  lesson  learned  in  improving  crisis  and 
emergency planning  

Crisis Management 
Strategy 

Goal:  Alert  key  actors  of  CII  of  the  interdependencies  and 
minimizing effects of disruptions on society. 

 
• 

 

 
 
 

	  

 

Approach: Using TSIN and ngCERT frameworks, constant 
rehearsals  and  practice  of  defined  crisis  management 
strategies 

 

 

NCSS	  Figure	  5:	  Four	  Pillars	  of	  Critical	  Infrastructure	  Protection	  [adapted	  from	  ITU’s	  A	  Generic	  	  

National	  Framework	  for	  Critical	  Information	  Infrastructure	  Protection	  (CIIP)]	  

 

 
 

6.9    Initiative 4:  Identify, analyse and manage cross-sectorial dependencies 

 

•  The identification and analysis of cross-sectorial dependencies assists the risk 
management decision making of critical infrastructure organizations and helps 
to inform the Government’s policy on CIP.  
 

telecommunications 

•  Critical  infrastructure  by  nature  are  highly  interdependent,  so  that  failure  or 
disruption in one sector can lead to disruptions in other sectors. For instance, 
owners  and  operators  of  water  infrastructure  rely  on  electricity  for  pumping 
and 
the 
communications  industry  needs  electricity  to  run  their  networks,  and  the 
electricity  industry  needs  telemetry  services  to  run  their  operations  and 
electricity marketing.  
 

for  monitoring  operations.  Similarly, 

	  

•  A cross-sectorial analysis of dependencies will assist owners and operators of 
critical infrastructure and the Nigerian Government to understand system-wide 
risks that are beyond the purview of individual organizations or sectors.  
 

•  This increases the potential for a more effective sharing of risk to cope with 
certain  incidents.  The  Critical  Infrastructure  Program  for  Modelling  and 
Analysis (CIPMA) is proposed as a key initiative of the Nigerian Government’s 
efforts  to  enhance  the  protection  and  resilience  of  critical  infrastructure  in 
Nigeria. 

6.9.1  The Critical Infrastructure Program for Modelling and Analysis (CIPMA) 

•  CIPMA is a computer-based capability, which uses a vast array of data and 
information  from  a  range  of  sources  (including  the  owners  and  operators  of 
critical  infrastructure)  to  model  and  simulate  the  behavior  and  dependency 
relationships of critical infrastructure systems. 
 

•  CIPMA  uses  an  all  hazards  approach  to  undertake  computer  modelling  to 
determine  the  consequences  of  different  disasters  and  threats  (human  and 
natural) to critical infrastructure.  
 

•  Owners  and  operators  of  critical  infrastructure  can  use  this  information  to 
prevent, prepare for, respond to or recover from a natural or human-caused 
hazard.  
 

•  CIPMA also helps government shape policies on national security and critical 

infrastructure resilience. 
 

•  CIPMA  is  an  important  capability  to  support  the  business-government 
partnership, and relies on strong support from stakeholders such as owners 
and operators of critical infrastructure, Federal, State and local governments, 
and government agencies for its ongoing development.  
 

	  

• 

Importantly,  CIPMA  can  show  the  relationships  and  dependencies  between 
critical infrastructure systems, and the cascade impacts from a failure in one 
sector on the operations of critical infrastructure in other sectors. 
 

•  NCIPP  unit  manages  CIPMA  and  works  with  ONSA-NCCC  and  other 
technical  service  providers  to  further  develop  and  deliver  this  whole-of-
government capability. 

 
 
 
 

6.10 Success Criteria And Review Of CIIP Strategy 

•  Critical  infrastructure  protection  and  resilience  is  an  ongoing  process  that 
requires periodic review and fine tuning of the activities under each strategic 
imperative will be required as the strategy is implemented. 

6.10.1 Mechanism for Measuring Success: 

Success will be measured through following mechanisms: 

•  Effective Critical Information Infrastructure Protection is reliant on a strong, 
collaborative  partnership  between  governments  and  critical  infrastructure 
owners  and  operators  to  deliver  the  Government’s  policy  aim  of  the 
continued operation of critical infrastructure in the face of all cyber threats. 
 

•  Need  for  investment  in  resilient,  robust  infrastructure  (e.g  CIPMA)  to 
identify  key  cross-sectorial  dependencies  and  vulnerabilities  with  respect 
to both cyber and physical infrastructure. 
 

•  Businesses and governments collaborating to progress national research 

and submission of curriculum inputs to training and research on CIP 
 

•  Periodic lessons from incident report and reaction exercise activities and 
real life events propagated to all Sector Groups to enhance organization’s 

 

	  

• 

 Understanding  of  protection  and  resilience  and 
arrangements. 
 

improve  planning 

•  Coordination of Nigeria’s international engagement with periodic updates 

• 

provided to NCCC as required 
 
In  order  to  ensure  Government’s  policy  settings  remain  appropriate,  the 
CIP  Strategy  will  undergo  a  comprehensive  review  after  five  years  of 
operation. 

 
 

 
	  
7.1  

Chapter Seven  

 

STRATEGY ON ASSURANCE & MONITORING 

Introduction 

7.1.1  There is a need to address the issues of cyber threats from risks management 
and  process  governance  approaches  because  of  the  need  to  address  the 
nation's internal vulnerability and other weakest link. 

7.1.2  The  development  of  a  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  designed  to  address 
these issues however, is only as good as the National Cybersecurity program 
that implements it.  

7.1.3  The continuous monitoring and review (i.e. assessment and evaluation) of the 
implementation and management of the National Cybersecurity Program, and 
the  surrounding  context  that  it  operates  within,  will  be  critical  in  providing 
assurance to various stakeholders that the National Cybersecurity program is 
well able, and continually so, to safeguard our vulnerability and other critical 
national infrastructure. 

7.2   Strategic Objective  

	  

i. 

This  strategy  seeks  to  establish  and  maintain  a  monitoring  and  an 
assurance framework that will ensure that the efforts put in place to secure 
the nations cyberspace are in compliance with international best practices, 
perform as expected by the stakeholders involved, as well as to maintain 
the  capabilities  necessary  to  protect  our  nation's  cyberspace  and  other 
critical infrastructure. 

 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

To  harness,  profile,  harmonize  and  priorities  various  technology  neutral 
information  security  frameworks  that  will  help  determine  best  standards 
and  guidelines  suitable  to  the  national  peculiarity  and  in  line  with 
international best practices. 
 
To  achieve  coordination  of 
consensus, collaboration, and partnership with relevant stakeholders.  
 
To facilitate national awareness on the criticality of ensuring and enabling 
information security conscious operational environment both in the public 
and private sectors   

information  security 

regimes 

through 

 
7.3   The Cybersecurity Assurance context 

•  The surrounding context within which the cybersecurity assurance mechanism 

will operate and monitor  include the following: 
 

i. 

The National Cybersecurity Strategy  
 
This is the foundation on which the National Cybersecurity Assurance 
Program and action plans will be built, it will be periodically reviewed to 
provide assurance that will continue to address evolving threats in a 
dynamic threat environment. 
 
 

ii.  Stakeholders' Commitment to Cybersecurity  

 

	  

•  An  effective  and  efficient  National  Cybersecurity  Assurance 
Program  will  require  clear  direction,  commitment  from  the  highest 
level of Government, top management and administration executive 
among others. 	  
	  

•  The  "tone  at  the  top"  will  determine  to  a  large  extent  the 
commitment  shown  by  others  in  the  lower  cadres  as  it  relates  to 
Cybersecurity  and  also  the  resources  committed  to  effecting  the 
Program. This will be periodically reviewed and adequate strategies 
developed to ensure that those at the top are motivated to ensure 
consistent commitment to the cause of Cybersecurity.	  

	  

	  

iii.  Cybersecurity awareness level 	  

	  

•  The  level  to  which  all  citizens  of  the  country  become  aware  of,  and 
educated  about  cybersecurity  issues  will  to  a  large  extent  determine 
how strong the cybersecurity efforts of the nation will be. As security is 
only  as  strong  as  its  weakest  link.  Initiatives  to  continually  create 
awareness  among  the  citizens  will  be  established  and  continually 
reviewed for effectiveness.	  
	  
The Regulatory/Legal environment 	  

•  The Cybersecurity bill, National Cyber Security Policy and other 

laws, policies and regulations will be periodically reviewed to ensure 
that they continue to be relevant, properly streamlined and serve as 
a good legal foundation to support the initiatives to secure the 

nation's cyberspace.	  

Cybersecurity Capabilities, Skills, Expertise  

•  The  level  of  skills,  capabilities  and  expertise  possessed  by  the 
personnel that will be charged with the responsibility of securing the 
nation's  cyberspace,  who  will  essentially  be  Nigerian  citizens,  will 
go a long way in determining how well it will be done. 	  

iv. 

	  
v.  
 

	  

	  

•  Lack  of  adequately  skilled  personnel  is  a  major  vulnerability,  and 
operating  a  national  cybersecurity  program  within  this  context  will 
constitute a major risk to the nation, therefore the capabilities, skills 
and  expertise  of  personnel  as  related  to  the  skills  required  to 
continually  defend  our  nation  in  cyberspace  will  be  periodically 
assessed and recommendations made to address any shortcoming.	  

	  

           vi.   Risk Management Program 	  

•  An effective cybersecurity risk management process will enable the 

nation to identify, assess, and mitigate risks to the nation's 
cyberspace. These will include threat analysis both for determining 
evolving threats to the nation's cyberspace and emerging trends 

and threats. 	  

	  

•  These information feeds   into the Cybersecurity program to ensure 
that  it  continues  to  provide  countermeasures  that  will  protect  the 
nation  against  both  current  and  future  threats  to  the  nation’s 
cyberspace and also serve as a basis for prioritizing responses to 
such threats based on risk/impact level.	  

	  

	  

	  

•  The Risk Management program will be established and continually 
reassessed to ensure it continues to provide relevant information to 

help proactively protect our presence in cyberspace.	  
v.  Cooperation/Collaboration and Communication/	  

 

Information sharing  	  
	  
•  Level  of  Public-Private  collaboration, 

intergovernmental, 

inter-
sectorial  and  international  collaboration  and  communication  will 
continually be assessed to ensure that maximum benefits that leads 
to  a  more  secure  cyberspace  are  achieved 
from  such 
collaboration/cooperation and information sharing.	  

             viii         	  National Cybersecurity program 	  

	  

Assurance activities including periodic assessment and reviews will be 
carried  out  to  provide  assurance  that  the  cybersecurity  program  is 
achieving  its  objectives  and  that  such  objectives  will  aligned  with 
SMART  framework  i.e.  Specific,  Measurable,  Achievable,  Results- 
focused and Time-bound 

 

 

 

	  

	  
National	  Cybersecurity	  Program	  
	  

	  
Stakeholders'	  Commitment	  
	  
Regulatory/Legal	  environment	  
	  

	  

	  

National	  Cybersecurity	  Strategy	  

	  

Cybersecurity	  
Assurance	  	  
(Assessment	  and	  

Monitoring)	  

	  

Cooperation	  and	  Information	  sharing	  

Risk	  Management	  program	  

Cybersecurity	  awareness	  level	  

Cybersecurity	  Capabilities,	  Skills,	  Expertise	  

NCSS	  Figure	  6	  The	  Cybersecurity	  Assurance	  context	  -­‐	  It	  shows	  the	  logical	  environment	  within	  which	  the	  Cybersecurity	  

Assurance	  mechanism	  will	  operate	  and	  monitor.	  

7.4 Focal Points  

7.4.1  Monitor  the  implementation  program  for  the  Cyber  Security  Strategy  to 
provide  assurance  that  the  program  is  meeting,  and  will  continue  to  meet 
stakeholder's expectations within a dynamic cyber landscape. 

7.4.2  Make  recommendations  on  possible  improvements  in  the  Cyber  Security 

Strategy itself based on observed changes in threats profile. 

7.4.3  Encourage, monitor and review the adoption of national and international best 
practices as codified in the international frameworks and standards to ensure 

	  

national cybersecurity practices that compare well with international standards 
and practices and also serve as a basis for benchmarking our maturity level. 

7.4.4  Monitor  and  review  cybersecurity  capabilities  of  actors  at  the  national,  state 
and  sectorial  levels  to  ensure  continuous  improvement  and  development  of 
relevant  capabilities,  skills  and  proficiencies,  enabling  them  to  defend  our 
nation in the face of present and future threats to the nation’s cyberspace. 

7.4.5  Monitor and review level of preparedness and capacity of various actors at the 
national,  state  and  sectorial  levels  to  ensure  their  readiness  to  defend  our 
nation in the face of present and future threats to the nation’s cyberspace. 

7.4.6 Ensure a continuous improvement process for cybersecurity. 

7. 4.7  To develop performance measures both at the policy, strategic, tactical and 
operational levels based on the proposed Cybersecurity balanced scorecard 
and  perform  reviews  based  on  these  measures  to  ensure  feedback  on 
performance  of  the  National  Cybersecurity  program  so  that  adequate 
corrective and improvement changes can be made. 

7.4.8  Conducting  information  security  audits  and  process  audits  for  government 
entities  and  also  coordinating  and  validating  security  audits  and  process 

audits of self- assessment entities.	  

7.4.9  Conducting  and  coordinating  information  security  risk  assessment  and 
analysis  while  establishing  reasonable  security  guidelines  and  measures  to 
protect data and systems. 

 

7.5   Strategy 

7.5.1 Initiative 1  

•  The  National  Cybersecurity  Assurance  Department  as  an  arm  of  the  NCCC 
will  be  established  to  serve  as  a  mechanism  for  fulfilling  all  Assurance  and 
Monitoring focal points.  

 

	  

•  The  department  will  be  charged  with  the  responsibilities  of  providing 

assurance as regards the National Cybersecurity program. 

•  The  unit  will  be  set  up  at  the  start  of  implementation  of  the  National 

Cybersecurity program. 

 

 

7.5.2 Initiative 2 

•  The Strategy approach to cybersecurity governance is anchored on a sound 
technology  neutral  framework.  This  is  line  with  global  best  practice,  while 
emphasizing  the  need  for  an  effective  business  governance  process  from  a 
risk management approach.  
 

•  The  dynamism  of  cybersecurity  risks  requires  a  flexible  and  responsive  risk 

management strategy. 
 

•  Thus, 

this  Strategy  provides  adoptable  and  adaptable 

fit-for-purpose 
International Standards and frameworks for information Security Governance, 
Risk and Control in line with globally consensus. 
 

•  This  strategy  will  facilitate  cooperation  among  stakeholders  responsible  for 
ensuring  the  security  and  safety  of  our  cyberspace  and  other  critical 
infrastructure  towards  ensuring  commonality  in  approaches  to  cybersecurity 
and standardization. 
 

•  This  initiative  recommends  consensus  driven  international  standards  and 

multi-stakeholders’ frameworks on information security assurance.  

 

7.5.3. Initiative 3 

•  With  a  definite  timeline,  the  strategy  will  implement  continuous  monitoring 
software  solutions  for  vulnerability  and  security  configuration  compliance 
monitoring, threat management functions and penetration testing activities to 

	  

identify  alterations  and  weaknesses  in  security  configurations  on  critical 

national infrastructure. 	  

7.5.4 Initiative 4	  

•  An effective Cybersecurity risk assessment program will be established with a 

definite timeline.	  

7.5.5. Initiative 5	  

•  This  strategy  will  implement  a  core  assurance  capability  thus  enabling  the 
nation  to  assess  the  effectiveness  and  adequacy  of  cybersecurity  controls, 
when  evaluated  from  an  attacker’s  perspective,  to  deny  the  compromise  of 

critical nation infrastructure.	  

7.5.6. Initiative 6	  

•  The Strategy implements an Enterprise Application Security Testing regimen 
with  standardized  processes  and  procedures  within  application  lifecycle 
development  processes  to  help  identify  vulnerabilities  and  weaknesses  in 
custom  and  source  code,  web  applications  and  databases  deployed  to 
support cybersecurity in the nation. 

7.5.7. Initiative 7	  

to  organization’s  cybersecurity  known  as 

•  This strategy recommends the adaptation of Balanced Scorecard framework 
and  approach 
the  National 
Cybersecurity Balanced Scorecard framework. This will serve as the basis of 
developing  performance  metrics,  key  performance  indicator  (KPIs)  and  key 
goal  indicators  (KGIs)  that  will  be  used  to  measure  the  success  of  the 
Cybersecurity program. 

 7.5.8. Initiative 8	  

•  This  strategy  provides  for  the  design,  development  and  documentation  of  a 
National  Enterprise  Security  Architecture  Framework  that  will  serve  as  the 
basis for the design and continuous improvement of a cohesive, standardized  
and  well  integrated  infrastructure  put  in  place  to  safeguard  the  nation's 
cyberspace 
7.5.9. Initiative 9	  

•  Develop Blue team and Red team capabilities among cybersecurity actors. 

 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY SKILL & 

MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT 

8.1 

Introduction: 

Nigeria presently  lacks  sufficient specialised cybersecurity  skilled  personnel 
required  for  driving  national  cybersecurity  capabilities  and  empowerment. 
This national cybersecurity strategy provides for a coherent and coordinated 
cybersecurity  skills  and  human  empowerment  framework  as  envisioned  in 
the National Cybersecurity Policy. 

 

8.2   Objectives: 

Cybersecurity skills development is a national priority and  also  a  foundation 
for  the  achievement  of  national  cybersecurity  readiness.  Therefore,  this 
focus  area  aims  to achieve the following objectives: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

To  provide  an  institutional  framework  anchors  on  public-private 
partnership towards building local professional skills. 
To  provide  central  coordination  and  regulation  of  skills  development 
within the public sector. 
To help build framework for public-private partnership on professional 
training  and  capacity  building  in  cybersecurity  for  private  sector 

	  

towards  promoting  common  understanding  on  cybersecurity 
challenge. 

8.3   Scope  

8.3.1  The  scope  of  the  national  cybersecurity  skills  development  include  the 

following;  

To leverage on cybersecurity in national security and economic 
innovation for competitive advantage.  
 
To develop cybersecurity professional skills roadmap that will facilitate 
emergence of local content and expertise. 
To  harness  initiatives  that  will  stimulate  emergence  of  cybersecurity 
industry in Nigeria. 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

 

 

8.3.2  Therefore,  this  section  focuses  on  the  framework  for  the  creation  of 
in 
programmes  to  increase  the  cadre  of  cybersecurity  professionals 
than 
Managerial,  Technical  and  Information  Assurance  areas  rather 
general  user  awareness  and  education.  It  further  advocate  for  re-
organization  of  the  nation’s  educational  priorities  to  address  cybersecurity 
challenges and opportunities. 

 
8.4 

Initiatives 	  

	  

8.4.1  A  specialized  national  skills  development  and  empowerment  initiative  on 
cybersecurity  covering  various  level  of  knowledge  in  information  assurance 
will be established under the National Cybersecurity Coordinating Center.  

	  

• 

 The  initiative  will  be  set  up  under  the  framework  of  Nigeria  Institution  of 
Cybersecurity  (NIOC)  in  partnership  with  stakeholders  as  enshrined  in  the 
National Cybersecurity Policy.	  

§ 

 The framework will involve designing, developing, and implementing level 
of  skills,  requirement,  coordination,  certifications,  regulations,  capabilities 
and expertise to be possessed by the personnel that will be charged with 

	  

	  

	  

the  responsibility  of  securing  and  maintaining  the  nation's  presence  in 
cyberspace, who will essentially be Nigerian citizens.	  

§  Lack of adequately skilled personnel is a major vulnerability, and operating 
a national cybersecurity program within this context will constitute a major 
risk  to  the  nation,  therefore  the  capabilities,  skills  and  expertise  of 
personnel  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  defending  our  presence  in 
cyberspace will be periodically assessed, regulated and recommendations 
made to address identified gaps.	  

	  

	  

 
	  
8.5	  	   Roadmap	  for	  Nigeria	  Cybersecurity	  Industry:	  

	  8.5.1	  
In	  Nigeria,	  cybersecurity	  essential	  skills	  at	  the	  public	  institutions	  and	  industry	  
level	  engagement	  are	  scarce.	  The	  scarcely	  available	  ones	  are	  extremely	  limited	  in	  
their	  scope	  and	  capabilities	  to	  safeguard	  and	  protect	  critical	  industries.	  Various	  
genuine	  concerns	  have	  been	  expressed	  on	  the	  apparently	  incapacity	  of	  Nigeria	  as	  
a	  nation	  to	  protect	  itself	  and	  her	  industry	  in	  the	  face	  of	  a	  major	  attacks	  on	  her	  
Critical	  Information	  and	  Related	  Infrastructures.	  
	  8.5.2	   Stakeholders	  from	  Industries,	  law	  enforcement	  agencies,	  academics,	  non-­‐
governmental	  organizations,	  government	  Ministries,	  Department	  and	  Agencies,	  
Nigeria	  Professionals	  in	  diasporas	  should	  emerge	  together	  under	  a	  proposed	  
framework	  for	  cybersecurity	  profession	  umbrella	  body	  to	  help	  the	  country	  drive	  
common	  professional	  synergy	  on	  cybersecurity	  instrument	  of	  research	  and	  
development,	  innovations,	  and	  trusted	  cooperation	  necessary	  for	  a	  national	  
cohesion	  on	  cybersecurity.	  
	  8.5.3	  	  The	  proposed	  government	  and	  private	  sector	  synergy	  should	  culminate	  into	  the	  
formation	  of	  Nigeria	  Institution	  of	  Cybersecurity	  (NIOC)	  that	  will	  help	  develop	  
and	  drive	  a	  coherent	  body	  of	  useful	  and	  applicable	  knowledge	  in	  cybersecurity.	  	  
	  8.5.4	   The	  NIOC	  will	  be	  expected	  to	  be	  built	  on	  nationwide	  standards	  with	  the	  aim	  of	  
enhancing	   multidisciplinary	  
harmonizing,	   developing,	   promoting	  
professional	  skills	  capacity	  and	  standards	  in	  the	  development	  of	  Cybersecurity	  
industry,	  while	  providing	  opportunity	  for	  the	  citizen	  positive	  engagement	  in	  
cyberspace.	  
	  8.5.5	  
It	  is	  expected	  that	  by	  promoting	  national	  dignity,	  preserving	  national	  security	  
and	  economic	  values,	  including	  international	  standards	  on	  multidisciplinary	  
professionalism	  and	  expertise,	  the	  institution	  will	  serve	  the	  human	  resources	  
needs	  of	  the	  country	  in	  both	  the	  government	  and	  private	  sectors	  covering	  all	  

and	  

	  

aspect	  of	  cybersecurity	  as	  defined	  through	  the	  international	  framework	  of	  
cooperation	  on	  cybersecurity	  and	  other	  widely	  recognized	  international	  best	  
practices.	  	  	  

Source:	  Recommendation	  from	  1st	  National	  Conference	  on	  Cybercrime	  &	  Cybersecurity	  2008	  –An	  event	  
organised	  by	  Global	  Network	  for	  Cybersolution	  in	  collaboration	  with	  NITDA,	  NCC,	  Ministry	  of	  Justice	  

	  
	  

 
 
8.6   Institutional Framework 

 
8.6.1   Under the NCCC, NIOC will provide strategic framework for partnership with 
the  following  stakeholder  on  cybersecurity  skill  development,  creativity, 
innovation  and  research:  academia,  research  &  development  agencies, 
industry, and multi-stakeholder civil society.    
 

8.6.2  The  NIOC  will  develop  professional  career  standard,  minimum  entry 
requirement,  based  on  categorizations  acceptable  to  the  government  and 
local industry. 
 

8.6.3  It  will  develop  unified  scheme 

in 
cybersecurity,  capacity  building  and  granting  recognized  professional  status 
level correspondence to professional categorization. 
 

for  national  certifications, 

8.6.4  NIOC will develop professional syllabus standardizations, and prospectus for 

training 

short term and career focused professional skills development. 
 

8.6.5  NIOC  will  prepare,  coordinate,  regulate  and  conduct  NIOC  professional 
examinations in different categories of certification nationwide in collaboration 
with the industry. 
 

8.6.6  The NIOC will regulate, approve and coordinate the lists of independent and 

accredited cybersecurity training centres in the country. 
 

8.6.7  NIOC will provide professional guidelines in learning resources, materials and 

curriculum development that best meet local and international requirement. 
 

8.6.8  NIOC will provide professional measurable benefits in line with national and 
international  best  practices  to  all  professional  members  scalable  to  fit  into 
various categories of membership. 
 

8.6.9  NIOC  will  develop  industry  acceptable  waiver  schemes  or  conversion 
programs  for  relevant  established  professionals  interested  in  cybersecurity 
profession,  Public  institutions,  law  enforcement  agencies,  Military,  Para-
military and security agencies whose operation and experience are relevant to 
cybersecurity irrespective of the professional background. 
 

8.6.10 NIOC  will  develop  industry  acceptable  waiver  schemes  or  conversion 
programs  for  relevant  established  academics  in  the  field  of  law,  ICT,  IT, 

	  

Finances  and  relevant  to  the  field  of  cybersecurity  specialization,  research 
and development. 
 

8.6.11 NIOC will develop industry acceptable conversion programs for young Nigeria 
graduates in any recognized and approved discipline or, and equivalent in line 
with  the  NIOC  approved  levels  of  certifications  and  categorization  of 
membership.  
 

8.6.12 NIOC  will  promote 

federal  government  and 

industry  acceptance  of 

certifications Nation-wide.  

8.6.13 NIOC will develop strictest professional code of ethical conducts, professional 

8.6.14  NIOC  will  secure 

international  best  practices  approval  and  relevant 

dispute and conflict resolution structures.  
 

international standards from global institutions. 
 

with international best practices. 
 

8.6.15 NIOC will provide framework for continuous professional development in line 

8.6.16 NIOC  will 

interface  and  collaborate  with  relevant  and  other  related 
professional  bodies  for  technical  cooperation  and  partnership  on  technical 
exchange programs relevant to cybersecurity.  
 

8.6.17 The  NIOC  professional  training  and  skills  development  will  be  based  and 
focused on generic cybersecurity technology and tested models as adopted 
globally.   
 

8.6.18 NIOC  will  become  a  unifying  professional  body  accommodating  all 
cybersecurity  stakeholders  from  existing  professional  bodies  in  the  country 
whose professional engagement fall within the purview of NIOC. 
 

Securing Nigeria in Cyberspace: 

To  build  an  infinitely  sustainable  cybersecurity  readiness,  there  is  critical  need  to 
focus on our collective strength, sense of responsibility, excellence, prudency, and 
strategic  appropriation  of  our  collective  ingenuity  for  the  benefit  of  protecting  our 
common wealth in cyberspace within the current and future dispensation.	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

CHAPTER NINE 

 

STRATEGY ON ONLINE CHILD ABUSE & EXPLOITATIONS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

	  

 
9.1 Introduction: 
 

•  Cyberspace has brought huge benefits to children around the world, with the 
number of connected households increasing each year. While the potential for 
good is undisputed, Internet has become increasingly accessible to the critical 
segment  of  our  population  i.e.  Nigerian  children  and  young  people,  both  at 
home and in schools.  

•  Rather  than  surfing  the  Internet  passively,  children  and  young  people 
participate  in  a  dynamic  online  environment  that  allows  them  to  generate, 
manipulate and consume internet content like never before, forging their place 
and identity in online communities. 
 
 

•  More importantly, as a result of the universal availability of Internet access 
in homes, schools, libraries, mobile phones, etc., children are increasingly 
becoming involved in the use of the new technological application and taking 
advantage  of 
research, 
entertainment and business.  

the  opportunity 

learning, 

it  provides 

for 

•  However,  the  Internet  has  also  raised  new  and  disturbing  issues  of 
vulnerability,  especially  for  children.    It  exposes  children  to  potentially 
negative contents.  

•  Children and Young Persons are the most active participants in online social 
networking and therefore are potential victims of improperly disseminated 
and  dysfunctional  contents  that  could  cause  disorientation  and  threaten 
their survival and that of the society. 

•  There are growing concerns on the distribution of online child abuse materials 
targeted to children which are making them vulnerable to child pornography, 
sexual abuse, harassment, exploitation, extremism, brain washing for terrorist 

acts  of  violence  and  human  trafficking  resulting  into  unpleasant  outcome  of 
the information age.  

• 

In order to address these issues of child online exploitation and its disastrous 
consequences,  the  National  Cybersecurity  Policy  viewed  it  as  one  of  the 
critical areas of focus.   

 

 

 

9.2 

 Rationale for COAEP 
 

9.2.1  The  National  Cybersecurity  Policy  framework  provides  a  rationale  and 
philosophy to guide development of strategy for Nigerian Child Online Abuse 
and Exploitation. 

9.2.2  The Principles on Child Online Abuse & Exploitation and Counter-measures 
emphasized  Social  Media  as  a  vital  attractive  channel  and  tool  for  social 
interactions  and  productive  engagements.  Regrettably,  the  openness  and 
transparent  nature  of  cyberspace  have  been  exploited  for  good  causes  and 
malicious intents.  

9.2.3  Therefore, there is need for the following actions; 

i. 

Integration  of  Child  Online  Abuse  and  Exploitation  into  National 
legislation on cybercrime and cybersecurity. 
 

ii.  There is a need to establish that any act against a child which is illegal 
in  the  real  world  is  illegal  online  and  that  online  data  protection  and 
privacy rules for legal minor are also adequate. 

iii.  Ensure  that  a  mechanism  is  established  and  is  widely  promoted  to 
provide a readily understood means for reporting illegal content found 
on the internet , for example , a national hotline which has the capacity 
to  respond  rapidly    and  have  illegal  material  removed    or  rendered 
inaccessible 

 

 

9.2.4  It  is  the  intention  of  government  to  harness  counter-measures  through  a 
legislative framework, policy and strategic actions to address cyber abuse and 
online exploitation of Nigerian Child in a manner that will prevent and curtail 
cybercriminal intents and related malicious acts inimical to the national dignity, 
security and economic interests of the country. 

 
 
9.3  Objectives  

9.3.1  To  provide  common  approach  in  the  development  and  implementation  of 

National Countermeasures strategy. 

	  

9.3.2  To provide robust security initiatives, action plan, and roadmap that will give 
these 

overall  direction 
implementation  of 
countermeasures strategy within the framework of National Security.  

the  planning  and 

to 

9.3.3  The  strategy  addresses  urgent  security  and  law  enforcement  challenges, 

roles and shared responsibilities and government interventions. 

9.3.4   The  strategy  harnesses  frameworks  that  provide  coherent  structure  for 

coordination of multi stakeholder engagement. 

 

9.4  Strategic Approach 

These  objectives  are  anchored  through  the  following  approaches  while 
considering our socio-economic security peculiarity and vulnerable operating 
environment  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  Nigerian  children  and  young 
generations on the internet. 

i. 

The National Cybersecurity Strategy approach adopts multi-stakeholder 
and  multi-sectorial  collaboration  through  partnership  and  alliances  of 
government and key actors with clearly defined and specific guidelines 
for policy makers, law enforcement and security agencies.  

 

ii. 

The  partnership  and  alliances  will  be  forged  to  ensure  cooperation 
for  action  and  mutual  awareness  among  stakeholders  on  the 
consequence of improper engagement in cyberspace. 

9.5.1    Initiative 1: Focusing on National Process Mechanism 

i.  There  shall  be  Infusion  of  Child  Online  Abuse  and  Exploitation  Protection 
Strategy (COAEPS) into the larger framework for National cooperation on 
cybersecurity. 
 

ii.  Establishment  of  a  unit  under  the  National  Cybersecurity    Coordinating 
Center  (NCCC)  to  handle  matters  relating  to  Child  Online  Abuse  and 
Exploitation within the scope National Cybersecurity Policy. 

iii. 

The  COAEP  unit  of  NCCC  will  collaborate  with  industry  regulators  and 
operators 
coherent  Countermeasures  Technical 
Mechanisms  (CTM)  to  prevent  access  to  web  sites  identified  as  hosting 

implement  a 

to 

9.5  Strategy  

 

 

 

	  

contents that are offensive to children and to implement processes to enable 
the removal of any child sexual abuse content posted on their own services. 

The  Unit  will  provide  partnership  mechanism  in  regard  to  the  promotion  of 
public awareness, messages and campaigns center on safety and security of 
Nigeria children interactions online. 

The unit will train and build the capacity of Nigerian Law enforcement officers 
to  conduct  investigations  into  Internet  related  crimes  against  children  and 
young people and maintain a register of convicted online crime offenders.  

 

 

 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

The  unit  will  facilitate  national  processes  which  ensure  that  all  Child  Abuse 
and  Exploitation  materials  found  in  cyberspace  are  channeled  towards  a 
centralized, national resource.  
  
 

9.5.2   Initiative 2: Focusing on International Process Mechanism 

The  NCCC  will  drive  Virtual  National  Taskforce  (VNT)  which  will  work  with 
Virtual  Global  Taskforce,  a  law  enforcement  body  which  provides  a  24/7 
mechanism to receive reports about illegal behavior or content from persons 
across the globe. The nation will develop modality for working with this global 
security  platform  most  especially  for  countermeasures  against  terrorist 
recruitment and online predators.3 

It  is  strategically  essential  that  the  Nigerian  law  enforcement  community 
becomes fully informed through training and capacity building and empower 
through  legislation  to  help  make  the  Internet  safer  for  children  and  young 
people. 
 
Investing in training for law enforcement, prosecutorial and building capacity 
of  Nigerian  Judges  through  collaboration  with  National  Judiciary  Institutes. 
Investment  will  also  be  needed  in  acquiring  and  maintaining  the  facilities 
necessary to obtain and interpret forensics evidence from digital devices on 
Child Abuse Materials.   

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

 

 

 9.6  Operational Measures 

 

 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	   www.virtualglobaltaskforce.com 	  

	  

9.6.1  NCCC  will  ensure  that  a  working  mechanism  is  established  and  is  widely 
promoted to provide a readily understood means for reporting illegal content 
found on the Internet, for example, a national hotline which has the capacity to 
respond rapidly and have illegal material removed or rendered inaccessible. 

9.6.2  NCCC  will  ensure  various  security  and  law  enforcement  agencies  in  the 
country  implement  abuse  report  mechanisms  which  will  be  prominently 
displayed on relevant parts of any web site that allows user generated content 
to  appear.  It  should  also  be  possible  for  people  who  feel  threatened  in  any 
way, or for people who have witnessed any worrying activity on the Internet, 
to be able to report it as quickly as possible to the relevant law enforcement 
agencies that need to be trained and ready to respond.  
 

9.6.3  NCCC will promote a number of software programmes which can help screen 
out unwanted material or block unwanted contacts. Utilizing some of the child 
safety  and  filtering  programmes  because  they  are  part  of  a  computer’s 
operating system or they are provided as part of a package available from an 
ISP or ESP. The manufacturers of some game consoles also provide similar 
tools  if  the  device  is  Internet  enabled.  These  programmes  are  not  foolproof 
but they can provide a welcome level of support, particularly in families with 
younger  children.  These  technical  tools  will  be  used  as  part  of  a  broader 
arsenal. Parental and/or guardian involvement is critical. 

 

9.6.4  It  is  strategically  essential  that  the  Nigerian  law  enforcement  community 
becomes  fully  engaged  with  any  overall  strategy  to  help  make  the  Internet 
safer for children and young people. 

 

9.6.5  Nigerian  Law  enforcement  officers  will  be  appropriately  trained  to  conduct 
investigations into Internet related crimes against children and young people. 
They  need  the  right  level  of  technical  knowledge  and  access  to  forensic 
facilities to enable them to extract and interpret data obtained from computers 
or the Internet. 

 

9.6.6  NCCC will establish a clear mechanism to enable children and young people, 
or any member of the public, to report any incidents or concerns they might 
have about a child’s or a young person’s online safety. 

 
 
9.7   National Security Response Measures 
  
 
9.7.1  With escalation of cybercrime, youths based conflict and terrorist recruitment, 
bombing  attack  in  the  country,  the  Internet  has  made  possible  a  range  of 

 

	  

ways  of  abusing  children  and  recruiting  young  people,  e.g.,  through  web 
cams, chat rooms and internet blog.  

 
9.7.2  The internet has also played a singular role in expanding the scale on which 
Child  Abuse  Material  (CAM)  has  become  available  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 
For these reasons, when addressing online safety concerns for children and 
young  people  from  national  security  perspective,  the  Strategy  gives  special 
consideration to the following: 

i.  Outlawing “grooming” or other forms of remote enticement of legal minors 
into inappropriate sexual contact or sexual activity, possession, production 
and distribution of CAM, irrespective of the intent to distribute. 

ii. 

Taking additional response steps to disrupt or reduce the traffic in CAM, 
for example by establishing a national hotline and by deploying measures 
which  will  block  access  to  web  sites  and  Usenet  Newsgroups  known  to 
contain or advertise the availability of CAM. 

iii.  Ensuring that national processes are in place which ensure that all CAM 

found in a country is channeled towards a centralized, national resource. 

iv.  Developing strategies to address the demand for CAM particularly among 
those  who  have  convictions  for  such  offences.  It  is  important  to  build 
awareness  of  the  fact  that  this  is  not  a  victimless  crime:  children  are 
abused to produce the material being viewed and by intentionally viewing 
or downloading CAM one is contributing directly to the abuse of the child 
depicted  and  one  is  also  encouraging  the  abuse  of  more  children  to 
produce more pictures. 

v.  Building  awareness  of  the  fact  that  Nigerian  children  usually  would  not 
consent to being sexually abused, whether for the production of CAM or in 
any other way. Encourage people who use CAM to seek help, while at the 
same time, making them aware that they will be held criminally responsible 
for the illegal activity in which they engaged/are engaging. 

vi.  Ensuring  that  law  enforcement  crime  prevention  strategies  as  well  as 
school-based and social programmes include sections on cyber safety and 
the risks posed by online predatory behavior, with age appropriate advice. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

vii.  NCCC  maintains  a  register  of  convicted  online  crime  offenders.  Courts 
have issued judicial orders banning such offenders from using the Internet 
altogether  or  from  using  parts  of  the  Internet  which  are  frequented  by 
children  and  young  people.  The  problem  with  these  orders  hitherto  has 
been its enforcement. 

 

viii.  Consideration will be given to integrating the list of convicted sex offenders 
into a block list which will prevent those on it from visiting or joining certain 
web sites. 

ix.  Providing  appropriate  long  term  support  for  victims.  Where  children  or 
young  people  have  been  victimized  online,  where  for  example  an  illegal 
image of them has appeared on the Internet, they will naturally feel very 
concerned about who might have seen it and what impact this will have on 
them. It could leave the child or young person feeling vulnerable to bullying 
or to further sexual exploitation and abuse. 

 

 

 

x.  Ensuring 

that  a  grassroots’ 

reporting  and 

intelligence  gathering 
mechanism  is  established  and  is  widely  promoted  to  provide  a  readily 
understood  and  rapid  means  for  reporting  illegal  content  or  illegal  or 
worrying  online  behavior  e.g.  a  system  similar  to  that  which  has  been 
established  by 
the 
INTERPOLi24/7 system will be encouraged. 

the  Virtual  Global  Taskforce.  The  use  of 

xi.  Ensuring  that  a  sufficient  number  of  law  enforcement  officials  are 
appropriately  trained  in  investigating  Internet  and  computer-based  crime 
and  have  access  to  appropriate  forensic  facilities  to  enable  them  extract 
and interpret relevant digital data. 

Investing  in  training  for  law  enforcement,  prosecutorial  and  judicial 
authorities  in  the  methods  used  by  online  criminals  to  perpetrate  these 
crimes.  Investment  will  also  be  needed  in  acquiring  and  maintaining  the 
facilities necessary to obtain and interpret forensics evidence from digital 
devices. 

In  addition,      it  will  be  important  to  establish  bilateral  and  multilateral 
collaboration  and  information  exchanges  with  relevant  law  enforcement 
authorities and investigative bodies in other countries. 

 
 

xii. 

 

xiii. 

 

	  

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

CHAPTER TEN 

STRATEGY ON PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP 

 
10. 1  Introduction 

•  The  present  administration  has  demonstrated  her  commitment  to  the 
prevailing security challenges by taking positive step to re-invigorate National 
Cybersecurity Strategy as part of the National Security agenda. 
 

•  The  Cybercrime  legislation  and  the  need  to  actualize  the  implementation  of 
National Cybersecurity Strategy requires effective machinery of public-private 
partnership  and  management  framework  to  drive  the  buildup  process  with 
tripartite  synergy  of  the  whole  nation  including  the  government,  non-
government actors and international stakeholders. 
 
In the light of the above, this section seeks to provide the government with a 
strategic  public-partnership  management 
the 
implementation of National Cybersecurity Strategy. 
 
 

framework  approach 

for 

• 

•  The key elements of this strategy are as follows: 

i. 

ii. 

The  PPP  Management  Framework  to  facilitate  the  cooperation  and 
partnership  in  the  implementation  of  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy 
among the tripartite stakeholders in the country. 
  
The Nature of the PPP Framework Model, Benefit, Impact & Direction. 

iii.  Special Purpose Vehicle and Delivery channel through the setting up of 

PPP for Cyber security (3PC). 

iv. 

v. 

3PC Working Document & Terms of Reference 
  
3PC Sustainable Strategy 

  

 

	  

  

vi.  Evaluation & Appraisal   

 
 

10.2   The  Imperative  of  Public-Private  Partnership  Framework  for  National 

Cybersecurity Strategy 

• 

In  the  current  dispensation,  engagement  in  cyberspace  is  central  to  the 
existence, survivability, relevancy, as well as security and protection of the 
public institutions and private sector businesses.  
 

•  The public and private sectors’ interests are enormously intertwined with a 
shared  responsibility  for  ensuring  a  secure  cyberspace  and  a  protected 
critical  economic  infrastructure  upon  which  businesses  and  government 
services depend. 
 

•  Public-Private Partnership framework is critical to the build-up process and 

overall success of the National Cybersecurity Strategy. 
 

•  Right  from  the  commencement  of  the  efforts  on  National  Cybersecurity 
Strategy since 2003, which was reinvigorated in 2010 and till the present 
time.  Most  often,  private  sectors  are  usually  caught  unprepared  in  the 
buildup process. 

 
•  There is a concrete evidence that the Federal government cannot succeed 
in the many facets of securing National cyberspace if it works in isolation 
in her build up in the implementation of National Cybersecurity Strategy. 
Therefore  PPPC  is  set  to  define  roles  and  responsibilities,  integrate 
capabilities,  and  facilitate  joint  ownership  of  the  problems  and  the 
challenges  towards  developing  holistic  Cybersecurity  Strategy.  It  is  only 
through  such  sustainable  partnerships  that  the  Country  will  be  able  to 
enthrone cybersecurity and reap the full benefits of the digital revolution. 

 

 

•  Furthermore,  the  National  Security  challenge  of  securing  cyberspace 
requires an increased effort in all stakeholders’ collaborations. This effort 
should  seek—in  continued  collaboration  with  the  private  sector—to 
improve the security of national interoperable networks  
 

•  The private sector, however, designs, invest, builds, owns, operates and 
maintains      most  of  the  critical  information  infrastructures  that  support 
government and private users alike. 
 

•  Therefore  Industry  and  governments  share  the  responsibility  for  the 

	  

security and reliability of the infrastructure and the transactions that take 
place  on 
these 
interdependencies.  
 

it  and  should  work  closely 

to  address 

together 

•  There  are  various  approaches 

the  NCSS 

take 

to  address 

these 

challenges, some of which require changes in law and policy.  

 

•  Thus private-sector engagement is required to help address the limitations of 
law  enforcement  and  national  security.  The  Federal  government  and  the 
private sector have an enduring interest in assuring the security of the digital 
infrastructure. Accordingly, government-industry collaboration is fundamental 
to achieving National Cybersecurity Strategy.  
  
It  is,  therefore,  critically  important  that  government  and  private  sector  work 
together 
in  a  proactive  way.  Successful  government-private  sector 
collaboration requires three important component:  
 
i.  A clear value proposition:  

• 

 

•  NCCC will articulate the mutual benefits to government and private 

sector partners. 
 

iii. 

	  

ii.  Clearly defined roles and responsibilities. 

 

•  NCCC  will  develop  a  framework  for  common  understanding  that 
will  guide  mutual  working  relation  and  define  basis  of  relationship 
between  NCCC  and  private  sector  with  clearly  define  roles  and 
responsibilities. 
 
Trust:  
 

•  This is fundamental and necessary for establishing, developing, and 
relationships  between  government  and 

maintaining  sharing 
industry. 
 

•  NCCC  will  develop,  engender,  nurture  and 

infuse  a  Trust 
Framework for public-private sector cooperation and understanding 
on  critical  issues  of  cybersecurity  assurance  and  monitoring, 
sectorial  CERT,  and  critical  information  infrastructure  protection 
plan. 
 

•  NCCC  will  provide  a  Trust  Framework  that  respect  and  address 
industry  areas  of  concern  in  a  manner  that  will  not  jeopardize  but 

balance intrinsic business interest and National Interest.  

 

10.3    Public-Private Sector Partnership Management Strategy (PPPMS) 

10.3.1 The nature of the proposed PPMF Model involves the following: 

•  A linear build-up structural processes and national coordination through a 

PPP Special Purpose Vehicle created by NCCC for this purpose 

•  The  SPV  drives  and  coordinates  all  the  PPP  buildup  processes  for  the 

coordination of government and industry partnership.  
 

Special	  Purpose	  Vehicle	  
(SPV)Comprising	  Joint	  Govt-­‐	  
Private	  Sector	  National	  Technical	  
Group	  (NTWG)	  

Build-­‐Up	  Processes,	  Cordinating	  
all	  Activities,	  Unifying	  Platform	  
for	  PPP,	  Cordination	  of	  all	  
National	  Stakeholders	  

Commencement	  of	  Operation	  of	  
National	  of	  Cybersecurity	  

Strategy	  

 

Fig 7 The proposed linear build-up process coordination through Special Purpose 

Vehicle (SPV) 

	  
ONSA-­‐Led	  
Govt	  Reps	  

SPV	  
Components	  

Private	  
Sectors	  Reps	  

Muilt-­‐
International	  
Reps	  	  

 

 

	  

•  The ONSA through the NCCC will take the lead by establishing PPP- National 
Technical Working Group (NTWG) composing of representatives from private 
sector,  government  organizations  and  representatives  of 
international 
multistakeholder partners. 
 

•  The  NTWG  should  not  exceed  a  number  needed 

to  be  sufficient 
representatives of all the interests but at the same time capable of conducting 
PPP-MF business. 

•  To assure its continued connection to the interests it is intended to represent, 

provisions could be made for term limits for members. 

 

10.3.2 The Objectives of PPP Management Framework (PPPMF) 
 

To  develop  and  implement  public-private  partnership  action  plan  to 
support  the  review  and  monitoring  of  implementation  cybercrime  and 
cybersecurity legislation. 
 
To  provide  and  nurture  a  sustainable  trusted  platform  for  National 
cooperation, understanding and interactions among all stakeholders, while 
managing  all  the  build-up  processes  that  will  lead  to  the  harmonized 
agreements  on  National  Cybersecurity  among 
the  government, 
lawmakers, and the private sector. 

To  provide  a  national  mechanism  that  will  unify  variety  of  positions, 
equities,  and  knowledge  gaps  to  overcome  differences  and  addresses 
institutional diverse positions. 

To  secure  other  stakeholders 
in 
implementation of National Cybersecurity efforts. 

inclusion 

the  development  and 

To  facilitate  the  development  and  coordination  of  private  sector  groups 
from  different  critical  infrastructure  industries  related  to  Cybersecurity  to 
address common security interests collaboratively with government. 
 
To  create  and  nurture  trusted  forums  to  address  common  Cybersecurity 
challenges, national discourse and dialogue that will enhance cooperation 
and understanding among various groups on National Cybersecurity effort. 

To  institute  fundamental  arrangements  between  government  and  the 
private sector for Cybersecurity incidence and response management. 

i. 

ii. 

 
iii. 

 
iv. 

 
v. 

vi. 

 
vii. 

 

 

	  

10.3.4 Implementation  Vehicle  for  the  Public-Private  Partnership  Management 

Framework 

i.  Creation  of  PPP-National  Technical  Working  Group  (NTWG)  for  the 

Implementation of the PPP-Framework.  
 
The  mandate  of  the  NTWG  will  be  anchored  on  the  implementation  of 
PPPMF objectives with the overall mission of actualizing national adoption 
and operation of National Cybersecurity Strategy within the country. 

ii. 

 

iii.  A selection criteria for the appointment of the Members of NTWG is based 

on the value Impact of their respective inputs, in terms of the following; 

•  Technical contributions 
•  Critical Infrastructural Operators 
•  National Platform & Backbone  
•  Organizational Support: Structure & Coordination  
•  Media 
•  Non-government Organization  
•  Multi-stakeholder Management  
•  Understanding of Regional and Global framework for cooperation  
•  Legal Issues 
•  Public interest 

  

 

10.3.5 The Benefit & Outcome of PPP-MF 

i. 

It  provides  opportunity  for  government  to  effectively  engage  the  core 
stakeholders  in  the  country  while  entrenching  nationally  acceptable 
National Cybersecurity Strategy at the onset.  
 

ii.  Cybersecurity Strategy is a complex set of issues involving legal, socio-
economic,  and  national  security  considerations.  Several  public 
institutions have significant jurisdictional claim on cybersecurity issues.. 
The  PPPMF  will,  therefore,  provide  opportunities  to  address  all  the 
divergent positions of these stakeholders.  

iii.  Cybersecurity strategy has a deep connection with critical information 
infrastructure,  economy  and  security.  Private  sector  provides 
technology innovations, critical resources and technical standards that 
the government needs to drive National Cybersecurity Strategy. While 
government  provides  enabling  mechanisms, 
instruments  and 
authorities to transform industry best practices and standards into the 

 

	  

framework of National Cybersecurity Strategy, thus, PPPMF will assist 
government to address structural weaknesses. 

iv.  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  driven  through  the  public-private 
partnership  of  government  and  private  sector  has  greater  national 
security  implication  and  economy  protection  values,  than  government 
working  alone  or  in  partnership  with  multilateral  and  multinational 
institutions.  

v.  PPPMF  enables  a  trusted  platform  for  strategic  information  sharing 
between government and private sector critical for the overall success 
of National Cybersecurity Strategy.  

vi. 

It provides partnership vehicle for National Executive Council, National 
Assembly  and  private  sector  to  achieve  mutual  understanding  and 
cooperation  on 
legislation  and 
implementation of National Cybersecurity Strategy. 

the  operation  of  Cybersecurity 

 

vii.  PPPMF  will  facilitate  structural  coordination  across  the  public  and 
private  sector,  building  public  confidence  in  National  Cybersecurity 
Strategy.  

 
viii.  Government  depends  on  a  privately  operated  cyber  infrastructure. 
Through  the  PPPMF,  government  engages  with  industry  to  continue 
building the foundation of a trusted partnership. This engagement will 
build value propositions that are understood by both government and 
industry partners for the benefit of National Cybersecurity Strategy.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CHAPTER ELEVEN 

Strategy on National Internet Safety 

11.1 Introduction 

•  The  nation  is  building  various  capabilities  in  computer  security  emergency 
response  and  internet  is  fast  becoming  the  mainstream  for  economy  and 
interaction.  The  government  will  need  to  interface  with  ordinary  citizens 
engaging  online  on  protection  awareness,  safety  consciousness,  learning 
materials, security tools and tips shall be articulated, localized and transmitted 
online to safeguard the most critical asset of the nation, i.e. her people.  
 

•  The Strategy on National Internet Safety is a response to the national need to 
plug  in  the  National  Internet  Safety  capability  gap  within  the  currently 
emerging cybersecurity in the country.  
 

•  The initiative fits into the framework of National Cybersecurity Policy, National 

Security Strategy and National ICT policy. 
 

•  The  strategy  is  a  product  of  intensive  research,  outcome  of  critical  needs 
assessment, recommendations of various fora and wider consultations on the 
criticality of pubic internet safety and online vulnerability in Nigeria.  
 

•  During the Nigeria Internet Governance Forum (NIGF 2013), it was estimated 
that over 95% of Nigerian on the internet are ignorant of personal security and 
safety responsibility online.     
 

•  The  weakest  link  within  a  cybersecurity  chain  of  any  country  is  her  people. 
Therefore, this Strategy provides initiatives and measures that help safeguard 
general  public  internet  users,  provide  materials  and  facilitate  tools  to  help 
safeguard  Nigerian  citizens  against  cyber 
threats  and  unwholesome 
vulnerability.     

 

	  

•  The Strategy is focusing on the development and implementation of National 
framework  and 

the  structural 

(NISI)  under 

Internet  Safety 
coordination of NCCC.  

Initiative 

 
11.2  National Internet Safety Initiative  

•  The  initiative  is  a  multi-disciplinary  Initiative  that  help  safeguard 

Nigerian citizens’ presence on the Internet. 

•  This  is  a  unique  home  grown  government  intervention  vehicle  which 
seeks   to help the nation protect her citizens against her own digital 
vulnerability and online threats, safeguards  the vulnerable groups, and 
re-channel  her  citizens  online  engagement  towards  a  rewarding 
experience  that  impact  the  socio-economic  development  and  healthy 
digital lifestyles in cyberspace.  

 

 

•  The  initiative  is  anchored  on  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  i.e.  the 
strategy is expected to be built through multi-stakeholder engagement.  

• 

It addresses internet safety and online security from the perspective of 
local and global peculiarities.    

•  The  strategy  marshalled  counter-measure  policy  guidelines,  roadmap 
strategy, local ideas, tested tools and materials for the delivery of the 
initiative.  

 Objective  

 

 

      
11.3 

•  The overall objective is to facilitate a unifying Nigeria Internet security 
literacy  programs,  open  ended,  with  workable  guidelines,  and  with 
implementation  strategy 
that  will  engage  Nigerians  online  and 
safeguard Nigerian public Internet users. 
 
11.4  Scope:  

•  The  initiative  scope  is  focused  on  Nigerian  public  internet  users 
covering  the  following  areas  which  can  hamper  National  Security, 
economy growth and local innovations.    
 
i.  Blacklisting Inappropriate contents  
ii.  Online backdoor distributive channels 
iii.  Misuse and abuse of critical internet resources 
iv.  User abuse and exploitative materials 
v.  Digital  vandalism  critical  to  national  economic  image  and  online 

presence 
Internet security and online safety illiteracy 

vi. 
vii.  Non-alliance countermeasures 

	  

 
11.5 
 

viii. 

Local peculiarity & literacy gap   

Initiative 

i.  Establish  a  strong  NISI  presence  under  an  effective  multi-stakeholder 

engagement framework. 
 

ii.  Designate  NISI  counter-measure  advocacy  requires  to  address  online 

iii. 

security and safety awareness and protection of Nigeria Citizens online.  
Initiate a national road shows- public awareness and education campaign 
to promote Citizen Online Safety & Protection in Nigeria. 
 

iv.  Setting up NISI hub under NCCC with capability for collaborating Network 
through which stakeholders can plug-in and interface with tools, materials 
programs, initiatives within the country. 

v.  Build  public  internet  safety  emergency  readiness,  national  advocacy  and 
awareness gateway which will fit into the emerging e-security ecosystem 
thus  complimenting  existing  countermeasure  efforts 
from  various 
government agencies and private sector. 

vi.  Development of monitoring tools and evaluation process to help safeguard 

local internet community and critical presence. 

vii.  Building   an indigenous capability for local internet presence, security and 

safety research and development.  

viii.  Development  of 

IT 

local 

tools,  materials,  contents  and  software 
applications  appropriate  for  ensuring  internet  security  and  safety  of  the 
citizens. 

ix.  Create  local  Internet  Safety  Wall  using  countermeasures  awareness, 

interactions and information sharing. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

	  

x.  Establish response mechanism and measures for public alert system 

 

 Importance of NISI to NCCC 

11.6 
 

•  Today, more than ever, government sees a real urgency to get the message 
out to the community about the emerging threats and abuses of the citizens 
on  the  internet.  It  is  within  the  purview  of  ONSA  through  the  National 
Cybersecurity  Strategy  to  provide  guidance  towards  the  development  of 
home-grown  innovative  ideas,  tools  and  materials  that  will  help  facilitate 
internet safety consciousness and online security learning aids to the citizens. 
 

•  The  initiative  is  an  important  focus  of  NCSS  to  help  design,  develop, 
advocate,  train  and  sustainably  deliver  resources  to  government,  corporate 
and  individual  citizens,  families  and  key  players  to  raise  awareness  on 
National  Internet  safety  to  make  the  online  community  a  safe  place  for 
productive  engagement  for  government,  businesses,  kids,  young,  adult 
people and families. 
 

•  The  initiative  helps  reawaken  the  nation  to  its  statutory  role  within  the 
framework  of  National  Cybersecurity  Policy  towards  safeguarding  Nigerian 
Online  Presence,  developing  and  implementing  local  strategies,  guidelines 
and mobilization of all stakeholders to achieve this cause through enterprise 
and unified platform of National Cybersecurity Coordinating Center. 

 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

	  	  	  	  

	  

