Strategy

Cyber Security Strategy
for Norway

2

Strategy

Cyber Security Strategy
for Norway

4

Contents

Foreword                                                                                                                    6
Introduction                                                                                                                                            8
1 

1.1 Target Audience                                                                                                                            10

1.2 Background                                                                                                                                       11
2  Security Challenges and Trends                                                                                         12
3 

 Roles and Responsibilities of Ministries for  
Cyber Security                                                                                                                                    15
4  Overarching Goals and Strategic Priorities                                                    17

4.1 A More Comprehensive and Systematic Approach to  
Cyber Security                                                                                            

4.2 Improve ICT Infrastructure                                                                   

17

18

4.3 A Common Approach to  
Information Security in Public Administration                                                               20

4.4 Safeguard Society’s Ability to Detect,  
Alert and Handle Serious ICT Incidents                                                                               21

4.5 Safeguard Society’s Ability to Prevent,  
Detect and Investigate cyber Crime                                                                                       22

4.6 Continuous Efforts to Raise Awareness and Competence                          23

4.7 High Quality National Research and Development  
within Information and Communications Security                                   

24

5  Responsibility for Implementation                                                    
6  Economic and Administrative Implications                                  
27
Appendix A: Terms and Expressions                                                                                      28
Appendix B: Selected National Contacts for  
Information Security                                                                                      

26

30

5

Foreword 

Information and communications technology (ICT)
has caused major changes to society over the past 
decades. There have been significant improvements 
for individuals, businesses and society as a whole. 
ICT systems have become increasingly integrated 
into all aspects of society. People have access to better 
and more diverse services. Technology is now the 
foundation for all interaction across sectors, making 
ICT a strategic security challenge. The infrastructure 
for these services has become critical for society to 
function normally.

An increased use of ICT has made society more 
vulnerable. Threats to ICT systems are on the rise, and 
attacks are increasingly more sophisticated. Therefore, 
good preventive information security is increasingly 
important for national security. By information 
security, we mean that information is protected against 
unauthorised access, that it is available when needed, 
and that it is protected against unauthorised changes. 

Our networks and systems must be secure and stable at 
all times. Industry, government and the general public 
must all feel confident that the digital services our 
society relies on work. By publishing a national cyber 
security strategy, the Government is setting the direction 
and priorities on which public authorities should base 
their information security efforts. The strategy describes 
current and future security challenges and points to 
where we should focus our efforts in order to meet 
those challenges.

Information security requires transboundary initiatives 
and encompasses technology, policies, attitudes and 
culture. This strategy has been developed jointly 
by the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Justice 
and Public Security, the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications and the Ministry of Government 
Administration, Reform and Church Affairs. An 
advisory group with representatives from the public 
and private sectors has assisted the ministries in 
formulating this strategy.

To achieve a comprehensive approach to current chal-
lenges, the National Security Authority’s 2009 Cyber 
Security Strategy and related hearings, were used as 
important background material for this cyber security 
strategy and accompanying action plan.

ICT is a very dynamic field, and security challenges 
are constantly changing. Therefore, this cyber security 
strategy will be revised accordingly.

17 December 2012

Minister of Justice and Public Security, Grete Faremo 
Minister of Defence, Anne-Grete Strøm-Erichsen
Minister of Transport and Communications, 
Marit Arnstad
Minister of Government Administration, Reform and 
Church Affairs, Rigmor Aasrud

P
h
o
t
o

:
 

 

l

O
a
v
H
e
g
g
ø

P
h
o
t
o

 

:
 
J
o
h
n
n
y
S
y
v
e
r
s
e
n

P
h
o
t
o

:
 

T
o
r
g
e
i
r
 
H
a
u
g
a
a
r
d

P
h
o
t
o

:
 

T
o
r
g
e
i
r
 
H
a
u
g
a
a
r
d

6

7

A   Introduction

In recent decades, developments in information 
and communications technology (ICT) have caused 
significant changes to society. The Internet has 
brought great social gains to Norway. These gains 
have been significant for individuals, businesses and 
society as a whole. ICT systems are increasingly 
important, integrated into all aspects of society, and 
critical for society to function normally. Technology is 
an integral part of our work and everyday life. In many 
cases, the population is dependent on ICT in order to 
receive a service. ICT has become the foundation for 
all interaction across sectors, and can be considered a 
fundamental social infrastructure.

The increased dissemination of ICT is a natural 
consequence of these social gains. However, this has 
also made ICT a strategic security challenge. 

Society will continue to develop through more 
extensive use of ICT. This means that we need to 
protect information and ensure that our networks and 
systems are secure and stable at all times. The general 
public, industry and public administration must all feel 
confident that digital services are reliable.

The object of ICT security efforts is that Norway 
should be characterised by:

•  All stakeholders are familiar with risks and secure 

their systems and networks accordingly.

•  Public authorities work actively to ensure that 
national ICT infrastructure is secure, through 
proper organisation, resource allocation, good 
general conditions, and effective measures.

•  Private and public organisations integrate security 

and robustness into their information infrastructure 
to protect their operations and safeguard their 
customers and users.

•  Individuals take the initiative to protect their 

identity, their privacy and their economic assets 
online.

8

9

1.1 Target Audience 
Public authorities play a central role in facilitating 
and influencing how ICT is developed and applied 
in society. This is also true for information security. 
This is achieved in part through the formulation and 
enforcement of laws and regulations, inspections, 
sharing information, and through advice and 
guidance. This national Cyber Security Strategy, 
with the accompanying action plan, complements 
and points the direction for further development of 
existing regulations and measures. The strategy is an 
expression of the Government’s overarching priorities 
in this area.

The Government has the primary responsibility for 
public information security efforts. To fulfil this 
responsibility, authorities must work closely with all 
relevant stakeholders in the public and private sectors. 
There are also a number of public bodies with ICT 
security as a particular responsibility, see Appendix B.

The ministries are responsible for ensuring that all 
relevant stakeholders in the sectors are included in 
the implementation of measures within the strategy’s 
strategic priorities.

Leaders of counties, municipalities and businesses 
have a responsibility, in line with their different roles, 
to follow up information security efforts in their 
own sector or business. They must, on their own 
responsibility and initiative, implement measures 
necessary to support the strategy’s strategic priorities.

Beyond this everyone has a personal responsibility to 
help safeguard and strengthen information security in 
society. Well-functioning everyday security is a basic 
prerequisite for being able to handle more serious 
incidents effectively.

Information security is about how to maintain the 
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information 

Integrity – Ensuring that information and information 
processing is comprehensive, accurate and valid, and 
the result of authorised and controlled activities 

Confidentiality – Ensuring that information is not 
disclosed to unauthorised persons, and that only 
authorised persons have access 

Availability – Ensuring that a service meets specific 
stability requirements, so that the information is 
available when needed 

Integrity, confidentiality, and availability are all 
important factors when it comes to safeguarding ICT 
security in society  Individual organisations will weigh 
these factors differently depending on the scope of 
their business and the risks they face 

Information security is an ongoing process. What was 
considered good security yesterday is not necessarily 
good enough today or tomorrow. To realise the full 
benefits of information security measures, we must 
maintain and update technical knowledge and be 
security conscious. New security challenges emerge as 
we see developments in technology, the introduction 
of new products and changing usage patterns.

The Government’s primary objective in publishing 
a national strategy for information security is to set 
the direction and priorities that will form the basis 
for the government’s information security efforts in 
the coming years. For each strategic priority, there is 
a description of objectives for the initiative, a status 
update and a list of specific areas of focus. How the 
Government aims to follow up specific aspects of this 
strategy will be described in a detailed action plan, 
which will be published separately and revised as 
necessary. In addition, follow-up of the strategy will aid 
decision makers in the public and private sectors in 
particular, and the population in general, in increasing 
their awareness of the security challenges we face.

10

1.2 Background
The challenges related to information security are 
not new. They have been discussed and dealt with by 
changing governments for decades and include the 
administration of personal information, as well as the 
protection of state secrets and critical infrastructure. 
A lot of work has been done both in the public and 
private sectors to follow up various reports and 
recommendations.

The Vulnerability Committee’s report, NOU 2000:24 
The Vulnerable Society, determined that ICT systems 
had become one of the pillars of society, and that 
society had become more vulnerable to their failure. 
In this context, the committee emphasised conveying 
the significance of ICT vulnerability as part of society’s 
overall vulnerability. The committee suggested a 
number of measures to mitigate security challenges, 
including the development of a national strategy to 
reduce ICT vulnerability.

The Vulnerability Committee’s work laid important 
groundwork for St.meld. no. 17 (2001–2002) Security 
for Society. The Road to a Less Vulnerable Society. This 
white paper included an overview of a number of 
recommended measures to reduce ICT vulnerability.

In 2004, the Infrastructure Committee initiated a study 
of the need for securing critical national infrastructure. 

The committee’s recommendations were presented 
in NOU 2006:6 When Security is Crucial. The 
Infrastructure Committee’s recommendations were 
reviewed and followed up in St.meld. no. 22 (2007–
2008) Security for Society. This white paper supports 
and describes the national CERT function (Computer 
Emergency Response Team).

St.meld. no. 29 (2011–2012) Security for Society 
determined that new developments, including the 
Internet, more mobile services, new service platforms 
and a greater use of offshoring, have made ICT a 
strategic security challenge. These developments place 
high demands on awareness and competence, and 
reinforce the need for cooperation and coordination 
across different sectors of society.

The first national strategy for information security was 
issued in June 2003 and was a joint publication by the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Defence 
and the Ministry of Justice and Public Security. During 
the strategy period of 2003–2006, several concrete 
measures and activities were executed. Protection 
of critical ICT infrastructure was prioritised. During 
that period, organisation of security efforts was also 
improved. This strategy was followed by the release of 
National Guidelines for Improving Information Security 
2007–2010.

11

B   Security Challenges and Trends  

ICT security challenges encompass all levels of 
society, from protecting individual mobile phones to 
safeguarding essential systems for critical societal 
functions.

Some of the challenges and trends that characterise 
the current situation include:

number of security and emergency challenges. For 
example, local operating conditions and other national 
regulations and practices may differ from Norwegian 
ICT security requirements or regulations for privacy 
and personal information. The lack of transparancy 
also makes it difficult for Norwegian authorities to 
carry out inspections and control activities

Internet and mobile devices. The increased use of the 
Internet and new computer systems, industrial control 
systems, mobile phones, memory sticks, social media, 
and tablets has made us more efficient, but also more 
vulnerable.

Downtime is increasingly critical. Society has become 
more vulnerable to even short interruptions to 
systems and networks, increasing the importance of 
having a secure and robust ICT infrastructure.

New service platforms and lack of clarity. The increased 
use of new types of service platforms, such as online 
and cloud computing means less transparent solutions 
and can make it more difficult for users to assess risk 
and vulnerability, and document their own security.

Increased use of offshoring. Norwegian companies are 
increasingly outsourcing operational and systems 
development tasks to suppliers located in other 
countries and on other continents, resulting in a 

A market for crime. The Internet and mobile devices 
have led to a greater risk of being exposed to cyber 
crime. Today, there is an underground market, 
easily accessible over the Internet, for buying and 
selling information and trading tools for cyber crime. 
Criminals are exploiting this opportunity more and 
more.

Espionage and sabotage – a growing threat. The trend 
toward targeted and professional hacking of critical 
ICT systems is increasing. Targeted espionage attacks 
against vital national security interests now constitute a 
significant challenge. Civil services, military units and 
private companies are all vulnerable to espionage and 
sabotage. Many countries are developing capabilies for 
espionage and warfare against critical infrastructure. 
We must assume that sophisticated sabotage and 
attacks will be directed against critical information 
resources, including the computer systems that 
control industrial processes and critical infrastructure.
Major requirements for awareness and competence. 

12

13

New services and devices place great demands on the 
competence of ordinary users. It is difficult for owners 
of critical infrastructure to have sufficient awareness 
and knowledge of vulnerabilities, interdependencies 
between infrastructure components, and what 
individual businesses must do to protect their 
infrastructure.

Increased complexity. Most companies currently have 
a system portfolio that is far more complex than just 
a few years ago. ICT is now part of almost all new 
products and systems, and it is taken for granted that 
they will interact seamlessly with other systems and 
across organisations and sectors. It is a challenge to 
keep track of all the interdependencies and potential 
vulnerabilities. The increasing complexity of systems 
and networks has also made it more difficult for 
procurers of ICT systems to set clear and precise 
security requirements.

Disloyal employees. Internal vandalism, theft or 
misuse of the organisation’s ICT resources by its own 
employees can be difficult to detect. This is partly 
because many businesses have bad or poor operating 
and administrative procedures, or that management 
is not entirely aware of what system privileges their 
employees actually have. Internal attacks against a 
computer network can also be harder to detect than 
external attacks.

Privacy and identity abuse. Personal privacy is also 
threatened by new methods of communication and 
ways to use information systems and the Internet. 
Identity abuse is a growing challenge for individuals, 
businesses and public authorities.

International attention. Information security is an area 
that many countries and international organisations 
emphasise as increasingly important for economic 
growth, societal security and national and international 
security policies. Many countries have developed their 
own cyber security strategies and guidelines. Each 
country’s reciprocal commitment to the community 
and to political alliances is a significant focus in this 
context.

Information security weaknesses. The Office of the 
Auditor General has revealed major weaknesses in 
cyber security in public administration in Document 
1 (2010–2011). In the Report on Security 2011, The 
Norwegian National Security Authority asserts 
that crucial national ICT systems in many cases 
are insufficiently protected, and that threats to the 
organisations are on the rise.

The Computer Crime Study of 2012 indicates that the 
gap between threats and security measures taken by 
both public an private organisations is increasing in 
parallel with an increase in their dependency on ICT. 

Security challenges and trends are described in more 
detail in the Government’s information security action 
plan. 

14

C   Roles and Responsibilities 

of Ministries for Information 
Security

Company Responsibility
ICT security is primarily a responsibility at the 
company level. This follows the Principle of 
Responsibility, in that whoever is responsible for 
an organisation under normal conditions is also 
responsible in a crisis situation. In practice, this 
means that responsibility lies with the owner of the 
organisation, be it in the private or public sector.

More comprehensive national ICT security measures 
are planned and implemented in a close collaboration 
between the authorities and the individual business. 
The state of national security is the sum of all security 
initiatives taking place in businesses, in each sector 
and at a national level. A good culture of security in the 
organisation will reduce the chance that employees are 
the weakest link in our security barriers.

Responsibilities of Sectoral Ministries
The primary responsibility for safeguarding security 
in each sector’s ICT infrastructure, and for ensuring 
adequate preventive measures for information security, 
lies with the sectoral ministries. This means that each 
sectoral ministry has a responsibility to:

•  Identifying critical infrastructure in their sector, and 

ensuring adequate security 

•  Assess, determine and implement preventive 

measures in their sector 

•  Plan emergency measures with respect to various 

crisis situations 

•  Plan for and, if necessary, initiate crisis 

management in their sector

•  Supervise and monitor information security efforts 

in their suborinate departments.

In practice, most of these tasks will be executed by the 
departments or their subordinate departments because 
they are the ones most familiar with their dependence 
on key information systems and infrastructure.

Ministries with Special Responsibility for ICT 
Security
Based on the above allocation of responsibility, most of 
the ICT security work is done in the individual sectors, 
and primarily in the individual organisations. Beyond 
this, some ministries have a specific role related to ICT 
security.

The Ministry of Justice and Public Security is 
responsible for coordinating civilian security. Besides 
initiating, developing and implementing measures 
through its own channels, the ministry is a driver 
and coordinator for other sectorial authorities. The 
Ministry of Justice and Public Security shall assume 
and develop responsibility for society’s information 
security. 

The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform 
and Church Affairs is responsible for coordinating 
the Government’s ICT policy. The ministry is also 
responsible for promoting a stronger and more 
comprehensive approach to information security in 
public administration.

The Ministry of Defence is responsible for cyber 
security in the military sector. The Ministry of 
Defence has ministerial responsibility for the National 
Security Authority, and administrative responsibility 
for the Security Act.

The Ministry of Defence is responsible for cyber security in 
the military sector. The Ministry of Defence has ministerial 
responsibility for the National Security Authority, and 
administrative responsibility for the Security Act.

15

The Ministry of Transport and Communications 
is responsible for ICT security in electronic 
communications networks and services, including 
Internet. The electronic communications sector is 
regulated by the Electronic Communications Act and 
its regulations. The Post and Telecommunications 
Authority, a government agency under the 
Ministry of Transport and Communications, has a 
special responsibility for security and emergency 
preparedness for electronic communication networks 
and services.

Although information security is primarily an 
organisation and sector responsibility, our increasingly 
networked society demands a comprehensive 
approach. ICT infrastructure and security challenges 
cut across established businesses and sectors. 
Effective protection of ICT infrastructure will require 
good coordination between public authorities, 
business and individual users.

16

D   Overarching Goals and  

Strategic Priorities

This strategy mainly addresses the challenges that we 
as a society must work together to solve. Based on the 
security challenges and trends discussed in Chapter 
2 of this strategy, the Government has identified four 
overarching goals for information security:

1   Better coordination and common situational 

understanding

2   Robust and secure ICT infrastructure for everyone
3   Good ability to handle adverse ICT events
4   High level of competence and security awareness

None of these overarching information security goals 
is more important than another, and are mutually 
dependent success factors. 

These overarching goals will be operationalised 
through seven strategic priorities:

•  Ensure a more comprehensive and systematic 

approach to information security

•  Improve ICT infrastructure
•  Ensure a common approach to information security 

in public administration

•  Safeguard society’s ability to detect, alert and handle 

serious ICT incidents

•  Safeguard society’s ability to prevent, detect and 

investigate cyber crime

•  Continuous efforts to raise awareness and 

competence

•  High quality national research and development in 

the field of information security

This strategy also contains a brief status report and 
indicates specific areas that should be emphasised 
in the future. Processes for further clarification of 
strategic priorities and the implementation of specific 
measures are described in chapter 5 of this strategy. 
How the Government will follow up this strategy 

through specific measures will be described in an 
action plan, which will be published separately and 
revised as necessary.

4.1 A More Comprehensive and Systematic 
Approach to Information Security 

Private and public organisations shall safeguard 
information security comprehensively and systematically  
This entails a conscious use of information security 
management systems (ISMS) as a part of corporate 
governance  Recognised standards must be applied  
Requirements must be tailored to the risk facing the 
individual organisation  The nature, size and social 
significance of the organisation will dictate its level of 
ambition and allocation of resources to security efforts  

Several regulations require organisations to have 
an information security management system, e.g. 
Electronic Public Administration Regulations, which 
apply to the entire public sector. Regulations relating 
to the Personal Data Act apply to both the private and 
public sector. In addition, the Security Act applies to 
the entire public sector and parts of the private sector. 
Several regulations state that security efforts must 
be tailored to the risk. Thus, it is crucial that public 
administration conduct good risk and vulnerability 
assessments. The Data Protection Authority, National 
Security Authority and Office of the Auditor General 
have revealed weaknesses in risk assessments 
conducted by public administration. They point out 
that existing security measures are often unsystematic, 
fragmented, and that information security efforts 
neither have enough support from management nor 
are they well integrated into business management. 
An increased use of international security standards 
in public administration could contribute to more 
comprehensive and systematic security efforts. 

17

Increased use of certified ICT products and systems 
may also help boost confidence in and improve the 
security of public sector systems and services in 
Norway.

The following must be an area of focus:
•  All departments and state-owned companies must 
have an information security management system. 
This management system must be based on 
recognised security standards. The system’s scope 
and level of detail must be tailored to the scope and 
nature of each organisation and the risk it faces. 
Local governments and private companies should 
be encouraged to establish similar management 
systems.

4.2 Improving ICT Infrastructure

ICT infrastructure that supports critical societal 
functions must be robust and reliable so that adverse 
events and actions are avoided to the greatest 
extent possible  The power grid and electronic 
communications networks need particular attention  
One primary objective is to require all stakeholders 
in the public and private sector to adhere to clear 
requirements and provide them with appropriate 
advice and guidance to enable them to procure and 
administrate electronic communications services with 
an adequate level of security based on the risk facing 
the individual organisation  The same requirements 
should apply to owners of businesses with important 
societal functions 

Technological developments entail that ICT 
infrastructure is constantly changing. Parts of it will 
be renewed continuously. The traditional telephone 
network for voice communications is being replaced 
by electronic communications networks used for 
all kinds of services. It is therefore difficult to label 
certain parts of ICT infrastructure as critical and other 
parts as less critical for national security.

It is important to emphasise that there are many 
electronic communications networks. Users who 
are dependent on electronic communication must 
be able to use alternative communication solutions 

18

if necessary. Users must have sufficient expertise to 
choose appropriate solutions and ensure that they 
receive the level of quality and reliability that they 
require from their service providers. This means that 
organisations need to have good user guidelines.

To ensure increased redundancy and a more robust 
infrastructure, security must be weighed against 
environmental and economic considerations when 
planning and developing infrastructure. Environmental 
and economic considerations are often important 
when establishing an infrastructure, for example, 
several companies using the same route for installing 
cables, many companies sharing a communications 
mast, and the co-location of technical equipment for 
several companies. Experience shows that this can be 
at the expense of security. On the other hand, security 
measures for one type of infrastructure can help 
safeguard other infrastructure along the same route. 
For example, securing a road against landslides can 
also help protect cables that run along the same route.

The implementation of changes to the the Security 
Act’s asset security regulations is an important tool 
for identifying critical societal functions and revealing 
mutual dependencies. This will strengthen national 
ICT and societal security.

Selected areas of focus include:
•  Sectoral authorities must set requirements for the 

operational continuity of systems that are crucial for 
society. 

•  Security measures for physical infrastructure must 

be coordinated across sectors so that different 
measures work together and do not conflict with 
each other. 

•  There should be regular drills for situations where 

infrastructure has partially reduced capacity or drops 
out. 

•  Sectoral ministries must verify that the sector’s 

organisations identify and propose ICT functions 
and systems that can be classified as critical societal 
functions, in line with asset security regulations.

19

4.3 A Common Approach to Information 
Security in Public Administration

Digital communication should be the norm for 
communication with and within public administration  
Our citizens, industry and public administration 
must be confident that electronic services in the 
public sector, as well as sectoral systems and online 
services, are secure and reliable  Therefore, we must 
establish comprehensive national solutions for secure 
communication and access to services  These kinds of 
national solutions include ID-porten and government 
issued electronic IDs (eID) at a high level  In addition 
to security benefits, a centralised approach will also 
entail financial savings in the form of more unified 
development and operation of these systems  The 
public authorities must clarify which general legal, 
organisational and technical security requirements 
apply to ministries and their subordinate organisations, 
key infrastructure owners and owners of classified ICT 
systems for use in public administration  A common 
approach to information security will also put more 
pressure on arriving at a common way to express 
risk, potential harm, and security level for public 
administration  Risk and vulnerability analyses should 
form the basis for all implementation of ICT security in 
public administration 

There are many regulations for information 
security, and various departments have regulatory 
responsibilities. Currently, there is not one set of 
common minimum standards for the public sector 
with regard to security procedures and technical 
measures for individual organisations, or for owners of 
critical infrastructure. This may contribute to business 
systems not being compatible, or that organisations 
do not have confidence in each other’s security 
levels, such that they cannot communicate and share 
information securely. Since there is such a large 
number of networks serving the public sector, it is 
difficult to establish secure, comprehensive solutions 
for the flow of information between ministries and 
between ministries and directorates. In addition, such 
fragmented solutions do not facilitate a satisfactory 
level of security. 

Ministries and directorates need to communicate 
highly classified information with each other, 
both in daily work and in various crisis situations. 
Practical experience has revealed challenges related 
to the ability of ministries to both administrate and 
communicate such information. Evaluations of various 
drills also indicate that there is a lack of joint systems 
in public administration for communicating sensitive, 
confidential and classified information.

Several ministries and their departments have called 
for a common set of requirements for public sector 
security. There have been attempts to coordinate 
regulations, but they have proven difficult. Regulation 
administrators and other regulatory bodies, such as 
the Agency for Public Management and eGovernment 
(Difi), has done much work in this area, but the efforts 
have not been sufficiently coordinated. There is also 
a need to secure electronic communication between 
government agencies on the one hand and citizens and 
businesses on the other hand.

Selected areas of focus include:
•  Public authorities must clarify the general legal, 

organisational and technical security requirements 
that apply to ministries and their departments, key 
infrastructure owners and owners of classified ICT 
systems in the public sector. These requirements 
must be the basis of all exchange of information 
in public administration. They should also include 
general requirements for suppliers of ICT products 
and systems to the public sector.

•  Public organisations should be able to securely send 
and receive documents electronically, such that the 
confidentiality, integrity and authenticity can be 
guaranteed.

•  The need for specific systems and solutions to 

secure existing and new sectoral systems in public 
administration must be reduced to a minimum.

•  Ministries must have ICT solutions that make 
it possible to store, manage and communicate 
sensitive and classified electronic information 
across ministries. These solutions must be 
compatible with corresponding systems in the 
defence sector.

20

4.4 Safeguard Society’s Ability to Detect, 
Alert and Handle Serious ICT Incidents

Norway must be in a constant state of proactive 
operational preparedness in order to prevent, detect 
and coordinate reactions to serious ICT incidents  In 
this context, relevant authorities and organisations 
must work in close collaboration, with special emphasis 
on working with those parts of the private sector that 
own or operate infrastructure  This collaboration must 
address both intentional and unintentional events, 
such as technical or human error, accidents, or natural 
disasters  

In this context, serious ICT incidents include: targeted 
attacks against critical ICT infrastructure and sensitive, 
confidential and classified information. Together, 
the large volume of minor incidents can also have 
serious consequences (such as leaks of sensitive 
business information or loss of confidential or sensitive 
information). Currently, not all organisations know 
what to do if they have a major ICT incident, or do not 
have the necessary routines and detection mechanisms 
in place to prevent, detect, alert and manage ICT 
incidents. There is great variation in terms of what 
incidents are recorded and reported to national 
authorities. In many cases, measures that make 
ICT systems more robust and reduce the impact of 
incidents, regardless of the cause, will be common for 
all organisations. It would be economically beneficial if 
such measures were coordinated. Organisations that 
are subject to the Security Act, are required to report to 
the National Security Authority if they detect incidents 
that threaten security, but this is not enough to get a 
comprehensive overview of the situation.

in close contact with NorCERT and businesses in 
their sector, or are in the process of doing so (for 
example, the defence, health and welfare, and justice 
sectors). Their sectoral expertise improves our overall 
ability to handle incidents, and also ensures that the 
responsibility of sectoral authorities is safeguarded. 
More and more individual organisations are 
establishing internal response teams or outsourcing 
such services. NorCERT is jointly financed by public 
and private funds. 

For incidents affecting electronic communications, 
such as software errors, loss or interruption of 
Internet services, mobile phone services or other 
electronic communication services, there are routines 
in place for network providers to notify the Post and 
Telecommunications Authority.

Selected areas of focus include:
•  There must be ICT alert teams with the basic 

capacity to coordinate and manage ICT incidents for 
all sectors (such as a sectoral CSIRT), and for the 
most important organisations that support critical 
societal functions. These alert teams should be 
structured such that they take into consideration 
the use, architecture and governance of ICT 
infrastructure in the sector.

•  The national CERT function (NorCERT) must 
actively collect and analyse information related 
to serious ICT incidents. NorCERT shall have 
the national responsibility for coordinating the 
management of such incidents and provide 
relevant and timely information and guidance to 
sectoral response teams and response teams in 
organisations that manage ICT infrastructure that is 
critical or important for societal functions.

The Norwegian Computer Emergency Response 
Team (NorCERT) in the National Security Authority, 
with the help of the Early Warning System for Digital 
Infrastructure (VDI) and a national collaboration, have 
the ability to prevent, detect and analyse data related 
to serious incidents on the Internet. NorCERT works 
closely with other countries and similar services in 
international organisations. NorCERT also participates 
in a Nordic CERT collaboration. Some key sectors 
of society have established sectoral response teams 

•  Cooperation with the private sector must be 

expanded and improved. NorCERT must analyse 
and communicate relevant risk information in an 
appropriate and responsible manner to those who 
are responsible for taking action, whether it be 
companies, sectoral authorities, the police, other 
public authorities or at the political level.

•  Preparedness for dealing with malicious incidents 

(crime, espionage, sabotage, and terrorism) 

21

should be coordinated at all levels, with adequate 
preparedness for handling random events caused 
by failures, accidents, the weather, and natural 
disasters. 

•  Notification and management procedures for faults, 
failures and loss of electronic communication must 
be improved. The Post and Telecommunications 
Authority and NorCERT must establish procedures 
for the prompt and effective exchange of 
information about adverse events.

•  Companies and sectors must plan and conduct 

drills designed to improve their ability to manage 
incidents. Furthermore, collaboration across sectors 
and international boundaries must also be drilled.

4.5 Safeguard society’s ability to prevent, 
detect and investigate cyber crime

Cyber criminals should not be able to plan or execute 
crimes without a significant risk of being detected 
and prosecuted  Society’s ability to prevent, detect 
and investigate cyber crime must be prioritised  All 
stakeholders should, on their own initiative, implement 
crime prevention measures in their own organisations, 
and seek to minimise losses or damage as a result 
of cyber crime  Public authorities shall achieve this 
through increased expertise, and improving specialist 
expertise and the skills of police generalists  The police 
must make this a priority and increase their capacity 
to give them a greater ability to prevent, detect and 
investigate cyber crime  Public authorities will continue 
to increase their capacity in this field in order to detect 
cyber crime that directly or indirectly may have an 
impact on national security or vital national interests 

Cyber crime includes crime aimed at computer 
systems and networks, and crime in which key 
elements of the chain of events are committed using 
computers or computer networks. There is no clear 
division between the two. Hackers often have a goal 
of gaining access to information that could be used 
to commit traditional crimes at a later time. In recent 
years, cyber crime has evolved from “troublesome 

pranks” to serious organised crime. Criminals are 
also increasingly using new technology to commit 
traditional crimes.

Some crimes may have consequences that may 
require infrastructure providers, sectoral authorities 
or companies themselves to implement crisis 
management (e.g. with assistance from NorCERT or 
sectoral CSIRT). 

There is a need for information retrieval over the 
Internet and securing electronic leads during a crisis. 
The police must also investigate what (and who) 
caused the criminal offense that triggered the crisis.

Criminals purchase tools for conducting various crimes 
over the Internet, such as software that can take control 
of other computers. Threat assessments and experience 
indicate that organised crime in particular employs the 
most modern computer tools to hide their activity from 
the police and impede investigations. All trend reports 
point to an expected increase in cyber crime as a result 
of technological developments in general and the 
increase in mobile devices such as mobile phones and 
computers in particular.

Police are largely dependent on tips or complaints from 
the public to detect cyber crime. It is a challenge that 
for certain types of cyber crime there is a gap between 
public perception of what is right and wrong and the 
relevant regulations. Copyright infringement and peer-
to-peer file sharing is one example of this challenge.

The Norwegian Business Security Council’s cyber 
crime survey for 2012 indicates that the gap between 
threats and security measures taken by both public 
and private organisations is increasing. At the same 
time, there is an increase in their dependency on ICT. 
Norwegian companies, especially at the executive 
level, lack knowledge about information security and 
do not have an overview of threats and incidents. In 
many cases, companies will not be aware that their 
server/network identity has been compromised. In 
addition, companies experience that the police don’t 
have the capacity to prioritise cyber crime other than 
in very serious cases.

22

Prevention, detection, investigation and legal 
prosecution of cyber crime is challenging. This work 
is often time consuming and requires specialised 
expertise and tools. In addition, there are often 
considerable challenges in identifying the criminal/
source. There are currently few police units with the 
necessary expertise for this type of investigation in 
Norway, as evidenced by the relatively low number 
of convictions related to cyber crime. The danger is 
that applicable legislation could lose its general and 
individual preventive effect, since the chances of being 
convicted are perceived as small.

Selected areas of focus include:
•  All stakeholders must take initiative to help prevent 
and mitigate losses or damage resulting from cyber 
crime and identity theft and abuse. 

•  The police must have sufficient expertise and 
capacity to detect, identify and deal with cyber 
crime. 

•  Police must be present on the Internet, both openly 

and covertly, in order to prevent, avert and, when 
necessary, investigate and try to bring this type of 
crime to justice. 

•  There must be clear procedures for collaboration 
and sharing knowledge both within the police, and 
between the police, government agencies and key 
security environments.

4.6 Continuous Efforts to Raise Awareness 
and Competence

Our citizens, staff and executives in Norwegian 
companies must be security conscious and increase 
their information security skills  Everyone should have 
access to information about security challenges and 
countermeasures  Everyone should understand that 
measures must be taken  Companies must have the 
necessary procurement expertise for purchasing new 
ICT tools and services, employing external consultants 
or outsourcing services  CIO’s must have adequate 
knowledge of ICT security, vulnerabilities and the need 
for redundancy in conjunction with the acquisition and 
operation of ICT systems  All children and young people 
should have basic information security skills 

Security incidents happen daily. In some cases, 
they have significant consequences for individuals 
or for society as a whole. Established activities 
organised by the Centre for Information Security 
(NorSIS), the Business Security Council, the 
Norwegian Data Protection Authority, the Post 
and Telecommunications Authority and the Media 
Authority an increasing need for awareness and 
education. Data can be lost, abused and manipulated 
without it being the result of a deliberate attack. There 
has also been an increase in targeted attacks, and 
attackers increasingly exploit end-users in order to 
achieve their ends. This suggests that the focus on 
education, skills and awareness must increase.

Authorities responsible for security and emergency 
preparedness are responsible for collecting and 
communicating information about threats on national 
and macro level. There are also many organisations in 
the public and private sectors striving to improve the 
general public’s security skills. These organisations 
collaborate on various levels, working with various 
segments of the population. This work could be 
improved with an increased coordination of activities. 
The goal of this coordination is to give everyone 
access to the same information about threats and 
measures for reducing the likelihood of attacks being 
successful.

23

Selected areas of focus include:
•  Information security research must maintain a 
high international level, and be quick to snap 
up changes in technology, infrastructure, and 
methods. Allocation of funding should be based on 
international cooperation and close collaboration 
between academia, infrastructure owners, relevant 
user groups, and the authorities. ICT security 
should also be integrated with other relevant 
research programmes. Information security should 
be a priority field in the Research Council of 
Norway’s portfolio.

•  All stakeholders should strive to facilitate productive 
interaction between both basic and applied research 
groups, and leading ICT companies and academic 
environments across sectors. The public and private 
sectors should facilitate opportunities for students 
of information security at the master’s level or 
higher to work with current relevant security issues 
within a sector, or a single business, by proposing 
topics with concrete applications for master’s and 
doctoral theses in information security.

•  Public authorities should employ R & D groups 

actively in its role as customer of various products, 
development projects and services. Public 
authorities should facilitate information sharing 
with the research community.

•  Norwegian cyber security researchers and affected 

businesses in the public and private sector should 
be encouraged to participate actively in projects 
within the various EU research programmes 
and other international research programmes of 
national interest.

Selected areas of focus include:
•  Public authorities and business associations should 
have joint or coordinated programmes for building 
awareness, training and developing a culture of 
cyber security. Government participation in relevant 
networks will ensure good exchange of information 
both nationally and internationally. 

•  All owners and suppliers of components for critical 
ICT infrastructure in the public and private sector 
should be invited to share information in public 
forums. 

•  Public authorities should survey the level of 

competence of the general population and 
businesses. The effect of initiatives must be 
measured to determine their effectiveness or if 
efforts can be improved.

4.7 High quality national cyber security 
research and development

Norwegian researchers should be at the forefront of 
numerous aspects of information and communication 
security, such as robustness and reliability, risk 
management, encryption technology, distributed 
systems and the law  This should be in close 
collaboration with universities and colleges, with 
industry and other user groups and the Research 
Council of Norway  Norwegian participation in 
international forums should be encouraged 

Research related to information and communication 
security is being conducted at a number of institutions 
in Norway. ICT security is also a key priority in 
the Research Council of Norway’s large-scale ICT 
programme – VERDIKT (Core Competence and Value 
Creation in ICT) – which started in 2005 and will run 
throught 2014.

ICT security is also a priority in EU research 
programmes (including the Seventh Framework 
Programme for Research and Technological 
Development and Horizon 2020). The EU’s research 
and innovation budget will trigger coordinated efforts 
by member states and countries participating through 
separate agreements, including Norway.

24

25

E   Responsibility for 

Implementation

Although information security is first and foremost 
a company responsibility, a successful follow-up 
of this strategy requires effective collaboration 
between private sector stakeholders, central and local 
authorities, and individual users. ICT development 
is on a global level and extensive international 
collaboration on information security is an essential 
prerequisite for the success of information security 
efforts. At the same time, we must also address purely 
national interests in this area.

Each sectoral ministry must – in line with the Principle 
of Responsibility – ensure that the strategy’s priorities 
are followed up in their sector. This follow-up must 
be in accordance with a nationally adopted action 
plan. In this regard, ministries must work closely with 
subordinate organisations and sector stakeholders so 
that planned security measures are coordinated with 
other ministries as necessary. Each ministry should 
actively involve stakeholders in the private sector as 
they develop initiatives for the action plan. Ministries 
must establish whether measures initiated in their 
sector contribute to achieving the goals formulated as 
strategic priorities.

The Ministry of Justice and Public Security will be 
primarily responsible for following up the strategy.

As old security problems are solved, new ones arise 
as a result of the introduction of new technology, 
changes in use patterns, and changes in the threats. 
Consequently, security measures that are appropriate 
today may be outdated tomorrow. The Government 
has therefore decided to develop an overarching 
strategy, and describe areas of focus rather than specific 

security measures. A detailed action plan describing 
how the strategy’s priorities should be followed up will 
be developed and published separately and revised 
as necessary. Sectoral ministries should include 
sector stakeholders during the development and 
implementation of action plan initiatives.

Specific measures in various priority areas should be 
initiated as part of the work on the ministries’ annual 
allocation letters to subsidiaries. These letters define 
goals and priorities for the coming year. Measures 
affecting the private sector should be implemented 
in close collaboration with private sector bodies. 
Measures affecting consumers should be implemented 
in collaboration with consumer organisations. Prior 
to implementing new measures, a privacy impact 
assessment should be conducted and, if necessary, 
the Norwegian Data Protection Authority should be 
involved in planning and implementation.

To assess the current status during follow-up of the 
strategy’s priority areas, the Government will regularly 
request a status update for sectoral implementations 
of action plan initiatives, in order to monitor 
developments in information security. The Ministry 
of Justice and Public Security is responsible for this 
work. An inter-ministerial group will be appointed to 
monitor the strategy continuously over the long-term. 
The group’s work will include following developments 
in security challenges and trends, and assessing 
whether those developments will trigger a need to 
revise all or part of the national strategy on an ongoing 
basis. The group will also be a driver for updating and 
developing the action plan further.

26

F   Economic and Administrative 

Implications

Primary responsibility for securing information 
systems and networks lies with the owner or operator, 
and is management’s responsibility. Security work 
must be a daily routine and financed within the 
framework of the normal operations. Each sectoral 
ministry has a sectoral responsibility. Sectoral 
initiatives must be funded within current budget 

frameworks. The cost of measures to promote 
information security must be proportionate to 
the estimated risk to individual areas of public 
administration. If risk mitigation measures are not 
implemented, the risk of unfortunate consequences 
and losses must be considered. 

27

Appendix A: 
Terms and Expressions

Accessibility

CERT

Cloud computing 
(cloud services)

Confidentiality

Critical ICT 
infrastructure

Critical infrastructure

Critical societal 
functions

CSIRT

Cyber security

ECOMM network

ICT infrastructure

ICT security

Assurance that a service meets certain requirements for stability, such that the 
information is available when needed.

Computer Emergency Response Team. A team of experts that handles security 
incidents. CERT is a registered trademark of Carnegie Mellon University. Many 
therefore use the abbreviation C(S)IRT; Computer (Security) Incident Response 
Team.

A collective term for services provided over the Internet and which are set up to 
work with other services. A designation for everything from data processing and 
storage to software on servers in remote server farms connected to the Internet.

Assurance that specific information is not disclosed to unauthorised persons, and 
that only authorised persons have access.

Critical ICT infrastructure is defined as critical infrastructure for electronic 
communications. See also ICT infrastructure.

Society’s functional ability is highly dependent on a number of physical and 
technical infrastructures. In the event of a failure in these infrastructures, 
society will be unable to maintain the supply of goods and services on which the 
population depends (cf. critical societal functions). These infrastructures can be 
described as critical to society.

Functions that fulfil society’s basic needs and people’s sense of security, 
e.g. banking and financial services, health services, etc. See also critical 
infrastructure.

Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) is a group of experts who 
handle ICT security incidents.

Protection of data and systems connected to the Internet. 

An ECOMM network is an electronic communications network.

Electronic systems that process data or communicate with other equipment, on 
which a unit or organisation is dependent to function effectively.

How business-critical electronic networks and systems that process data or 
communicate with each other are protected.

ICT systems

See Information systems.

Information security

Protection of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information.

28

Information security 
management system

A management system and guide for organisations with regard to information 
security. May include tools such as:
•  Information security handbook
•  Risk and vulnerability analysis
•  Compliance audits
•  Emergency plans
•  E-learning about information security for the entire organisation

Information systems

System for collecting, storing, processing, transmitting and presenting data.

Infrastructure

Integrity

Sensitive information

Threat

Vulnerability

The basic structures and systems* necessary for an organisation, a collection of 
organisations, or a country to function effectively.
*structures and systems: “Technical installations and equipment, and related 
administrative and organisational measures.”

Assurance that information and information processing is comprehensive, 
accurate and valid, and the result of authorised and controlled activities. 

Used in this strategy as a collective term for information that must be protected 
for various reasons, cf. Personal Data Act, Freedom of Information Act, Public 
Administration Act, Security Act, etc.

An entity that constitutes a real or potential threat to an identifiable goal or in a 
limited and identifiable context.

The challenges a system will have to face to function when subjected to an 
adverse event, and challenges related to resuming normal system operation 
after the event has occurred. The vulnerability of a system is an expression of 
its weaknesses and flaws and special circumstances that would increase the 
likelihood that threats will materialise into a security incident (examples of 
special circumstances can include size, complexity, that many stakeholders are 
involved, geographical distribution, frequent changes, and exposed location). A 
system’s vulnerability is reduced by increasing the system’s robustness. 

29

Appendix B: 
Selected National Contacts for 
Information Security

The Norwegian National Security Authority 
(NSM)
The central directorate for the protection of information 
and infrastructure crucial for critical societal functions  
– Protects information, information systems and other 
assets against espionage, sabotage, and terrorism through 
inspections in accordance with the Security Act; develops 
security initiatives; provides advice and guidance; detects 
and manages countermeasures for serious cyber attacks 
(see NorCERT)  Driving force for improving security 
conditions 
www.nsm.stat.no

The Norwegian Centre for Information Security 
(NorSIS)
A resource centre created through an initiative by the 
Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and 
Church Affairs  The centre offers consultancy services 
for information security for all Norwegian private and 
public entities  All levels of society should be able to take 
advantage of these services  NorSIS also runs the web site 
slettmeg.no which gives advice to those who feel offended 
online.
www.norsis.no
www.slettmeg.no

NorCERT – the national centre for notification of and 
countermeasure coordination for serious cyber attacks 
and other ICT security incidents targeting important ICT 
infrastructure for critical societal functions 
www.cert.no

The Norwegian Post and Telecommunications 
Authority (PT)
Monitors companies providing electronic communications 
services, electronic communications networks and postal 
services, and issuers of official eSignature certificates  PT 
shall contribute to secure and robust networks and services 
www.npt.no

Nettvett.no – A web site run by PT providing information, 
advice and guidance about safe Internet use  Information 
is aimed at both consumers and small and medium sized 
companies 
www.nettvett.no

Norwegian Directorate for Civil Protection (DSB)
Driver, advisor and coordinator for preventive and crisis 
measures nationally, regionally and locally  Capacity and 
aid supplier to support higher authorities and all other 
authorities in the event of major emergencies or when 
needed 
www.dsb.no
www.kriseinfo.no

Kripos (National Criminal Investigation Service)
The national service for combating organised and other 
serious crime  The main objective of Kripos is to combat 
organised and other serious crime 
www.politiet.no/kripos

30

Norwegian Intelligence Service (NIS)
Responsible for detecting and analyzing external threats 
and the motives, capabilities and methods of foreign actors, 
cf  the Norwegian Intelligence Service Act  The objective of 
intelligence activities is to contribute to counteract threats 
and to provide Norwegian authorities with a solid basis for 
foreign, security and defense policy decisions 

Norwegian Police Security Service (PST)
Responsible for the nation’s internal security  
Prevents and investigates crimes that threaten national 
security, including collecting information on individuals 
and groups who may pose a threat, developing various 
analyses and threat assessments, investigations and other 
operational countermeasures and advice 
www.pst.politiet.no

The Norwegian Data Protection Authority (DT)
The Norwegian Data Protection Authority oversees a 
number of laws and regulations, where information security 
is an important part of the regulation  The overall regulatory 
framework affects much of the public and private sectors  
The Norwegian Data Protection Authority has developed a 
number of guidelines on information security and provides 
guidance on compliance with legislated requirements 
www.datatilsynet.no

31

Published by:
The Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and 
Church Affairs
 
Public institutions can order additional copies from:
Government Administration Services
Internet: www.publikasjoner.dep.no
E-mail: publikasjonsbestilling@dss.dep.no
Tel.: +47 22 24 20 00

Publication code: P-0976
Design: Melkeveien Designkontor AS
Photo: ©Fotolia.com
Printed by: Norwegian Government Administration Services 
04/2013 - impression 500

