NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

2015

A secure, resilient and prosperous  

online New Zealand

Ministerial Foreword

The internet and technology have become a fundamental element  
in our lives. 

We use the Internet to connect with friends and family, access 
government and commercial services, conduct business, store vital  
data, and operate national infrastructure, including telecommunications, 
energy and transportation systems. 

New Zealand has benefited enormously from connectivity and the innovations offered by 
technology. Technology has accelerated our global connections and transformed almost 
every sector of the economy. 

While connectivity has opened up significant economic opportunities, it has also led to 
vulnerabilities. The threat to New Zealanders, and the New Zealand economy from cyber 
intrusions is real and growing, and there are serious implications for our economic well-
being and national security. 

Perpetrators can range from a lone hacker through to organised criminal groups, activists  
or state-sponsored actors who operate domestically and internationally. 

It’s estimated that cybercrime has cost New Zealand almost $257 million in the past year.

More than 80 per cent of New Zealanders have experienced a cyber-security breach, yet 
only 39 per cent have changed anything about their online behaviour as a result.

56 per cent of businesses have been attacked at least once per year. Only 65% of 
businesses are confident that their information technology security systems are effective. 

In order to make the most of the opportunities a digital economy offers, it is vital we place a 
strong focus on securing our information systems and building the skills across the economy 
to prevent cyber intrusions happening. Improving our ability to handle cybercrime and 
engaging with other countries on cyber security issues and the international management  
of the Internet is also important. 

That’s why we’re launching a refreshed New Zealand Cyber Security Strategy and Action 
Plan which will provide a framework for the government to improve New Zealand’s  
cyber security. 

The Strategy emphasises that there is no simple fix and, while technological defences are 
effective, better cyber security will require a multi-layered approach.

As technology evolves, so too will the threats, so the Action Plan will be monitored and 
reviewed on an annual basis.

We’ll be working across relevant government agencies and will be looking for private sector 
support as well. Implementing the Strategy’s Action Plan will require an effective joint effort 
if we want to improve New Zealand’s cyber security and achieve our vision of a secure, 
resilient and prosperous online New Zealand.

Hon Amy Adams 
Minister for Communications

2

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015

TECHNOLOGY IS TRANSFORMING  
NEW ZEALAND

The Internet and other information technologies have transformed the way New Zealanders 
live. Connectivity is an integral part of New Zealand’s economic growth and international 
competitiveness.

Ninety percent of New Zealand households and 96 percent of businesses now have an Internet 
connection. New Zealanders rely heavily on the Internet for work, play and everyday life. People 
are embracing the benefits the technology provides: 

•  Individuals are connecting to friends and family and shopping, banking, and being entertained 

and educated through the Internet

•  Businesses are promoting their services, selling, banking and communicating using the Internet. 

They use information technology to manage their business information

•  The government is heavily reliant on technology for the country’s day-to-day administration  

and it is essential for the operation of our critical infrastructure 

By 2019, there will be 24 billion networked devices and connections, with global Internet traffic  
up to 168 exabytes per month.1

WHAT IS CYBERSPACE?

The global network of interdependent information technology infrastructures, 
telecommunication networks and computer processing systems in which online 

communication takes place.

Cyber attacks are increasing and can cause 
significant damage

Increased connectivity, however, provides increased opportunities for people and groups with 
criminal, hostile or offensive intentions. Every year, we are detecting more cyber incidents than  
the year before.

•  NetSafe recorded 8,061 cyber incidents in 2014, with losses through scams and fraud of almost 

NZ$8 million (up from 3,317 cyber incidents in 2013 with losses of more than NZ$4.4 million). 

•  In the 12 months to 31 December 2014 the National Cyber Security Centre recorded 147 cyber 
incidents. In the first six months of 2015, 132 incidents have been recorded. It is expected that 
by the end of 2015 this figure will be in excess of 200.

•  The Department of Internal Affairs Electronic Messaging Compliance Unit received 8,786 
complaints of unsolicited commercial electronic messages (email, SMS or text) in 2014-15  
(up from 7,747 in the 2013-14 period). 

The impacts of cyber attacks can range from a minor inconvenience through to a major system 
failure. At the severe end, cyber attacks have the potential to cause real harm – financial losses, 
reputational damage, intellectual property theft, damage to services and operations, or disruption 
of critical national infrastructure. 

It is difficult to obtain adequate information on either the incidence or the cost of cyber  
incidents. Victims, including businesses, often do not report incidents to law enforcement  
or disclose them publicly. 

1  http://newsroom.cisco.com/press-release-content?articleId=1644203: last accessed 28/10/2015.

3

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015HOW DO NEW ZEALANDERS BEHAVE ONLINE?

Connect Smart research on New Zealander’s cyber security practices (2014):

83%  

of New Zealanders have  

experienced a cyber breach – 22% had  
their email accounts hacked for example. 

61%  

have not changed their  
behaviour as a result.

34%  

of New Zealanders do not have passwords  

on their personal smartphones. 

48%  

do not have passwords on their  

work smartphones.

18%  

of New Zealanders are overwhelmed  

by cyber security. 

73%  

want more advice.

83%  

of New Zealanders rarely  
change their passwords.

28%  

use more complex passwords for  

certain sites, such as banking. 

67%  

of New Zealanders check a website  
is secure before using it for payments.

26%  

of New Zealanders  

believe they are not personally  

at risk of a cyber attack.

What does a cyber attacker look like?

Cyber risks include state-sponsored espionage, cyber vandalism or issue-motivated hacktivism, 
a broad range of cybercrime (e.g. scams and fraud), and deliberate or inadvertent actions by 
employees or contractors. 

Malicious cyber actors are constantly changing their methods and tactics, often re-emerging 
in different guises or exploiting vulnerabilities before they are patched. They can act stealthily 
and anonymously online, leaving few clues, and operating from any Internet-connected location 
globally. This makes it hard to distinguish between the actions of state-sponsored cyber intruders, 
organised cyber-criminal groups or an isolated computer hacker. 

New Zealand faces cyber risks because of the importance of its information assets, the inevitable 
weaknesses or gaps in the protection of these information assets, and the existence of attackers 
who can exploit these vulnerabilities for their own advantage.

4

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015A secure, resilient and prosperous online  
New Zealand

New Zealand faces on-going cyber risks. Malicious cyber techniques can be deployed from  
any location. New Zealand’s geographic isolation offers no protection against cyber threats. 

This Strategy sets out what government will do, working in partnership with the private sector,  
to prevent and respond to a range of cyber security threats. A range of actions are required. 

OUR VISION IS THAT NEW ZEALAND IS SECURE, RESILIENT AND PROSPEROUS ONLINE

Achieving this vision means that individuals are protected online and New Zealand’s businesses 
can function, grow and innovate. Cyber security has the potential to be used as a point of positive 
competitive advantage internationally.

Ensuring New Zealand is secure and resilient online is an essential component of building a more 
competitive and productive economy. This is a government priority. 

New Zealand’s scale and relatively simple telecommunications and network structure enables 
the public and private sector to work closely together to embed a cyber security culture, and to 
respond nimbly to evolving cyber risks.

This Strategy will mean New Zealand is a place where: 

•  New Zealanders and their businesses prosper; 

•  the harm from cyber threats and cybercrime is reduced;

•  fundamental rights online are protected; 

•  significant national information infrastructures are defended; and

•  New Zealand is respected internationally as a secure place to do business and store data.

The Strategy has four intersecting goals:

CYBER RESILIENCE

Cyber Resilience involves detection, protection and recovery from cyber incidents. 
Government agencies and businesses need to have timely, actionable cyber security 
information and advice and be able to deal with a trusted agency when they have a 
cyber security incident.

This goal is about ensuring New Zealand’s most significant assets are protected, that 
agencies may use cyber tools to further New Zealand’s national security interests, 
and to ensure preparedness for major cyber incidents.

CYBER CAPABILITY
The Cyber Capability goal goes beyond promoting awareness to focus on building 
cyber security capability among individuals, businesses, government departments 
and organisations. Achieving this goal means that New Zealanders at all levels  
will have the skills and tools to protect themselves online, making it harder for 
malicious cyber actors to steal private data, identity information or cause damage  
to information systems.

5

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015The aim is to spread the cyber security message as broadly as possible, including 
using Connect Smart public and private partners to build the cyber security skills of 
their staff, customers and supply chains. Investing in cyber security is fundamental 
for competitive commercial performance. New Zealand’s cyber security expertise 
also needs to grow so that businesses and organisations can source the technical 
staff required to carry out ICT security.

ADDRESSING CYBERCRIME
Cybercrime ranges from harmful digital communications of a criminal nature 
(cyberbullying), to state-sponsored theft of intellectual property. Given the broad 
scope of cybercrime and the range of organisations engaged, this particular goal  
is outlined in a separate, more detailed National Plan to Address Cybercrime.  
This Plan sets out the cybercrime problem and the challenges it poses. It outlines  
a range of actions to prevent cybercrime and reduce the harm to New Zealanders.

Prevention first is at the heart of the approach to cybercrime – giving  
New Zealanders the tools to change their online behaviour. A joined-up  
approach will also be critical to provide an effective, customer-focused  
response to cybercrime.

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
International engagement is essential for cyber security. The trans-boundary  
nature of cyberspace means the outcomes of international debates will affect 
how New Zealanders use and access the online world. International cooperation 
underpins the other goals of the Strategy. 

The benefits of connectivity depend on continuation of an open, innovative and 
secure cyber space. To ensure this we need international partnerships, with a 
particular focus on the Asia-Pacific region. Being recognised as a cyber secure 
country is important for New Zealand’s international credibility – including the ability 
of businesses to be internationally competitive. New Zealand will need to work with 
key trading partners to ensure any cyber security measures put in place are not an 
impediment to New Zealand businesses.

CYBER RESILIENCE

New Zealand’s information 
infrastructures can resist cyber 
threats and we have the tools to 
protect our national interests

ADDRESSING 
CYBERCRIME

New Zealand improves its 
ability to prevent, investigate 
and respond to cybercrime

NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

CYBER CAPABILITY

New Zealanders, businesses and 
government agencies understand 
cyber threats and have the 
capability to protect themselves

INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION

New Zealand protects and 
advances its interests on 
cyberspace issues internationally

6

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015Delivering the vision: The Action Plan

To deliver the vision, the government has developed a plan of action to bring each of the four 
goals to life. The Action Plan will be reviewed and reported on annually, and changes made 
to keep the Strategy alive and current. The National Cyber Policy Office will also work with 
government agencies and Connect Smart partners to produce a public annual report on the  
Cyber Security Action Plan. 

The Strategy is underpinned by four principles:

PARTNERSHIPS ARE ESSENTIAL 
The government has a role to play in cyber security – but not on its own. Close partnerships  
with the private sector and non-government organisations are required. Businesses drive the  
New Zealand economy and depend on the Internet and networked technology. They must 
protect the information that is critical to their commercial success. The private sector owns and 
operates the telecommunications systems. The private sector and technical community also have 
considerable cyber security expertise. 

The Connect Smart partnership is a public-private collaboration 
focused on driving cyber security improvement in New Zealand. It 
includes a growing network of banks, telecommunication companies, 
ICT companies, software companies, social media, retail organisations, 
education institutions, non-government organisations, community groups, 
sectoral bodies, business associations and government agencies. 

Protect yourself online

ECONOMIC GROWTH IS ENABLED 

Strong cyber security practices will result in businesses remaining productive, profitable and 
transparent to customers and shareholders. New Zealand will be recognised as a desirable  
place to do business, store data, innovate and invest. 

ICT and enhanced connectivity will continue to boost economic growth, and the costs of cyber 
insecurity will be minimised.

NATIONAL SECURITY IS UPHELD
Cyber threats to New Zealand, particularly state-sponsored espionage, cyber terrorism, theft of 
intellectual property from government and critical national infrastructure, are national security risks. 
Upholding New Zealand’s national security in the face of this threat is a fundamental principle of 
this Strategy. 

HUMAN RIGHTS ARE PROTECTED ONLINE
The openness of the Internet is part of its unique value – allowing for unrestricted participation  
and the free flow of information. 

Cyberspace should be a trusted medium, where users have confidence in the integrity of 
information and the protection of their private and financial details. They should be able to  
engage online without suffering harm or unlawful interference. 

Human rights apply online as they do offline. This includes the right to freedom of expression,  
and the protection of privacy, as set out in New Zealand law and existing international law. 

7

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015WHAT HAS NEW ZEALAND DONE SO FAR?

POLICE ELECTRONIC 

CRIME GROUP  

ESTD 1984

ONLINE CHILD 

EXPLOITATION ACROSS 
NZ (OCEANZ) SPECIALIST 

POLICE UNIT ESTD

2011 NZ CYBER 

SECURITY STRATEGY

NATIONAL CYBER 
SECURITY CENTRE 
ESTD WITHIN GCSB 

2011

NATIONAL CYBERCRIME 
CENTRE ESTD OCT 2009. 
NOW CALLED THE POLICE 

CYBER CRIME UNIT 

NATIONAL CYBER POLICY 
OFFICE ESTD, JUNE 2012

NGOs, such as NZ Internet Taskforce and Internet 
NZ, provide a forum for cyber security collaboration

Government’s Protective Security Requirements,  

incl Information Security Manual launched  

(Dec 2014) 

DIA/NZ POST ESTABLISH 
‘REAL ME’ PROVIDING A 
VERIFIED ONLINE ID AND 

SECURE LOG-IN

PREVENTION FIRST: POLICE 
NATIONAL CYBERCRIME  
OPERATING STRATEGY

TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

(INTERCEPTION CAPABILITY 
AND SECURITY) ACT (TICSA) 

2013 

NETSAFE ESTD 1998 
– EDUCATION AND 
RESPONSE SERVICES

Office of the Privacy Commissioner focus on 

technology and privacy with its “Making the Future” 

strategy (Dec 2014)

NCSC DEVELOPMENT OF 
VOLUNTARY STANDARDS 

DIA ELECTRONIC 

CYBER SECURITY 

FOR ELECTRICITY 

MESSAGING COMPLIANCE 

AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS 

SECTOR/INDUSTRIAL 

CONTROL SYSTEMS 2013

TEAM ESTD

2012, 2013

CAPACITY BUILDING IN THE 

ASIA-PACIFIC REGION 

International engagement on norms of State 
behaviour in cyberspace (e.g. London agenda)

GOVT ICT STRATEGY 

AND WORK TO IMPROVE 
SECURITY AND PRIVACY 

OF GOVERNMENT 

INFORMATION

GCSB SUPPORT TO 

GOVT AGENCIES AND 

PRIVATE SECTOR AGAINST 

ADVANCED THREATS 

(CORTEX)

GCSB ACT 2013 – 

INFORMATION ASSURANCE 

INTERNATIONAL 
ENGAGEMENT ON 

AND CYBER SECURITY  

INTERNET GOVERNANCE 

A CORE FUNCTION 

(E.G. ICANN)

CYBER EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE PLAN AND 

EXERCISES 2012, 2013, 2014

 ESTD 2014

Protect yourself online

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015

