SUMMARY OF NEW ZEALAND’S  
Cyber Security Strategy:

A secure, resilient and prosperous online New Zealand

New Zealand is increasingly reliant on information communication technology 
and an open, trusted Internet.  Internet connectivity is an integral part of  
New Zealand’s economic growth and international competitiveness.

But this technology provides opportunities for those with criminal or hostile 
intentions. The 2015 Cyber Security Strategy signals the government’s 
commitment to ensuring New Zealand is safe, resilient and prosperous online.  

New Zealand’s scale and relatively simple telecommunications and network 
structure enables the public and private sector to work closely together to 
embed a cyber security culture, and to respond nimbly to evolving cyber risks.

WHAT IS CYBERSPACE?

The global network of 

interdependent information 
technology infrastructures, 

telecommunication networks and 

computer processing systems 
in which online communication 

takes place.

Cyber Security Goals

FOUR INTERSECTING GOALS WILL CREATE A  

SECURE, RESILIENT AND PROSPEROUS ONLINE NEW ZEALAND:

CYBER RESILIENCE

New Zealand’s information 
infrastructures can resist cyber 
threats and we have the tools to 
protect our national interests

ADDRESSING 
CYBERCRIME

New Zealand improves its 
ability to prevent, investigate 
and respond to cybercrime

NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

CYBER CAPABILITY

New Zealanders, businesses and 
government agencies understand 
cyber threats and have the 
capability to protect themselves

INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION

New Zealand protects and 
advances its interests on 
cyberspace issues internationally

Principles underpinning the Cyber Security Strategy

PARTNERSHIPS ARE ESSENTIAL 
The government has a role to play in cyber security – but  
not on its own. Close partnerships with the private sector and  
non-government organisations are required. Businesses drive the 
New Zealand economy and depend on the Internet and networked 
technology. They must protect the information that is critical to 
their commercial success. The private sector owns and operates 
the telecommunications systems. The private sector and technical 
community also have considerable cyber security expertise. 

The Connect Smart partnership is a public-private collaboration 
focused on driving cyber security improvement in New Zealand.  
Connect Smart includes a growing network of banks, 
telecommunication companies, ICT companies, software  
companies, social media, retail organisations, education  
institutions, non-government organisations, community groups, 
sectoral bodies, business associations and government agencies. 

ECONOMIC GROWTH IS ENABLED 
Strong cyber security practices will result in businesses remaining 
productive, profitable and transparent to customers and 
shareholders. New Zealand will be recognised as a desirable  
place to do business, store data, innovate and invest. 

ICT and enhanced connectivity will continue to boost economic 
growth, and the costs of cyber insecurity will be minimised.

NATIONAL SECURITY IS UPHELD
Cyber threats to New Zealand – particularly state-sponsored 
espionage, cyber terrorism, theft of intellectual property  
from government and critical national infrastructure – are national 
security risks. Upholding New Zealand’s national security in the face 
of this threat is a fundamental principle of this Strategy. 

HUMAN RIGHTS ARE PROTECTED ONLINE
The openness of the Internet is part of its unique value – allowing  
for unrestricted participation and the free flow of information. 

Cyberspace should be a trusted medium, where users have 
confidence in the integrity of information and the protection of their 
private and financial details. They should be able to engage online 
without suffering harm or unlawful interference. 

Human rights apply online as they do offline. This includes the right 
to freedom of expression, and the protection of privacy,  
as set out in New Zealand law and existing international law.

Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 

The Cyber Security Strategy is accompanied by a living Action Plan. This Plan will evolve to keep pace with technology 

developments and the emergence of new threats. New actions may be added, and existing actions amended.  

The National Cyber Policy Office will work with government agencies and Connect Smart public-private  

cyber security partners to produce a public annual report on progress.

CYBER  

RESILIENCE

CYBER  

CAPABILITY

ADDRESSING  
CYBERCRIME

INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION

•  Set up a national CERT1

•  Vigorously protect New 

Zealand’s most important 
information infrastructures

•  Use cyber tools to further 

New Zealand’s national 
security interests

•  Prepare for major  

cyber incidents

•  Expand Connect Smart 
activities and partnership

•  Build capability to address 

cybercrime

• 

Improve the cyber security 
capability of small and 
medium enterprises

•  Adapt New Zealand’s policy 

and legislative settings for 
the digital age

•  Boost the cyber security 

•  Enhance New Zealand’s 

operational response  
to cybercrime

•  Use New Zealand’s 

international connections  
to fight cybercrime

capability of the corporate 
sector, including national 
infrastructure, and the  
public sector

•  Promote cyber security 
education and training, 
including building a cyber 
security professional 
workforce

•  Support cyber security 
research and business 
innovation

•  Promote internet governance 
and norms of state behaviour 
that reflect New Zealand’s 
interests

•  Build networks of 

international operational 
cooperation

•  Contribute to international 

cyber security capability  
and confidence

•  Maximise the economic 

opportunities of cyberspace 
for New Zealand and 
New Zealanders

1    CERT was once an acronym for ‘computer emergency response team’. Since 1997, CERT has been a registered trademark owned by Carnegie Mellon University 

and is no longer used as an acronym. New Zealand is requesting permission to use the CERT trademark. 

