NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

2015

Action Plan

A LIVING ACTION PLAN WITH  
ANNUAL REVIEWS

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy provides a single cohesive framework to ensure that  
New Zealand is secure, resilient and prosperous online. The Strategy is accompanied by an  
Action Plan which sets out concrete steps to protect the country’s information technology  
systems and ensure New Zealanders can make the most of being online. 

In order to deal with a rapidly changing threat, the Action Plan will be a living document  
that is updated annually. Many actions are already underway – and will be on-going to maintain 
cyber security. The Action Plan also sets out new initiatives, some of which will need further 
research and consultation to test whether they are feasible, and to provide more precision  
about implementation. All will require on-going attention and resources. 

The Action Plan has four goals. There is an introductory text for each goal, followed by four to five 
actions. Each action involves a number of government agencies. Many actions will involve Connect 
Smart, a public-private collaboration with the aim of improving cyber security.

The National Cyber Policy Office (NCPO) will produce an annual report on the Action Plan to 
Cabinet to evaluate progress and recommend new actions where necessary. The NCPO will also 
work with government agencies and Connect Smart partners to produce a public annual report  
on the Cyber Security Action Plan. 

CYBER RESILIENCE

New Zealand’s information 
infrastructures can resist cyber 
threats and we have the tools to 
protect our national interests

ADDRESSING 
CYBERCRIME

New Zealand improves its 
ability to prevent, investigate 
and respond to cybercrime

NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

CYBER CAPABILITY

New Zealanders, businesses and 
government agencies understand 
cyber threats and have the 
capability to protect themselves

INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION

New Zealand protects and 
advances its interests on 
cyberspace issues internationally

A secure, resilient and prosperous 
online New Zealand.

2

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015GOAL ONE: 

Cyber Resilience

NEW ZEALAND’S INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES CAN RESIST  
CYBER THREATS AND WE HAVE THE CYBER TOOLS TO PROTECT  
OUR NATIONAL INTERESTS

Cyber Resilience involves detection, protection and recovery from cyber incidents. 

Government agencies and businesses need to have timely, actionable cyber security information 
and advice and be able to deal with a trusted agency when they have a cyber security incident. 

It is proposed that a national CERT1 be established. This institution would act as a central 
reporting mechanism for the full range of cyber incidents, triaging incident response to the  
relevant separate organisation and ensuring technical advice gets to the organisations that  
need it – in real-time. 

A national CERT would bring together representatives and functions from a range of  
government agencies, non-government organisations and the private sector that currently  
deal with cyber incidents. 

It would be an internationally recognised point of contact – an important factor given the extent  
to which cyber incidents are perpetrated from off-shore and the need for international cooperation 
to manage these incidents.

The CERT would incorporate a threat analysis and information sharing platform. This would 
improve understanding of the likelihood and impact of cyber risks facing the country. 

The platform would examine existing threat patterns and techniques (i.e. the signatures or cyber 
“fingerprints” of malicious actors), and look out for brand new threats, including those arising from 
technological innovations. 

Information about cyber threats can come from a variety of sources: classified intelligence, other 
national CERTs, the private sector, multinational ICT companies, non-government organisations  
and individuals. 

The government should review regularly those government and private sector information 
infrastructure systems that are most vulnerable to threats and, if compromised, would have the 
most consequence for New Zealand’s national interests. This ensures that New Zealand’s most 
significant assets are protected. 

Project CORTEX counters foreign-sourced, technically sophisticated or persistent cyber threats 
against a limited number of government and consenting private sector organisations of national 
significance. The detection and disruption capabilities are operated by the National Cyber Security 
Centre within the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB). 

As a matter of national security, the government must ensure that the New Zealand Defence 
Force’s (NZDF) networked information systems, including for command and control, logistics  
and operation of major platforms, are adequately protected, particularly in offshore situations.  
New Zealand’s intelligence agencies may also use cyber tools to gather intelligence and 
information for the protection of New Zealand’s interests. 

Regular cyber security exercises involving public, private and international partners, are necessary 
to ensure preparedness for major cyber incidents. This will test the effectiveness of the national 
Cyber Security Emergency Response Plan, involving a detailed escalation process, and seamless 
coordination of technical, law enforcement, policy, communications and private sector responses.

1    CERT was once an acronym for ‘computer emergency response team’. Since 1997, CERT has been a registered trademark 

owned by Carnegie Mellon University and is no longer used as an acronym. New Zealand is requesting permission to use the 
CERT trademark. 

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015

3

ACTIONS

OUTCOMES

ACTION 1
SET UP A 
NATIONAL CERT 

•  Agencies, businesses and individuals have clarity 

about where to report cyber incidents.

•  Efficient triaging of cyber incidents to relevant 

agencies. 

•  The impact of cyber incidents is contained  

– harm and reoccurrence is reduced. 

•  There is trusted two-way sharing of information  

on cyber threats.

•  Actionable and timely advice provided to agencies, 

businesses and individuals

•  An internationally recognised contact point  

for dealing with cyber security incidents.

ACTION 2 
VIGOROUSLY 
PROTECT  
NEW ZEALAND’S 
MOST IMPORTANT 
INFORMATION 
INFRASTRUCTURES 

•  The protection of New Zealand’s most important 

information infrastructures is prioritised and reflects 
our evolving national interests. 

•  Increased number of organisations receiving 

CORTEX malware protection services.

•  Increased number of instances of malware detected 

and disrupted.

•  Potential for additional support to Internet  

Service Providers (ISPs) is explored.

WHO?*

NCPO/CERT
NCSC/GCSB
Police
DIA/GCIO
NZSIS
Private sector
Connect Smart 
partners 
-  NetSafe 
-  NZITF

NCSC/GCSB
NCPO
ISPs
Government 
agencies and 
private sector 
entities of high 
national interest.

ACTION 3
USE CYBER TOOLS 
TO FURTHER  
NEW ZEALAND’S 
NATIONAL 
SECURITY 
INTERESTS

ACTION 4
PREPARE FOR 
MAJOR CYBER 
INCIDENTS 

•  NZDF’s information systems and platforms  

are resilient to adversary exploitation.

•  Threats to New Zealand’s security interests  

are detected and averted.

•  Cyber tools are used in accordance with the law  

and subject to relevant oversight mechanisms. 

NZDF
GCSB
MoD
NZSIS

•  Twice yearly inter-agency exercises, including  

the private sector and international partners.
•  Readiness and capability to deal with a major 

cyber incident, including coordinated technical, 
law enforcement, policy and communications 
responses.

•  Trusted relationships established with international 

partners. 

NCPO/CERT
NCSC/GCSB
Police
DIA/GCIO
NZSIS
MFAT
Connect Smart 
partners 
-  NetSafe 
-  NZITF

*  DIA: Department of Internal Affairs; GCIO: Government Chief Information Officer; GCPO: Government Chief Privacy Officer; 
GCSB: Government Communications Security Bureau; IITP: Institute of IT Professionals; ISP: Internet Service Provider; MBIE: 
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment; MFAT: Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; MoD: Ministry of Defence; 
MoE: Ministry of Education; MoJ: Ministry of Justice; NCPO: National Cyber Policy Office; NCSC: National Cyber Security 
Centre; NGO: Non-Governmental Organisation NZDF: New Zealand Defence Force; NZITF: New Zealand Internet Task 
Force; NZQA: New Zealand Qualifications Authority; NZSIS: New Zealand Security Intelligence Service; NZTE: New Zealand 
Trade and Enterprise; TEC: Tertiary Education Commission.

4

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015GOAL TWO: 

Cyber Capability

NEW ZEALANDERS, BUSINESSES AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 
UNDERSTAND CYBER THREATS AND HAVE THE CAPABILITY TO  
PROTECT THEMSELVES ONLINE

The Cyber Capability goal goes beyond promoting awareness, to focus on building cyber security 
capability among individuals, businesses, government agencies and organisations. Achieving this 
goal means that New Zealanders at all levels will have the skills and tools to protect themselves 
online, making it harder for malicious cyber actors to steal private data, identity information or 
cause damage to information systems. 

Connect Smart is an on-going cyber security awareness and capability campaign. The aim is  
to spread the cyber security message as broadly as possible, including using Connect Smart public 
and private partners to build the cyber security skills of their staff, customers and supply chains. 
Connect Smart partners are cyber security champions working collectively to improve  
New Zealand’s cyber security. 

Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) play a huge role in New Zealand’s economic growth; it is 
important that they are equipped to protect their business information. Targeted and accessible 
cyber security advice will be made available for SMEs through the Connect Smart website and 
activities, including an online questionnaire to complement the “SME Cyber Security Toolkit”. 

A new “cyber credentials” scheme is proposed for SMEs. The scheme will promote to the SME 
audience the core actions that, if implemented properly, can make a big difference to their cyber 
security. SMEs can use their “cyber credentials” to demonstrate publicly to their customers and 
business supply chain that they have in place the key cyber security practices. The scheme will 
involve self-assessment and independent verification. Ultimately, if there is sufficient interest from 
SMEs, it could also involve a system of independent certification to ensure objective testing of 
cyber security practices. Carrying out these core actions provides a pathway towards more detailed  
cyber security standards that are already available (e.g. ISO 27000 series). 

Investing in cyber security is fundamental for competitive commercial performance. A guide  
for business executives is available on the Connect Smart website to ensure cyber security is  
“on the agenda before it becomes the agenda”.2 Voluntary standards have been developed  
for industrial control systems, based on work led by the electricity sector.3 These materials  
will be updated and expanded.

Improving and maintaining the cyber security capability of government agencies is important. 
The head of each government agency is responsible for the implementation of the government’s 
Protective Security Requirements. These requirements include measures to protect information 
security such as policies relating to IT procurement, supply chain, cloud services, user access 
privileges, mobile devices, websites and on-line services.4 

New Zealand’s cyber security expertise needs to grow so that businesses and organisations can 
source the technical staff required to carry out ICT security. At the same time, the education and 
training system should produce ICT users at all levels with the skills to put in place basic cyber 
hygiene practices. 

2   National Cyber Security Centre, Cyber Security and Risk Management – an Executive Level Responsibility, 2013.  

http://www.connectsmart.govt.nz/businesses/boards-and-executive/ or http://www.ncsc.govt.nz/assets/cyber-security-risk-
management-Executive.pdf

3   National Cyber Security Standards, Voluntary Cyber Security Standards for Industrial Control Systems, March 2014.  

http://www.ncsc.govt.nz/newsroom/ncsc-voluntary-cyber-security-standards-for-infrastructure-operators/

4   Protective Security Requirements, Information Security Management Protocol, December 2014. http://protectivesecurity.govt.

nz/home/information-security-management-protocol/

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015

5

Several tertiary institutions have incorporated cyber security into their ICT or computer science 
courses and there is a growing level of cyber security specialisation.  Partnerships, including 
mentoring, internships, work experience and apprenticeships, between tertiary education providers 
and the private sector should be encouraged to ensure that courses and students are fit for 
purpose. The government is funding three new ICT Graduate Schools to be established in Auckland, 
Wellington and the South Island. These and other approaches across tertiary education may be one 
way for tertiary providers to work together with business to help grow cyber security capability.

More can be done at the secondary school level to channel students into studying ICT (which should 
incorporate cyber security), including appropriate qualifications, mentoring, work experience, careers 
and further study advice. More can also be done to integrate “cyber hygiene” and safe use of ICT 
into primary and secondary school lessons as a basic component of digital literacy for all students. 
By the end of 2015, 90% of schools will be connected through the Ministry of Education-funded 
Network for Learning (N4L) providing a safe, online learning environment for students and staff. 

There is also scope to work with Connect Smart partners to support targeted cyber security courses, 
such as practical on-the-job training or e-learning modules for employees, or the incorporation of 
cyber security as a business risk for those on commerce or business management courses.

Research, largely driven by the private sector including tertiary institutions, is necessary for 
New Zealand to develop its own innovation capability to deal with rapidly evolving cyber risks.  
This includes research into adversary tactics, including test beds, modelling and malware analysis.

Such research can lead to the availability of improved defensive techniques and commercial 
opportunities for New Zealand businesses as the national and global market grows for innovative 
cyber security products and services. 

There should be strong links between the research sector and the proposed CERT. It is also 
important to strengthen New Zealand cyber security research capability so that it can tap into,  
and leverage off, international research networks.

WHO?*

NCPO/CERT
MoE
Police
NCSC/GCSB
DIA
Private sector
Connect Smart 
partners 
-  NetSafe 
-  NZITF

ACTIONS

OUTCOMES

ACTION 1
EXPAND 
CONNECT SMART 
ACTIVITIES AND 
PARTNERSHIP 

•  Media and commentators recognise Connect Smart 

advice as technically authoritative and trusted.

•  Traffic to the Connect Smart website, and social 

media followers, increases.

•  A growing range of Connect Smart partners are 

actively involved in promoting the Connect Smart 
message to their staff and clients, through their own 
media channels, and the Connect Smart website.

•  A high-level cyber security summit reinforces 

corporate commitment to cyber security 
and establishes a platform for strengthened 
cooperation. 

•  There is a regular flow of public Connect Smart 

cyber security messages, including practical advice 
and tips, through multiple channels and linked to 
events and activities throughout the year.

•  Evidence through Connect Smart public surveys and 

research of growing cyber security awareness and 
capability amongst New Zealanders and businesses.

•  Increased number and range of Connect Smart 

partners.

6

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015ACTIONS

OUTCOMES

ACTION 2
IMPROVE THE 
CYBER SECURITY 
CAPABILITY 
OF SMALL 
AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES 

•  Increased website hits on the SME questionnaire 

shows that it has proved popular.

•  Positive feedback from SMEs and other businesses 

that the advice has been useful.

•  Evidence that SMEs are willing to demonstrate  

their “cyber credentials” through self-assessment 
and independent verification.

•  Evidence (from surveys and market research) that 

customers and supply chain clients prefer businesses 
that can demonstrate their “cyber credentials”.

ACTION 3
BOOST THE 
CYBER SECURITY 
CAPABILITY OF 
THE CORPORATE 
SECTOR, 
INCLUDING 
NATIONAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE, 
AND THE PUBLIC 
SECTOR

•  Government agencies’ self-assessment reports to 

the PSR team and Government Chief Privacy Officer 
demonstrate improvements in the information 
protection capabilities of government agencies.

•  Increased number of corporates, including critical 

national infrastructure, have implemented the  
“top 4” mitigations.

•  Critical Infrastructure, using Industrial Control 

Systems (ICSs) and Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisitions (SCADAs), have policies and procedures 
in place to mitigate cyber security threats. 

ACTION 4 
PROMOTE 
CYBER SECURITY 
EDUCATION 
AND TRAINING, 
INCLUDING 
BUILDING A 
CYBER SECURITY 
PROFESSIONAL 
WORKFORCE 

•  Improved understanding of the extent of cyber 

security and/or digital literacy training at primary, 
secondary and tertiary levels.

•  Identify gaps and opportunities in the supply of 

cyber security training given the growing demand 
for a cyber security professional workforce.

•  A public-private taskforce stimulates new initiatives 

to promote effective ICT training, incorporating 
cyber security, and links with the private sector 
(e.g. scholarships, competitions, internships, work 
placements, workforce training). 

ACTION 5 
SUPPORT CYBER 
SECURITY 
RESEARCH 
AND BUSINESS 
INNOVATION

•  An increase in the number of cyber security research 

projects funded in New Zealand.

•  Cyber security research projects have an impact  
on New Zealand’s understanding and mitigation  
of cyber security threats.

•  A cyber security innovation plan stimulates  

New Zealand businesses, universities and  
research institutes to build commercial 
opportunities based on cyber security  
research, innovation and development.

•  A confidential survey of businesses provides an 

understanding of the cost and incidence of cyber 
insecurity to the New Zealand economy – and a 
benchmark is established to measure progress.

* Refer to page 4 for detail on acronyms.

WHO?*

NCPO
MBIE
NZTE
Connect Smart 
partners

NZSIS
DIA/GCIO/GCPO
NCSC/GCSB
NCPO 
Connect Smart 
partners

NCPO
MoE
TEC
NZQA
MBIE
DIA
Connect Smart 
partners 
-  NetSafe 
-  Education 
   institutions 
-  IITP

MBIE
NZTE
NCPO
NCSC
Connect Smart 
partners 
International 
partners

7

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015GOAL THREE: 

Addressing Cybercrime

NEW ZEALAND IMPROVES ITS ABILITY TO PREVENT, INVESTIGATE  
AND RESPOND TO CYBERCRIME 

Cybercrime ranges from harmful digital communications of a criminal nature (cyberbullying), to 
state-sponsored theft of intellectual property. Given the broad scope of cybercrime and the range 
of organisations engaged, this particular goal is outlined in a separate, more detailed National Plan 
to Address Cybercrime. This Plan sets out the cybercrime problem and the challenges it poses. It 
outlines a range of actions to prevent cybercrime and reduce the harm to New Zealanders. 

Prevention first is at the heart of the approach to cybercrime – giving New Zealanders the tools to 
change their online behaviour. This approach intersects closely with the Cyber Capability goal of 
the Strategy, particularly through investment in Connect Smart. 

Lifting the government’s capability to deal with cybercrime is a key priority. As new technologies 
emerge, new skills are required for cybercrime investigation and prosecution, including digital 
forensics and the ability to secure electronic evidence. Some of this is already underway as 
agencies work together to share tools and techniques.

It is also critical that New Zealand’s legal framework remains fit for purpose, adapting to rapidly 
evolving technologies and the challenges posed by crimes across multiple jurisdictions. The 
Harmful Digital Communications Act 2015 is a recent development (addressing cyberbullying) and 
a review of the Privacy Act 1993 is underway. As the threat picture evolves, other questions will 
need to be considered. These may include considering giving Police the tools to address botnets; 
widening enforcement powers to include seeking information on care and protection matters; and 
the role of the Internet in funding or supporting organised criminal or terrorist groups.

Reflecting the overlapping risks across the cyber-security continuum, we need a coordinated and 
accessible operational response to cybercrime. This goal will intersect with the Cyber Resilience 
goal, particularly the proposal for a threat analysis tool and the establishment of a CERT. 

International cooperation is essential. Most cybercrimes originate outside New Zealand’s borders. 
Successful investigation and prosecution requires interaction between law enforcement agencies 
from different countries. Building trust and cooperation, and sharing best practice, between the 
law enforcement agencies of different jurisdictions helps to ensure that the rule of law is also 
effective in cyberspace. This requires continued work with key partners, such as efforts to support 
cyber capacity building activities in the Asia-Pacific region. A further step involves progressing 
New Zealand’s accession to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime. The Convention 
is the first international treaty to address cybercrime by promoting harmonised legal frameworks, 
improving investigative techniques and increasing cross-border cooperation.

8

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015

ACTIONS

OUTCOMES

WHO?*

ACTION 1
BUILD CAPABILITY 
TO ADDRESS 
CYBERCRIME

•  Cybercrime and electronic evidence training 

Police

programmes enable frontline responders to deal 
appropriately with situations involving cyber 
elements.

•  New Zealand Police meet Australia New Zealand 

Policing Advisory Agency (ANZPAA) standards.

ACTION 2 

ADAPT  
NEW ZEALAND’S 
POLICY AND 
LEGISLATIVE 
SETTINGS  
FOR THE  
DIGITAL AGE

ACTION 3 

ENHANCE 
NEW ZEALAND’S 
OPERATIONAL 
RESPONSE TO 
CYBERCRIME

ACTION 4
USE 
NEW ZEALAND’S 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONNECTIONS 
TO FIGHT 
CYBERCRIME

•  Test whether agencies have appropriate and 
effective powers and legislative framework to 
respond to cybercrime.

•  Law enforcement can swiftly respond to and 

investigate threats, including those emanating  
from outside New Zealand.

MoJ
Police
NCPO
DIA
NZSIS

•  New Zealanders know where to go for help with 

cybercrime through one single point for reporting.

•  Better cybercrime reporting information is available 

and can inform government decision-making.

•  Cybercrime is clearly reflected in crime reporting  

in New Zealand.

•  Cross-border access to cybercrime information is 
significantly improved, including through possible 
accession to the Council of Europe Convention 
on Cybercrime (also known as the Budapest 
Convention).

•  Agencies can leverage international relationships  

in responding to cybercrime.

•  Cybercrime in the Asia-Pacific region is reduced 

through working with countries in the region 
to identify gaps in their capacity to respond to 
cybercrime and providing targeted assistance.

Police/CERT
DIA
GCSB
NZSIS
NCPO
NGOs
Private Sector

MoJ
NCPO
MFAT
Police
DIA

* Refer to page 4 for detail on acronyms.

9

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015GOAL FOUR: 

International Cooperation

NEW ZEALAND PROTECTS AND ADVANCES ITS INTERESTS  
ON CYBERSPACE ISSUES INTERNATIONALLY 

International engagement is essential for cyber security. The trans-boundary nature of cyberspace 
means the outcomes of international debates will affect how New Zealanders use and access the 
online world. International cooperation underpins the other goals of the Strategy.

New Zealand supports the maintenance of a global Internet which ensures that all users are able 
to access, create and share information regardless of their location. This openness underpins the 
unique value of cyberspace, allowing it to act as an enabler of social and economic development. 
The benefits of connectivity depend on continuation of an open, innovative and secure cyberspace 
and, to ensure this, we need international partnerships. 

This includes developing norms and rules of the road, engaging in discussion about how 
international law applies online, and contributing to international debate on technical Internet 
governance and the evolving role states play in cyberspace. New Zealand needs to be active in 
these discussions to protect our interests. This involves deepening policy cooperation with a broad 
range of traditional and non-traditional partners, including other governments, industry and civil 
society. This will provide operational benefits, an opportunity to broaden support for key tenets of 
our vision for cyberspace and contribute to international cyber stability. New Zealand has recently 
become a member of the Freedom Online Coalition: a group of governments committed to 
working together to support Internet freedom and protect fundamental human rights online.

Sharing threat information and best practice with international partners helps New Zealand to 
assess the cyber threat and put in place systems to address it. Cooperation and joint operations 
with international partners are essential to mitigating threats to New Zealand. Cybercrime 
investigation and prosecution requires close international law enforcement cooperation and raises 
complex jurisdictional issues.

Improving confidence and understanding of cyber security issues is an important component  
of international stability. With particular focus on the Asia-Pacific region, New Zealand  
contributes to building cyber security capability in developing states, assists in the development 
of confidence building measures and cooperates on emergency responses to cyber incidents, 
including through exercises. New Zealand is one of 42 founding members of the Global Forum on 
Cyber Expertise (GFCE), launched at the 4th Global Conference on Cyber Space in the Hague in 
2015. The GFCE is intended to give momentum to global cyber security capacity building. 

Being recognised as a cyber secure country is important for New Zealand’s international  
credibility – including the ability of businesses to be internationally competitive and the 
attractiveness of New Zealand as a place to store data. New Zealand will need to work with key 
trading partners to ensure any cyber security measures put in place are not an impediment to  
New Zealand businesses.

10

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015

ACTIONS

OUTCOMES

ACTION 1 

•  New Zealand advances its interest in maintaining  

PROMOTE 
INTERNET 
GOVERNANCE 
AND NORMS OF 
STATE BEHAVIOUR 
THAT REFLECT 
NEW ZEALAND’S 
INTERESTS

a free, open and secure cyberspace.

•  New Zealand participates in international discussion 

on appropriate state behaviour in cyberspace and  
is recognised as a constructive partner.

•  New Zealand’s cyber infrastructure is safeguarded 

through international engagement on technical 
Internet governance matters. 

•  New Zealand contributes to international 

discussions about how international law applies 
online, including how to manage national  
security interests and human rights obligations  
in cyberspace.

ACTION 2
BUILD NETWORKS 
OF INTERNATIONAL 
OPERATIONAL 
COOPERATION 

•  International information sharing networks enable 

operational agencies to draw on international 
expertise for the protection of New Zealand systems 
and preventing and/or investigating cybercrime and 
other threats.

•  International links enable agencies to access cyber 

training and development opportunities.

•  New Zealand participates in joint cyber incident 

response management and crisis response  
exercises and initiatives with security partners  
and Asia-Pacific partners.

ACTION 3 

•  New Zealand capacity building helps to raise 

CONTRIBUTE TO 
INTERNATIONAL 
CYBER SECURITY 
CAPABILITY AND 
CONFIDENCE

regional cyber capability, including through 
provision of assistance in the Pacific. 

•  New Zealand helps to build consensus on  
cyber confidence building measures in the  
Asia-Pacific region, including through the  
ASEAN Regional Forum.

•  New Zealand engages with key partners (including 

in the Pacific) to build confidence, pursue  
practical cooperation and, where needed,  
ensure New Zealand’s concerns are registered.

WHO?*

MFAT
NCPO
MBIE
MoD
NZDF
NZITF and other 
stakeholders

NCSC
Police
MoJ
MFAT
MoD
NZDF 
NZITF and other 
operational 
partners

MFAT
NCPO
MBIE
Police
NZITF and other 
stakeholders

ACTION 4 

MAXIMISE  
THE ECONOMIC 
OPPORTUNITIES  
OF CYBERSPACE 
FOR  
NEW ZEALAND 
AND 
NEW ZEALANDERS 

•  New Zealand engages with trading partners on 
the development of their national cyber security 
practices to ensure new requirements do not 
establish barriers to trade. 

•  Mutual recognition/equivalence of cyber security 

measures with trading partners are pursued. 

•  Engage with industry to understand, and consider 

how to address, any cybersecurity related 
impediments to trade.

MFAT
NCPO
MBIE
NZTE
Connect Smart 
partners

* Refer to page 4 for detail on acronyms.

11

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy Action Plan 2015

