National Plan to  
Address Cybercrime

2015

Improving our ability to prevent,  

investigate and respond to cybercrime

Contents

INTRODUCTION 

Purpose of the Plan 

What is cybercrime? 

The nature of the cybercrime problem and the challenges for New Zealand 

PRINCIPLES TO UNDERPIN OUR APPROACH 

PRIORITY ACTIONS 

1. Build capability to address cybercrime 

2. Adapt New Zealand’s policy and legislative settings for the digital age 

3. Enhance New Zealand’s operational response to cybercrime 

4. Use New Zealand’s international connections to combat cybercrime 

3

3

4

4

8

8

9

11

13

14

A secure, resilient and prosperous 
online New Zealand.

2

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015INTRODUCTION

New Zealanders live in a connected world. The Internet and information communications 
technologies (ICT) have broken down geographical barriers, brought people together and created 
opportunities for economic growth and innovation. New Zealanders’ private and professional lives 
are underpinned by digital technologies as never before. Government, business, non-governmental 
organisations and individuals are seizing the opportunity to deliver services, transact business and 
communicate in cyberspace.

The cyber environment also provides opportunities for those with criminal or hostile objectives.  
The scale, speed and global nature of cybercrime present a challenge to traditional law 
enforcement methods and skills, and to confidence in our online world.  

Purpose of the National Plan to Address 
Cybercrime

New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2015 has four goals: Cyber Resilience, Cyber Capability, 
Addressing Cybercrime and International Cooperation. The National Plan to Address Cybercrime 
(the Plan) has been developed to support the cybercrime goal and contribute to the delivery  
of the Strategy’s vision: “A secure, resilient and prosperous online New Zealand”. 

CYBER RESILIENCE

New Zealand’s information 
infrastructures can resist cyber 
threats and we have the tools to 
protect our national interests

ADDRESSING 
CYBERCRIME

New Zealand improves its 
ability to prevent, investigate 
and respond to cybercrime

NEW ZEALAND’S  

Cyber Security Strategy

CYBER CAPABILITY

New Zealanders, businesses and 
government agencies understand 
cyber threats and have the 
capability to protect themselves

INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION

New Zealand protects and 
advances its interests on 
cyberspace issues internationally

The Plan sets out the New Zealand government’s understanding of the cybercrime  
issue, principles and actions to improve our ability to prevent, investigate and  
respond to cybercrime and reduce harm to New Zealanders.

It will ensure New Zealand’s response to cybercrime is coordinated at a national and 
international level, while also providing individuals and businesses with the tools to  
protect themselves.

3

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015What is cybercrime?

Cybercrime is part of a continuum of activity that ranges from cyber safety challenges to threats to 
national security. Cybercrime can encompass criminal activity from cyberbullying to state-sponsored 
theft of intellectual property. Cybercrime can be devastating to individuals, communities and 
business at both ends of the scale.

For the purposes of this Plan, the definition of cybercrime has two elements.1

•  A criminal act that can only be committed through the use of ICT or the Internet and where the 

computer or network is the target of the offence. This is regardless of what the criminal goal 
is – whether political or financial gain, espionage or any other reason. Examples of cybercrime 
include producing malicious software, network intrusions, denial of service attacks and phishing.

•  Cyber-enabled crime is any criminal act that could be committed without ICT or the Internet,  

but is assisted, facilitated or escalated in scale by the use of technology. This includes a vast 
amount of serious and organised crime, such as cyber-enabled fraud or the distribution of  
child exploitation material.

However, cybercrime is a subset of general crime, and the boundaries will not always be  
hard and fast.

The nature of the cybercrime problem and the 
challenges for New Zealand

THE COSTS OF CYBERCRIME ARE DIFFICULT TO CALCULATE RELIABLY

The extent of the cybercrime problem is not well understood. Worldwide, many instances of 
cybercrime go unreported. In some instances, victims will be unaware they have been affected.  
Other victims are too embarrassed to report the crime, do not know to whom to report, whether 
a crime has been committed, or do not believe law enforcement can provide a remedy. If victims 
receive a remedy from a supplier or financial institution, they may not also report a crime. Finally, 
businesses can be reluctant to disclose losses or breaches for fear of reputational damage. 
According to the UK Home Office, survey data suggests that in 2012, businesses reported only 2%  
of online crime incidents.2 As a result, the economic cost of cybercrime is notoriously difficult to 
calculate reliably.3 What we do know is that survey and anecdotal evidence indicates a high level  
of experience with cybercrime. One recent report estimated the annual cost to the global economy  
at more than US$400 billion.4

The indirect costs from cybercrime are equally difficult to quantify, including the opportunity costs. 
For many small-to-medium enterprises, cybercrime may result in ‘denial of business’ – nothing may 
be stolen, but an attack can reduce their ability to trade. Businesses and individuals also face costs 
to protect against cybercrime and for remediation (if required). Overseas, well-known losses include 
the theft of personal and financial information for 70 million customers of US retailer Target in 2013 
and the theft of data related to 56 million credit cards from Home Depot in 2014. Cybercrime 
can also enable the organisation and perpetration of physical crime, for example fraud, extortion, 
disorder, sexual and other violent assaults. 

1   New Zealand Police “Prevention First: National Cybercrime Operating Strategy 2014-2017” (Wellington, 2014).
2   M McGuire and S Dowling “Cyber crime: A review of the evidence” (Home Office Research Report 75, October 2013).
3   Police National Intelligence Centre (NIC) “Summary from ‘Cyber crime: The need to improve public confidence’ (May 2014)” 

(New Zealand Police, Wellington, 2014).

4   Police, 2014.

4

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015Cybercrime may result in social harms through embarrassment and nuisance and, in more serious 
cases, physical or emotional harm. In the Sony pictures hack in late 2014, large quantities of 
personal and commercial data were stolen and publicly released (in addition to triggering an 
international debate on freedom of expression in the digital age). Finally, while the financial losses 
from cybercrime can be small in an individual instance, the effects on public trust and confidence 
may be corrosive over time. 

THERE IS NO COMPLETE PICTURE OF CYBERCRIME IN NEW ZEALAND

We are only seeing the tip of the iceberg. Research 
commissioned for Connect Smart Week 2014 found 
that 83% of New Zealanders had experienced a cyber-
security breach.5 This is not yet reflected in reporting, 
as New Zealand does not have a single, central point of 
reporting and breach disclosure is not mandatory. Even if 
they want to, victims do not always know where to report. 
Different agencies are responsible for different types 
of cybercrime, so some incidents will be reported to 
multiple places, while other victims may be passed from 
one agency to another in an effort to find the best place 
for a resolution.6 Responses may also vary within each 
service. As a result, no one has a consolidated picture  
of cybercrime in New Zealand. 

83%  

of New Zealanders  
have experienced  
a cyber breach.

As the threat picture develops, we will gain a better understanding of what is required to 
effectively combat cybercrime, including the full ramifications of rapid technological change and 
emerging trends such as the rise of online or ‘crypto’ currencies. Related legislative reforms are 
already underway but further amendments are likely to be required to ensure New Zealand’s legal 
framework is future-proof and facilitates an effective response to cybercrime.

IT IS DIFFICULT TO DETECT, INVESTIGATE AND PROSECUTE CYBERCRIME

Cybercrime produces high returns at a low cost and reasonably low risk to the criminal. Thousands 
of spam emails may generate small losses for each victim, but a much greater loss for New Zealand 
as a whole. The two most common techniques – social engineering (where a victim is tricked into 
granting access) and vulnerability exploitation (taking advantage of programming issues) – do 
not require much investment by criminals, due to the low marginal cost between one victim and 
thousands of victims.

Cybercrime can also be distinguished from ‘traditional crimes’ by the challenges its global nature 
presents for law enforcement. Individuals and groups overseas can operate wherever an Internet 
connection is present. The perpetrators are overwhelmingly based overseas and are highly 
organised – one United Nations report estimates that 80% of cybercrime is a part of organised 
criminal activity.7 Traditional organised crime groups are migrating to this environment for greater 
profit at less risk. 

5   Connect Smart “Understanding Public Perceptions Toward Cyber Security” (July 2014). Last accessed 30/09/2014.  

http://www.connectsmart.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/Perceptive-Research-Understanding-Cyber-Security-Public-
Perceptions-2014.pdf

6  Police NIC, 2014.
7   United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime “Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime: Draft.” (February 2013). Last accessed: 

24/09/14. http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_STUDY_210213.pdf

5

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015The global element makes it difficult to find the perpetrator and access related evidence. 
Information exchange and cooperation between different countries can be poor and even  
where strong cooperative relationships exist, mutual legal assistance treaty processes can be  
very slow and cumbersome. Cases may require a disproportionate amount of investigative effort, 
reducing the availability of resources to deal with other demands. The country where a perpetrator 
is based may also not have the necessary skills or capacity to conduct a suitable investigation or 
preserve evidence.8

Investigation is further complicated by the ability to operate near-anonymously on the Internet. 
Attribution in cyber incidents is very difficult, particularly when an attack originates overseas. This 
makes cybercrime challenging not only to investigate but also to prosecute. Proxies and channels 

like The Onion Router (TOR) and peer-to-peer (P2P) 
networks can be exploited by criminals attempting to 
hide their identity under layers of encryption. Those 
networks are frequently used to facilitate criminal activity 
and pose challenges for law enforcement. One well-
known example was the use of the now-closed ‘Silk 
Road’ site on the TOR network for drugs trading. The 
fastest growing is a market called ‘Evolution’ – advertising 
guns, stolen credit card data, stolen medical information 
and fake identification – which offers highly secure 
transactions.9 Increasingly, such sites and dark markets 
are also selling cybercrime as a service, such as hackers 
for hire or simple toolkits. These developments lower the 
barriers for entry into cybercrime.10

Dark markets are selling 
cybercrime as a service: 

hackers for hire or  

simple toolkits.

Accordingly, a growing group of unskilled actors can have a relatively damaging impact. At the 
other end of the spectrum, the lines are blurring between criminal actors and state actors (some of 
whom may also act with criminal intent) as activity proliferates and techniques become increasingly 
sophisticated. As technology and detection strategies evolve, so too do the actors, making it 
difficult for responders to keep pace.11 New Zealand offenders are not averse to using anonymising 
technology, including the use of TOR to attempt to hide sites providing child exploitation material 
and drug dealing.

NEW ZEALAND’S RESPONSE TO CYBERCRIME IS SHARED BETWEEN  

GOVERNMENT, NGOs, THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND INDIVIDUALS

A range of government agencies have policy and operational responsibilities related to cybercrime. 
Those roles have largely evolved organically rather than by design. At present, these include:

•  New Zealand Police: overarching responsibility for crime prevention, detection and 

investigation in New Zealand, the Police Cybercrime Unit, Online Child Exploitation Across  
New Zealand (OCEANZ), Organised Financial Crime Agency New Zealand (OFCANZ).

•  Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment: Scamwatch and fraud awareness.

•  Department of Internal Affairs: Electronic Messaging Compliance (anti-spam),  

Censorship Compliance Unit. 

8   Calum Jeffray and Tobias Feakin “Special Report: The Underground Web: The Cybercrime Challenge” (Australian Strategic 

Policy Institute, March 2015).

9  Jeffray and Feakin, 2015.
10 Police NIC, 2014.
11 Police NIC, 2014.

6

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015•  Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet: the National Cyber Policy Office,  

Connect Smart.

•  Ministry of Justice: criminal justice policy development.

•  National Cyber Security Centre (in the Government Communications Security Bureau): 

advanced threats against New Zealand’s information infrastructures of national importance.

•  New Zealand Customs Service: border protection.

•  New Zealand Security Intelligence Service: investigation of state-sponsored espionage,  

either directed against or involving New Zealand, with emphasis on detection and  
investigation of threats.

•  Serious Fraud Office: serious or complex frauds.

However, cybercrime is a shared problem – non-governmental organisations (NGOs), civil society 
and the private sector all have a role to play in both prevention and response. NetSafe12 and the 
New Zealand Internet Taskforce,13 for example, provide a reporting point and incident advisories 
– and have taken on roles not currently provided by government. Twenty-three percent of all the 
reports NetSafe received in 2014 were directly referred from the New Zealand Police.14

The New Zealand government has also initiated Connect Smart:15 
a partnership with a range of organisations to raise awareness and 
capability. Many private sector companies provide a response to 
cybercrime as a part of their core customer service – managing 
cybercrime is a part of doing business in the 21st century – and build  
a range of protections into the services they offer.

Protect yourself online

Responsibility also sits with the wider community. The New Zealand Police’s operating strategy 
is Prevention First, an approach which is also relevant to cybercrime.16 Ideally, cybercrime will be 
prevented before it occurs. While there is no way to totally eliminate the risk, there are simple 
steps every individual can take to reduce risk. New Zealanders need to take cyber security threats 
seriously and be equipped with the tools and techniques to protect themselves online.

To reduce the number of cybercrime victims in New Zealand, we need to raise awareness in a way 
that creates behavioural change. Research commissioned as part of Connect Smart Week 2014 
showed that, of the 83% of New Zealanders who had experienced a cyber-security breach, 61% 
had not changed their online behaviour since the breach.17 The research also suggested that  
New Zealanders find the topic overwhelming, meaning there is a role for government, in 
partnership with the private sector and NGOs, to be a trusted source of information and advice.

Accordingly, there are opportunities for the government to improve the experience for victims 
of cybercrime, while also gaining a better understanding of the issue. A joined-up approach will 
be critical to provide an effective, customer-focused response to cybercrime. Confidence in the 
security and use of ICT will also be critical to achieve the government’s objectives in delivering 
services to citizens via online channels. 

12 http://www.theorb.org.nz
13  http://www.nzitf.org.nz
14  Figure from NetSafe.
15  www.connectsmart.govt.nz
16 Police NIC, 2014.
17  Connect Smart, 2014.

7

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015PRINCIPLES TO UNDERPIN OUR APPROACH

Four key principles underpin the New Zealand government’s approach to cybercrime. Three of 
these are drawn from New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy. The first principle (below) is specific 
to this Plan’s cybercrime focus. 

PREVENTING AND MINIMISING HARM
Initiatives and activities aimed at increasing awareness of the risks posed by cybercrime will be 
prioritised, with the goal of promoting behavioural change and raising capability to mitigate  
those risks. 

ECONOMIC GROWTH IS ENABLED
Economic harm is a major consequence of cybercrime. Businesses in New Zealand – large  
and small – are increasingly affected by cybercrime. Ways to address cybercrime which support 
productivity and competitiveness will be sought.

A PARTNERSHIP APPROACH IS ESSENTIAL
The government has a role to play in cyber security – but it cannot do it alone. The cybercrime 
response is a shared responsibility and the New Zealand government will work in close partnership 
with the private sector, academia, civil society, individuals and other countries. That partnership will 
be based on mutual respect and trust.

The plan will seek opportunities to share experiences, best practice and to cooperate on research 
and development initiatives. Industry-led and targeted initiatives will be supported (for example, 
among the banking sector). The government will also continue to work with NGOs like NetSafe that 
are engaged in a range of cyber safety and security challenges on behalf of New Zealanders.

HUMAN RIGHTS ARE PROTECTED ONLINE 
A key part of the New Zealand’s government’s approach to cyber security policy is to support  
the creativity, freedom, openness and dynamism that has made the Internet what it is today.  
New Zealanders should be able to engage online without suffering harm or unlawful interference.

PRIORITY ACTIONS

This Plan includes four priority actions. Each should be considered alongside the wider 
actions in the New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy; all have been incorporated into  
the 2015 Action Plan.
1  Build capability to address cybercrime

2   Adapt New Zealand’s policy and legislative  

settings to the digital age

3   Enhance New Zealand’s operational response  

to cybercrime

4   Use New Zealand’s international connections  

to combat cybercrime

8

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015PRIORITY ACTION 1

Build capability to address cybercrime

Preventing harm to New Zealanders means that increasing capability and awareness must be at  
the heart of any response to cybercrime, giving New Zealanders the incentives and tools to change 
their online behaviour. This should result in New Zealanders being alert to social engineering and 
other cybercrime techniques, and actively taking practical steps to protect themselves online.  
Law enforcement agencies will also have the capability to undertake search and evidence recovery 
when a crime has been committed. Success will be measured when New Zealanders know where  
to go for assistance and cybercrime rates reduce. 

This is closely linked to the Cyber Capability goal in New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy.

Connect Smart (www.connectsmart.govt.nz) was launched in 
2014 to provide an ongoing, positive approach to cyber security, 
supported by a wide range of partners from across the public, 
private and NGO sectors.

Protect yourself online

Connect Smart is aimed at raising awareness of security and 
promoting ways for New Zealanders to protect themselves online.

USING THE CONNECT SMART BRAND TO PREVENT CYBERCRIME
We will continue to use the Connect Smart brand, website and partner channels to raise 
awareness of the cybercrime threat and promote behavioural change. Providing up-to-date 
alerts and information around current scams and attack vectors will help ensure New Zealanders 
understand the threat. Creating a clear understanding of the challenges will underpin active 
behavioural change by New Zealanders and foster a culture of cyber security. This will also align 
with initiatives like NetSafe’s work with schools to ‘grow digital citizens’ and significant work by the 
Ministry of Education on digital literacy. 

We will continue to provide advice, through Connect Smart, about simple tools and 
techniques to prevent cybercrime. It is critical that individuals and small-to-medium enterprises 
have up-to-date, trusted advice about what action they can take. We will work with partners to 
develop and distribute this advice through a range of channels, including the Connect Smart 
website and social media. We will also integrate Connect Smart messaging into crime-prevention 
initiatives and community liaison roles (such as Police community liaison officers).

DEVELOPING GOVERNMENT CYBERCRIME CAPABILITY 
The Strategy sets out the need to develop a cyber security professional workforce and the difficulty 
in both attracting and retaining highly skilled people. This also applies to law enforcement. 
Electronic evidence is increasingly a part of many criminal investigations. New Zealand must ensure 
its capability keeps up with demand for these skills and emerging technologies. All front line 
Police officers and other investigators need, as a minimum, to be able to identify cybercrime and 
cyber-enabled crime. Investigators will need to be able to identify lines of enquiry and evidential 
material, and specialist units must have the capability to provide assistance in more complex and 
sophisticated cases. There must be enough skilled investigators to keep up with the rising demand 
for electronic evidence.

Agencies will continue to share experience, skills, knowledge and resources through the 
Electronic Combined Law Agency Group (e-CLAG). E-CLAG sits within the broader Combined 
Law Agency Group – a group of intelligence, enforcement and compliance professionals who 

9

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015collaborate on a whole-of-government approach to leverage combined resources. CLAG 
partnerships are used to tackle the threats of cross-agency crime. 

Members of e-CLAG are the digital forensic investigators and analysts from member agencies with 
digital forensic divisions. The field is rapidly evolving and, in some instances, an agency will only 
have one investigator or analyst on staff, hence a need to make use of the knowledge, experience 
and resources of other e-CLAG member agencies. Past and ongoing e-CLAG activities include 
joint agency training sessions and the provision of assistance and tools between member agencies 
(and to agencies without digital forensics capability). Current projects include developing a matrix 
capturing equipment assets and training requirements across agencies.

New Zealand Police is actively developing capability and training to deal with cybercrime.  
The Police Prevention First: National Cybercrime Operating Strategy 2014-2017 sets out Police 
goals to develop capacity and capability to meet the growing needs around cybercrime and  
cyber-enabled crime. The Police Cybercrime Unit is the core Police unit that deals with cybercrime 
and provides Police with a central point of contact for other agencies. The Unit has recently 
expanded to seven staff, comprised of a mix of detectives and technical investigators.

Investments in core capability are designed to create a foundation for further development and 
capacity building. All front line staff (level one) will be trained to deal with customers at the front 
desk and triage incoming reports. Investigators (level two) will identify and follow online lines of 
enquiry, identify evidential material and prosecute offenders. Specialists within the Cybercrime Unit 
(level three) will deal with the more complex cybercrimes impacting on New Zealand businesses 
and our reputation. Training material will be in line with the Australia New Zealand Police Advisory 
Agency Training guidelines.

10

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015PRIORITY ACTION 2 

Adapt New Zealand’s policy and 
legislative settings for the digital age

Alongside increased capability, law enforcement and the national security agencies need appropriate 
and effective powers to investigate cybercrime. New Zealand’s legislative and policy settings must 
adapt to new technologies and balance security and privacy. Rapid changes require a technology-
neutral framework; at the same time, the global nature of cybercrime poses a challenge to traditional 
thinking about borders and jurisdiction. This area of work will be successful when New Zealand’s 
legal framework supports a rapid and effective response to cybercrime.

LEGISLATIVE REFORM ALREADY UNDERWAY
In recognition of these challenges and other issues, legislative reform is underway in a number  
of related areas.

In 2014, following a report from the Law Commission, Cabinet agreed to the Ministry of Justice 
undertaking work to update New Zealand’s privacy laws. Advances in technology since 1993 have 
dramatically changed how personal information is collected, stored and shared.  Reform of the 
Privacy Act 1993 will emphasise identifying and addressing risks before privacy breaches can occur.

The Law Commission is currently undertaking a review of the Extradition Act 1999 and the Mutual 
Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1992. These Acts frame New Zealand’s response to requests 
from foreign governments in the investigation and prosecution of crime. The review is based on the 
effects of technological change, alongside other developments in the international context, such as 
globalisation, increasing mobility and transnational crime.

The New Zealand Customs Service is in the process of 
reviewing the Customs and Excise Act 1996. The intent 
of the review is to ensure that the Act is flexible and 
permits Customs to undertake their border protection role 
using new technology and operating methods.

In response to rising concerns about the harmful effects 
of cyberbullying on young people, the Harmful Digital 
Communications Act was passed in July 2015. Under 
previous laws, it could be difficult for victims to deal with 
harmful digital communications – for example, trying to 
remove abusive, intimidating and distressing material 
from the Internet could be difficult, drawn out and costly. 

Law enforcement needs  
to operate swiftly across 

many jurisdictions.

Also, few sanctions were available to aid such efforts and to hold offenders to account. The Act is 
intended to prevent harm and provide victims with quick and efficient redress. The Act has created 
a range of measures to address damaging electronic communications spread through methods such 
as emails, texts and social media posts.

DEVELOPING A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF OUR LEGISLATIVE NEEDS
The Law Commission reviewed ‘computer crime’ in 1999. The drafting of legislation is technology 
neutral, but given technological and global developments, since then there may be a need to 
update or amend it. 

Elements of New Zealand’s legislative framework will be tested to see whether amendment to 
effectively prevent, investigate and respond to cybercrime is required. This would be a targeted 
review. Examples may include amending section 252 of the Crimes Act to permit Police to remove 

11

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015botnet infections, considering widening enforcement powers to include seeking information on 
care and protection matters, considering whether we need an offence of unlawful possession of 
stolen data, reviewing the crimes involving computers provisions in the Crimes Act and the role of 
the Internet in funding or supporting organised criminal or terrorist groups.

Elements of New Zealand’s policy and legal frameworks will be tested to see whether they 
need amendment to permit further preventative operational activity. Covert work currently 
plays an important role in investigating and preventing the online exploitation of children. Many 
criminal networks online rely on trust and confidence to operate so there may be opportunities to 
enhance a proactive approach to preventing cybercrime or responding to offenders.

MEETING TRANS-BOUNDARY CHALLENGES
Most cybercrime is perpetrated from outside New Zealand. Criminals exploit the differences 
between countries and evidence relating to a criminal act may sit in multiple locations. 

The government will work with partners (including multinational companies) to meet the challenges 
raised by extraterritorial jurisdiction. Cybercrime often means that law enforcement needs to 
operate swiftly across many jurisdictions and to access information under many different legal 
and political regimes. This challenges our traditional notions of sovereignty and jurisdiction – and 
the issue will not be resolved by one state alone. Exploring accession to the Council of Europe 
Convention on Cybercrime is an important first step, as is working with companies to ensure that 
law enforcement and security agencies have lawful access to data.

12

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015PRIORITY ACTION 3 

Enhance New Zealand’s operational  
response to cybercrime

A range of government agencies, NGOs and private sector companies play different roles in 
regard to cybercrime. To generate the strongest possible response to cybercrime, we need to work 
together and leverage our individual and collective strengths. Our measures of success will be a 
coordinated response to cybercrime and a better understanding of the size, nature and impact of 
cybercrime threats.

ENHANCING NEW ZEALAND’S RESPONSE TO CYBER INCIDENTS

As set out in New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy, work is underway to establish a national 
CERT18 to deal with issues across the spectrum, including cybercrime. New Zealand’s cyber 
response capabilities have developed organically and are spread across a range of agencies. A 
CERT should bring some of those capabilities together and result in a more effective and efficient 
response for victims of cybercrime.

Ways to enhance cross-agency operational 
effectiveness in the prevention, investigation and 
response to cybercrime will be investigated. There 
are opportunities for agencies to share knowledge and 
techniques in investigations. As discussed earlier, some  
of this is already underway through forums like e-CLAG.

Police reporting will begin to distinguish cybercrime 
from other crimes. At present, it is not always possible to 
distinguish between crimes committed online and those 
committed offline. Police recording of reported incidents 
will need regular reviews to consider identification of 
cybercrime and cyber-enabled crime so that they are 
distinguishable from offences which are not facilitated 
by ICT. This will mean developing criminal behaviour is 
properly monitored, allowing new and developing trends 
to be better identified.

Making it easier for  

New Zealanders to report 

cybercrime will…  
help New Zealand  

better understand and 
respond to cybercrime

ENHANCING OUR CUSTOMER FOCUS
As highlighted earlier, cybercrime tends to be under-reported for a range of reasons. Making it 
easier for New Zealanders to report cybercrime will provide better support to victims and ensure 
better information is collected, to help New Zealand better understand and respond to cybercrime. 

Options to establish a central point for cybercrime reporting will be considered. Options to 
improve customer experience will be considered by providing a single ‘front door’ at which issues 
are triaged and directed to the appropriate responder.

Victims of cybercrime have access to the same support as other victims of crime. Focusing 
on victims in the criminal justice system helps reduce the cost and impact of crime on individuals. 
Financial and emotional effects of crime on victims will be minimised and services for victims will  
be provided in a timely and credible way.19 

18   CERT was once an acronym for ‘computer emergency response team’. Since 1997, CERT has been a registered trademark 

owned by Carnegie Mellon University and is no longer used as an acronym. New Zealand is requesting permission to use the 
CERT trademark.

19 www.victimsinfo.govt.nz/

13

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015PRIORITY ACTION 4 

Use New Zealand’s international 
connections to combat cybercrime

International engagement is essential for cyber security. As a result, the principle of partnership 
applies equally internationally as it does domestically. New Zealand is not isolated in cyberspace, 
which creates challenges for law enforcement in investigating and prosecuting cybercriminals.  
The fundamentally global nature of the problem requires a coordinated international response.  
This will be successful when law enforcement in New Zealand can more effectively prevent crime 
and respond swiftly to cybercrime threats emanating outside our jurisdiction.

CLOSER COOPERATION ON CYBERCRIME
Differences in national laws and enforcement regimes can create barriers to effective international 
cooperation. New Zealand is committed to working with partners to reduce those barriers. 
Law enforcement agencies work closely with counterparts through INTERPOL and in Australia 
(particularly through the Australia New Zealand Policing Advisory Agency), Canada, the United 
States and the United Kingdom. New Zealand is also a member of the Virtual Global Taskforce, the 
Global Alliance against Child Sexual Abuse Online, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the London  
Action Plan on spam. 

Consider progressing New Zealand’s accession to the Council of Europe Convention on 
Cybercrime (also known as the Budapest Convention). The Council of Europe Convention on 
Cybercrime is the first international treaty seeking to address cybercrime by promoting harmonised 
legal frameworks, improving investigative techniques and increasing cross-border cooperation. 
It was developed by the Council of Europe but a wide range of states have since acceded to the 
Convention, including our closest partners. As at May 2015, 45 states parties have ratified the 
Convention. To accede will require a National Interest Analysis to test the benefits for New Zealand, 
including testing the domestic policy implications.

Continue to promote governance of cyberspace and norms of state behaviour online that 
reflect New Zealand’s vision and interests. There is not yet a clear consensus about appropriate 
behaviour for states in an online environment. As set out in the Strategy’s International Cooperation 
goal, New Zealand will continue to participate in the development of international consensus about 
appropriate state of behaviour and the development of confidence-building measures, including 
on cybercrime.

Strengthen New Zealand’s relationships with international bodies focused on addressing 
cybercrime. There are opportunities for New Zealand to contribute to and benefit from 
relationships with other law enforcement groups (such as Europol, NGOs, and specialist bodies 
sponsored by the private sector such as Microsoft’s Digital Crimes Unit). International cooperation 
currently relies largely on personal and informal relationships. New Zealand must find ways to 
ensure these ongoing cooperative relationships are maintained and embedded. For example,  
New Zealand Police currently has a secondee at the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation  
– a cutting edge research and development facility, based in Singapore.

Networks of international cooperation will be built to support operational activity, through joint 
investigations, joint operations, intelligence sharing, growing expertise and developing models of 
best practice. 

14

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015CAPACITY BUILDING IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
New Zealand is committed to the maintenance of stability and security in cyberspace. Improving 
confidence and understanding of cyber security issues is an important part of international stability. 
Although the national response to cybercrime is still being developed, nevertheless New Zealand 
is relatively well-placed to contribute to building capacity in the Asia-Pacific region. As the Pacific 
region becomes more connected, the opportunities for cybercriminals will increasingly affect 
economic growth and regional security. Pacific states are also likely to be targets for criminal activity 
as criminals seek legislative settings that are less likely to facilitate their arrest and conviction.

Work with Pacific island states to identify gaps in their capability to respond to cybercrime 
and undertake capacity building activities in the Asia-Pacific region. New Zealand is one of 42 
founding members of the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE), launched at the 4th Global 
Conference on Cyber Space in the Hague in 2015. The GFCE is intended to give momentum to 
global cyber security capacity building. New Zealand’s capacity building activities will assist in 
building a more secure, open and accessible cyberspace that delivers broad-based economic and 
social benefits. Efforts will focus on raising awareness of the opportunities and risks cyberspace offers 
and ways to manage those; along with practical solutions to raise the policy and operational capacity 
of law enforcement and other government agencies to respond cyber security risks. 

15

National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015National Plan to Address Cybercrime 2015

