REPUBLIC OF POLAND

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation,

Internal Security Agency

CYBERSPACE PROTECTION POLICY

OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

REPUBLIC OF POLAND

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation,

Internal Security Agency

CYBERSPACE PROTECTION POLICY

OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

WARSAW
25 June 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS:
THE MAIN PREREQUISITES AND ASSUMPTIONS OF THE CYBERSPACE PROTECTION POLICY OF 
1. 
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND ...................................................................................................................... 4
1.1.   DEFINITIONS  ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5
1.2.   STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
1.3.   SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES ........................................................................................................................................................ 6
1.4.   ADDRESSEES AND EXTENT OF IMPACT............................................................................................................................ 7
1.5.   ESTABLISHING RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE SECURITY OF CRP ...................................................................................... 8
1.6.   COMPLIANCE OF THE POLICY WITH LEGAL ACTS ......................................................................................................... 8
CONDITIONS AND PROBLEMS OF THE CYBERSPACE AREA ........................................................ 9
2.  
3.  
THE MAIN LINES OF ACTION ..................................................................................................... 10
3.1   RISK ASSESSMENT ............................................................................................................................................................ 10
3.2   THE SECURITY OF GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION PORTALS ................................................................................. 10
3.3  
PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS ......................................................................................................................... 11
3.4  
PRINCIPLES OF PROCEDURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL ACTIONS .............................................................................. 11
3.4.1  Management of the cyberspace security of the Republic of Poland ..................................................... 11
3.4.2   The safety management system in organizational unit ............................................................................. 12
3.4.3   The role of plenipotentiaries for cyberspace security .............................................................................. 12
3.5  
PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATION, TRAINING AND AWARENESS-RAISING IN THE FIELD OF SECURITY ......................... 13
3.5.1   Training of plenipotentiaries for cyberspace security .............................................................................. 13
3.5.2   Introduction of ICT security topics as a permanent element of higher education ....................... 13
3.5.3   Education of clerical staff in government administration .................................................................... 13
3.5.4   Social campaign of education and prevention nature ............................................................................... 14
3.6  
PRINCIPLES OF TECHNICAL ACTIONS ........................................................................................................................... 15
3.6.1   Research programmes ............................................................................................................................................... 15
3.6.2 
 Expansion of ICT security incident response teams in government administration  ..................... 15
3.6.3   Development of an early warning system and implementation and maintenance of preventive 
solutions ........................................................................................................................................................................ 16
3.6.4   Testing the level of security and the continuity of actions.................................................................. 16
3.6.5   Development of security teams ............................................................................................................................ 16
IMPLEMENTATION AND DELIVERY MECHANISMS OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE DOCUMENT ... 18
4.  
4.1  
SUPERVISION AND COORDINATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION ................................................................................ 18
4.2   THE NATIONAL RESPONSE SYSTEM FOR COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENTS IN CRP ................................................ 18
4.3  
INFORMATION EXCHANGE MECHANISM ....................................................................................................................... 19
4.4   METHODS AND FORMS OF COOPERATION .................................................................................................................... 19
 COOPERATION WITH ENTREPRENEURS ....................................................................................................................... 19
4.5 
4.5.1 
 Cooperation with manufacturers of ICT equipment and systems .......................................................... 20
4.5.2   Cooperation with telecommunication entrepreneurs ............................................................................... 20
4.6  
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION .................................................................................................................................... 20
5.  
FINANCING ................................................................................................................................. 21
6.   ASSESSMENT OF EFFECTIVENESS OF THE POLICY .................................................................... 22
EXPECTED EFFECTS OF THE POLICY ............................................................................................................................. 23
6.1  
6.2  
EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTIONS .......................................................................................................................................... 24
6.3   MONITORING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTIONS AS A PART OF THE ADOPTED POLICY ........................................ 24
6.4   CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATING THE PROVISIONS OF THE POLICY ........................................................................... 24

This document has been drawn up in the Ministry of Administration and Digitization 

– 

– 

– 

in cooperation with the Internal Security Agency, based on:
the  document  discussed  on  9  March  2009  by  the  Standing  Committee  of  the 
Council of Ministers, “The Government Cyberspace Protection Programme of the 
Republic of Poland for 2009-2011 – Principles,”
the  periodic  reports  on  the  security  status  of  the  gov.pl  area,  published  by  the 
Governmental Computer Security Incident Response Team CERT.GOV.PL,
the decision of the Chairman of the Committee of the Council of Ministers for 
Digitization No. 1/2012 of 24 January 2012 with regard to the creation of a Task 
force for the protection of governmental portals.

Page 3 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency1.  The main prerequisites and assumptions  

of the Cyberspace Protection Policy  
of the Republic of Poland

In the face of globalization, the cyberspace security has become one of the key 
strategic objectives in the area of security of each country. At a time of free movement 
of  people,  goods,  information  and  capital  –  the  security  of  a  democratic  country 
depends on the development of mechanisms which allow preventing and combating 
threats to the cyberspace security.

Due to the increase in threats to the ICT systems, from which the total separation 
is not possible, and the fact that the responsibility for ICT security is distributed, it is 
necessary to coordinate actions which will allow for a fast and effective response to 
attacks directed against ICT systems and services offered by them.

The  ICT  systems  operated  by  the  government  administration,  the  legislative 
authorities, the judiciary, local government, as well as the strategic systems from the 
point of view of the security of the State as well as entrepreneurs and natural persons are 
covered by this “Cyberspace Protection Policy of the Republic of Poland,” hereinafter 
referred to as the Policy.

By  this  Policy,  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Poland  accepts  that  by  its 
representatives it takes an active role in ensuring the security of information assets of 
the State, its citizens, and it executes its constitutional duties.

A part of the Policy includes the support for social initiatives aimed at implementing 

the tasks coinciding with this document.

The  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Poland,  in  fulfilling  the  constitutional 
obligations  implemented  by  cyberspace,  consults  organized  groups  of  society,  in 
particular  the  representatives  of  telecommunications  entrepreneurs  and  purveyors 
providing services by electronic means, to agree on an acceptable level of security of 
execution of obligations in question.

Accepting the status of the Policy for this document, it should be noted that under 
the  current  system  of  governmental  strategic  documents  a  Policy  is  in  the  group 
of  strategic  documents  detailing  the  courses  of  action  identified  in  the  strategies, 
development programmes and other programme documents, which do not specify 
new priorities and activities. They set the vision of development for a given sector and 
the way for its implementation, based on the provisions of the relevant documents.

The Policy does not cover with its task area the classified ICT systems. It should be 
emphasized that the area of protection of classified information has its own regulations 
and appropriate protective mechanisms. It has the organizational structures dedicated 
to the protection of classified information produced, processed and stored in separate 
ICT systems. The main legislative act is the Act of 5 August 2010 on the protection of 
classified information (OJ No. 182, item 1228).
Page 4 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency1.1. Definitions

The meaning of terms and abbreviations used in this document:
Abuse – a common name of a security department of an internet service provider 
who manages the computer security incident response process and the examination 
of complaints of abuse,
cyberspace  security  –  a  set  of  organizational  and  legal,  technical,  physical  and 
educational projects aimed at ensuring the uninterrupted functioning of cyberspace,
CERT  (Computer  Emergency  Response  Team),  CSIRT  (Computer  Security 
Incident Response Team) – a team set up to respond to incidents violating security 
on the Internet,
cyber attack – an intentional disruption of the proper functioning of cyberspace,
cybercrime – an offence committed in cyberspace,
cyberspace  –  a  space  of  processing  and  exchanging  information  created  by  the 
ICT systems, as defined in Article 3 point 3 of the Act of 17 February 2005 on the 
informatization of entities performing public tasks (OJ No. 64, item 565, as amended), 
together with links between them and the relations with users; in accordance with 
Article 2 paragraph 1b of the Act of 29 August 2002 on martial law and the powers of the 
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces as well as the Commander’s subordination 
to the constitutional authorities of the Republic of Poland (OJ No. 156, item 1301, as 
amended), Article 2 paragraph 1a of the Act of 21 June 2002 on the state of emergency 
(OJ No. 113, item 985, as amended) and Article 3 paragraph 1 point 4 of the Act of 18 
April 2002 on the state of natural disaster (OJ No. 62, item 558, as amended), 
cyberspace of the Republic of Poland (hereinafter referred to as CRP) –cyberspace 
within the territory of the Polish state and beyond, in places where the representatives 
of the RP are functioning (diplomatic agencies, military levies),
cyberterrorism – an offence of a terrorist nature committed in cyberspace,
computer security incident – a single event or a series of adverse events related to 
information  security  which  pose  a  significant  likelihood  of  disruption  of  business 
operations and jeopardize the security of information (according to the PN-ISO/IEC 
27000 norm series),
organizational unit – an organizational unit within the meaning of the Act of 23 April 
1964 – Civil Code (OJ No. 16, item 93, as amended),
PCS  –  a  plenipotentiary  for  cyberspace  security  in  organizational  units  of  public 
administration,
entrepreneur – an entrepreneur within the meaning of Article 4 of the Act of 2 July 
2004 on freedom of economic activity (OJ of 2010, No. 220, item 1447, as amended) or 
any other organizational unit, regardless of the form of ownership,
risk assessment – means the total risk analysis, which consists of: risk identification 
Page 5 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agencyand determination of extent of risks, as well as the risk assessment process,
cyberspace user – each organizational unit, an office supporting a public administration 
authority, an entrepreneur and a natural person who uses the resources of cyberspace.

1.2. Strategic Objective

The strategic objective of the Policy is to achieve an acceptable level of cyberspace 

security of the State.

The achievement of the strategic objective is accomplished by creating a legal and 
organizational framework and a system for effective coordination and exchange of 
information between the users of CRP.

Actions  undertaken  to  achieve  the  strategic  objective  are  the  result  of  risk 
assessments conducted by the qualified entities, with respect to threats occurring in 
cyberspace.

At the same time, the Policy is in line with the objectives of:
1)  the Digital Agenda for Europe of the European Council [COM(2010)245];
2)  the Strategy for Development of Information Society;
3)  the National Security Strategy;
4)  the Medium-Term National Development Strategy;
5)  the “Europe 2020” Strategy;
6)  the Efficient State Strategy.

1.3. Specific Objectives

1)  Increasing the level of security of the State ICT infrastructure.
2)  Improving the capacity to prevent and combat threats from cyberspace.
3)  Reducing the impact of incidents threatening the ICT security.
4)  Determining  the  competence  of  entities  responsible  for  the  security  of 

cyberspace.

5)  Creating  and  implementing  a  coherent  system  of  cyberspace  security 
management  for  all  government  administration  entities  and  establishing 
guidelines in this area for non-state actors.

6)  Creating  a  sustainable  system  of  coordination  and  exchange  of  information 
between  the  entities  responsible  for  the  security  of  cyberspace  and  the 
cyberspace users.

7)  Increasing  awareness  of  the  cyberspace  users  on  the  methods  and  safety 

measures in cyberspace.

Page 6 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security AgencyThe objectives of the Policy are implemented through:
a)  the  coordination  system  to  prevent  and  respond  to  threats  and  attacks  on 

cyberspace, including attacks of a terrorist nature;

b)  the widespread adoption of mechanisms for the prevention and early detection 
of threats to the cyberspace security and the proper procedure for the identified 
incidents among the government administration units as well as non-state actors;

c)  the general and specialized social education in the field of security of CRP.

1.4. Addressees and extent of impact

The Policy is addressed to all the cyberspace users within the State and beyond its 
territory, in places where the representatives of the RP are functioning (diplomatic 
agencies, military levies).

This Policy applies to the government administration:
1)  offices  supporting  the  state  bodies  of  government  administration:  Prime 
Minister, the Council of Ministers, ministers and chairmen specified in statutes 
of committees;

2)  offices supporting central bodies of government administration: other than the 
above-mentioned, i.e. bodies subordinate to the Prime Minister or individual 
ministers;

3)  offices  supporting  local  bodies  of  government  administration:  province 

governors, bodies of combined and non-combined administration;

4)  Government Centre for Security.
At the same time the Policy is recommended for local government administration 
of communes, districts and provinces and other offices (units which do not belong to 
the state and local government administration), including:

a)  Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland;
b)  Chancellery of the Sejm of the Republic of Poland;
c)  Chancellery of the Senate of the Republic of Poland;
d)  Office of the National Broadcasting Council;
e)  Office of the Human Rights Defender;
f)  Office of the Children’s Ombudsman;
g)  Office of the National Council of the Judiciary of Poland;
h)  offices of state control bodies and protection of the law;
i)  National Bank of Poland;
j)  office of the Polish Financial Supervision Authority;
k)  state  legal  persons  and  state  organizational  units  other  than  the  above-

mentioned.

Page 7 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security AgencyThe Policy is at the same time a guide to actions for all other users of cyberspace 

who are not mentioned above.

1.5. Establishing responsibility for the security of CRP

Due  to  the  international  nature  of  the  Policy  the  entity  coordinating  the 
implementation of the Policy, on behalf of the Council of Ministers, is the minister 
responsible for informatization who, with the help of the Team referred to in point 
3.4.1,  ensures  coordination  and  consistency  of  actions  undertaken  to  ensure  the 
security of CRP.  

In the implementation of tasks relating to the security of CRP the Governmental 
Computer Security Incident Response Team CERT.GOV.PL is acting as the primary 
CERT in the area of government administration and the civil area. The main task is to 
provide and develop the capacity of organizational units of public administration of 
the Republic of Poland to protect against cyber threats, with particular emphasis on 
attacks targeted at infrastructure including ICT systems and networks, destruction or 
disruption of which could pose a threat to human life, health, national heritage and 
the environment to a significant extent, or cause serious property damage and disrupt 
the functioning of the state. 

Similarly,  in  the  military  this  role  is  performed  by  “Departmental  Centre  for 

Security Management of ICT Networks and Services.”

For the success of the Policy, an active participation of users of CRP in the efforts 

aimed at improving the level of its security is essential.

It is also important to increase the participation of users of CRP in the implementation 
of the Policy by consulting its content and participation in the coordination of the 
implementation of the Policy and its reviews with the representatives of society and 
ICT community.

The general use of solutions aimed at improving the security by the users of CRP 
will be an expression of approval for the actions undertaken by the Government of the 
Republic of Poland in this area.

1.6. Compliance of the Policy with legal acts

The Policy is in compliance with the generally applicable laws of the Republic of 
Poland (the Constitution, acts, ratified international agreements and regulations) and 
without prejudice to any of them.

Page 8 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency2. Conditions and problems of the cyberspace area

Functioning  of  the  State  and  the  implementation  of  its  constitutional  obligations 
is  increasingly  dependent  on  the  development  of  modern  technology,  information 
society and uninterrupted functioning of cyberspace. Currently, the safe functioning of 
cyberspace largely depends on the security of ICT infrastructure, which allows the use of 
cyberspace, information resources and services gathered in it, operating thanks to it. The 
infrastructure functioning in CRP allows the State to fulfil its constitutional obligation 
to the citizen, ensures continuity and effectiveness of government administration as well 
as uninterrupted and efficient development of the economy of the Republic of Poland.

Polish  government  sees  the  need  to  introduce  measures  aimed  at  ensuring  the 
security of the State ICT infrastructure, namely ensuring the correctness and continuity 
of  functioning  of  ICT  systems,  facilities  and  installations  used  to  implement  the 
constitutional duties of the State to the citizens and its internal security. For this purpose 
it is necessary to determine the minimum security standard which will allow for the 
implementation  of  this  objective  and  will  reduce  to  the  minimum  potential  damage 
which  may  be  entailed  by  attack  on  individual  elements  of  cyberspace  of  RP.  The 
Policy is the basis for developing the concept of management of infrastructure security 
functioning within CRP and developing guidelines for the creation of the legal basis 
serving the implementation of tasks in this regard by the government administration. 
The principles of ensuring cyberspace security developed under the cooperation referred 
to in point 4.4, within the infrastructure of CRP are also recommended to entrepreneurs.
The actions concerning the security of ICT infrastructure will be complementary 
to  the  efforts  aimed  at  protection  of  the  critical  infrastructure  of  the  State.  In  this 
respect, the Policy does not affect the provisions contained in the National Critical 
Infrastructure Protection Programme.

The  Policy  indicates  the  need  to  develop  the  concept  of  ensuring  security  of 
infrastructure  functioning  within  CRP  and  prepare  legal  basis  for  performance  of 
tasks in this regard by the government administration.

The ICT infrastructure of CRP must be protected against attacks from cyberspace, 

destruction, damage or unauthorized access.

As a part of actions connected with the implementation of the Policy a risk assessment 
is carried out with regard to the identification of resources, sub-systems, functions and 
dependencies on other systems relevant to the functioning of CRP. At the same time, 
the implementation of the Policy will allow for the development of target guidelines for 
performance of risk estimates and model of reports containing general data on types of 
risks, threats and vulnerabilities identified in each of the sectors of the Polish economy 
in relation to the constitutional tasks carried out on the basis of CRP.

There is a need to develop, on the basis of the conducted risk analysis, the minimum 
safety  standards  according  to  which  the  identified  resources  and  systems  will  be 
protected, thanks to which the constitutional obligations of the State are fulfilled.

Page 9 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency3. The main lines of action

The Policy will be implemented through the following actions, in accordance with 

the priorities resulting from the order shown.

3.1. Risk Assessment

The  assessment  of  risk  associated  with  the  functioning  of  cyberspace  is  a  key 
element of the process of cyberspace security, determining and justifying the actions 
undertaken to reduce it to an acceptable level.

In  order  to  achieve  an  acceptable  level  of  security,  it  is  assumed  that  each 
government administration unit, referred to in point 1.4 (points 1-4), shall, no later 
than January 31 each year, submit to the minister responsible for informatization the 
report summarizing the results of the risk assessment (in accordance with the model 
developed by the minister responsible for informatization). The report should contain 
general information on types of risks, threats and vulnerabilities diagnosed in each of 
the sectors which an individual institution is operating in and is responsible for. The 
report should also present information on how to deal with risk.

Minister  responsible  for  informatization  in  collaboration  with  the  involved 
institutions will determine the uniform methodology for performing risk analyses. 
There is a necessity for the use of this methodology to be eventually mandatory for the 
institutions of government administration.

It is recommended that the Governmental Computer Security Incident Response 
Team  CERT.GOV.PL  presented  to  the  minister  responsible  for  informatization,  in 
order to unify the approach, complied directories containing the specification of the 
risks and possible vulnerabilities affecting the security of cyberspace.

3.2. The security of government administration portals

The main place for exchanging information between the government administration 
units and a citizen, in e-society, are websites. They should comply with the fundamental 
safety requirements, that is, ensure adequate availability, integrity and confidentiality of 
data. Each organizational unit should independently assess the risk (referred to in point 
3.1) for its portals. It is assumed that on this basis the appropriate (depending on the type 
of site and the results of the risk assessment) organizational and technical solutions will 
be implemented so as to ensure an adequate level of security. Due to the different types of 
parties and their different priorities, these solutions will differ from each other.

It is proposed that the government administration units running Internet portals, 
in addition to complying with the minimum requirements, implement also the relevant 

Page 10 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agencyrecommendations and good practices in the field of security, which will be prepared 
by the Task force for the protection of government portals in cooperation with the 
Governmental Computer Security Incident Response Team CERT.GOV.PL.

3.3. Principles of legislative actions

The  basic  elements  of  the  execution  of  the  Policy,  planned  for  immediate 
implementation, are legislative actions. The Council of Ministers, understanding a high 
priority of these actions, notices the need for their initiation by the minister responsible 
for informatization in order to create regulations which give grounds for further actions 
in the implementation of the provisions of the Policy. It is necessary to review the existing 
regulations with a view to the preparation of solutions aimed at increasing the sense of 
security, not only of government institutions, but of all the users of cyberspace. 

3.4. Principles of procedural and organizational actions

An important step in the implementation of the Policy will be the procedural and 
organizational actions. Their aim is to optimize the functioning of CRP through the 
implementation of best practices and standards in this area. At this stage it is necessary 
to use both the legal tools developed in the first stage and the “soft”1 mechanisms of 
regulations.

Performance of this stage will take place thanks to the creation of separate specific 

projects.

3.4.1. Management of the cyberspace security of the Republic of Poland
As  a  part  of  the  management  of  the  cyberspace  security  of  the  RP,  as  well  as 
to  improve  the  process  of  implementation  of  the  Policy  objectives  and  to  ensure 
effectiveness of the State authorities in the field of security of CRP, it is necessary for the 
Prime Minister to appoint a team responsible for the preparation of recommendations 
concerning the implementation and coordination of any actions related to its security 
(hereinafter referred to as the Team). 

The Team may be organized with the use of the existing potential of the Task force for 
the protection of government portals, appointed by the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Council of Ministers for the Digitization by the Decision No. 1/2012 of 24 January 2012.

It is recommended that the Team, within 30 days from the date of appointment, 
prepared  and  presented  an  action  plan  to  ensure  the  security  of  cyberspace  of  the 
Republic of Poland.

The primary task of the Team shall be recommending actions aimed at coordination 

1  A  soft  regulation  means,  for  example,  codes  of  good  practice,  guidelines,  recommendations,  code  of  ethics,  etiquette,  best  practices  or 

standards, etc.

Page 11 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agencyof activities of the institutions carrying out the tasks imposed by the Policy, organization 
of regular meetings, recommending the proposed solutions for the security of CRP.

It is assumed that as for the implementation of tasks related to the security of CRP 
in the area of government administration and the civil area, the role of the main CERT 
is performed by the Governmental Computer Security Incident Response Team CERT.
GOV.PL. Similarly, in the military this role is performed by “Departmental Centre for 
Security Management of ICT Networks and Services.”

3.4.2. The safety management system in organizational unit
In each organizational unit of government administration, as a part of ensuring 
the cyberspace security, the head of the unit should establish an information security 
management system, in accordance with the applicable provisions and best practice.

It is assumed that the public body will develop and modify according to the needs, 
and implement a security policy for ICT systems used by it for the execution of public 
tasks. While developing the security policy a public body includes obligations arising 
from the Act of 17 February 2005 on the informatization of entities performing public 
tasks (OJ No. 64, item 565, as amended) concerning the minimum requirements for 
ICT systems in the field of information security.

In order to ensure consistency of information security policies of organizational 
units, it is assumed that the minister responsible for informatization in consultation 
with the Minister of National Defence and the Head of the Internal Security Agency 
may prepare guidelines for information security management systems.

3.4.3. The role of plenipotentiaries for cyberspace security
The organizational units of government administration should define the role of a 

plenipotentiary for cyberspace security (hereinafter referred to as PCS).

The tasks of a plenipotentiary within the scope of cyberspace security shall include 

in particular:

1)  implementation  of  the  obligations  arising  from  the  provisions  of  legal  acts 

relevant to ensure cyberspace security; 

2)  development and implementation of procedures for responding to computer 

incidents which will apply in the organization;

3)  identification and conducting periodic risk analyses;
4)  preparation of emergency plans and testing them;
5)  development of procedures to ensure information of appropriate CERTs about: 

a)  the occurrence of computer incidents, 
b)  the relocation of an organizational unit, contact information, etc.

The Policy does not indicate the location of a plenipotentiary for cyberspace security 
in the structure of an organizational unit, however, the role of a plenipotentiary should 
be assigned to the person responsible for carrying out the process of ICT security.

Page 12 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency3.5.  Principles  of  education,  training  and  awareness-

raising in the field of security

As a part of execution of the Policy, the Council of Ministers recognizes the need 
to begin work on the implementation of educational activities. It is assumed that the 
actions in this area will be conducted among the current and future users of CRP. 
They are designed to reinforce the impact of the two previous measures, strengthen 
them  among  the  users,  and  create  the  possibility  of  passing  to  the  next  stage  of 
implementation of the Policy. 

3.5.1. Training of plenipotentiaries for cyberspace security
In  order  to  improve  qualifications  there  is  a  need  to  develop  a  training  system 
for  plenipotentiaries  for  cyberspace  security.  The  project  of  trainings  should  place 
emphasis on the issue of responding to incidents relating to the cyberspace security.

3.5.2. Introduction of ICT security topics as a permanent element of higher 

education

One of the fundamental aspects of ensuring security of CRP is highly qualified 
personnel working in the public and private sectors, responsible for maintenance of 
ICT systems with particular emphasis on resources crucial for the safety of the state. 
In order to ensure a continuous supply of well-trained professionals in the field of 
ICT security it is necessary to involve higher education institutions in achieving the 
objectives of the Policy. The issues relating to the cyberspace security should become 
a  permanent  element  of  education.  This  applies  in  particular  to  technical  higher 
education  institutions  teaching  computer  scientists.  The  situation  where  designers, 
computer programmers focus exclusively on functionality, forgetting the principles 
of creating a secure code, and system administrators give priority to the availability 
of resources of users forgetting the need to protect the processed information from 
intruders should be prevented from happening. For this purpose it is necessary to take 
into account the issues of ICT safety among the outcomes of education specified in the 
National Qualification Framework for Higher Education.2 

3.5.3. Education of clerical staff in government administration
The Council of Ministers notices the need for education of government administration 
employees having access to and using CRP, in the scope of issues concerning the security 
of ICT systems – according to their positions and risks associated with them.

2  Regulation  of  the  Minister  of  Science  and  Higher  Education  of  2  November  2011  on  the  National  Qualification  Framework  for  Higher 

Education, OJ No. 253, item 1520.

Page 13 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency3.5.4. Social campaign of educational and preventive nature
The widespread use of systems connected to the Internet by the citizens and the 
increasing importance of the availability of services offered by cyberspace forces the 
necessary to raise awareness of the safe methods of using the Internet and to sensitize 
the citizens to the emerging threats. 

Awareness and knowledge on how to prevent and combat threats are key elements 
in the fight against these threats. Only responsible behaviour of appropriately educated 
user  can  effectively  minimize  the  risks  arising  from  the  existing  threats.  It  should 
be  emphasized  that  in  the  modern  world  the  assurance  of  ICT  security  is  largely 
dependent on the knowledge and actions of each user of cyberspace. 

Due to the fact that both individuals as well as public institutions, entrepreneurs, 
social organizations are at risk of crime in cyberspace, the campaign will be multi-
dimensional and will take into account the necessary diversity of forms and content of 
communication, depending on the needs of its recipients. It is assumed that the public 
campaign will be long-term and widespread. 

Due  to  the  ICT  security  conditioning  the  implementation  of  public  tasks,  the 
addressees of information campaigns will be, in particular, government administration 
employees and entities whose resources are included in the ICT infrastructure of CRP.
It is assumed that the educational and preventive campaign will be directed to the 

public, and in particular:

1)  children and youth – as the group most susceptible to influence. Education 
should  begin  already  from  an  early  age  in  order  to  develop  habits  which 
will protect young people from the dangers lurking on the Web (e.g. from a 
phenomenon called cyberbullying – violence on the Web, making dangerous 
acquaintances, obscene content, hacking, addiction to the Internet). Knowledge 
about the dangers of cyberspace should be received by a child, in the first place, 
at school at all levels of education (primary school, lower secondary school, 
upper-secondary school).

2)  parents  –  as  those  responsible  for  the  education  of  successive  generations. 
Parents  bear  responsibility  for  the  preparation  of  children  to  function  in  a 
society, including information society. With the aim to effectively oversee the 
activities of a child on the Internet, parents should get adequate knowledge 
about the dangers of cyberspace and the methods of their elimination.

3)  teachers  –  since  2004,  the  education  of  teachers  within  the  specializations 
has taken place in accordance with the Regulation of the Minister of National 
Education,  defining  the  standards  of  teacher  education.3  As  a  part  of  the 
mandatory classes of higher education teachers gain basic knowledge in the 
field of information technology, including the safe and conscious use of ICT 
systems.

3 Regulation of the Minister of National Education and Sport of 7 September 2004 on teacher education standards (OJ No. 207, item 2110).
Page 14 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security AgencySocial campaign directed at children, youth and their parents should be largely 

implemented in educational institutions of all levels.

The campaign will be carried out also through the mass media. Mass media – as an 
important partner in promoting security issues, CRP and popularization of projects 
contained in the Policy – will improve the effectiveness of execution of the objectives. 
With  its  help  during  the  implementation  of  the  Policy  it  will  be  also  possible  to 
carry out informational and educational campaigns. For this purpose, the national, 
regional and local media will be involved. The assumption is that as a part of the social 
campaign information about the ICT security and educational and organizational and 
legal undertakings within the Policy will be presented on the websites of the Ministry 
of Administration and Digitization and on the website of the Governmental Computer 
Security  Incident  Response  Team  CERT.GOV.PL.  At  the  same  time,  an  effective 
communication of content, initiatives and results of the Policy to broad social and 
professional circles is assumed.

3.6. Principles of technical actions

On the basis of procedural and organizational activities (e.g. plan for dealing with 
risk), the last stage of implementation of the Policy should be technical actions. Their 
goal will be to reduce the risk of threats from CRP. Performance of this stage will take 
place through launching specific projects.

3.6.1. Research programmes
Supporting  research  initiatives  relating  to  the  ICT  security  is  essential  for  the 
effective implementation of the Policy. The formula of support should encourage to 
conducting joint research by the actors in the sphere of ICT security from the sphere 
of public administrations, research centres and telecommunications companies and 
purveyors providing services by electronic means.

It  is  assumed  that  the  entity  coordinating  the  implementation  of  the  Policy 
provisions  in  this  regard  will  be  the  Ministry  of  Science  and  Higher  Education 
(MNiSW), as the one responsible for the research and development work. The list of 
initiatives which take account of the dynamics of the state of knowledge will be defined 
at the level of specific projects, developed on the basis of the Policy and may be revised 
at the initiative of the competent bodies responsible for its implementation.

3.6.2. Expansion of ICT security incident response teams in government 

administration

In order to be able to effectively carry out activities related to ensuring the security 
of CRP, including response to ICT security incidents, it is necessary to provide adequate 
technical facilities which will not only enable the execution of current tasks, but will 

Page 15 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agencyalso take into account the increasing demand for specialized ICT systems in the future.
All the teams, after the unification of responsibilities and response procedures, as 
well as determination of the constituency, would create a national computer security 
incident response system, which, in addition to cooperation, would also cover joint 
conferences, training and exercises.

3.6.3. Development of an early warning system and implementation and 

maintenance of preventive solutions

The  ICT  Security  Department  of  the  Internal  Security  Agency  together  with 
the CERT Poland, which is part of the Research and Academic Computer Network 
(NASK), has implemented an early warning system against threats from the Internet 
– ARAKIS-GOV. Development of the system will be implemented in accordance with 
the specific project.

At the same time, bearing in mind the progress taking place in ICT technologies 
and  the  related  trend  of  emergence  of  increasingly  sophisticated  threats,  taking 
initiatives to promote the creation of more and more modern solutions supporting the 
ICT security is assumed during the implementation of the Policy.

The aim should be to use the widest possible range of different types of security 

systems to ensure the security of critical ICT resources.

3.6.4. Testing the level of security and the continuity of actions
As a part of testing the level of security and ensuring continues implementation of 
processes of CRP, the PCS should organize and coordinate periodic tests of both the 
level of technical, organizational protection and procedural solutions (e.g. procedures 
of continuity of actions or supra-departmental cooperation). The results of exercises 
will be used for evaluation of the current resistance of cyberspace to attacks, while the 
conclusions will form the basis for the preparation of recommendations for further 
preventive measures.

3.6.5. Development of security teams
The CERT-type teams are competency centres offering substantive help at the stage 
of creating appropriate structures and procedures. In addition, they are also used to 
solve problems during their operation in various organizational units of government 
administration or of entrepreneurs. Each institution, within own personal resources 
and  technical  means  available,  may  establish  its  own  local  incident  response  team 
whose operation is coordinated in accordance with point 4.2. 

Moreover,  the  tasks  of  Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Teams  should 
include maintaining internal informational sites. The sites will be the main sources of 
information about the ICT security for people involved in ICT security in government 
administration institutions, as well as other persons interested in this subject. 

Page 16 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security AgencyIn particular, the site will be a place for publication of the following information:
1)  news related to ICT security;
2)  information about potential risks and threats;
3)  security bulletins;
4)  different types of guides, best practices; 
5)  reports and information on the trends and statistics;
6)  forum for the exchange of information and experience of those involved in 

activities related to ICT security.

The sites will function as points for reporting ICT security incidents. A site will be 
designed so that users without much computer knowledge can report the incident or 
find information where to report the incident.

Page 17 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency4. Implementation  and  delivery  mechanisms  of  the 

provisions of the document

It is assumed that the objectives and principles of the Policy will be executed taking 

into account risk assessment and implemented within the specific projects.

4.1. Supervision and coordination of the implementation

Due to the international nature of the Policy the body supervising its implementation 
is the Council of Ministers. The entity coordinating the implementation of the Policy, 
on behalf of the Council of Ministers, is the minister responsible for informatization.
4.2. The National Response System for Computer Security 

Incidents in CRP

The  government  of  the  Republic  of  Poland  establishes  a  three-level  National 

Response System for Computer Security Incidents in CRP:

1)  Level I – the level of coordination – the minister responsible for informatization;
2)  Level II – computer incident response:
a)  the Governmental Computer Security Incident Response Team CERT.GOV.PL 
– at the same time performing the tasks of the main national team responsible 
for coordinating the process of handling computer incidents in CRP,

b)  Departmental Centre for Security Management of ICT Networks and Services 

performing tasks in the military sphere,

3)  Level  III  –  the  level  of  implementation  –  administrators  responsible  for 

individual ICT systems operating in cyberspace.

The established response system ensures the exchange of information between teams 
of government administration and CERTs (CERT Poland, TP CERT, PIONIERCERT), 
CSIRT,  ABUSE,  telecommunications  companies,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Act  of 
16 July 2004 – Telecommunications Law (OJ No. 171, item 1800, as amended), and 
purveyors providing services by electronic means, within the meaning of the Act of 
18 July 2002 on providing services by electronic means (OJ No. 144, item 1204, as 
amended), in accordance with applicable laws, and in particular in accordance with 
the Act of 29 August 1997 on the protection of personal data (OJ of 2002, No. 101, 
item 926, as amended) and the Act of 5 August 2010 on the protection of classified 
information (OJ No. 182, item 1228).

Page 18 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency4.3. Information exchange mechanism

An efficient system of coordination will ensure the exchange of information gained 
from the international cooperation between the governmental, military and civilian 
teams, in accordance with applicable law, and in particular in accordance with the Act 
of 29 August 1997 on the protection of personal data (OJ of 2002, No. 101, item 926, 
as amended) and the Act of 5 August 2010 on the protection of classified information 
(OJ No. 182, item 1228). 

This system will, among other things, identify alternative channels for the exchange 
of  information  and  introduce  periodic  tests  of  effectiveness  of  the  information 
exchange processes.

4.4. Methods and forms of cooperation

As  a  part  of  implementation  of  the  Policy,  forms  of  cooperation  between  the 
authorities  responsible  for  the  security  of  cyberspace  and  responsible  for  combating 
computer crime of criminal nature should be developed. These forms of cooperation will 
have both a working form, in order to minimize delays of computer incident response, as 
well as a formalized form – serving the elimination of jurisdiction problems.

4.5. Cooperation with entrepreneurs

It  is  essential  to  activate  entrepreneurs  whose  protection  from  the  cyberspace 

threats is important from the point of view of the proper functioning of the State.

This group should include entrepreneurs active in particular in the following sectors:
1)  supply in energy, energy resources and fuel,
2)  communications,
3)  ICT networks,
4)  finances,
5)  transport.
The  Policy  assumes  taking  up  actions  activating  the  cooperation  between 
entrepreneurs  managing  their  own  ICT  infrastructure,  falling  within  the  ICT 
infrastructure  of  CRP  of  a  similar  nature,  and  thus  exposed  to  similar  types  of 
vulnerabilities and methods of attacks. One of the forms of cooperation will be the 
creation of bodies appointed for the internal exchange of information and experiences 
and  the  cooperation  with  the  public  administration  in  the  field  of  security  of  ICT 
infrastructure of CRP.

Page 19 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency4.5.1. Cooperation with manufacturers of ICT equipment and systems
Important  partners  for  government  institutions  and  other  entities  responsible 
for the ICT security and increasing the security in cyberspace are manufacturers of 
hardware and software. Development of cooperation with these partners, including 
the exchange of experiences and expectations, should be one of the most important 
factors which significantly influence the public and specialist education system, as well 
as the quality of the created systems. The cooperation of entities responsible for the ICT 
security with manufacturers of security systems should be of particular importance for 
the expansion of the spectrum of available tools. 

 The aim should be to provide the users with the largest range of solutions for the 

broadly understood ICT security and protection of information. 

4.5.2. Cooperation with telecommunication entrepreneurs
Due to the global nature of threats, a close, coordinated cooperation in the field 
of  cyberspace  security  between  the  Office  of  Electronic  Communications  (UKE), 
telecommunication companies and the users of CRP is required.

4.6. International cooperation

Due  to  the  global  nature  of  the  problems  related  to  cyberspace  security,  an 
important element is to maintain and develop international cooperation in this regard. 
The government of the Republic of Poland recognizes the need for Poland, through 
its  representatives,  government  agencies,  public  institutions  and  cooperation  with 
non-governmental  institutions,  to  initiate  and  conduct  active  steps  to  increase  the 
security of CRP and the international security. 

Page 20 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency5. Financing

The Policy will not imply additional resources from the state budget to finance the 
assumed activities in the year of its entry into force, because the current organizational 
units of government administration have been already partially fulfilling the objectives 
set out in the Policy. Therefore, it is assumed that after its approval each organizational 
unit  will  clearly  indicate  the  tasks  already  performed  and  the  expended  financial 
resources. 

This document assumes the continuation of the activities carried out and planned 

by the Team referred to in point 3.4.1. 

It  is  assumed  that  since  the  entry  into  force  of  the  Policy  individual  units  are 
estimating the costs of the implemented tasks corresponding to the tasks imposed by 
this Policy. 

The presented estimates of costs will allow for their inclusion in the plan of the 

following fiscal year with a clear indication that they relate to cyberspace security. 

Individual organizational units transmit data on the costs of implementation of 
tasks estimated by them to the minister responsible for informatization. The costs of 
the implementation of tasks will be determined by the results of the risk assessment 
and  presented  in  specific  projects  with  ascribing  them  to  individual  units  and  an 
indication of the sources of funding. 

Necessary expenses related to the implementation of the Policy will be financed 
within  the  limit  of  budgetary  expenditure  provided  for  in  the  relevant  part  of  the 
budget in the budget act for a given year.

Page 21 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency6. Assessment of effectiveness of the Policy

Due to the innovative nature of this document, detailed indicators of implementation 

of the provisions of the Policy will be developed following the risk assessment. 

It is essential, from the entry into force of the Policy, for individual organizational 
units to analyse and suggest indicators of the implementation of tasks on whose basis 
information will be aggregated and global indicators of the objectives of this document 
will be developed. It is assumed that the presented proposals of global indicators will be 
used in updating the Policy and allow for assessment of the degree of implementation 
of the planned objectives and tasks related to the security of CRP. 

The  degree  of  implementation  of  projects  related  to  the  implementation  of  the 
strategic objective and specific objectives of the Policy will be evaluated within the 
specific projects by the following criteria: 

1)  the degree of saturation of all organizational units which have security systems 
and early warning systems in relation to the number of public administration 
employees;

2)  the level of integration:

a)  the method and procedure for the exchange of information between teams, 

ensuring confidentiality, integrity and availability,

b)  the possibilities for and scope of achieving a common, dynamic imagery of 

cyberspace covered by this Policy,

3)  the degree of standardization – the degree of implementation of the standards, 

categories of incidents and procedures;

4)  the degree of equipping the systems in a comprehensive anti-virus software, 
firewalls, anti-spam with relation to those requiring protection (identification 
of resources).

The  following  measures  will  be  used  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  specific 

projects, created on the basis of this Policy:
1.   Effectiveness measures – measure the degree of achieving the objectives and can be 

applied at all levels of task classification.

Sample effectiveness measure: 
– 

the  number  of  closed  incidents  in  relation  to  the  total  number  of  categorized 
incidents.

2.    Product measures – reflect performance of a given task in a short period and show 
specific  goods  and  services  produced  by  the  public  sector.  Product  measures  – 
measure the degree of implementation of operational objectives. 

Sample product measures: 
– 
Page 22 of 24

the number of responses to incidents reported by citizens,

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency– 

the number of handled incidents.

3.    Result measures – measure the effects achieved through the actions included in 
a task or under a task, carried out by the appropriate expenditure, at the level of 
task/subtask/action. Measure the results of undertaken actions. Result measures – 
measure direct effects of undertaken actions in the short or medium term. 

Sample result measures: 
–  shortening the time of handling an incident,
– 

the average response time to an incident. 

4.  Impact measures – measure the long-term consequences of implementation of a 
task. They can measure the direct effects of the implementation of a task which 
become apparent after a long period of time. Sometimes, the impact measures refer 
to the values which are only partially the result of the implementation of a task (the 
results are also affected by other external factors). 

Sample impact measure:
– 

the increase of the sense of security on the Internet in Poland (research of CBOS – 
Public Opinion Research Centre). The degree of implementation will be assessed 
in percentage, while 100% means the implementation of all the tasks under specific 
projects developed on the basis of the Policy.

Within one year from the entry into force of the Policy, each involved entity, referred 
to in point 1.4. paragraph 1 of this document, shall estimate (in %) to what extent the 
principles of the Policy have been already achieved.

6.1. Expected effects of the Policy

The following long-term effects of actions resulting from the implementation of 

this Policy and specific projects developed on its basis are expected:
–  a higher level of security of CRP and a higher level of resistance of the state to 

attacks in CRP,

–  a policy concerning the cyberspace security consistent for all the involved agents,
lower  effectiveness  of  terrorist  attacks  in  CRP  and  lower  costs  of  removing  the 
– 
results of cyberterrorist attacks,

–  effective  system  of  coordination  and  exchange  of  information  between  public 
and private entities responsible for ensuring the security of cyberspace and those 
administering the resources constituting the critical ICT infrastructure of the state,
–  greater competence of actors involved in the ICT infrastructure security of the 

State functioning in cyberspace,

Page 23 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security Agency–  greater  confidence  of  the  citizens  in  the  proper  protection  of  the  state  services 

provided by electronic means,

–  greater  public  awareness  as  to  the  methods  of  the  safe  use  of  systems  available 

electronically and ICT networks.

6.2. Effectiveness of actions

The measure of effectiveness of actions undertaken as a part of the Policy will be 
the  assessment  of  the  created  regulations,  institutions  and  relationships  which  will 
enable the actual existence of an effective cyberspace security system. One of the basic 
methods of influencing the effectiveness of the planned activities performed by many 
institutions is to establish the scope of tasks of each of the entities and to determine the 
responsibility for their implementation.

6.3. Monitoring the effectiveness of actions as a part of 

the adopted Policy

Reports on the progress of implementation of the Policy will be sent by the bodies 

mentioned in point 1.4 to the minister responsible for informatization.

6.4. Consequences of violating the provisions of the Policy 

Each government administration entity shall apply the provisions of this Policy, 

regardless of liability specified in the provisions of generally applicable law.

Violation of the rules set out in this Policy may result in the exclusion of the entity 
from the information society and emergence of barriers in access to public information. 
Adequate protection, security of the processed data and reliability of the ICT systems 
are the highest values faced by the modern systems. Entities implementing the Policy 
in question should indicate ways for securing information systems, procedures for the 
ICT security breach in information systems in security policies of these systems. The 
implementation of the provisions of this document is to provide an adequate response, 
evaluation and documentation of cases of the system security breaches and ensure an 
appropriate way of responding to incidents in order to restore an acceptable level of 
security. An important obligation is to immediately inform an administrator or an 
appropriate CERT about detected incidents and take or refrain from actions aimed at 
handling them. 

Page 24 of 24

Ministry of Administration and Digitisation, Internal Security AgencyWARSAW, 25 June 2013

