 

 

 

 

Society, the economy and the state depend on information and communications technology 

(ICT). 

We have witnessed the accelerated development of an information society and the growing 

dependency on ICT in areas vital to the functioning of the nation. 

The  definition  of  a  digital  agenda  allows  the  provision  of  economic  and  social  benefits, 

stimulates  job  creation,  sustainability  and  social  inclusion,  maximising  the  benefits  new 

technologies have to offer and to improve the structure of the national framework. 

These technologies are vulnerable, however, and create social and material risks. If on the 

one hand they bring clear benefits to society, on the other they significantly increase the 

risks resulting from dependency and the quantity of stored and circulating information that 

exposes the state, business and citizens. 

Cyberspace transposes real life to a virtual world with unique characteristics that require 

new forms of interaction and relationships. 

In terms of legal issues of a personal nature, there has been an exponential increase in sex 

crimes against minors facilitated by the Internet, with this phenomenon often involving a 

criminal  transnational  dimension  and  highly  sophisticated  methods,  which  demands  firm, 

determined and effective intervention. 

This “networked world” engenders new and unique criminal activities, such as cybercrime, 

in particular organised cybercrime associated with bank fraud and identity theft linked to 

the  former,  the  many  forms  of  political  hacktivism  (such  as  the  leaking  of  sensitive  or 

classified  information  and  information  sabotage),  as  well  as  an  increase  of  state  and 

industrial espionage. 

There is evidence of the ability of political and religious activists with criminal and terrorist 

motivations to engage nationally and internationally in activities that have an impact on the 

security of vital information infrastructures. These pose serious threats to the survival of the 

rule of law and to a space for freedom, security and justice. 

The  need  to  protect  those  areas  embodying  national  sovereignty,  ensuring  the  nation’s 

political and strategic autonomy, as well as the growing number of malicious incidents and 

attacks, mean the security of cyberspace should be considered a national priority. 

Therefore, it is important that the state has a National Cyberspace Security Strategy that 

establishes goals and lines of action that seek to ensure effective crisis management, the 

coordination  of  operational  responses  to  cyber-attacks,  the  development  of  national 

synergies and improved national, European and international cooperation in this area. 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
2 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

Efforts  to  reduce  weaknesses  in  the  security  of information  networks  and  to  increase  the 

resilience of their critical infrastructures are also essential, both within the framework of 

the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty 

Organisation’s (NATO) cyber defence policies. It is essential to invest in strengthening this 

cooperation, which will result in an exponentially improved effectiveness in protecting the 

above. 

In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  outline  a  vision  and  a  strategic,  logical  and  coherent 

framework. 

 

28 May 2015, 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
3 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

PRESIDENCY OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 

Resolution of the Council of Ministers 36/2015 

In accordance to with articles 199 (d)(f)(g) and 200 (1a) of the Portuguese Constitution, the 

Council of Ministers resolves to: 

1 -  Approve the National Cyberspace Security Strategy, which is appended to and forms 

part of this current resolution. 

2 -  Establish that the current resolution takes effect on the date of its approval. 

NATIONAL CYBERSPACE SECURITY STRATEGY 

1.  The  National  Cyberspace  Security  Strategy,  henceforth  “the  Strategy”,  is  based  on  a 

commitment to improve the security of networks and of information, in order to protect 

and  defend  critical  infrastructures  and  vital  information  services  and  to  promote  the 

free, secure and effective use of cyberspace for all citizens, businesses and public and 

private bodies. 

2.  The Strategy is based on the general principles of state sovereignty, the general ideas 

contained in the Cybersecurity Strategy of the EU and on the strict observance of the 

European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  the  EU  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,  the 

protection of the fundamental rights, freedom of expression, personal data and privacy, 

and rests on the following five pillars: 

a)  Subsidiarity: 

The security of cyberspace is an integral part of national security and is essential for 

the functioning of the nation, for economic development and innovation, as well as 

for citizen confidence in the digital marketplace and in cyberspace. 

The state confirms its strong commitment to defending cyberspace. Nevertheless, a 

large part of the technological infrastructures that make up cyberspace are owned 

by  private  operators,  who  are  principally  responsible  for  their  protection.  This 

responsibility begins with the individual and their responsible use of cyberspace and 

ends with the state as guarantor of sovereignty and of constitutional principles. 

b)  Complementarity: 

Responsibility  for  the  security  of  cyberspace  is  shared  among  different  actors, 

whether public or private, military or civilian, or collective or individuals. 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
4 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

A  broader  and  more  integrated  approach  to  cyberspace  security  brings  together  a 

number of actors with different responsibilities and abilities, for the benefit of all. 

c)  Cooperation: 

In our highly interconnected and interdependent world, a secure cyberspace requires 

close  cooperation  and  collaboration  between  national  and  international  allies  and 

partners, based on the development of mutual trust. 

d)  Proportionality: 

The  risks  inherent  to  cyberspace  must  be  assessed  and  appropriately  managed, 

ensuring proportionality of means and measures for their exercise. 

e)  Awareness: 

Guaranteeing the security of technological infrastructures, information systems and 

networks  relies  on  end  users  knowing  what  steps  to  take  in  order  to  minimise  the 

risks to which they are exposed. Raising awareness is a key aspect for maintaining a 

secure cyberspace. 

3.  The Strategy will develop the following strategic objectives: 

a)  To promote awareness, free, safe and efficient use of cyberspace; 

b)  To  protect  fundamental  rights,  freedom  of  expression,  personal  data  and  the 

privacy of citizens; 

c)  To strengthen and guarantee the security of cyberspace, of critical infrastructures 

and of vital national services; 

d)  To affirm cyberspace as a place for economic growth and innovation. 

4.  The implications and requirements associated  with each of these strategic objectives 

sets  out  general  and  specific  guidelines,  which  translate  into  six  axes  of  intervention 

with actual measures and lines of action to enhance the strategic national potential in 

cyberspace: 

Axis 1 – Structure of cyberspace security 

Axis 2 – Tackling Cybercrime 

Axis 3 – Protecting cyberspace and national infrastructures 

Axis 4 – Education, awareness and prevention 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
5 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

Axis 5 – Research and development 

Axis 6 – Cooperation 

Axis 1 – Structure of cyberspace security 
Axis 1 – Structure of cyberspace security 

The  complexity  and  extent  of  the  challenges  to  cyberspace  security  require  a  strong  and 

multidisciplinary  leadership  and  governance;  agile,  responsive  and  effective  operational 

coordination;  the  ability  to  respond  to  and  protect  the  national  interest  and,  above  all, 

access  to  resources,  knowledge  and  skills.  Consequently,  the  following  measures  must  be 

adopted: 

1)  Establish politico-strategic coordination for the security and defence of cyberspace: 

Responsibility  for  the  security  of  national  cyberspace  is  currently  distributed  across 

different actors with different missions and goals. There is no common thread and no 

consistency in the policies and initiatives each of them develops. 

As a result, developing a multidisciplinary approach that incorporates the sensitivities 

of the various sectors of society is a necessary priority. 

To this end, a coordinated politico-strategic plan for the security of cyberspace must be 

defined,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Prime  Minister,  with  representatives  of  all 

interested parties. 

The  politico-strategic  coordination  must  assume  responsibility  for  controlling  and 

reviewing the current Strategy and the measures contained within it. Carrying out these 

measures is the responsibility of each party, which must provide periodic reports of their 

implementation; 

2)  Consolidate  the  operational  coordination  and  national  authority  role  of  the  National 

Centre for Cybersecurity (Centro Nacional de Cibersegurança – CNCS) in matters of the 

cybersecurity of public bodies and critical infrastructures: 

a)  Confirm the CNCS’s right to operate as the competent national authority in matters 

of the cybersecurity of public bodies and national critical infrastructures; 

b)  Operational coordination is an essential factor in the successful implementation of 

the  measures  outlined  in  this  Strategy.  The  CNCS  will  oversee  the  coordination 

between the various responsible parties; 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
6 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

c)  Cyberspace  security  presupposes  an  understanding  of  existing  threats  and 

vulnerabilities. This knowledge is essential for carrying out a risk analysis designed 

to improve the use of available means and resources for dealing with the risks and 

identifying gaps that need to be filled; 

d)  The CNCS, as operational coordinator, must develop and implement measures that 

ensure the human and technological capacities of public and critical infrastructures, 

with a view to preventing and responding to cybersecurity incidents; 

e) 

In order to achieve operational effectiveness and improved situational assessment, 

cybersecurity incident report mechanisms must be developed for public bodies and 

critical  infrastructure  operators.  The  desired  situational  assessment  results  from 

the  establishment  of  conditions  for  the  identification  of  a  national  alert  level  in 

matters of cyberspace security, which is then shared with all of the bodies involved; 

f) 

In association with the competent authorities and the national cyberspace security 

community,  CNCS  will  compile  a  knowledge  base  containing  information  about 

known threats and vulnerabilities, that will be made available to public bodies and 

critical infrastructure operators; 

g)  The CNCS must produce and submit a complete up-to-date picture of all incidents, 

threats and vulnerabilities to national cyberspace. 

3)  Develop the capacity for cyber defence: 

a) 

Implement the Cyber Defence Policy Guidance, approved by Dispatch 13692/2013, 

dated 11 October, and published in the Diário da República, no. 208, 2nd series, 28 

October, which created the national cyber defence structure; 

b)  Establish and consolidate a national cyber defence command and control structure, 

with the strategic-military aspects of cyber defence being the responsibility of the 

Council of the Chiefs of Staff (Conselho de Chefes de Estado-Maior) and the planning 

and  immediate  effective  responses  to  cyberspace  crises  to  the  Cyber  Defence 

Centre (Centro de Ciberdefesa – CCD) and the various branches of the armed forces; 

c)  To implement, develop and consolidate cyber defence capabilities ensuring military 

operations in cyberspace, defending the nation’s freedom of action in cyberspace 

and,  whenever  required,  the  proactive  use  of  cyberspace  to  impede  or  hinder 

hostile acts against the national interest; 

d)  Make  cyber  defence  an  area  where  it  is  necessary  to  promote  synergies  and 

encourage the dual use of its capabilities, under the scope of military operations 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
7 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

and  national  cybersecurity,  developing  and  consolidating  an  information  sharing 

system at various levels of decision-making.  

4)  Develop a national incident response capability: 

In a context of the distributed management of cyberspace, information sharing between 

interested  parties  is  a  critical  success  factor  in  ensuring  improvements  in  detecting, 

preventing and responding to failures and breaches of cyberspace security. 

a)  The role of Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) communities must 

be  strengthened  as  a  platform  of  excellence  for  sharing  good  practices  and 

information  on  cyber  incidents,  for  operational  response  services  to  incidents  in 

Portugal  and  abroad,  in  this  case  when  they  represent  a  threat  to  national 

sovereignty; 

b)  The  various  CSIRTs  must  use  a common  taxonomy  and  automatic  mechanisms  for 

sharing operational information among themselves and with the security forces and 

services. 

5)  Establish an office for managing cyberspace crises: 

a)  The  response  to  high-impact  cyber  incidents  requires  specific  and  special 

procedures. It is important to establish a cyberspace crisis management office with 

an  integrated  approach  for  responding  to  threats  and  risks  within  an  effective 

national crisis management system that includes important actors in this area; 

b)  National  crisis  management  exercises  in  cyberspace  must  organised  and  held  to 

enable the assessment of the level of preparation and maturity of the various bodies 

to  cope  with  large-scale  incidents,  which  should,  whenever  possible,  leverage 

synergies resulting from the integration with other exercises in this field, organised 

and conducted at the national level. 

6)  Define and implement cyberspace governance and security processes: 

Develop  a  proposal  to  address  the  various  fields  of  action,  containing  legislative  and 

regulatory  changes  as  well  as  mechanisms  for  the  self-regulation  and  governance  of 

national cyberspace security. 

 

 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
8 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

Axis 2 – Tackling Cybercrime: 
Axis 2 – Tackling Cybercrime 

Cyberspace has created new legal interests deserving of protection, new types of crimes and 

new ways to commit old crimes. 

The challenges posed by cybercrime mean that laws need to be constantly updated in order 

to  ensure  their  maximum  effectiveness.  Similarly,  institutions  concerned  with  the 

investigation  of  cybercrime  must  be  fully  equipped  to  carry  out  their  mission  while  the 

judicial system in general must adapt to the new technologies. Consequently, the following 

measures must be adopted: 

1)  Review and update legislation: 

The competent authorities must adopt the measures necessary for the development and 

implementation  of  legislation  designed  to  ensure  the  criminalisation  of  new  types  of 

crimes  –  whether  against  or  taking  advantage  of  cyberspace  –  and  ensure  improved 

judicial cooperation at a national and international level. 

Legislation supporting criminal investigations must be constantly updated to ensure their 

effective application in cyberspace. 

2)  Enhance the powers of the Portuguese Criminal Police (Polícia Judiciária): 

The  Polícia  Judiciária  must  improve  its  structures  and  technical  and  human  skills  for 

combating  cybercrime,  as  it  must  strengthen  its  technical  and  forensic  skills  for 

cyberspace investigations. 

Axis 3 – Protecting cyberspace and infrastructures 
Axis 3 – Protecting cyberspace and infrastructures: 

The threats to infrastructures and information systems are aimed at both public and private 

bodies  and  citizens.  Public  services  are  an  example  to  society  and  must  be  capable  of 

enhancing  the  protection  of  information  systems  and  the  information  for  which  they  are 

responsible. 

The  following  measures  must  be  taken  to  ensure  the  protection  of  cyberspace  and  its 

infrastructures: 

1)  Assess the maturity and ability of the public and private bodies that administer critical 

infrastructures and vital information services to ensure the security of cyberspace; 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
9 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

2)  Promote the adaptation and continuous improvement of the security of the information 

systems  of  public  bodies,  critical  infrastructures  operators  and  vital  information 

services,  as  a  means  of  ensuring  greater  national  resilience  (survivability),  adapting 

them to the new risks and threats from cyberspace; 

3)  Analyse the information environment in order to anticipate possible attacks and to take 

the necessary action by keeping up to date with the latest technological developments 

and by analysing and anticipating threats; 

4)  Develop the ability to detect attacks on information systems, especially those belonging 

to public bodies and critical national infrastructures, which will allow  the competent 

authorities to be warned of and help them to understand the nature of the attack and 

develop the necessary countermeasures; 

5)  Promote the implementation, by public bodies, of the necessary measures to ensure the 

continuity  of  operations  while  responding  to  the  main  crises  that  are  affecting  or 

threatening the security of information systems or critical infrastructure operators; 

6) 

Include  cyberspace  security  measures  in  national  critical  infrastructures’  protection 

plans, following a risk management based approach; 

7) 

Include  measures  to  address  cyberspace  threats  to  the  security  plans  of  national  and 

European critical infrastructure operators; 

8)  Promote  the  use  of  information  security  norms  for  public  body  information  and 

communications  infrastructures.  Adopt  good  cyberspace  security  practices  that  will 

operate simultaneously as mechanisms for ensuring harmonisation and interoperability 

and as a reference measuring instrument; 

9)  Promote an information security policy for public bodies and create instances that will 

guarantee information security in all these bodies with access to sensitive information, 

personal data or which provide critical online services, providing that the identification 

of  the  measures  for  applying  the  security  policy  follows  a  risk  management  based 

approach, in accordance with best international practice; 

10)  Improve  the  ability  to  prevent,  detect  and  respond  to  cyberspace  security  incidents. 

Critical  infrastructure  operators  must  report  any  breach  or  attempted  breach  of  the 

security of their cyberspace systems. Each of these operators must also establish  the 

minimum  set  of  technical  and  human  resources  required  to  ensure  the  security  of 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
10 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

cyberspace. These resources must operate in a network within and outside their activity 

sector; 

11)  Assess and develop sectoral regulatory frameworks; 

12)  Adapt national legislation in order to respond to technological developments and new 

practices; 

13)  Guarantee  and  protect  critical  information  infrastructures  via  a  National  Information 

Infrastructure Protection System (SPIIN). 

Axis 4 – Education, awareness and prevention 
Axis 4 – Education, awareness and prevention: 

The  success  of  cyberspace  security  is  the  result  of  promoting  a  culture  of  security  that 

supplies  the  necessary  knowledge,  awareness  and  trust  to  use  information  systems  and 

reduces exposure to the risks of cyberspace. It is important to inform, educate and raise the 

awareness  of  public  bodies  and  critical  infrastructures  as  well  as  of  businesses  and  Civil 

society in general. It is also important for the nation to provide qualified human resources 

capable  of  dealing  with  the  complex  challenges  of  cyberspace  security.  The  following 

measures must be adopted in the field of education, awareness and training: 

1)  Promote information campaigns and alerts for all citizens and businesses; 

2)  Raise awareness among public and private operators of the critical nature of computer 

security; 

3)  Promote  a  culture  of  cyberspace  security  through  campaigns  and  initiatives  that  are 

coordinated  and  developed  with  a  common  and  positive  approach.  These  will  draw 

attention  to  the  dangers  and  threats  on  the  Internet  and,  at  the  same  time,  offer 

solutions and measures to mitigate them. Therefore, it is important to create resources 

and raise awareness in Civil society in order to promote the secure and responsible use 

of ICT; 

4) 

Improve  cyberspace  security  training.  Improve  and  extend  instruction  and  training  in 

primary, secondary and higher education as a means of improving skills and knowledge 

on the safe use of ICT; 

5)  Promote  the  safe  use  of  ICT  and  cyberspace,  paying  particular  attention  to  the 

knowledge and skills obtained by adolescents, the elderly and other high-risk groups; 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
11 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

6)  Promote specialist training in cyberspace security by creating or enhancing the provision 

of multidisciplinary courses, and by changes to the existing curriculum; 

7)  Promote  specialist  training  of  decision-makers  and  public  body  and  critical 

infrastructure  administrators  from  an  awareness  and  prevention  perspective  for  the 

need to safeguard critical national interests and information; 

8)  Establish special programmes for Small and Medium Enterprises (SME), socio-professional 

associations and, particularly, freelance professionals. 

Axis 5 – Research and development 
Axis 5 – Research and development: 

Taking  the  strategic  importance  of  cyberspace  security  into  account,  it  is  important  to 

support,  develop  and  enhance  technological  capabilities  in  order  to  create  certifiable 

national, secure and trustworthy solutions that will improve the protection of systems facing 

a  number  of  threats.  It is  essential  to  develop  and  support  all  research  and  development 

activities  and  initiatives  involving  businesses  and  industry,  research  bodies  and  academe. 

Consequently, the following measures must be adopted: 

1)  Promote scientific research and development in various aspects of cyberspace security. 

Scientific  and  applied  research  and  the  development  of  innovative  solutions  are 

important  factors  in  cyberspace  security.  Scientific  output  across  various  areas  of 

knowledge  and  the  development  of  applied  solutions  in  the  many  domains  must  be 

promoted and encouraged; 

2)  Stimulate  and  enhance  the  nation’s  scientific,  technical,  industrial  and  human 

capabilities in order to confirm national independence in this domain; 

3)  Support national participation in international projects; 

4)  Maximise  synergies  resulting  from  national  participation  in  international  fora  in  this 

domain, and from the presence on national territory of international bodies dedicated 

to research and development in this area; 

5)  Exploit the experience gained in this field as a result of the involvement of the armed 

forces  in  overseas  missions,  so  that,  in  collaboration  with  the  universities,  research 

centres and industry, technological solutions with dual military and civilian use can be 

developed; 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
12 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

6)  Support the participation of academe and national businesses in international research 

and development projects. 

Axis 6 – Cooperation: 
Axis 6 – Cooperation 

The security and defence of cyberspace require close cooperation and collaboration between 

national and international allies and partners. Responding to the challenges of cyberspace 

security  and  defence  requires  a  networked  approach,  through  which  national  and 

international  cooperation  in  the  various  fields  is  of  great  importance.  Consequently,  the 

following measures must be adopted: 

1)  Develop cooperation initiatives. Develop cooperation initiatives in areas linked to the 

security of information systems, cybercrime, cyber defence and cyber terrorism, cyber 

espionage and cyber diplomacy, in such a way as to enhance the necessary knowledge 

to protect national information systems; 

2)  Multilateral  cooperation  and  collaboration.  Current  national  and  international 

multilateral  cooperation  mechanisms  must  be  strengthened,  particularly  within  the 

framework  of  the  Cybersecurity  Strategy  of  the  EU  and  the  NATO  cyber  defence  and 

cybersecurity partnership; 

3)  Participate  in  and  cooperate  with  CSIRT  forums.  CSIRT  forums  are  instruments  for 

sharing information and creating the trust necessary to respond to cyberspace incidents. 

Promote participation in CSIRT’s main forums; 

4)  Participate  in  exercises.  Cyberspace  security  exercises  enable  the  evaluation  and 

development of doctrinal and operational capabilities. Promote participation in major 

cyberspace security and defence exercises, alongside national and international actors, 

particularly in the context of the EU and NATO. 

 

 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
13 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

 

Strategy Review: 

A rapid evolution is intrinsic to cyberspace and, consequently, there is an increase of threats, 

vulnerabilities, processes and infrastructures, as well as an evolution of the economic, social 

and  cultural  models  upon  which  their  use  is  based.  This  demands  that  this  Strategy  be 

periodically  reviewed.  It  is  believed  that,  without  prejudice  to  any  extraordinary  review 

procedures that can be carried out whenever circumstances demand, this document should 

be reviewed: 

a)  Within no more than three years; 

b)  Annual verification of the strategic objectives and lines of action and their adaptation 

to changing circumstances. 

 

 

Page 
 
 

        
14 of 14 

 

 

National Cyberspace Security Strategy 
Portugal 

