Qatar National  
Cyber Security Strategy

MAY 2014

i

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYii

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYTABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD ................................................................................................................................................................ v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................................ vi

1. 

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................... 1

2.  THE IMPORTANCE OF CYBER SECURITY TO QATAR ..........................................................................3

2.1  Threats .................................................................................................................................... 3
2.2  Challenges ............................................................................................................................. 5
2.3	 Existing	Capabilities	to	Meet	the	Threats	and Challenges ............................................. 6

3.  QATAR’S NEW APPROACH TO CYBER SECURITY ................................................................................ 9

3.1  Vision ...................................................................................................................................... 9
3.2  Objectives .............................................................................................................................. 9
3.3  Strategic Initiatives  ............................................................................................................. 10

4.  ACTION PLAN FOR 2014–2018 ...................................................................................................................13

5. 

IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH .................................................................................................................. 17

5.1  Guiding Principles ................................................................................................................17
5.2  Governance ...........................................................................................................................17
5.3  Performance Measurement ............................................................................................... 18

6.  MOVING FORWARD ......................................................................................................................................19

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ....................................................................................................................................... 19

APPENDIX A.  ABBREVIATIONS .......................................................................................................................21

APPENDIX B.  DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................................22

APPENDIX C.  REFERENCES ..............................................................................................................................25

iii

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYiv

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYFOREWORD

The Internet has connected us to people all over the globe in ways that were unimaginable a 
decade ago, reducing barriers to communication and promoting cooperation in every area of 
our personal and professional lives. Cyberspace has become a dynamic and integral part of 
our society, propelling economic growth and innovation and enriching our lives in countless 
ways—and it will continue to expand and afford us even more opportunity in the future.
However, with these great rewards come new risks to the very infrastructure that underpins 
our ability to use the Internet safely and securely. Cyberspace, with its unlimited borders, 
provides those who would do harm with unparalleled opportunities to interfere with 
individuals and businesses. Luckily, we do not have to face this formidable task of cyber 
security alone. In this era of increasing—and increasingly malicious—cyber attacks of all sorts, 
keeping our networks and our people safe is one of the greatest global challenges facing 
all nations.
To address those challenges, Qatar is ramping up its cyber security efforts as well as working 
with our counterparts across the globe to ensure an open and secure cyberspace. In 2013, 
the Prime Minister established the National Cyber Security Committee to address the cyber 
agenda at the national level and to ensure that all public and private entities are adopting 
the right cyber agenda. And, we have developed a National Cyber Security Strategy, which is 
outlined in the pages of this document.
The objectives are very clear: safeguard the nation’s critical information infrastructure; 
respond to and recover from cyber attacks; establish a legal framework and regulations to 
establish a safe and secure cyberspace; foster a culture of cyber security that promotes safe 
and appropriate use of cyberspace; and enhance our national cyber security capabilities.
While the government will lead the effort to safeguard government systems and networks, 
to succeed, cyber security must be a shared responsibility of government, businesses 
institutions, and individuals, and stakeholder coordination is essential.
As new, complex and global cyber security challenges emerge, Qatar is well positioned 
to be vigilant in enhancing the country’s cyber readiness and resilience and protecting 
cyberspace for future generations. Inspired by the leaders of our nation, as envisioned in 
the Qatar National Vision 2030, we will continue to harness the power of information and 
communications technology to ensure a prosperous future for all of our people.

Dr. Hessa Al-Jaber 
Minister of Information and 
Communications Technology
 

v

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Internet has been an unprecedented engine for development, social progress, and inno-
vation. However, it is also used by cyber criminals, hackers, hacktivists, and foreign intelligence 
services who want to harm us by compromising or damaging our digital infrastructure. The 
unlimited borders of cyberspace have provided them with an unparalleled opportunity to 
interfere with individuals, businesses, government, and other institutions, and they use some 
of the most malicious and advanced techniques. One of the greatest global and strategic chal-
lenges	of	our	time	is	how	to	sustain	a	safe	environment	while	continuing	to	expand	the	benefits	
of a free and open cyberspace.
Qatar’s rapidly developing economy is using information and communications technology (ICT) 
as a platform for innovation and prosperity. Resilience and security in cyberspace are vital to 
Qatar’s continued success and growth. Therefore, a comprehensive national strategy is required 
to address current and emerging threats and risks.
In 2013, Qatar established the National Cyber Security Committee (Committee) to provide a 
governance structure for collaboratively addressing cyber security at the highest levels of its 
government. The Committee developed Qatar’s National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS), which 
represents a blueprint for moving forward to improve Qatar’s cyber security. The NCSS combines 
good governance with a set of cyber security initiatives, measures, and awareness programs that 
will	result	in	an	efficient	protective	strategy	in	the	long	term.
The NCSS is based on a deep understanding of the threats and challenges Qatar is facing—from 
malicious actors to a shortage of workers with the necessary cyber security skills and a lack of 
reliable local providers of cyber security services—and is divided into several sections. Chapter 
2 describes the threats and Qatar’s existing capabilities in detail. Qatar’s current capabilities 
to respond to the threats—from policy instruments such as the National Information Assurance 
Policy, and the Banking Supervision Rules to the technical and operational expertise in Qatar’s 
Computer	Emergency	Response	Team	(Q-CERT),	a	trusted	authority	that	promotes	the	identifi-
cation and prevention of cyber attacks for the government and critical sectors—provide a strong 
foundation for continuing to improve Qatar’s cyber security. 
Chapter 3 describes Qatar’s strategic approach to national cyber security.
Qatar’s vision is to establish and maintain a secure cyberspace to safeguard national interests 
and preserve the fundamental rights and values of our society. 
The	vision	is	supported	by	five	objectives	that	determine	where	action	will	be	taken	to	deliver	
benefit	and	improve	Qatar’s	cyber	security:	
§§ Objective 1: Safeguard the national critical information infrastructure; 
§§ Objective 2: Respond to, resolve, and recover from cyber incidents and attacks through timely 

information sharing, collaboration, and action;

vi

§§ Objective 3: Establish a legal and regulatory framework to enable a safe and vibrant 

cyberspace;

§§ Objective 4: Foster a culture of cyber security that promotes safe and appropriate use of 

cyberspace; and 

§§ Objective 5: Develop and cultivate national cyber security capabilities.
Together, these objectives provide the foundation for protecting against, preparing for, detecting, 
responding to, and recovering from cyber incidents and attacks. Each objective is supported by 
initiatives that will drive action. 
Chapter 4 provides details on the Qatari Government’s Action Plan to achieve Qatar’s cyber 
security vision. The Action Plan is organized by objective. The delivery of these projects will take 
considerable time and coordination between all stakeholders. 
Successful implementation of the NCSS requires continuous commitment, governance, and 
action by various stakeholders who are connected by a shared vision and guiding principles. 
Qatar’s approach to cyber security is based on three guiding principles:
§§ The government will lead by example to safeguard government systems and networks, 

implementing cyber security requirements while building and adopting new technologies;

§§ Cyber security is a shared responsibility of all government entities, businesses, institutions, 

and individuals; and

§§ Qatar will pursue cyber security policies and initiatives that preserve society’s fundamental 

rights and values, consistent with laws and regulations.

Strong governance is needed to implement and manage execution of the NCSS. To that end, 
Qatar	will	establish	the	Cyber	Security	Coordination	Office,	which	will	report	to	the	Prime	Minister	
and	be	the	focal	point	for	cyber	security	activity	across	Qatar.	This	office	will	be	responsible	for:	
(1) establishing priorities to promote the highest level of cyber security in Qatar, (2) providing 
strategic direction for Qatar’s cyber security efforts, and (3) working in close partnership with 
organizations	with	cyber	security	missions	and	mandates	to	fulfill	the	objectives	of	the	NCSS.	
This is an integrated and holistic approach that will enhance synergies, avoid duplication, and 
maximize resource utilization in managing the dynamic environment and emerging threats 
in cyberspace.
As new, complex, and global cyber security challenges emerge, Qatar’s dependence on ICT 
will continue to increase. Qatar must be vigilant and enhance the country’s cyber readiness and 
resilience, and the NCSS demonstrates Qatar’s commitment to protecting a safe and secure 
cyberspace for future generations. 

vii

viii

1.  INTRODUCTION

Qatar is rapidly developing its economy, in part by embracing information and communi-
cations technology (ICT) as a platform for innovation and prosperity. The adoption of ICT is 
expanding Qatar’s cyberspace, which has become integral to society, government, and busi-
nesses. Resilience and security in cyberspace are vital to Qatar’s continued success and growth; 
therefore, a comprehensive national strategy is required to address current and emerging risks 
and threats.1
While ICT facilitates a well-connected society, it also increases the risk of undermining our social 
norms. The interconnected nature of cyberspace also increases the threat from a variety of 
malicious actors. These threats come from hackers, hacktivists, organized criminals, and even 
foreign governments. Qatar currently relies on a small set of penal statutes to investigate, 
prosecute, and punish cyber crime; however, additional measures are needed to ensure more 
comprehensive protection against cyber incidents and attacks.
To address current and emerging risks, Qatar’s National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS):
§§ Makes a commitment to protect Qatar’s interests in cyberspace;
§§ Institutionalizes a cyber security vision and objectives for the future;
§§ Is grounded in the key principles of leadership, shared responsibility, and ethical values; and
§§ Is informed by mandates, other national strategies and international best practices, as well 

as the rights and values of individuals.

1

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY2

2.  THE IMPORTANCE OF CYBER SECURITY 

TO QATAR

ICT systems provide government, businesses, institutions, and individuals with access to the 
information and knowledge needed to transform Qatar into a more advanced country by 2030.2 
Critical	sectors	in	Qatar	include	but	are	not	limited	to	finance,	energy,	electricity	and	water,	
government, and healthcare, and they are increasingly adopting the most modern digital applica-
tions.	Doing	so	enables	the	delivery	of	high-quality,	efficient,	and	effective	services	to	customers	
in Qatar and around the world. These technologies will allow Qatar to sustain economic growth 
and	development,	provide	a	higher	standard	of	living	for	future	generations,	create	significant	
employment opportunities, and drive innovation and entrepreneurship.
Qatar’s	significant	investment	in	technology	has	positioned	the	country	as	a	regional	leader.	
Qatar is ranked 23rd among 148 countries in the 2014 World Economic Forum’s Networked 
Readiness Index.3 Internet penetration is also well above the world average at 88 percent.4 
Assuring the safety and security of broadband services is essential to increasing broadband 
penetration	 and	 usage,	 and	 subsequently,	 increasing	 confidence	 in	 online	 activities.5  In 
addition, Cyber Safety and Security is one of 
three  key  programs  in  the  National  ICT  Plan 
2015: Advancing the Digital Agenda. This plan 
is essential to: (1) improve connectivity; and (2) 
create an economy based on advanced technol-
ogy solutions and services that will enrich society 
and  distinguish  Qatar  as  a  regional  leader  in 
Arab-originated	digital content.
Qatar  has  invested  billions  to  improve  the 
country’s physical infrastructure. Enhancements 
include  expanding  and  modernizing  Doha’s 
International Airport, building a new seaport, 
upgrading  road  infrastructure,  and  installing 
a  new  high-speed  rail  and  metro  system.  In 
addition,  Qatar  is  making  sizeable  infrastruc-
ture investments to host the 2022 Fédération 
Internationale  de  Football  Association  (FIFA) 
World Cup, including technology investments 
to provide new digital services for visitors and 
international  viewers.  These  infrastructure 
enhancements  will  rely  heavily  on  innovative 
and sophisticated ICT, presenting not only great 
opportunities for continued economic growth 
and expansion, but also opportunities to address 
cyber	security	throughout	the	project lifecycle.

§§ In 2012, 66% of businesses in Qatar used 
the Internet; an increase from 51% in 2008.
§§ The  number  of  businesses  with  an  ICT 
security policy increased from 37% in 2010 
to 61% in 2012.

§§ In  2012,  92%  of  households  in  the 
mainstream population had a computer, 
while 87% of mainstream individuals had a 
computer.

§§ In 2012, 74% of companies in Qatar used 
computers, including desktops, laptops, 
and newer tablet technologies; an increase 
from 64% in 2008.

§§ In  2012,  skilled 

ICT  professionals 
represented approximately 2% of Qatar’s 
total workforce.

KEY INDICATORS OF  
ICT USE IN QATAR6

§§ In 2012, Internet penetration for mainstream 

individuals was approximately 88%.

§§ In 2012, Qatar’s mobile penetration was 
approximately 100%—one of the highest 
penetration rates in the world.

2.1 Threats
Increased	ICT	use	and	broadband	connectivity	bring	enormous	benefits	to	government,	busi-
nesses,	institutions,	and	individuals.	However,	vulnerabilities	often	accompany	these	benefits.	
As a key provider of clean fuel, a home to global companies, an early adopter of digital technol-
ogies, and a leader in regional affairs, Qatar is an attractive target for malicious actors who seek 
to	cause	disruption	and destruction.

3

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYThe cyber threat landscape has evolved from one of individual hackers to highly organized 
groups and advanced cyber criminal syndicates. Cyber attacks are more targeted and sophis-
ticated	than	ever	before.	Powerful	new	malware	is	capable	of	stealing	confidential	data	and	
disabling network infrastructure. Attacks on critical infrastructure, including industrial control 
systems (ICS), can disable physical machinery, cause catastrophic equipment failure, and even 
result in loss of life. Qatar, like many other nations, must be prepared to address the following 
types of threats:
§§ Hacktivists. These are individuals or groups who seek 
to disrupt systems and networks for a variety of motives, 
including	notoriety,	financial	gain,	or	political	agendas.	
They connect across borders to overwhelm targeted 
websites and access sensitive information. They may seek 
to harm their enemies by either shaming them or disabling 
their services. Hacktivists typically launch distributed 
denial of service (DDoS) attacks, deface websites, access 
sensitive government data, and publish the personal 
information	of	high-ranking	persons	and	business leaders.
§§ Advanced Persistent Threats (APT). These occur when 
malicious actors use complex and unique malware to 
quietly gain access to proprietary or personal information 
and sensitive government information. They may also 
use customized solutions to take advantage of insiders, 
social engineering, network hardware, and third-party 
software to cause various malfunctions, destroy data, and 
disable networks.

§§ The  Middle  East  and  North 
Africa  received  the  third 
highest volume of SMS spam 
(1.7  billion  spam  texts  per 
month) from November 2013 
to March 2014.8

§§ Trojans,  worms,  and  viruses 
were  among 
the  most 
common  threats  to  Qatar 
from April to June 2013.7

CYBER THREATS 

TO QATAR

§§ Qatar was one of the countries 
most  affected  by  targeted 
attacks in 2013.9

§§ Cyber Crime Syndicates. These organizations seek account information to make fraudulent 
transactions or to siphon money. Information theft is also common, as cyber criminals will 
sell sensitive corporate information to unauthorized individuals or groups. Cyber criminals 
leverage various methods to achieve their objectives, such as distributing massive amounts 
of	e-mails	while	posing	as	banks	or	other	authorities	to	obtain	customer	identification	and	
financial	information.	They	may	also	use	large-scale	DDoS	attacks	to	overwhelm	Internet-
dependent enterprises. Qatar anticipates that cyber crime syndicates may use 419 (advance 
fee)	fraud	scams	to	target	unsuspecting	individuals	for	financial	gain	prior	to	the	2022	FIFA	
World Cup in Qatar.10

§§ Malicious Insiders. These are trusted individuals who are motivated to compromise the 
confidentiality,	integrity,	or	availability	of	an	organization’s	information	and	information	
systems.	Their	motives	may	include	financial	gain,	revenge,	or	ideology.	Insiders	do	not	need	
to	infiltrate	perimeter	network	defenses	because	they	have	trusted	access	to	information	and	
information systems and can use various methods to damage or destroy government and 
business systems.11

Cyber attacks are on the rise in Qatar and around the world; therefore, continued vigilance and 
attention is required. Qatar is committed to ensuring the security of information assets and 
systems essential to government, businesses, institutions, and individuals.

4

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY2.2 Challenges
The adoption of new technologies such as cloud computing and mobile applications, the imple-
mentation of smart-grid technology, and the substantial increase in technology users present 
key opportunities for development and innovation. These opportunities, however, exist in an 
increasingly fast-paced and evolving environment that will continue to impact Qatar’s ability to 
innovate and compete in the global economy. The challenges in this environment include:
§§ Cyber Security Skills and Services Deficits. Globally, and in Qatar, there is a shortage 
of workers with the requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities to effectively understand 
the complexity of ICT and address cyber security issues. In addition, few local providers 
offer robust and reliable cyber security services. As ICT products and services increase in 
complexity,	these	deficits	have	the	potential	to	grow,	and	if	not	adequately	addressed,	further	
impact the country’s ability to protect critical information infrastructure (CII).

§§ Global Supply Chain Risks. The global cyber ecosystem is a system of interconnected 
systems that often include multiple components from various sources around the world. It is 
increasingly	difficult	to	determine	the	origin	and	integrity	of	the	components	of	ICT	products.	
A global supply chain introduces weaknesses that malicious actors may exploit to launch 
attacks.

§§ ICS Connectivity. ICSs are increasingly connected to business networks and the Internet. 
While	this	connectivity	provides	efficiencies	that	enable	the	remote	monitoring	of	the	
mechanical processes used for oil and natural gas production, electricity generation, and 
water	purification,	it	also	increases	the	vulnerability	of	ICSs	to	cyber	threats.

§§ Information Sharing Constraints. Information owners or providers may be reluctant to 
share information about vulnerabilities, incidents, and best practices for fear of revealing 
weaknesses. In addition, individual organizations do not always understand that information 
they possess about cyber threats, vulnerabilities, and effective best practices can be of value 
to others.

§§ Executive  Leadership  Awareness.  While  information  technology  (IT)  managers,  chief 
information	officers,	chief	technology	officers,	and	chief	information	security	officers	typically	
address cyber security for their organizations, cyber security affects more than the smooth 
operation of an organization—it affects an organization’s overall mission and its bottom line. 
Unfortunately, when communication between executive leadership and IT professionals is 
limited, the senior-most levels of the organization can lack awareness of the real risks or the 
resources necessary to implement security requirements, coordinate incident response, and 
mitigate those risks.

§§ Changing Privacy Expectations. Due to the increased use of personal information within 
government organizations and throughout international business, countries continue to enact 
and update privacy laws to protect individuals and their data. Many of these countries require 
“adequate levels of protection” before allowing international organizations to transfer data 
to destinations outside their borders.12 When personal information is not properly protected, 
organizations face potential risks: for a government organization, this could mean loss of trust 
in its online services; businesses risk losing customers to global competitors.

5

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY2.3 Existing Capabilities to Meet the Threats and Challenges
Qatar recognizes the importance of cyber security and has worked diligently over the last several 
years to develop and implement cyber security protection measures across the country. These 
measures have made it possible for government, businesses, institutions, and individuals to 
respond to the threats and challenges in cyberspace, thereby providing a strong foundation for 
achieving cyber security objectives. Among these efforts:
§§ Qatar has developed strategies and implemented policies to safeguard CII that is important 
to national security and economic prosperity, such as that used for power generation, oil and 
gas	production,	financial	transactions,	healthcare,	and	government	operations.	The	National 
Information Assurance Policy and the National ICS Security Standard provide important 
guidance on security controls and practices to protect CII and improve Internet security. 
In addition, as part of the National Information Assurance Framework, Qatar published 
Anti-Spam Guidelines in 2013 to reduce the impact of unsolicited electronic messages (or 
spam) on entities and individuals.

§§ To	improve	the	security	of	financial	transactions,	the	Qatar	Central	Bank	(QCB)	issued	Banking 
Supervision Rules, which	identifies	the	cyber	security	controls	that	banks	must	follow,	such	as	
reporting	cyber	incidents	and	attacks	to	QCB	and	the	Qatar	Computer	Emergency	Response	
Team (Q-CERT).

§§ Qatar	has	established	Information	Risk	Expert	Committees	(IREC)	in	the	finance,	energy,	and	
government sectors. These public-private partnerships deal with a variety of cyber security 
issues, including threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences; preparedness activities; and 
mitigation strategies. The IRECs facilitate the exchange of information within each sector 
and with other stakeholders to enhance CII resilience.

§§ Qatar has made progress in developing a domestic legal framework that provides national 
governance for cyber security, combats cyber crime, protects individuals’ privacy, and 
promotes CII resilience. The enactment of Decree Law No. 16 of 2010 on the Promulgation 
of the Electronic Commerce and Transactions Law established penalties for crimes, including 
unlawful access to information systems, identity theft, and intercepting information or 
illegally interfering with an information system. In 2013, Qatar established the National Cyber 
Security Committee (Committee) to provide an overarching governance structure to oversee 
collaborative efforts to address cyber security.

§§ Qatar’s  investment  in  developing  technical  and  operational  expertise  includes  the 
establishment of Q-CERT, a trusted authority that promotes a strengthened cyber environment 
for the Qatari government and all critical sectors. Q-CERT seeks to proactively prevent and 
detect	cyber	threats	before	they	cause	significant	harm.

6

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY§§ In	December	2013,	Qatar	held	its	first	national-level	cyber	exercise	for	critical	sectors,	including	
banking	and	finance,	energy	facilities	and	networks,	government,	and	transportation,	to	
enhance these organizations’ capabilities to identify and mitigate cyber threats.

§§ Qatar continues to empower Internet users with the Cyber Safety Education and Awareness 
programs that provide information on cyber threats and cyber security prevention and 
detection tools.

§§ Qatar has established capabilities in digital forensics, enhancing its ability to investigate cyber 
crime. Qatar’s Cyber Crimes Investigation Center and Information Security Center support 
efforts to safeguard the general public and crack down on criminals who use sophisticated 
technologies to carry out criminal activities.

§§ Qatar has formed strong international alliances and is an active participant in global efforts 
to shape international standards and norms on cyber security, including efforts in the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Forum for Incident Response and Security 
Teams (FIRST), and Meridian Process.13

The Qatari government is proactively investing in people, developing policies and processes, 
and implementing technology to improve cyber security for government entities, businesses, 
institutions, and individuals. Additional efforts, however, are needed to meet the demands of 
the future as new threats emerge and ICT reliance grows. Efforts to date have largely been 
distributed and from the bottom up. As a result, cyber security is neither institutionalized at the 
national level nor implemented across government entities, businesses, and other institutions. 
The Qatari government’s ability to enforce laws and promote the adoption of cyber security best 
practices	has	been	limited,	making	it	difficult	to	combat	cyber	crime	and	help	entities	deter	and	
defend against cyber attacks.
While businesses are beginning to appreciate the risks in cyberspace and take actions to improve 
cyber security, many follow independent policies and cannot obtain the necessary skills and 
technologies to institute effective cyber security best practices. Although individuals can access 
information about cyber threats as well as simple yet effective mitigation techniques, users 
require additional assistance to help maintain the health of their systems and protect their 
personal information. The efforts discussed above provide a strong foundation for the future; 
however, government entities, businesses, institutions, and individuals must work together to 
enhance Qatar’s cyber security.

7

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY8

3.  QATAR’S NEW APPROACH TO 

CYBER SECURITY

Qatar’s new approach to cyber security balances the need to protect interconnected ICT 
products	and	services	with	the	need	to	provide	opportunities	that	maximize	the	benefits	and	
efficiencies	found	in	ICT	advances.	The	Qatari	government	will	act	to	defend	Qatar’s	interests	in	
cyberspace	from	large-scale	attacks	and	incidents	that	could	harm	national	security.	Specifically,	
the government is prepared to engage in diplomacy; participate in the formation of international 
rules; and bring military, intelligence, and security expertise to bear on cyber operations to 
protect the nation.
The NCSS represents an actionable path forward to achieve Qatar’s cyber security vision for 
the future. It is a call to government, businesses, institutions, and individuals to create a more 
secure	cyber	environment.	This	section	describes	Qatar’s	cyber	security	vision	and	identifies	
the objectives and initiatives necessary to achieve that vision. 

3.1 Vision 

Establish and maintain a secure cyberspace to safeguard national interests 

and preserve the fundamental rights and values of Qatar’s society.

3.2 Objectives
To	achieve	this	vision,	Qatar	seeks	to	fulfill	the	following	objectives:	

Objective 1:
Safeguard 
national CII.

Objective 2:
Respond 
to, resolve, 
and recover 
from cyber 
incidents 
and attacks 
through timely 
information 
sharing, 
collaboration, 
and action.

Objective 3: 
Establish a 
legal and 
regulatory 
framework to 
enable a safe 
and vibrant 
cyberspace.

Objective 4: 
Foster a 
culture of 
cyber security 
that promotes 
safe and 
appropriate 
use of 
cyberspace.

Objective 5: 
Develop 
and cultivate 
national 
cyber security 
capabilities.

Collectively, these objectives provide the foundation for protecting against and preparing for 
cyber threats (i.e., a proactive approach to cyber security) as well as detecting, responding to, 
and recovering from threats and challenges (i.e., reactive cyber security efforts).

9

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY3.3 Strategic Initiatives 
The strategic initiatives below describe how Qatar will make progress against the cyber security 
objectives. While the initiatives are organized by objective, initiatives for one objective may 
enable progress and success for other objectives.

Objective 1: Safeguard national CII.

To make progress against the objective, Qatar will:
§§ Assess the risk to CII;
§§ Implement cyber security controls and standards to mitigate risk to CII;14
§§ Analyze  cyber  security  trends  and  threats  to  CII  and  provide  timely  reports  to 

stakeholders;

§§ Foster the use of trustworthy technology products and services; and
§§ Continuously monitor the security posture of CII.

Proactive cyber risk management is necessary to ensure that Qatar continues to identify and 
protect systems that support the delivery of essential services and capabilities. To prevent future 
cyber incidents and attacks, the government, critical sector organizations (CSO), and other orga-
nizations must adopt security controls and prioritize actions to mitigate risk to those assets, 
systems, and networks essential to Qatar’s well-being, prosperity, and security.
In addition, Qatar is building the capability to collect and analyze cyber security incident, alert, 
and threat information from the Government Network, a network for government entities to 
connect over a secure communications platform, thereby allowing for improved information 
sharing and enhanced security for e-services. Through advanced data analytics, Qatar plans to 
correlate this information to identify trends related to security requirement compliance and cyber 
threat activity on the network.15 This continuous monitoring of critical networks will enable Qatar 
to understand in close to real time the risk to networks, detect incidents, and take immediate 
actions to mitigate consequences.

Objective 2: Respond to, resolve, and recover from cyber incidents and attacks 

through timely information sharing, collaboration, and action.

To make progress against the objective, Qatar will:
§§ Enhance and maintain situational awareness capabilities;16 
§§ Establish and continuously enhance incident response capabilities;
§§ Reduce cyber infections within CII;
§§ Establish mechanisms and procedures to facilitate timely information sharing and action 

among stakeholders; and

§§ Ensure preparedness by conducting cyber security exercises and drills.

10

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYSituational awareness is necessary to effectively detect, respond to, and recover from cyber 
incidents and attacks. Sector regulators and CSOs should have the capability to monitor network 
activity and maintain situational awareness. Information sharing among the critical sectors will 
further increase visibility into the current state of threats as well as provide an early warning 
system for preventing, detecting, and responding to cyber incidents and attacks. Qatar will 
establish	the	Cyber	Security	Coordination	Office,	which	will	report	to	the	Prime	Minister.	The	
Office	will	be	a	focal	point	for	coordinating	core	cyber	security	functions,	including	national	cyber	
incident management. Collaboration and partnership among multiple stakeholders to share 
information and gain greater situational awareness of threats, incidents, and attacks will enhance 
Qatar’s ability to anticipate, respond to, and recover from incidents and attacks with minimum 
impact	to	government,	businesses,	and	society.	Furthermore,	national	and	sector-specific	cyber	
exercises will be held regularly to improve information sharing, collaboration, and coordination 
among stakeholders; identify risks; and drive improvements.

Objective 3: Establish a legal and regulatory framework  

to enable a safe and vibrant cyberspace.

To make progress against the objective, Qatar will:
§§ Increase capabilities to combat cyber crime;
§§ Develop and implement laws, regulations, and national policies to address cyber security 

and cyber crime;17

§§ Monitor and enforce compliance with cyber security and cyber crime laws, regulations, 

and national policies; and

§§ Build	and	maintain	strong	international	relationships	to	establish	cyber	security	norms	

and standards.

Qatar seeks a dynamic legal framework that can keep pace with an evolving cyber threat 
landscape and new technologies as government entities, businesses, and society continue to 
mature. The development, enactment, and enforcement of a comprehensive set of laws related 
to cyber security and cyber crime will empower organizations by clarifying roles and responsi-
bilities. Qatar will collaboratively consider the perspectives and input of relevant government 
entities and institutions to develop these laws, regulations, and national policies.
The Qatari government is committed to protecting its citizens and residents from cyber criminals. 
Qatar aims to combat cyber crime by neutralizing and reducing threats via enhanced law enforce-
ment techniques and technologies related to gathering forensic evidence and investigating 
malicious activity. 
The interconnected and distributed nature of cyberspace allows malicious actors to easily cross 
geographic boundaries. Combating cyber crime and other threats requires international col-
laboration. The Qatari government will coordinate with the international community to enhance 
capabilities in Qatar and to combat cyber crime internationally. Furthermore, Qatar will establish 
entities and acquire the capabilities necessary to increase its ability to prevent and combat 
cyber crime. Participation in international efforts to develop global cyber security standards 
and norms, identify and promote best practices, modernize and increase privacy protections, 
and maintain stable and effective Internet governance will further position Qatar to meet its 
obligations in cyberspace.

11

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYObjective 4: Foster a culture of cyber security that  
promotes safe and appropriate use of cyberspace.

To make progress against the objective, Qatar will:
§§ Enhance cyber security awareness across society using multiple channels;
§§ Encourage individuals to use cyber safety tools and solutions to protect against cyber 

threats; and

§§ Promote the development and delivery of cyber security education in schools, colleges, 

and universities.

Maintaining	a	safe	and	secure	online	environment	is	essential	to	fostering	digital	confidence.	To	
encourage	a	profitable	online	economy,	consumers	must	trust	that	their	transactions	are	secure	
and their personal information is safe. Raising awareness and encouraging information sharing 
among government, businesses, institutions, and individuals are two of the most effective ways 
to improve cyber security. In addition, the appropriate collection, use, and protection of personal 
information will help consumers safeguard themselves from identity theft.
Qatar has begun building a cyber security culture through cyber safety campaigns, such as Safer 
Internet Day 2013, and targeted warnings about scams and other online threats via print and 
social media. Stakeholders from government, law enforcement, businesses, and academic institu-
tions will work together to develop and implement cyber safety solutions and increase awareness 
of	cyber	security	and	associated	legal	requirements.	Fulfilling	this	objective	will	require	significant	
collaboration among government entities, businesses, and institutions to educate all audiences 
on the importance of cyber security and cyber safety.

Objective 5: Develop and cultivate national cyber security capabilities.

To make progress against the objective, Qatar will:
§§ Develop and maintain a professional cyber security workforce;
§§ Foster business opportunities and strengthen the competitiveness of the cyber security 

industry in the public and private sectors; and

§§ Invest in research to develop and commercialize innovative cyber security technologies 

and solutions.

Qatar must be at the forefront of educational initiatives that will build and maintain a cyber 
workforce. This workforce must be capable of defending and protecting against cyber incidents 
and attacks. Qatar needs employees in government and industry who can recognize new devel-
opments in cyberspace and understand how those developments may impact operations.
At the same time, Qatar must also continue to drive the local innovation necessary to identify and 
implement new solutions that will address the complex cyber security challenges of the future. 
Local	cyber	security	businesses	must	be	able	to	flourish	and	provide	robust	and	reliable	cyber	
security products and services that meet government and critical sector needs and requirements.
Development of a national cyber security research and development agenda that is focused on 
building solutions to prevent, predict, and overcome cyber attacks will further prepare Qatar 
for emerging cyber threats. Existing data analytics and social computing capabilities will enable 
Qatar to pursue an agenda that supports the application of real-time data analytics to detect 
cyber attacks, conduct forensics and remediate cyber events, and anticipate and ultimately 
defeat cyber attacks.

12

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY4.  ACTION PLAN FOR 2014–2018
The Action Plan provides more detail on the Qatari government’s plan to achieve Qatar’s cyber 
security vision. The Action Plan is organized by objective. Various stakeholders from govern-
ment entities and institutions, including the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Information and 
Communications Technology, the Ministry of Interior, Public Prosecution, Qatar Foundation, 
sector regulators and CSOs, the Supreme Education Council, and other organizations, must work 
collaboratively	with	many	others	to	implement	these	actions	for	the	benefit	of Qatar.

Initiative
Assess the risk to CII

Implement cyber 
security controls and 
standards to mitigate 
risk to CII

Analyze cyber security 
trends and threats to 
CII and provide timely 
reports to stakeholders
Ensure the use of 
trustworthy technology 
products and services

Continuously monitor 
the security of CII

Objective 1: Safeguard national CII.

Action
§§ Develop a national CII risk management framework to guide 

the	identification	of	CII	assets	and	organizations;	assessment	of	
threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences; and development of 
risk	profiles	

§§ Conduct regular risk assessments of CSOs and other 

organizations with CII 

§§ Conduct dependency and interdependency assessments to 

identify systemic risks that cut across critical sectors

§§ Establish and maintain a CII cyber security standard and 
maturity	model,	including	specific	cyber	security	controls

§§ Conduct regular evaluations and audits of CSOs to measure the 

effectiveness of cyber security programs and controls

§§ Develop risk management strategies to protect the most critical 
services, systems, and organizations and track implementation 
of those strategies

§§ Share information on risks and risk management strategies 

across sectors to enable the prioritization of mitigation actions 
and the investment of resources 

§§ Create	sector-specific	or	organizational	security	operations	

centers or threat intelligence centers

§§ Develop the capability to evaluate and certify ICT products and 

systems for use in critical sectors 

§§ Develop guidelines that specify security requirements for ICT 

and cyber security service providers 

§§ Establish a capability to conduct continuous diagnostics and 
monitoring of networks to better understand risks, promote 
preventive measures, detect and treat infected devices, and 
notify affected users

13

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYObjective 2: Respond to, resolve and recover from cyber incidents and attacks 

through timely information sharing, collaboration, and action.

Initiative
Enhance and maintain 
situational awareness 
capabilities

Establish and 
continuously enhance 
incident response 
capabilities 

Reduce cyber infections 
within CII

Establish mechanisms 
and procedures to 
facilitate timely action 
and information sharing 
among stakeholders

Ensure preparedness 
by conducting cyber 
security exercises 
and drills

Action
§§ Establish and maintain a national cyber security coordination 

capability to improve Qatar’s collective understanding of cyber 
security threats and incidents and help manage the response to 
national incidents 

§§ Develop a national system for recording and monitoring cyber 

threats, incidents, and attacks 

§§ Develop a process for coordinating and managing cyber 

incident response

§§ Establish information exchanges between cyber operations 
centers to facilitate incident response, share information, and 
provide training opportunities 

§§ Conduct regular assessments of networks to identify and 

remove malicious code on network infrastructure

§§ Develop and implement tools to detect APTs attacking CII 
§§ Establish and operate systems and tools for disseminating 

threat and vulnerability information among trusted 
stakeholders

§§ Establish additional sector partnerships to bring stakeholders 

together to address cyber threats and improve CII 
preparedness and resilience

§§ Establish a forum to bring together security practitioners from 

across critical sectors to address systemic risks 

§§ Hold national cyber security exercises and incorporate lessons 
learned into policies, procedures, and operational capabilities
§§ Conduct	sector-specific	cyber	security	exercises	to	assess	and	

test CSOs’ incident response capabilities

§§ Participate in or host international cyber exercises to further 

establish relationships and test incident response coordination 
capabilities

14

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYObjective 3: Establish a legal and regulatory framework  

to enable a safe and vibrant cyberspace.

Initiative
Increase capabilities to 
combat cyber crime

Develop and implement 
laws, regulations, and 
national policies to 
address cyber security 
and cyber crime

Monitor and enforce 
compliance with cyber 
security and cyber 
crime laws, regulations, 
and national policies

Build and maintain 
strong international 
relationships to 
establish cyber security 
norms and standards

Action
§§ Create new abilities to investigate criminal activity through 
training, new forensic techniques, and access to technology
§§ Enact a Cyber Crime Law to provide law enforcement with 

additional	authority	and	define	criminal	acts	

§§ Collect statistics on cyber crime trends and methods
§§ Conduct regular reviews of laws and other policies to 

ensure they remain adequate to address emerging cyber 
security needs	

§§ Enact proposed laws (e.g., Data Privacy and Protection Law, 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Law) to prevent 
misuse of personal information and protect CII

§§ Establish a scheme and process for determining if CSOs are 

adhering to laws and regulations and if they have implemented 
national policies

§§ Develop guidance and resources for CSOs, such as training, 
tools, and audit workshops, to promote the adoption of 
cyber security best practices and facilitate compliance with 
requirements 

§§ Evaluate the NCSS and report annually on government and CSO 

efforts to implement the NCSS and improve cyber security
§§ Engage regularly with international partners on policy and 
operations to raise cyber security awareness, identify and 
address threats, and coordinate actions to improve cyber 
security worldwide

§§ Enhance existing and establish new bilateral and multilateral 

agreements to promote information sharing, enable cyber 
crime investigations, and support cyber operations

15

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYObjective 4: Foster a culture of cyber security that promotes  

the safe and appropriate use of cyberspace.

Initiative
Enhance cyber security 
awareness across society 
using multiple channels

Encourage individuals 
to use cyber safety tools 
and solutions to protect 
against cyber threats
Promote the 
development and 
delivery of cyber security 
education in schools, 
colleges, and universities

Action
§§ Establish and maintain national cyber security awareness 
across different demographic groups, such as young children, 
students, parents, older adults, government employees, 
small	and	medium-sized	enterprises,	chief	executive	officers,	
and others

§§ Create an awards program to recognize excellence in cyber 
security for key contributions, such as innovative solutions 
and services or implementation of security controls and 
best practices

§§ Work with Internet service providers (ISP) and others to help 

individual users determine the health of their devices 

§§ Work with colleges and universities to develop and implement 

cyber security curricula and educational programs at the 
graduate and post-graduate levels 

§§ Work with schools to establish cyber safety education 

programs as well as provide school teachers and 
administrators with materials to support the delivery of cyber 
safety education

Objective 5: Develop and cultivate national cyber security capabilities.

Action
§§ Develop a cyber security workforce competency model 
§§ Establish local and national cyber security competitions for 
different age groups to identify and recognize highly talented 
Qataris, develop their cyber skills, and encourage them to 
pursue careers in cyber security

§§ Hold a Cyber Innovation Challenge to encourage small and 

medium-sized enterprises to develop innovative cyber security 
solutions and services

§§ Develop a national cyber security research and development 

agenda to drive investment in solutions that can be rapidly 
transitioned from development to operation

§§ Establish strategic partnerships with local and international 
universities, institutes, and research organizations for cyber 
research and development projects

Initiative
Develop and maintain 
a professional cyber 
security workforce

Foster business 
opportunities and 
strengthen the 
competitiveness of the 
cyber security industry 
in the public and 
private sectors
Invest in research 
to develop and 
commercialize 
innovative cyber 
security technologies 
and solutions

16

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY5.  IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH
Successful implementation of the NCSS requires continuous commitment, governance, and 
action by various stakeholders who are collectively responsible for the national approach to 
cyber security. These stakeholders are connected by a shared set of guiding principles that 
support Qatar’s cyber security vision.

5.1 Guiding Principles
Qatar’s approach to cyber security is based on the following three principles:
The Government Will Lead the Way. Governments have an important responsibility to safeguard 
government	information,	systems,	and	networks	and	ensure	their	confidentiality,	integrity,	and	
availability. The Qatari government will therefore lead by example, implementing cyber security 
requirements while building and adopting innovative and new technologies that provide the 
foundation for the economy.
Cyber Security Is a Shared Responsibility. Cyber security should be the responsibility of all 
government entities, businesses, institutions, and individuals.
§§ The Qatari government is responsible for protecting its information, systems, and networks; 
investing in the people, processes, and technologies necessary to safeguard the services 
that society relies on; and setting the direction for Qatar’s continued economic development 
and growth.

§§ Businesses	are	responsible	for	protecting	their	information,	systems,	and	networks	from	cyber	

threats; sharing information; and responding should cyber incidents and attacks occur.

§§ Individuals  are  responsible  for  being 
aware of threats; adopting best practices; 
understanding  who  is  collecting  their 
personal  information;  and  securing  their 
own information, systems, and networks.

Fundamental  Rights  and  Values  will  be 
Preserved. 
In  cyberspace,  security  and 
privacy are tightly intertwined. Strong security 
measures and sound best practices are encour-
aged to protect personal or private information 
from unauthorized access or misuse. Qatar will 
pursue cyber security policies and initiatives 
that preserve society’s values and expectations, 
consistent with laws and regulations.

VALUES IN CYBER SECURITY

§§ Protect government, businesses, institu-
tions, and individuals from unacceptable 
online	content	and behaviors;
§§ Show tolerance and respect;
§§ Embrace	innovation	and	the	free	flow	of	

ideas and information;

§§ Support  collective  and  collaborative 
efforts to address complex cyber security 
challenges; and 

§§ Promote  an  environment  that  rewards 

investment in security and technology.

5.2 Governance
Strong governance is needed to implement and manage execution of the NCSS. To that end, 
Qatar	will	establish	the	Cyber	Security	Coordination	Office	(CSCO),	which	will	report	to	the	
Prime Minister and be the focal point for cyber security activity across Qatar. The CSCO will 
be responsible for: (1) establishing priorities to promote the highest level of cyber security in 
Qatar, (2) providing strategic direction for Qatar’s cyber security efforts, and (3) working in close 
partnership	with	organizations	with	cyber	security	missions	and	mandates	to	fulfill	the	objectives	
of the NCSS. 

17

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYIt is essential that stakeholders commit to successfully implementing the NCSS. Stakeholders will 
be	responsible	for	defining	their	own	detailed	implementation	plans	for	the	actions	they	need	
to	fulfill.	Government	entities,	CSOs,	and	other	institutions	will	need	to	keep	track	of	milestones	
and progress and be prepared to provide regular updates to the CSCO. In addition, stakehold-
ers should commit to active and ongoing coordination across all levels of society to improve 
cyber security.

5.3 Performance Measurement
Stakeholder coordination, integrated decision making, and tracking progress will be required 
to accomplish the strategic initiatives and actions outlined in the NCSS and supporting docu-
mentation.	The	CSCO	will	define	mechanisms	to	assess	progress,	work	with	the	Committee	and	
stakeholders to make decisions regarding prioritization or Action Plan amendments, and monitor 
efforts to advance the objectives using a variety of metrics. In addition, the CSCO will report 
annually on progress against the objectives, thereby providing ongoing visibility into efforts to 
secure Qatar’s cyberspace.

18

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY6.  MOVING FORWARD 
Qatar will revise the NCSS every four years, or as necessary, to make coordinated adjustments 
and	refinements	to	account	for	national	and	international	legal,	operational,	and	technolog-
ical developments. This review will seek to align Qatar’s cyber security vision with any new 
national-level strategy documentation (e.g., development strategies) and obtain input from 
stakeholders, as appropriate.
As new, complex, and global cyber security challenges emerge and Qatar’s dependence on 
ICT increases, Qatar must be vigilant and continuously work in partnership to enhance its cyber 
security readiness and resilience in accordance with the NCSS. More than any other national-level 
document, the NCSS demonstrates Qatar’s commitment to protecting Qatar’s cyberspace for 
future generations. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the members of the National Cyber Security Committee, chaired by 
Dr. Hessa	Al-Jaber,	Minister	of	Information	and	Communications	Technology,	for	their	active	
participation and contributions during the development of the NCSS.
Brigadier	Saleh Khamis Al-Kubaisi
Vice Chair, National Cyber Security Committee 
Manager of Information Systems Department 
Ministry of Interior
Lieut. Col. Nawaf Ahmad Al-Rumaihi
Head of Corporate Information Technology 
State	Security	Bureau
Dr. Saif Mohammed Al-Kuwari
Director	of	Information	Systems	and Technology 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Ali Abdulla Al-Siddiqi Al-Emadi
Manager of Information and 
Communication Technology 
Qatar Petroleum
Mr. Ahmad Sultan Al-Mulla
Manager	of	Information	Technology Department 
Ministry of Justice

Brigadier	Eng.	Abdulaziz Falah Al-Dosari
Director of Technical Affairs 
Qatar Armed Forces
Mr. Abdullah Mohammed Al-Naimi
Chief	Operating	Officer 
Qatar	Credit	Bureau
Mr. Mustapha Huneyd
Senior Manager for Corporate 
Information Security 
Ooredoo
Ms. Maryam Haji Abdullah
Manager	of	Information	Technology Department 
Public Prosecution
Mr. Khalid Sadiq Al-Hashmi 
Executive Director for Cyber Security 
Ministry of Information and 
Communications Technology

We would like also to thank Mr. Rashid Zayed Al-Naemi, Cyber Security Specialist, Ministry of Information 
and	Communications	Technology,	and	Dr.	Hoda	Baraka,	Advisor	to	the	Minister	of	Information	and	
Communications Technology, for their contributions to the development of the NCSS.

19

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY20

APPENDIX A.  ABBREVIATIONS

Advanced Persistent Threat
Computer Emergency Response Team
Critical Information Infrastructure
Cyber	Security	Coordination	Office
Critical Sector Organization
Distributed Denial of Service
European Union
Fédération Internationale de Football Association
Forum for Incident Response and Security Teams
Industrial Control System
Information and Communications Technology
Information Risk Expert Committee
Information Technology
International Telecommunication Union
National Cyber Security Strategy
Qatar	Central	Bank

APT 
CERT 
CII 
CSCO	
CSO 
DDoS 
EU 
FIFA 
FIRST 
ICS 
ICT 
IREC 
IT 
ITU 
NCSS 
QCB	
Q-CERT  Qatar Computer Emergency Response Team

21

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYAPPENDIX B.  DEFINITIONS
Awareness Campaign. 

Communications and outreach activities designed to increase knowledge and support for 
cyber security, improve understanding of cyber threats and security practices, and encourage 
adoption and ownership of necessary changes in online behaviors.

Capabilities. 

People, processes, and technologies that support cyber security efforts.

Critical Infrastructure. 

Physical assets, systems or installations, which if disrupted, compromised, or destroyed, 
would have a serious impact on the health, safety, security, or economic well-being of Qatar 
or the effective functioning of the Qatari government.18

Critical Information Infrastructure (CII). 

The information and communications technology systems, services, and data assets that are 
critical	to	Qatar	based	on	the	following	classification	criteria:
1. 
Identify the organization’s key, core business processes and their dependency on assets 
owned	and	managed	by	the	organization	(e.g.,	power	plant,	refinery,	general	ledger,	etc.);
2.  Use impact severity table to determine an impact score for the loss/non-functioning of 
each key asset; and
3.  Classify all assets as critical when the criticality score is greater than twenty (20).19

Impact Severity Table

Low/1
<10

<20M

Medium/3
10–100

High/5
100–500

Severe/15
>500

20M–200M

200M–1B

>1B

Minor Impact Moderate 
Impact/
Disruption
Large Local or 
Multiple Sectors 
(Partially)
1–30

Local

<1

Significant	
Impact/
Disruption
National or 
Single Sector 
(Fully)
30–180

Debilitation 
Impact

International 
or Multiple 
Sectors (Fully)
>180

Public 
perceives low 
national risk, 
high ability to 
control

Public perceives 
moderate 
national risk, 
moderate 
ability to control

Public 
perceives high 
national risk, 
low ability to 
control

Public 
perceives 
severe national 
risk, ability to 
control in doubt

Impact Factor/Score
Population Impact 
(Potential for loss of life)
Economic Impact/QAR  
(Direct damage and 
restoration cost 
including CII  
networks/systems)
Interdependency 
Impact  
(On other sectors)
Scope Impact

Service Impact 
(Recovery time in days)
Public Confidence 
Impact

22

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYCritical Sector. 

The critical sectors in Qatar include but are not restricted to:

Energy, Electricity, and Water 
Finance

§§
§§
§§ Government
§§ Healthcare
§§
§§

Information and Communications Technology
Transportation 

Critical Sector Organization. 

An organization that owns and/or operates a substantial portion of CII in Qatar.20

Cyber Crime. 

Misconduct or crime committed using technology. Examples of cyber crime may include 
illegal access to systems or information, fraud, identity theft, or content-related offenses 
such as spam.

Cyber Security. 

The collection of tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk man-
agement approaches, actions, training, best practices, assurance, and technologies that can 
be used to protect the cyber environment and organization and user’s assets. Organization 
and user’s assets include connected computing devices, personnel, infrastructure, applica-
tions, services, telecommunications systems, and the totality of transmitted and/or stored 
information  in  the  cyber  environment.  Cyber  security  strives  to  ensure  the  attainment 
and maintenance of the security properties of the organization and user’s assets against 
relevant security risks in the cyber environment. The general security objectives comprise 
the	following:	confidentiality,	integrity	(which	may	include	authenticity	and	non-repudiation),	
and availability.21

Cyber Security Controls. 

Safeguards	or	counter	measures	to	ensure	the	confidentiality,	integrity,	and	availability	of	
information assets, systems, or networks and mitigate the risk to those assets, systems, 
and networks.

Cyberspace. 

A virtual or electronic environment that results from the interdependent network of infor-
mation and communications technology (e.g., the Internet, telecommunications networks, 
computer systems, and embedded processors and controllers) that links people with services 
and information.

Ecosystem. 

A variety of interconnected and interdependent organizations, systems, and devices that 
interact for multiple purposes using different processes.

Exercise. 

An	interactive	engagement	(half-day	to	five	days	or	more)	that	enables	participants	to	react	
to a plausible scenario in a risk-free environment. Exercises provide an effective tool for 
testing incident response plans; validating policies, plans, and procedures; identifying 
vulnerabilities and reporting requirements; assessing risk and preparedness; discovering 
interdependencies and response gaps; creating a shared perspective and buy-in among 
diverse stakeholders; and building a common understanding of roles and responsibilities. 
An exercise may also be referred to as a simulation, seminar, tabletop, drill, or wargame.

23

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYPersonal Information. 

Recorded information about an individual, such as name, address, e mail, phone number, 
marital	status,	healthcare	or	financial	data,	employment	history,	and	associations.

Policy. 

A type of instrument such as a strategy, standard, framework, guideline, or other document 
that establishes, implements, guides, describes, or explains organizational responsibilities, 
authorities, actions, and procedures.

Resilience. 

The ability to prepare for, adapt to, withstand, and rapidly recover from disruptions resulting 
from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents.

Unintentional Insiders. 

Those  with  authorized  access  to  an  organization’s  network,  system,  or  information. 
Unintentional insiders can represent a threat due to non-malicious action or inaction that 
causes	harm	or	impacts	the	confidentiality,	integrity,	or	availability	of	networks,	systems,	or	
information.

24

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGYAPPENDIX C.  REFERENCES
1  Resilience is the ability to prepare for, adapt to, withstand, and rapidly recover from disruptions resulting 

from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents.

2  Qatar National Vision 2030 envisions a prosperous country in which there is economic and social justice 
for all, and in which nature and man coexist harmoniously. It promotes human, social, economic, and 
environmental development to provide educational opportunities, preserve Qatar’s national heritage, 
and	maintain	financial	and	economic	stability.	

3  Networked Readiness Index 2014, World Economic Forum, http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_

GlobalInformationTechnology_Report_2014.pdf.

4  “Percentage  of  Individuals  Using  the  Internet,”  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU),  
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2013/Individuals_Internet_2000-2012.xls.
5	 The	National	Broadband	Plan	for	the	State	of	Qatar	provides	the	necessary	actions	to	maximize	the	use	

of broadband.
ictQatar, Qatar’s ICT Landscape 2013: Business; ictQatar, Qatar’s ICT Landscape 2013: Households and 
Individuals.

6 

7  Microsoft Security Intelligence Report, Volume 15 January through June, 2013 (http://www.microsoft.

com/security/sir/default.aspx)

8  April 2014 Threat Stats—SMS Spam Volume by month for each region, SC Magazine (http://www.

scmagazine.com/april-2014-threat-stats/slideshow/1906/#2)

9  TrendLabs 2013 Annual Security Roundup, Cashing in on Digital Information: An Onslaught of Online 
Banking	Malware	and	Ransomware,	Trend	Micro	(http://www.trendmicro.com/cloud-content/us/pdfs/
security-intelligence/reports/rpt-cashing-in-on-digital-information.pdf)

10 “419 Scammers Planning Ahead with 2022 World Cup Scams,” Symantec, February 3, 2011, http://www.

symantec.com/connect/blogs/419-scammers-planning-ahead-2022-world-cup-scams

11  Unintentional insiders—those with authorized access to an organization’s network, system, or information—
can also represent a threat due to non-malicious action or inaction that causes harm or impacts the 
confidentiality,	integrity,	or	availability	of	networks,	systems,	or	information.

12 For example, the European Union (EU) Data Protection Directive (Article 25[6] of directive 95/46/EC) 
requires special precautions to be taken when transferring data outside EU countries. See http://
ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/data-collection/data-transfer/index_en.htm for more information. 
13 ITU is a United Nations agency that specializes in ICT issues, particularly infrastructure development, 
standardization, and international cooperation. FIRST is the global association of computer security incident 
response teams; it promotes information sharing and promulgates computer security best practices 
and tools for incident response. The Meridian Process facilitates cooperation among governments on 
CII protection and provides participating countries with the opportunity to share best practices from 
around the world.

14	Cyber	security	controls	are	safeguards	or	counter	measures	to	ensure	the	confidentiality,	integrity,	and	
availability of information assets, systems, or networks and mitigate the risk to those assets, systems, 
and networks. 

15	For	example,	firewall,	intrusion	detection	system/intrusion	prevention	system,	and	proxy	server	logs.
16 Capabilities include people, processes, and technologies that support cyber security objectives.
17  Policies include types of instruments such as strategies, standards, frameworks, guidelines, or other 
documents that establish, implement, guide, describe, or explain organizational responsibilities, 
authorities, actions, and procedures. 

18	Unofficial	English	translation	of	the	Critical	Information	Infrastructure	Protection	Law.
19  Ibid.
20 Ibid.
21 “Overview of Cybersecurity,” International Telecommunication Union (ITU), ITU-T X.1205, http://www.

itu.int/en/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/Pages/cybersecurity.aspx.

25

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY26

QATAR NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY