PRIME MINISTER'S

FOREWORD

Singapore  is  an  international  centre  of  exchange  and 
commerce. We must always be open to new technologies 
and know-how, in order to connect ideas, economies and 
cultures across the world. 

Digitally,  Singapore  is  one  of  the  most  connected 
nations in the world. We have long embraced infocomm 
technologies  for  economic  and  social  development. 
Today, we have more phone lines than people. Almost all 
households have high-speed broadband Internet access. 

However,  reliance  on 
infocomm  technologies  also  makes  us  vulnerable. 
Cyber  threats  and  attacks  are  becoming  more  sophisticated,  with  more  severe 
consequences. We cannot take cybersecurity for granted. 

The  Cybersecurity  Strategy  outlines  Singapore’s  vision,  goals  and  priorities.  
We are determined to protect essential services from cyber threats, and to create a 
secure cyberspace for businesses and communities. The Cyber Security Agency 
of Singapore will take the lead, and work with other agencies and private sector 
partners to achieve this. 

The  Government  cannot  do  it  alone.  Businesses  are  responsible  for  protecting 
customers’  personal  data.  Individuals  need  to  practise  good  cyber  hygiene 
to  keep  personal  devices  and  data  safe.  If  we  each  do  our  part  to  use  our 
systems  and  devices  responsibly,  then  collectively  we  can  help  to  protect  
Singapore’s cyberspace.

Cyber  attackers  do  not  respect  jurisdictions.  All  countries,  especially  highly-
connected ones like Singapore, benefit from international cooperation in securing 
global infocomm infrastructures and responding to cyber threats. Singapore will 
work closely with other countries to build consensus in cyber norms, strengthen 
capacity and address cyber threats and crimes.

As an industry, cybersecurity offers opportunities and good jobs for Singaporeans. 
The  Government  will  provide  education  and  training  opportunities  for 
Singaporeans who wish to pursue a career in cybersecurity.

Together, we will build a resilient and trusted cyber environment for Singapore – 
one that harnesses the benefits of technology to improve the lives of Singaporeans.

Lee Hsien Loong

Singapore’s Cybersecurity Strategy
Copyright © 2016 
by Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
All rights reserved. 
 
ISBN: 978-981110812-9

Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
www.csa.gov.sg 

Design and layout by: 
APT811 Design & Innovation Agency
www.apt811.com

CONTENTS

SINGAPORE'S CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AT A GLANCE

INTRODUCTION

1  A RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE

 

Protect Our Essential Services

  Respond Decisively to Cyber Threats

 

 

Strengthen Governance and Legislative Framework

Secure Government Networks

2  A SAFER CYBERSPACE

 

 

 

Combat Cybercrime

Enhance Singapore’s Standing as a Trusted Hub

Promote Collective Responsibility

3  A VIBRANT CYBERSECURITY ECOSYSTEM

 

 

 

Establish a Professional Cybersecurity Workforce

Extend Singapore’s Cybersecurity Advantage

Innovate to Accelerate

4  STRONG INTERNATIONAL PARTNERSHIPS

 

 

 

Forge International and ASEAN Cooperation to Counter Cyber Threats and Cybercrime

Champion International and ASEAN Cyber Capacity Building Initiatives

Facilitate International and Regional Exchanges on Cyber Norms and Legislation

4

6

8

12

16

19

20

22

26

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

47

SINGAPORE'S CYBERSECURITY 

STRATEGY AT A GLANCE

Singapore’s Cybersecurity Strategy 
aims to create a resilient and trusted 
cyber environment. This will enable us 
to realise the benefits of technology and 
so secure a better future for Singaporeans. 

Four pillars underpin our strategy. 
We will strengthen the resilience of 
Critical Information Infrastructures 
(CIIs). We will mobilise businesses and 
the community to make cyberspace safer, 
by countering cyber threats, combating 
cybercrime and protecting personal data. 

We will develop a vibrant cybersecurity 
ecosystem comprising a skilled workforce, 
technologically-advanced companies and 
strong research collaborations, so that it 
can support Singapore’s cybersecurity 
needs and be a source of new economic 
growth. Finally, given that cyber threats 
do not respect sovereign boundaries, 
we will step up efforts to forge strong 
international partnerships.

“Cybersecurity is a team effort, everyone has a part to play, and everyone 

has to play their part. The Government will take the lead to spearhead 

initiatives to enhance Singapore’s cybersecurity stance, and we will need 
everyone’s cooperation to reap long term benefits for the cyber ecosystem. 
We aim to build a Smart Nation – one that will be enabled by trustworthy 

infrastructure and technology.”

Minister-in-charge of Cybersecurity, Dr Yaacob Ibrahim, 

GovernmentWare 2015

Building a  
Resilient 
Infrastructure

Creating 
a Safer 
Cyberspace

Developing
a Vibrant 
Cybersecurity 
Ecosystem

Strengthening 
International 
Partnerships

  OUR STRATEGY:  

  OUR STRATEGY:  

  OUR STRATEGY:  

  OUR STRATEGY:  

To secure our digitally-enabled economy and society, 
the Government will work with key stakeholders – 
private sector operators and the cybersecurity community 
– to strengthen the resilience of our CIIs.  
 
First, we will enhance our CII Protection Programme to 
establish robust and systematic cyber risk management 
processes across all critical sectors. Second, we will 
improve our sectors’ response and recovery plans to 
breaches. We will mount multi-sector cybersecurity 
exercises to test cooperation across multiple sectors and 
address inter-dependencies during major cyber-attacks. 
We will also expand and beef up national resources such 
as the National Cyber Incident Response Team (NCIRT) 
and the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). Next, we 
will introduce the Cybersecurity Act to give the Cyber 
Security Agency of Singapore (CSA) greater powers to 
secure our CIIs. Finally, as threats to government networks 
will continue to grow, we will expand efforts to secure 
government systems and networks, so as to protect 
citizens’ and official data.

Cyber technology can enable and empower business  
and society, but only if it is safe and trustworthy.  
A safer cyberspace is the collective responsibility of the 
Government, businesses, individuals and the community.  
 
First, to effectively deal with the threat of cybercrime, 
the Government will implement the recently launched 
National Cybercrime Action Plan. Second, we will 
enhance Singapore’s standing as a trusted hub by 
fostering a trusted data ecosystem. We will work 
with global institutions, other governments, industry 
partners and Internet Service Providers to quickly 
identify and reduce malicious traffic on our Internet 
infrastructure. Finally, communities and business 
associations can play their part by fostering their 
members’ understanding of cybersecurity issues 
and promoting the adoption of good practices. 

Cybersecurity is both an imperative and an 
opportunity. With advanced infrastructure and 
a highly-skilled IT workforce, Singapore is well-
positioned to build a vibrant cybersecurity ecosystem. 

First, the Government will collaborate with industry 
partners and Institutes of Higher Learning (IHLs) 
to grow the cybersecurity workforce, including 
encouraging existing cybersecurity professionals to 
deepen their skills. Second, we will develop strong 
companies and nurture local start-ups to ensure that 
best-in-class solutions are available locally. There 
are also opportunities for cybersecurity companies 
to leverage Singapore’s traditional strengths in areas 
such as financial and infocomm services to develop 
exportable solutions. Third, we will foster closer 
partnerships between academia and industry so as 
to harness cybersecurity R&D in a more targeted 
manner to deliver effective solutions. With skilled 
professionals, technologically-advanced companies 
and strong research collaborations, Singapore can be 
at the global forefront of cybersecurity innovation and 
create economic opportunities for Singaporeans and 
the industry.

Cybersecurity is a global issue. Cyber threats do not 
respect sovereign boundaries; indeed, jurisdictional 
gaps are exploited to the cyber-attacker’s advantage. 
Cyber-attacks disrupting one country can have 
serious spill-over effects on other countries as our 
inter-dependencies have increased through trade 
and global financial markets.  
 
Singapore is committed to strong international  
collaboration in cybersecurity for our collective global 
security. Singapore will actively cooperate with the 
international community, particularly ASEAN, to 
address transnational cybersecurity and cybercrime 
issues. We will champion cyber capacity building 
initiatives, and facilitate exchanges on cyber norms and 
legislation. Through international consensus, agreement, 
and cooperation, we can make cyberspace a safer and 
more secure place for all.

4
4

INTRO

INTRO

5
5

INTRODUCTION

“Cybersecurity is important for Singapore given our high dependence 
on information technology and the Internet, and cybercrime is also 
growing. Cyber-attacks can take many forms and come from many 
sources. They range from defacements of website and data theft, 

often by persons who hide behind the anonymity of cyberspace [and] 

can also include systemic threats” 

Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean, 

Committee of Supply, 6 Mar 2013

Cyber-attacks are increasingly frequent, sophisticated 
and impactful. Globally, we have seen a surge in the 
number of cyber incidents, such as ransomware, cyber 
theft, banking fraud, cyber espionage and disruptions to 
Internet services. Attacks on systems that run utility plants, 
transportation networks, hospitals and other essential 
services are more frequent. Successful attacks result in 
disruptions which could cripple economies, and lead to 
loss of life. 
 
The advent of the Internet of Things will further 
increase the attack surface. Left unchecked, malicious 
entities can find more ways to launch attacks, steal data 
and make cyberspace dangerous for all. The result is a 
cyberspace that is hostile, and where basic interactions 
and transactions cannot be trusted.
 
Singapore has consistently taken cyber threats seriously 
and developed timely responses. Our cybersecurity 
journey started a decade ago with the first Infocomm 
Security Masterplan in 2005. The Masterplan was a 
coordinated effort to secure Singapore’s digital environment 
and strengthen public sector cybersecurity capabilities. 
Since then, Singapore’s cybersecurity capabilities have 
grown. With the formation of the Singapore Infocomm 
Technology Security Authority (SITSA) in 2009, we 
developed the capability to coordinate national-level 
responses against large-scale cyber-attacks, particularly 
against our critical information infrastructures.

In 2015, the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
(CSA) was formed as the central agency to oversee 
and coordinate all aspects of cybersecurity for the 
nation. CSA is empowered to develop and enforce 
cybersecurity regulations, policies, and practices. 
 
While much has been achieved so far, the threats have 
also become more sophisticated. We are even more 
dependent on digital technology, especially as we 
develop a Smart Nation of digitally-enabled businesses 
and lives. Cybersecurity, beyond a necessity to defend 
and protect, is also an enabler for our future economy 
and society.
 
This Strategy is a statement of Singapore’s vision 
and priorities for cybersecurity. It aims to catalyse 
participation by all stakeholders - government 
agencies, the cyber industry, professionals and 
students, academia and researchers, and providers 
of essential services. Together, we will ensure the 
resilience of our national infrastructure and a safer 
cyberspace, supported by a vibrant ecosystem that 
provides good jobs and economic opportunities for 
Singaporeans. It also signals Singapore’s willingness 
to forge strong partnerships with the international 
community to combat the transnational nature of 
cyber threats.  

Our 
Smart 
Nation 
Journey

Singapore is transforming to become  
a Smart Nation, where Singaporeans 
are empowered by technology to lead 
meaningful and fulfilling lives, where 
digital connectivity leads to stronger 
community bonds, and where the 
power of networks, data and 
infocomm technologies is harnessed 
to create economic opportunities.

Smart Nation is a whole-of-nation 
rallying call for citizens, companies, 
and government agencies to work hand-
in-hand to seize the many possibilities 
of digital technology. We are putting in 
place the necessary infrastructure and 
policies to build capabilities, and to create 
a conducive ecosystem where people and 
companies co-create innovative solutions 
to enhance the lives of our citizens. 

 OUR CYBERSECURITY 

 JOURNEY SO FAR 

 2015  Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
(CSA)
CSA was established under the Prime Minister’s 
Office (PMO) and is managed administratively 
by the Ministry of Communications and 
Information (MCI). With its formation, all 
agencies and initiatives related to cybersecurity 
– the Singapore Computer Emergency Response 
Team (SingCERT), national cybersecurity 
master-planning and development functions 
from IDA, and SITSA – were brought under 
a single agency.  
 
CSA is dedicated to the development of 
cybersecurity, protection of CIIs and essential 
services, and coordination of national efforts 
against large-scale cyber incidents. CSA 
is also empowered to develop and enforce 
cybersecurity regulations, policies, and practices. 
It will coordinate efforts across government, 
industry, academia, businesses and the people 
sector, as well as internationally.
 
 2015  Cybercrime Command
The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
established the Cybercrime Command as 
a unit within the Criminal Investigation 
Department (CID) of the Singapore Police 
Force (SPF). The Command works closely with 
other law enforcement agencies and industry 
stakeholders, including the INTERPOL Global 
Complex for Innovation (IGCI) located in 
Singapore, to investigate cybercrimes.

 2016  National Cybercrime Action  
Plan (NCAP)
The NCAP was launched by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA) in July 2016. The 
plan spells out the priorities needed in the 
fight against cybercrime. These include 
a) the need for public education on staying 
safe in cyberspace; b) the development of 
capabilities to fight cybercrime; c) strengthening 
cybercrime laws; and d) building local and 
international partnerships.

 2005  Infocomm Security Masterplan (ISMP) 
(2005-2007)
The Info-communications Development 
Authority (IDA) launched Singapore’s first 
Infocomm Security Masterplan to coordinate 
cybersecurity efforts across the Government. 
A key priority was building basic capabilities 
within the public sector to mitigate and respond 
to cyber threats.

 2008  Infocomm Security Masterplan 
(2008-2012)
The second Masterplan focused especially on 
the security of Singapore’s CIIs, with a vision of 
making Singapore a ‘Secure and Trusted Hub’.

 2009  Singapore Infocomm Technology 
Security Authority (SITSA)
SITSA was established under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) to safeguard Singapore 
against cyber-attacks and cyber-espionage. 
SITSA’s responsibilities as a national specialist 
authority included overseeing the preparation 
and securing of CIIs against cyber threats.

 2013  National Cyber Security Masterplan 
(NCSM2018)
The third Masterplan expanded to cover the 
wider infocomm ecosystem, which includes 
businesses and individuals, in addition to 
the previous focus on CIIs. It sought to make 
Singapore a ‘Trusted and Robust Infocomm Hub’. 

 2013  National Cybersecurity R&D (NCR) 
Programme 
The National Cybersecurity R&D Programme 
was established in October 2013 to develop 
R&D expertise and capabilities in cybersecurity 
for Singapore. It aims to improve the 
trustworthiness of cyber infrastructure, with 
emphasis on security, reliability, resilience and 
usability. It is now co-managed by the National 
Research Foundation and the Cyber Security 
Agency of Singapore. 

 2014  National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC)
The NCSC was formed as part of SITSA, to 
maintain cyber situational awareness, correlate 
cybersecurity events across sectors, and 
coordinate with the respective lead agencies to 
provide a national-level response to large-scale, 
cross-sector cyber incidents.

6
6

INTRO

INTRO

7
7

CHAPTER 1

A

RESILIENT
INFRASTRUCTURE

Behind the scenes, in every city (and Singapore is no exception), 
a gamut of essential services and infrastructure are needed to 
keep a modern metropolis running smoothly. Essential services 
such as energy, banking, healthcare and transport are powered 
by infocomm technology. Cyber-attacks on these Critical Information 
Infrastructures (CIIs) can interfere with these essential services. 
At best, they lead to inconveniences. At worst, they can result in 
significant disruptions to the economy and to our society. 

The effects of a cyber-attack on Singapore have ramifications beyond 
our shores. Singapore is an open economy and connected to the rest 
of the world. It is a major international centre for trade, finance and 
logistics. A cyber-attack on Singapore could potentially impact the 
wider regional and global economy. 

Singapore has to ensure that its CIIs are not just resilient against 
physical threats, but also against cyber threats. A cyber-resilient 
infrastructure will provide peace of mind to Singaporeans. 
A cyber-resilient infrastructure will reinforce confidence in Singapore 
as a resilient and trusted global centre of trade and commerce.

The Government will work with key stakeholders - the CII operators 
and the cybersecurity community - in four major areas. 

We will:

Step up the protection of our essential services. We will implement 
a CII Protection Programme which emphasises robust and systematic 
cyber risk management processes, and the importance of a culture 
of cyber risk awareness across all levels of CII organisations. We will 
increase the adoption of Security-by-Design practices to address 
cybersecurity issues upstream and along the supply chain. 

Enhance our capability to respond decisively to cyber threats.  
We will enhance our national cyber situational awareness and 
conduct regular multi-sector cybersecurity exercises with more 
complex scenarios and involving more and more sectors. We will 
build up more National Cyber Incident Response Teams (NCIRT) 
and enhance the Disaster Recovery Plans (DRP) and Business 
Continuity Plans (BCP) of the critical sectors.

Strengthen our cybersecurity governance and legislative 
framework. We will introduce a new Cybersecurity Act that will 
require CII owners and operators to take responsibility for securing 
their systems and networks. The Act will also facilitate the sharing 
of cybersecurity information with and by CSA, and empower CSA 
and sector regulators to work closely with affected parties to resolve 
cybersecurity incidents in a timely manner. 

Make Government systems more secure. The Government will 
expand its efforts to secure its systems and networks. This includes 
allocating 8 per cent of the total Government ICT expenditure to 
cybersecurity. We will also reduce the attack surface of Government 
systems, enhance cyber situational awareness in the government 
sector and sharpen cyber incident management.

SINGAPORE’S  

CRITICAL INFORMATION 

INFRASTRUCTURE SECTORS

Sources:
Department of Statistics – "Singapore in Figures 2016" publication 
www.changiairport.com – Air Traffic Statistics 
www.mpa.gov.sg – Port Statistics 
www.mas.gov.sg – MAS Electronic Payment System (MEPS+) Statistics

The reliable supply of essential services depends on the security of the 
computer and network infrastructure in Singapore’s Critical Information 
Infrastructure (CII) sectors. Today, we have identified 11 CII sectors,  
which cut across utilities, transport, and services. 
 
Cyber-attacks on Singapore’s CIIs may have spill-over effects regionally 
and globally. As an international financial, shipping and aviation hub, 
Singapore also houses critical systems that transcend national borders, 
such as global payment systems, port operations systems, and air-traffic 
control systems. Successful attacks on these supra-national CIIs can have 
disproportionate effects on the trade and banking systems beyond 
Singapore’s shores. 
 
The Singapore Government is working with the operators of our CIIs  
to ensure they remain resilient in the face of cyber-attacks.

  SERVICES  

  UTILITIES  

  TRANSPORT  

Singapore is a major financial centre that processes massive amounts 
of transactions every second. For example, our local inter-bank 
payment systems handle millions of transactions totalling trillions 
of dollars annually. Many of our public services – government 
transactions, healthcare, emergency services – are increasingly reliant 
on complex underlying computer systems to serve millions of users 
each year. The Government Technology Agency (GovTech), Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA), MOH Holdings (the holding company of 
Singapore’s public healthcare entities), Info-communications Media 
Development Authority (IMDA) and the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore (MAS) are committed to strengthening the cybersecurity 
of the systems delivering government and emergency services, 
healthcare, media, and banking and financial services. 

Power, water and telecommunications 
are the lifeline of modern cities. 
In particular, the failure of power 
and telecommunications services can 
bring other services to a grinding halt. 
The Energy Market Authority
(EMA), Public Utilities Board (PUB)
and Info-communications Media
Development Authority (IMDA) will 
work closely with the private operators 
delivering these services to raise
their cybersecurity posture and ensure 
the reliability of these services.

Singapore is an international logistics hub. The 
Singapore Port and Changi Airport are among the 
world’s busiest. The Port is a major transhipment hub 
that handles more than 130,000 vessels and 30 million 
containers each year. The Airport sees more than 
340,000 flights, 55 million travellers, and 1.8 million 
tons of cargo annually. Our public transport system 
handles 7.5 million passenger trips per day. The Land 
Transport Authority (LTA), Maritime and Port Authority 
(MPA) and Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore 
(CAAS) have put in place governance frameworks and 
are building cybersecurity capability to ensure that our 
transport and logistics systems are robust. 

10

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

11

PROTECT OUR

ESSENTIAL SERVICES

Operators increasingly rely on computer networks and the Internet 
to maintain essential services and to serve their businesses and 
consumers. For CII operators, the gain in efficiency and productivity 
is significant – but so are the increased vulnerabilities of essential 
services to cyber disruption. 
 
To ensure the continuous delivery of essential services, CII operators 
need both physical resilience and cyber resilience. Cyber resilience 
is the ability of our CIIs to withstand cyber-attacks, allowing them 
to continue operating under the toughest conditions and recover 
quickly after a disruption. We must raise the cyber resilience of our 
essential services, and we can achieve this only with the trust and 
participation of all stakeholders – the Government, CII operators, 
and the cybersecurity community. 
 
Singapore will: 

Implement across all critical sectors, a CII Protection Programme 
with robust and systematic cyber risk management processes. 
A key part of the CII Protection Programme is to grow a culture 
of cyber risk awareness across all levels of a CII organisation. 
From the CEO to the employee, cybersecurity must be seen 
as a business concern and not just one for the IT department. 

Pre-empt cyber vulnerabilities by going upstream and 
promoting Security-by-Design practices. Cybersecurity 
will no longer be an afterthought, but will be consciously 
implemented throughout the lifecycle of technology systems.

  Implement CII Protection Programme  

The Government will roll out a holistic CII Protection Programme 
for government agencies and CII operators. It will build on the 
Cybersecurity Readiness Maturity Assessment programme 
implemented in 2012, which has enabled agencies and operators 
identify areas for improvement. 
 
The CII Protection Programme will, firstly, establish the foundation 
to facilitate information exchange among CII operators through clear 
policies and guidelines. Second, it will enable targeted and systematic 
improvements through clearer  measurements of governance 
maturity and networks’ cybersecurity hygiene. Third, it will require 
operators to foster a culture of cyber-risks literacy across all levels in 
organisations, proactively address cyber-risks and ensure that their 
practices are consistent with policies. With a deep understanding of 
cyber risks, sectors take ownership and provide management focus to 
implement effective CII protection plans that are tailored to the unique 
circumstances of each sector.
 
The goal is for all critical sectors to establish robust and systematic 
cyber risk management processes and capabilities that are effective 
against the evolving cyber threats.

  Systematic Cyber Risk Management  

A systematic cyber risk management framework comprises:

1

2

3

4

5

thorough identification and prioritisation of cyber risks and CIIs through 
risk assessments, vulnerability assessments and system reviews;

well-informed and conscious trade-offs in security, cost and functionality, 
decided at management levels of appropriate seniority; 

sound systems and procedures to mitigate and manage these risks, 
including disaster recovery and business continuity plans; 

effective implementation that encompasses awareness building and 
training across the organisation; and 

continuous measurement of performance through process audits and 
cybersecurity exercises.

  Cybersecurity Maturity Assessment  

The Government has been using the Readiness Maturity Index (RMI) framework 
to assess the readiness of CII sectors in terms of their capabilities for risk-based 
mitigation, early detection of threats, and robustness of the response measures.
The RMI is the metaphorical health check that directs the CII sectors’ effort to 
manage cyber risks, and facilitates the development of action plans to improve 
governance and procedures.

12

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

13

  Promote Security-by-Design  

Security-by-Design is an approach in the system development 
lifecycle process to ensure that our applications and systems are 
built, deployed, maintained, upgraded and disposed of securely. 

The Government will promote the adoption of Security-by-Design 
in several ways: 
 

Progressively institutionalise Security-by-Design into the 
governance framework for CII protection;  

Promote the practice of penetration testing to discover 
vulnerabilities early for remediation at the design stage;  

Build a strong community of practice in product and system 
testing based on established international standards, such as 
the Common Criteria product assurance certification; and  

Continue to refine methodologies and develop new security 
validation tools to improve the efficacy of Security-by-Design.

  Why is Security-by-Design   
  important?  

Security-by-design is a best practice 
to ensure that system is developed 
with security consideration upfront and 
throughout its lifecycle. By integrating 
risk assessment into the system 
development lifecycle, trade-offs between 
security, cost and functionality are 
deliberated. The trade-off decisions should 
be made by well-informed management at 
the appropriate level of decision making. 
This ensures that the system is optimised 
for the conditions in which it is to be used. 
 
Subscribing to Security-by-Design will 
reduce piecemeal implementation and 
the need for costly and often ineffective 
retrofitting. Cybersecurity, when 
thoughtfully considered and incorporated 
at the design stage of a system will result 
in an organically robust system design 
that can better withstand cyber threats.

“The first priority 

on our journey 

towards a 

Smart Financial 

Centre is therefore 

to continually 

strengthen 

the industry’s 
cybersecurity.” 

Mr Ravi Menon, 

Managing Director, Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS), 

Global Technology Law Conference, 

June 2015

  Opening of the CREST Examination  
  Facility  for Penetration Testing Certifications   
  and Accreditations at the Singapore Institute  
  of Technology  

The implementation of Security-by-Design 
has to be complemented with highly skilled 
professionals who can carry out security 
validation processes rigorously and proficiently. 
The introduction of CREST penetration testing 
certifications and accreditations in Singapore 
is one means of raising the professional 
competency standards.

  Designing cybersecurity into FinTech  

The Monetary Authority of Singapore 
(MAS) has formed a Financial Technology 
& Innovation Group since August 2015 
to drive the Smart Financial Centre 
initiatives. This Group is responsible 
for formulating regulatory policies and 

developing strategies to facilitate the use 
of technology and innovation to enhance 
efficiency and better manage risks in the 
financial sector. Efforts by MAS to manage 
risks associated with FinTech include:

1

2

3

Establishing a FinTech Innovation Lab that allows stakeholders to experiment with 
FinTech solutions, including security solutions; 

Establishing “regulatory sandboxes” that can be used to carve out a safe and 
conducive space to experiment with FinTech solutions, and where the consequences 
of failure can be contained; and 

Providing financial support through the Financial Sector Technology & Innovation 
scheme for projects that uplift the cybersecurity ecosystem in Singapore.

14

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

15

RESPOND DECISIVELY 

TO CYBER THREATS 

An effective cyber defence must assume that 
there can and will be successful cyber-attacks. 
When such attacks materialise, the cyber 
defenders must be able to mount a robust response 
and implement reliable recovery plans. This can 
only be possible with a comprehensive framework 
for preparedness. 
 
Singapore has developed a national cybersecurity 
response plan which allows for timely response 
and ground initiative at the local level, 
complemented with effective coordination and 
strategic support at the sectoral and national 
level. The plan envisages three tiers of response – 
Tier 1 for cyber campaigns that threaten national 
security, Tier 2 for cyber-attacks on a sector, and 
Tier 3 for cyber-attacks on a specific operator. 
The plan requires CSA to work closely with CII 
operators and the cybersecurity community 
to ensure an effective response. 

The national response to a cyber-attack will 
be led by an inter-agency Cybersecurity Crisis 
Management Group, or CMG (Cyber). It is led 
by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry 
of Communications & Information, supported 
by CSA, and comprises senior policy decision-
makers from government agencies overseeing 
the different critical sectors. CMG (Cyber) 
serves dual functions: (a) it is responsible for 
the development of cybersecurity policies and 
standards, and oversees the implementation 
of cybersecurity protection measures in the 
critical sectors; and (b) in a cyber crisis, it 
mobilises the necessary resources and directs 
the operational responses to provide 
a coordinated response to the threat. 

Singapore will:  

Enhance its national cyber situational 
awareness by integrating threat discovery, 
analysis and incident responses. 
Conduct regular multi-sector cybersecurity 
exercises with more complex scenarios 
and involving more and more sectors. 
Through these exercises, we aim to 
identify vulnerabilities due to cross-sector 
interdependencies and stress-test coordination 
and communication across sectors. 
Build up more National Cyber Incident 
Response Teams (NCIRT) which can be 
mobilised to lend support to a sector or CII 
operator should they face an escalating 
cyber incident. 
Strengthen the Disaster Recovery Plans 
(DRP) and Business Continuity Plans (BCP) 
of essential services, especially against  
a cyber-attack.

  Exercise Cyber Star  

Over the past years, the Government has 
conducted sector level exercises to exercise 
individual critical sectors in their readiness 
and incidence response plans against a cyber-
attack. This culminated in Exercise Cyber Star, 
a multi-sector exercise conducted by CSA in 
March 2016. It brought together industry and 
Government representatives across the infocomm, 
Government, energy, and banking and finance 
sectors to exercise the response to a nationwide 
attack. The exercise was a milestone in building 
up cybersecurity readiness and validating the 
effectiveness of cross-sector cooperation.

  Integration of Threat Discovery,  
  Analysis and Incident Response  

  More Comprehensive  
  Cybersecurity Exercises  

  Expand the National Cyber Incident  
  Response Team (NCIRT)  

  Recover, Restore, Remediate  
 

The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) 
monitors and analyses the cyber threat landscape 
to maintain cyber situational awareness and 
anticipate future threats. In the event of large-scale 
cyber incidents involving multiple sectors, NCSC 
coordinates with the sector regulators to provide 
a national level response and facilitate quick alerts 
to cross-sector threats. 

The Government is investing in technologies 
and systems that will strengthen and integrate 
the NCSC’s three key functions of threat discovery, 
threat analysis and incident response. This will 
enable faster threat discovery and operational 
response for cross-sector cyber incidents.

Cybersecurity exercises are important ways  
to raise the readiness of sectors, build incident  
response plans and capabilities, and improve 
communication and coordination between the 
CII operators and government agencies. The 
Government will conduct these cybersecurity 
exercises at both the sector and national levels. 
 
Sector exercises will run with more complex 
scenarios and more sophisticated attack methods. 
This will enhance the capability of the sectoral 
cyber response teams and the quality of incident 
management by the C-suite decision-makers in 
the CII operators. 
 
National-level exercises will encompass more 
and more sectors, with an emphasis on the inter-
dependent nature of essential services. This will 
facilitate the discovery and mitigation of the 
sectors’ inter-dependencies, and stress-test the 
coordination and communication capabilities at 
the national level. 

National Cyber Incident Response Teams 
(NCIRT) are currently drawn from the incident 
response teams from CSA, Government 
Technology Agency (GovTech), the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) and the Ministry of Defence 
(MINDEF). They are part of the Tier 1 and Tier 2 
response under the national cyber response plan.  
 
The Government will further enhance the 
capability of the NCIRTs to deal with more 
complex and challenging attack scenarios. 
It will also build up more NCIRTs by upgrading 
certain sectoral CIRTs and also consider raising 
additional NCIRTs from industry and academia. 
This will increase the national capacity to deal 
with large scale cyber-attacks. 

Resilience in essential services is especially 
applicable to CIIs, as a cyber-breach realistically 
cannot be prevented all the time. A resilient system 
will need to put in place prevention activities that 
must be integrated with an expedient incident 
response plan and a comprehensive recovery 
strategy to mitigate the effects of cyber incidents. 
As such, an important aspect following a cyber-
attack is to be able to return affected CIIs to normal 
operations as soon as possible, or to facilitate their 
continued operations in sub-optimal conditions 
through a prolonged attack. The Government will 
work with the sectors to ensure that robust Disaster 
Recovery Plans (DRP) and Business Continuity 
Plans (BCP) are built into their CII protection plans.

16
16

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

17
17

STRENGTHEN GOVERNANCE  

LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 

AND 

  The Cybersecurity Act  

The Government will introduce a new Cybersecurity Act. This new legislation will equip 
CSA with the necessary powers to effectively address increasingly sophisticated threats 
to national cybersecurity.

The new Cybersecurity Act will establish a comprehensive framework for the prevention 
and management of cyber incidents, and complement the existing Computer Misuse and 
Cybersecurity Act (CMCA), which will continue to govern the investigation of cybercrime. 
It will: 

Require CII owners and operators to take responsibility for securing their systems 
and networks. This includes complying with policies and standards, conducting 
audits and risk assessments, and reporting cybersecurity incidents. CII owners and 
operators will also be required to participate in cybersecurity exercises to ensure 
their readiness in managing cyber incidents; and

Facilitate the sharing of cybersecurity information with and by CSA. Recognising that 
cybersecurity breaches will happen despite our best efforts, the Act will empower 
CSA and sector regulators to work closely with affected parties to expeditiously 
resolve cybersecurity incidents and recover from disruptions. 

 
CSA has been and will continue to work closely with sector regulators, CII stakeholders 
and industry players in formulating detailed proposals for the new Act. A key principle is 
to adopt a risk-based approach to cybersecurity, and to build in sufficient flexibility to take 
into account the unique circumstances and regulations in each sector.

“We will develop a standalone 

Cybersecurity Act that 

provides for stronger and 
more proactive powers.”

Minister-in-charge of Cybersecurity,

 Dr Yaacob Ibrahim, 2015

  The need for stronger cybersecurity laws  

In 2013, the Government amended 
the then-Computer Misuse Act to 
strengthen Singapore’s capability 
in responding to national-level 
cyber threats. This became the 
Computer Misuse and Cybersecurity 
Act (CMCA). When there is an actual 
or suspected cyber threat, the CMCA 
empowers the Minister of Home 
Affairs to direct affected parties to 
share vital information, and carry 
out necessary measures to mitigate 
the impact of the threat. Additionally, 
some sector regulators have other 
legislative powers to enforce 
cybersecurity requirements on their 
licensees. These powers, however, 
vary from sector to sector, depending 
on the operating environment and 
level of technology adoption in 
each sector.
 

Today, cybersecurity threats 
have become more sophisticated. 
Essential services around the 
world, including Singapore’s, face 
a greater risk of being disrupted. 
In the recent past, cyber perpetrators 
have demonstrated attacks on a 
range of essential services, including 
the power grid and key banking 
systems. There is a need to implement 
more robust laws that allow for a 
more proactive approach to national 
cybersecurity. Many countries have 
also strengthened their cybersecurity 
laws over the past few years, 
focusing on areas such as standards 
for essential service providers, 
information sharing, and cyber 
crisis management.

18
18

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

19
19

SECURE

GOVERNMENT NETWORKS

Government systems are among the prime targets 
for cyber-attackers. Government systems contain 
sensitive data, including those about their citizens; 
they may be linked to essential services supplied 
by CII operators; they are used to support a gamut 
of public services including the maintenance of 
national security and sustaining the economy. 

Hence, the Government will spare no effort in 
safeguarding its systems and networks. The 
Government has undertaken, in this current term, 
to work towards a goal of setting aside 8 per cent 
of its ICT expenditure on cybersecurity.

The Government sector is already identified 
as one of the eleven CII sectors in the national 
cyber response plan.  

The Government’s plans as a CII sector 
lead incorporate many of the elements of 
the larger national plan. They involve: 

 
Reducing the attack surface presented by 
Government systems and erecting multiple 
layers of security controls and network 
segmentation according to vulnerability 
and need; 
 
Expanding our capacity to detect, correlate 
and analyse threats, using automation 
and other technologies; and 
 
Sharpening the skills of our incident 
responders and stress-testing our 
systems through more complex and 
realistic attack scenarios.

Reducing 
Attack Surface

Enhancing Situational 
Awareness through Technology

Preparing for 
Cyber Breaches

The Government has put in place long-term 
measures including on-going and proactive 
reviews of the ICT operating environments, 
to ensure that security controls are commensurate 
with rapidly evolving threats. For example, 
in view of the increased frequency of targeted 
attacks on Government networks, the Civil 
Service will separate Internet surfing from the 
networks that hold classified data according 
to vulnerability, exposure and need. 
 
At the same time, the Government will continue 
its approach of adopting new technologies 
to deliver secure and resilient digital services. 
It is also looking into risk reduction initiatives 
to minimise the potential loss of citizens’ data 
or prolonged outages of digital services.

The Monitoring and Operations Control Centre 
(MOCC), Cyber-Watch Centre (CWC), and Threat 
Analysis Centre (TAC) provide the Government 
with cyber situational awareness of its networks. 
 
We will continue to invest in technologies such 
as analytics, automation, artificial intelligence, 
and other state-of-the-art security technologies. 
This will maintain the centres’ operational 
excellence, to enable timely detection and 
response to a cyber incident. 

The Government has expanded 
considerable effort in building a 
team of highly-skilled security incident 
responders. However, we recognise 
that no system is 100 per cent fool-
proof and breaches may still occur even 
despite the best of our efforts. We will 
continue to hold regular cybersecurity 
exercises to stress test our procedures 
and capabilities for a realistic evaluation 
of our proficiency, and conduct red-
teaming sessions to validate the security 
of our systems. The Government 
will work with the sectors to ensure 
that CII protection plans are in place 
for expedient remediation to restore 
essential services.

Cybersecurity professionals on duty at Cyber-Watch Centre (CWC)

  Cyber-Watch Centre (CWC)  

The Cyber-Watch Centre (CWC) 
was established by the Info-
communications Development 
Authority of Singapore (IDA) in 
2007 to monitor cyber threats to 
government networks and provide 
early warning of impending cyber-
attacks. To improve the detection  
of malicious activities which could 
affect access to online public services, 
the CWC was upgraded in 2015 with 
a wider range of detection capabilities 
and enhanced correlation capabilities. 

This is an example of a proactive 
defence-in-depth security measure 
to mitigate increasingly sophisticated 
attacks and enhance infocomm 
infrastructure security. 

20

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 1

21

CHAPTER 2

A

SAFER
CYBERSPACE

Digital connectivity has both empowered and endangered 
businesses and individuals. It opens new social and commercial 
opportunities, yet also exposes citizens to criminal syndicates across 
the world. By commandeering computing devices, these malicious 
actors can steal data, extort money, and attack networks, causing 
harm to others. Cyberspace needs to be kept safe and trustworthy 
for businesses and individuals to benefit from it. 

Keeping cyberspace safe requires a spectrum of actions from the 
international to individual levels. Countries have to cooperate to 
take down criminals operating across borders, while businesses 
and individuals can take preventive measures to keep their systems 
and devices safe. Cybersecurity is the collective responsibility of 
everyone - the Government, businesses, individuals and the community.

The Government will:

Combat cybercrime through the National Cybercrime Action Plan 
(NCAP). The National Cybercrime Action Plan (NCAP) was launched 
in July 2016 to establish a coordinated national effort to deal with 
cybercrime. First, we will educate and empower the public to stay 
safe in cyberspace, as it is more effective to prevent a cybercrime 
from happening in the first place. Second, we will enhance the 
Government’s capacity and capability to combat cybercrime, 
in view of cybercrime’s transnational nature, speed and scale. Next, 
we will strengthen legislation and the criminal justice framework. 
This will support the investigation of cybercrimes and prosecution 
of cybercriminals. Finally, we will step up partnerships and 
international engagement to manage the rapidly evolving nature 
of cybercrime and tackle cross-border issues. 
 
Enhance Singapore’s standing as a trusted hub. 
We will build a trusted data ecosystem by fostering trust between 
organisations and users for data usage. Next, we will develop Data 
Protection Officers as a professional career track to support the 
effective implementation of data protection measures. We will also 
strengthen Singapore’s position as a data hub by facilitating cross-
border data flows and introducing Data Protection TrustMarks. Finally, 
we will work with partners – global institutions, other governments, 
industry partners and Internet Service Providers – to achieve a 
cleaner internet by regularly measuring the health of the Internet, 
identifying cyber threats quickly and reducing malicious traffic. 
 
Promote collective responsibility for cybersecurity. 
The actions of each business and individual can impact our 
collective safety in cyberspace. Businesses and individuals need to 
stay informed and take preventive measures to secure their computer 
systems and digital devices, particularly to prevent malicious actors 
from hijacking their systems and devices to cause harm to others. 
Communities and business associations can take the lead to make 
cybersecurity a priority, and tap on government cybersecurity 
expertise to improve their members’ understanding of cybersecurity 
issues and encourage adoption of good practices. With the right 
knowledge, expertise and attitude, we can all reap the full benefits
and possibilities of technology. 

CYBERCRIME: 

THE NEW CRIMINAL FRONTIER

Ransomware

In May 2016, ransomware 
encrypted University of 
Calgary’s computer systems  
on the eve of a conference.  
The conference organisers  
had to re-create processes  
and conference data by hand  
for the event to continue.  
To prevent the malware from 
spreading to the rest of the 
systems, the University had  
to shut down other IT services, 
causing a week-long, campus-
wide disruption that was more 
far-reaching than the impact 
of the malware.

The malicious actors behind 
this incident demanded the 
equivalent of Canadian $20,000 
in Bitcoins to decrypt the data. 
The University eventually  
gave in and paid the ransom  
to retrieve the research data.

Supply chain malware attack

In 2013, more than 40 million credit 
card numbers were stolen through 
malware that was injected into the 
US retailer Target’s Point-of-Sales 
system. Although Target had 
multiple cybersecurity solutions in 
place, the malware slipped in through 
one of Target’s vendors. Further 
investigations were hindered as 
the stolen data was sent offshore. 

Target incurred US$252 million 
of breach-related expenses and 
faced several lawsuits. Target’s CEO 
held himself personally accountable 
and resigned. 

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)

In January 2016, online banking 
services for millions of HSBC UK 
customers were taken offline by a  
DDoS attack. The disruption happened 
on an important day for personal 
finances; it was the first pay-day of the 
year, and two days before the deadline 
for personal tax returns. Many HSBC 
customers took to social media to vent 
their anger.

DDoS attacks work by overwhelming 
websites with Internet traffic. Globally, 
such attacks have become more 
frequent against even small businesses. 
The motives are varied. Attacks can be 
used to protest against a company, take 
down a competitor temporarily, or be 
part of extortion threats. 

The growth of the Internet has created numerous business and social opportunities. However, 
where there are opportunities, there are also risks. Locally and internationally, the Internet has been 
exploited for cybercrimes like scams, hacks and thefts.

For businesses, malicious cyber activities may cause service disruptions and loss of data pertaining  
to customers, employees, and commercial entities. These can result in substantial revenue losses,  
erosion of customer goodwill, and loss of reputation. Inextricably, personal lives may also be affected. 

For individuals, poor personal cybersecurity habits can open doors to cybercrime and malicious 
activities. Extortion, fraud, and adverse credit ratings are some of the detrimental consequences that 
individuals and their families may face, when their computers and mobile devices are compromised 
and personal data stolen.

Smartphone hack

In 2015, 50 Singapore users  
had their smartphones infected 
by a malware that disguised 
itself as a banking application 
to steal credit card details and 
other user credentials. 

Today’s smartphones are 
essentially computers that 
execute highly personal tasks 
while being always connected 
to the Internet, making them 
attractive targets for cybercrime.

Online scams

Traditional crime is increasingly 
migrating to where Singaporeans 
spend a good part of their 
time – online. The number of 
e-commerce and online scam 
cases in Singapore doubled from 
1,929 in 2014 to 3,759 in 2015, 
resulting in a loss of S$16.7 
million.

Malware enabled heist

In February 2016, US$81 million was 
stolen from Bangladeshi Bank in a carefully 
coordinated hack. After using stolen credentials 
to initiate fraudulent bank transfers, the 
hackers used malware to hide the traces of 
the transactions, hindering remediation actions.

24

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 2

25

COMBAT CYBERCRIME

National Cybercrime Action Plan (NCAP)

The Internet has afforded criminal elements the 
opportunity to commit cybercrimes quickly, easily 
and on a large scale. Criminals have also exploited 
the anonymity provided by the Internet and the 
transnational nature of cybercrime to escape 
detection and prosecution. These characteristics 
of cybercrime pose significant challenges for law 
enforcement agencies around the world. 

As the use of the Internet becomes more prevalent 
in Singapore, the number of cybercrime cases has 
risen sharply. Recognising the need for a concerted 

and coordinated national effort to effectively 
deal with the cybercrime, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA) launched the National Cybercrime 
Action Plan (NCAP) in July 2016. 

The NCAP sets out the Government’s key 
principles and priorities in combating cybercrime. 
The Plan also details the Government’s ongoing 
efforts and future plans to tackle cybercrime. 
The vision of the NCAP is to ensure a safe and 
secure online environment for Singapore.

The NCAP has four priority areas:

A Educating and 

empowering the  
public to stay safe  
in cyberspace

Prevention is the best way 
to combat cybercrime; the 
majority of cybercrimes can 
be prevented if businesses 
and individuals are educated 
on the risks of cybercrime 
and adopt simple cybercrime 
prevention measures to 
protect themselves online. 

(i) Conducting outreach to the  
general public 

(ii) Engagement of vulnerable 
groups in society 

In order to educate and empower 
the public to stay safe in cyberspace, 
the Singapore Police Force (SPF) 
regularly shares cybercrime 
prevention messages with the 
public via various media platforms, 
such as television, newspapers, 
social media, text messages and 
posters at public transport nodes 
and lifts in public housing blocks. 
At the local community level, SPF’s 
Neighbourhood Police Centres 
frequently engage the residents 
through Community Safety & 
Security Programmes and roadshows. 
Through its Public Cyber-Outreach & 
Resilience Programme (PCORP), SPF 
uses behavioural insights to nudge 
the general public to adopt good 
cyber hygiene practices.

SPF has also tailored its 
cybercrime prevention outreach 
programmes to match the profile 
of different vulnerable groups 
in society, thereby ensuring 
that the message of cybercrime 
prevention is effectively 
communicated to all segments of 
society. Through its Collaborative 
Social Programme (CoSP), SPF 
will work with schools and Non-
Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) to raise cybercrime 
prevention awareness among 
vulnerable groups. 

(iii) Providing a one-stop self-
help portal against scams 

SPF has worked with the National 
Crime Prevention Council (NCPC) 
to transform the Scam Alert 
website (www.scamalert.sg) into 
a one-stop self-help portal against 
scams. The portal will provide 
information to the public on the 
different types of scams, and 
empower the public to take steps 
to guard against them. 

B Enhancing the 

Government’s capacity  
and capability to  
combat cybercrime

The transnational nature 
of cybercrimes, coupled 
with the speed and scale 
at which such crimes are 
perpetrated, presents 
formidable challenges 
for traditional law 
enforcement approaches. 
In order to effectively 
combat cybercrime, 
the Government will 
(i) establish the SPF 
Cybercrime Command, 
(ii) boost cybercrime 
investigation capabilities, 
(iii) equip public officers 
with the relevant skills 
to combat cybercrime, and 
(iv) enhance coordination 
between SPF and 
government agencies.

cybercrime. To achieve this, a Cyber 
Security Lab (CSL) has been set up 
in the CCSS as a modern hands-on 
facility for familiarising trainees on 
approaches to mitigate cyber threats 
and investigate cyber incidents. 
CCSS will expand its curriculum 
to offer a variety of skills-based 
courses, ranging from cybersecurity 
fundamentals and cyber defence, 
to incident response, digital forensics 
and malware analysis. These courses 
are tailored to the needs of officers, 
depending on their professional roles 
and competency requirements.

(iv) Strengthening coordination 
between SPF and government 
agencies 

SPF also works closely with 
its partner agencies to ensure 
a coordinated response to 
cybercrimes. In recent years, 
AGC and SPF have worked closely 
together on sensitive and high-
profile cybercrime cases, coming 
together right from the start of the 
investigations. AGC’s expertise has 
helped SPF to ensure that crucial 
evidence is secured at an early
 stage and that police investigations 
are watertight.

Given the closely-related nature 
of cybersecurity and cybercrime, 
SPF and CSA will work together 
to ensure an effective response 
to cyber-related incidents and 
conduct exercises to stress-test 
existing workflows, coordination 
arrangements and procedures. 

(i) Establishing the SPF  
Cybercrime Command 

The SPF Cybercrime Command 
was established in December 2015 
to increase the agility and 
effectiveness of the SPF to respond 
to cybercrimes by integrating SPF’s 
cyber-related investigation, forensics, 
intelligence and crime prevention 
capabilities within a single command. 

(ii) Boosting cybercrime 
investigation capabilities 

SPF has also embarked on several 
technology initiatives to improve 
its cybercrime investigation 
capabilities. These efforts will enable 
SPF to effectively investigate the 
rising number of cybercrime cases 
and quickly process large volumes 
of digital information in order to 
sieve out necessary evidence for 
a successful prosecution. 

One such initiative is the DIGital 
Evidence Search Tool (DIGEST) that 
will automate the forensic processing 
of voluminous data. This will in turn 
lighten the workload of investigation 
officers and allow them to focus 
their efforts on more specialised 
investigation functions. The tool 
will also reduce the processing time 
for digital evidence, ensuring that 
investigation officers can follow up 
on leads expeditiously and solve 
cases in a shorter time. 

(iii) Equipping public officers 
handling sensitive data with the 
relevant skills to combat cybercrime 

In recognition of growing 
cybersecurity and cybercrime threats, 
the Centre for Cyber Security Studies 
(CCSS) was established in 2014 
within the Home Team Academy 
(HTA). The CCSS facilitates the 
capability and capacity development 
of Home Team Departments and 
key stakeholders responsible for 
the protection and operations of 
infocomm systems across the public 
sector. One of CCSS’ core functions 
is to equip Home Team officers with 
the necessary skills to deal with 

26

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 2

27

C Strengthening 
legislation and 
the criminal justice 
framework

The investigation of 
cybercrimes and prosecution 
of cybercriminals must be 
supported by a robust criminal 
justice framework. Laws need 
to be updated to deal with new 
cyber-offences and traditional 
crimes committed online. 
Regulatory frameworks have to 
be constantly strengthened to 
prevent criminals from taking 
advantage of loopholes. 

D Stepping up 
partnerships and 
international 
engagement

  Industry and   
  Academic Partnerships  

Deep expertise to deal with 
cybercrimes need not just 
reside with the Government 
and can be found within the 
private sector and academia. 
Given the rapidly evolving 
nature of cybercrime, the 
Government will work closely 
with industry players and 
Institute of Higher Learning 
(IHLs) so that the necessary 
information and expertise 
to deal with the latest threat 
posed by cybercrime can 
be shared seamlessly. 

(i) Amending the Computer Misuse 
and Cybersecurity Act 

(iii) Strengthening regulatory 
frameworks 

Aside from public education 
and outreach, a key method 
of cybercrime prevention is 
to increase the difficulty of 
committing such offences by 
plugging potential loopholes 
in digital platforms and 
processes. MHA will regularly 
review regulatory frameworks, 
to ensure that cybercriminals are 
not able to exploit vulnerabilities 
in technology. 

MHA intends to amend the Computer 
Misuse and Cybersecurity Act 
(CMCA), to ensure that the Act 
continues to be effective in dealing 
with the transnational nature of 
cybercrimes, as well as the evolving 
tactics of cybercriminals. 

(ii) Reviewing other laws 
 
In addition to amending the CMCA, 
MHA will review other related laws 
such as the Criminal Procedure 
Code to ensure that these laws 
remain relevant in dealing with 
traditional crimes that are committed 
in cyberspace. 
 

(i) Increasing cybercrime awareness 
in the private sector 

(ii) Developing capabilities 
to combat cybercrime 

MHA has partnered industry 
and IHLs to increase awareness 
of cybercrimes in the private sector. 
SPF regularly engages key private 
sector stakeholders, such as those 
from the Infocomm Technology 
and banking industries to enhance 
cybercrime prevention efforts, raise 
awareness of cybercrimes and 
encourage the adoption of good 
cyber hygiene practices. 

The Government has also  
collaborated with the private  
sector to jointly develop 
capabilities to respond to the 
latest cyber threats. For instance, 
SPF has partnered local research 
institutes to develop new 
cybercrime investigations and 
forensics capabilities. MHA has 
also worked with IHLs to create 
conducive environments for the 
development of cyber-related 
innovations. One example is 
MHA and Temasek Polytechnic’s 
joint establishment of the 
Temasek Advanced LEarning, 
Nurturing and Testing (TALENT) 
Lab, which serves as a platform 
for IHL students to design and 
validate innovations, to see if 
they are effective in dealing 
with cyber-threats. 

Prevention is key in countering 
the threat of cybercrime

The scale and complexity of 
cybercrime will continue to grow, 
with its transnational nature posing 
legal and operational difficulties for 
law enforcement agencies. Prevention 
is therefore still the key strategy to 
counter the threat of cybercrime. 
The NCAP will prioritise educating 

and empowering the public to be 
safe in cyberspace. Through the 
various initiatives in the NCAP, 
the Government will build strong 
partnerships with industry, IHLs 
and the public, and forge a sense 
of shared responsibility in the fight 
against cybercrime. 

  International engagement  

Strong international 
partnerships enable 
countries to deal with 
cybercrime more effectively. 
Singapore will actively 
foster regional and global 
cooperation, partner 
INTERPOL and other 
countries in capacity 
building initiatives, and 
bring global experts and 
thought leaders together 
to discuss the latest threats, 
trends and solutions in the 
cyber domain, and share 
best practices and solutions.

(i) Fostering regional  
and global cooperation 

Singapore is at the forefront of 
working with foreign countries to 
enhance our operational cooperation 
against cybercrime. At the regional 
level, Singapore is the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
Voluntary Lead Shepherd on 
Cybercrime. This provides a platform 
for the ASEAN Member States (AMS) 
to coordinate the regional approach 
to cybercrime, and work together 
on capacity building, training and 
the sharing of information. At the 
international level, Singapore hosts 
the INTERPOL Global Complex for 
Innovation (IGCI), INTERPOL’s global 
hub on cybercrime. Singapore has 
led the IGCI Working Group and 
INTERPOL Operational Expert Group 
on Cybercrime, working with other 
INTERPOL member countries to define 
INTERPOL’s cybercrime programme. 
Singapore will leverage INTERPOL’s 
resources to strengthen our global 
operational networks and build new 
capabilities to tackle cybercrime.

(ii) Building capacities and capabilities 
through collaboration at the regional 
and global levels 

Singapore has rolled out several 
programmes with partner countries and 
INTERPOL. This includes the two-year 
(2016 – 2018) ASEAN Cyber Capacity 
Development Project funded by Japan 
and implemented by INTERPOL, the 
Singapore-United States Third Country 
Training Programme, and the ASEAN Plus 
Three Cybercrime Workshop, involving 
the People’s Republic of China, Japan and 
the Republic of Korea. The involvement of 
key Asian partners, AMS and INTERPOL 
facilitates a conducive environment for 
collaboration on cybercrime issues and 
sharing of best practices, and forging 
of effective operational links between 
countries and across the regions.

(iii) Bringing global experts  
and thought leaders together 

Since 2013, Singapore has been 
supporting thought leadership platforms 
that bring together public sector and 
industry partners on cybercrime. One 
such example is the RSA Conference 
Asia Pacific and Japan (RSAC APJ). Held 
annually in Singapore, the RSAC APJ 
is Asia Pacific’s leading conference on 
information security. 

28

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 2

29

ENHANCE SINGAPORE'S 

STANDING AS A TRUSTED HUB

Build a trustworthy data ecosystem

The compromise of personal data can cause 
adverse disruptions to the affected individuals 
and businesses. With increasing amounts of data 
migrating to computer systems and electronic 
devices, there is a need to secure these systems 
and safeguard individuals’ data against theft and 
misuse. At the same time, organisations can 
leverage good personal data management to gain 
a better understanding of their customers, increase 
business efficiency and effectiveness, and boost 
customer confidence. 

Trust is essential for a data-enabled economy 
and society. To build a trusted data ecosystem, 
our organisations have to shift from compliance 
to accountability. 

Singapore will:

Work with organisations to embrace data 
protection as part of their corporate culture; 

Professionalise Data Protection Officers to 
support the effective implementation of data 
protection measures; and

Enhance Singapore’s standing as a trusted 
data hub by introducing Data Protection 
Trustmarks and working with foreign Data 
Protection Authorities to facilitate cross-
border data flows.

Professionalise Data 
Protection Officers

Today, Data Protection Officers 
(DPOs) hail from a range of 
occupations. PDPC will develop 
a Data Protection Competency 
Framework (DPCF) to grow DPOs 
as a professional career dedicated 
to overseeing data protection 
requirements of organisations. 
This will ensure that DPOs are 
equipped with the relevant skills, 
competencies, and certifications 
needed to do their jobs.

Personal Data Protection Seminar 2016

applications and business processes. 
Given that data breaches can and will 
still happen despite organisations’ 
best efforts at securing personal data, 
PDPC is studying a mandatory breach 
notification for serious data breaches. 

Build a relationship of trust

A reliable and robust data ecosystem 
promotes trust and innovation. To 
help organisations take ownership 
in promoting trust and adopting 
a mindset of accountability, the 
Personal Data Protection Commission 
(PDPC) will develop a Data Protection 
Management Programme to help 
organisations embrace data protection 
as part of their corporate culture. 
Robust data protection processes 
are needed to enable organisations 
to better use data. To do so, 
organisations should adopt a Data-
Protection–by-Design approach, 
which factors data protection as 
a key consideration in the early 
stages of any product or service 
development. The rigour of this 
framework will also require that 
businesses conduct Data Protection 
Impact Assessment as part of the 
design, rollout and review of systems, 

  Ongoing efforts for personal   
  data protection  

Under the Personal Data Protection 
Act (PDPA), organisations are to take 
reasonable steps to manage and secure 
personal information that they hold.  
Today, the PDPC adopts a multi-pronged 
approach in supporting organisations, 
particularly the Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises (SMEs). Through industry 
briefings, online training resources, and 
advisory guidelines, SMEs are equipped 
with information on the requirements of 
the PDPA and good data management 
practices to adopt.

Enhance Singapore’s standing  
as a trusted data hub

PDPC is currently developing 
a system of Data Protection 
Trustmarks to certify organisations’ 
data protection processes. By helping 
organisations gain mutual confidence 
in each other’s transactions involving 
personal information, the Trustmarks 
will increase compliance and 
reinforce Singapore’s standing 
as a trusted data hub.

Another focus area is the facilitation 
of cross-border data flows. PDPC will 
identify areas of collaborations and 
cooperation with well-established 
foreign Data Protection Authorities. 
It will participate in global multilateral 
networks to mutually recognise 
the adequacy of each economy’s 
data protection laws, thus enabling 
transfers of data across jurisdictions. 

Cleaner Internet

The Internet’s ability in allowing anyone to send 
large volumes of any form of information – data, 
voice, video - to another user has propelled it to 
be the world’s dominant communication platform. 
However, this design exposes end-users' 
machines to malicious software that can hijack 
these devices to blast phishing emails and even 
launch cyber-attacks. 

The increasing number of infected machines 
spewing malicious traffic into the Internet has made 
cyberspace less safe for everyone. Just as we would 
stop people who eject sewage into clean water 
pipes, we will also have to block users who may be 
unwittingly polluting the Internet pipeline and alert 
them on measures for cleaning up their machines.

As “gatekeepers” managing the Internet gateways 
and enabling information flows across the Internet, 
local Internet Service Providers (ISPs) play an 
essential role to achieve a safer Internet space. 
In 2011, the Government issued the first Secure 
and Resilient Internet Infrastructure Code of 
Practice to designated ISPs to ensure that sound 
security is in place to deal with current and 
emerging cyber threats. The Info-communications 
Media Development Authority (IMDA) will 
continue working with the ISPs to secure Internet 
infrastructure for businesses and individuals. 

Singapore will join the global community to measure 
and improve the health state of cyberspace, and  
CSA will collaborate with international organisations 
on this front. To complement these efforts, the 
Singapore Computer Emergency Response Team 
(SingCERT) will continue to obtain early warning 
of cyber threats and alert users on the preventive 
measures they can adopt.

30

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 2

31

PROMOTE COLLECTIVE

RESPONSIBILITY

The prevalence of ICT and the Internet has transformed the way 
we work, play, live, learn and connect with one another. Just as 
we lock our doors and keep our keys safe in the physical world, 
we have a similar responsibility to stay safe in the cyber world. 
Individuals now keep more of their friends’ and families’ personal 
data than ever before on personal devices. The stakes are higher
for businesses as they are custodians of computerised data that 
are vital to operations and impact customers’ lives. Cybersecurity 
is a collective responsibility and a way of putting Total Defence 
into action to keep Singapore safe. Everyone, whether individuals 
or businesses, has a role in creating a safer cyberspace.

  Stay informed  

Recognising that businesses and 
individuals can reduce cyber 
incidents by taking basic measures, 
the Government has taken steps to 
educate the public on cybersecurity 
since the first Infocomm Security 
Masterplan was launched in 2005. 
This needs to be a continuous effort 
as “old” technology gets upgraded 
with smart features. Today, 8 in 10 
Singapore residents install anti-virus 
software on their computers but only 
3 in 10 do so on their smartphones². 

CSA will keep the public updated 
on new cybersecurity measures 
to keep pace with technological 
changes. We will continue existing 
outreach programmes such as the 
Cybersecurity Awareness Campaign 
which started since 2011. We will 
also broaden their reach across 
age groups, and to include both 
individuals and businesses. We will 
leverage national security awareness 
building platforms such as the Total 
Defence and Let’s Stand Together 
campaigns to raise appreciation of 
the role of cybersecurity for a 

strong and prepared nation. 
We will expand the range of 
resources on the GoSafeOnline 
web portal and other critical 
social media platforms.

Public education can be more 
effective through collaborative 
projects across the government, 
industry and community. The 
Inter-Ministry Cyber Wellness 
Steering Committee brings 
cyber-wellness messages to 
youths and has reached more 
than 245,000 participants 
through 25 supported projects 
since 2009. Another example is 
the Cyber Security Awareness 
Alliance, which brought together 
government agencies, private 
enterprises, and professional 
associations to promote 
the adoption of essential 
cybersecurity practices. Since its 
formation in 2008, the Alliance 
has reached out to various 
audiences through exhibitions, 
clinics and talks.

¹ The Singapore Government introduced Total Defence in 1984 as a concept to involve every Singaporean 
in playing a part, individually and collectively, to build a strong, secure and cohesive nation. It involves all 
Singaporeans in the following five aspects: military defence, civil defence, economic defence, psychological 
defence and social defence.
² Infocomm Development Authority (IDA) Infocomm Usage by Households and Individuals Survey 2014
³ Ministry of Education (MOE) Press Release on 7th Call for Proposals on Cyber Wellness Projects

"Having strong 

security technology 

is not enough […] 
training employees 

in cybersecurity 

is critical. "

Mr Teo Siong Seng, 

Singapore Business Federation 

Chairman, 2015

National Security Conference 2015, In Conversation - How ready are Singapore Companies?

  Make cybersecurity  
  a business priority  

For sustained and sustainable 
cybersecurity adoption, cyber risks 
should be recognised and treated 
as important business risks. Trade 
Associations and Chambers (TACs) 
play an important role in reaching 
out to businesses. 

Trade Associations and Chambers 
(TACs) play an important role in 
improving the cybersecurity of their 

  Tap on government   
  cybersecurity expertise  

Businesses may find it challenging 
to keep pace with new cyber threats. 
SingCERT, which was set up in 1997 
to facilitate the detection, resolution 
and prevention of cybersecurity 
related incidents, will deepen its 
threat discovery and analysis 
capabilities to deal with the evolving 
local cyber threat environment. 
SingCERT will expand its capacity to 
facilitate the sharing of cybersecurity  

members’ business operations. 
The Government will continue 
engaging TACs to help their members 
tap on grants and resources to adopt 
cybersecurity measures and develop 
cybersecurity capabilities. We will 
also work with TACs to advocate the 
Security-by-Design approach and 
incorporate cybersecurity holistically 
into business risk management.

 
 
 
information with the business 
community, while ensuring that 
sensitive corporate and personal 
data are protected. It will also 
partner the industry and Institutes 
of Higher Learning (IHLs) to support 
cybersecurity resource centres for 
businesses and individuals.

32

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 2

33

CHAPTER 3

A

VIBRANT
CYBERSECURITY
ECOSYSTEM

With its advanced infrastructure and tech-savvy workforce, 
Singapore is well-positioned to develop a vibrant cybersecurity 
ecosystem comprising highly skilled professionals, companies with 
deep cybersecurity capabilities and strong translational research 
and development (R&D). 

The ecosystem will ensure a sustainable source of expertise and 
solutions to support our plans for a resilient national infrastructure 
and a safer cyberspace. It will also bring economic opportunities 
to Singaporeans and Singapore-based companies. Singapore’s 
cybersecurity industry is dynamic and fast-growing, and has the 
potential to double in value by 2020. Furthermore, integrating 
cybersecurity service offerings with industry sectors that Singapore 
is traditionally strong in will enhance our competitive advantages 
in these areas.  

The Government will work with industry partners, professional 
associations, IHLs and research institutes in three main areas. 

We will:

Establish a professional workforce. We will encourage existing 
cybersecurity professionals to develop their careers in the industry 
by defining clearer career pathways, promoting internationally-
recognised certifications, and building strong communities of 
practice. To grow the workforce, we will attract promising students 
through scholarship and sponsorship programmes. We will also 
support new entrants to the profession through industry-oriented 
curriculum for students as well as up-skilling and re-skilling 
opportunities for mid-career professionals. 

Extend Singapore’s cybersecurity advantage through strong 
local companies. We will build up the industry by attracting and 
anchoring companies with advanced capabilities. We will also 
nurture start-ups to boost the development of niche and advanced 
solutions and grow local champions to sustain strategic areas of 
interest. We will also develop market opportunities to bring 
made-in-Singapore solutions into the global market. 

Innovate to accelerate the industry’s growth. The National 
Cybersecurity R&D Programme has set aside S$190 million from 
2013 to 2020 to support research into both technological and 
human-science aspects of cybersecurity. We will sustain this effort 
with world-class R&D facilities and focused talent development 
programmes. We will promote R&D collaborations between the 
Government, academia and industry to engender faster and more 
market-relevant R&D outcomes.

ESTABLISH A 
PROFESSIONAL
CYBERSECURITY 

WORKFORCE

Good security requires highly-skilled 
practitioners with deep expertise. Today, there is 
a shortage of cybersecurity manpower around the 
world. Qualified professionals are in great demand 
as businesses pay more attention to cyber risks. 
This demand will only increase as the frequency 
and consequences of cyber threats continue to 
grow. To ensure that Singapore has an adequate 
and well-trained cybersecurity workforce, 
Singapore will:

Encourage existing professionals to remain 
and further their development in the industry. 
We will institute clear career pathways, 
promote certification, and foster strong 
communities of practice; and 

Work with industry and IHLs to attract new 
graduates and convert existing professionals 
from related fields. IHLs will update their 
curriculum to be relevant to industry needs so 
as to facilitate the transition of new entrants to 

the workforce. We will offer cybersecurity 
scholarships and sponsorships to attract 
promising students. We will also offer 
up-skilling and re-skilling opportunities 
to cross-train mid-career professionals in 
cybersecurity for better job prospects.

The cybersecurity profession is fast-paced and 
varied. There are opportunities to specialise 
in different areas. These include incident 
response, digital forensics and penetration 
testing for the technically inclined; threat 
and intelligence analysis for the analyst-at-
heart; and risk management and governance 
for the methodical change drivers. Regardless 
of specialisation, cybersecurity professionals 
from entry-level to C-suite positions are 
highly sought after as companies across 
many industries seek to secure their systems 
and data. The Government is committed to 
developing the cybersecurity industry as 
a source of good jobs for Singaporeans.

Current professionals can look forward to:

  Defined Career Trajectory   
 
The growth of a capable, adept and 
competent workforce is sustained 
by attractive career prospects and 
a respected professional status. 
The Government will work with 
the industry to define a competency 
framework for cybersecurity 
professionals and it will be 
incorporated into the upcoming 
SkillsFuture Framework⁴ to be 
launched in 2017. This will allow 
professionals and employers to 

determine the types of skills and 
competencies required for different 
cybersecurity jobs, and to establish 
relevant training programmes and 
clearer career pathways accordingly. 

bring cybersecurity discussions 
into the boardroom. Larger 
companies could also define 
apex cybersecurity positions 
at the C-suite level. 

Companies are also encouraged to 
work with the Government to help 
cybersecurity professionals develop 
complementary skills such as risk 
management and communication. 
These will facilitate professionals in 
translating cybersecurity issues into 
enterprise risk considerations, and 

To further improve the standing 
of cybersecurity professionals, 
the Cyber Security Agency of 
Singapore (CSA) will work with 
industry partners to reach out 
to more companies, especially 
Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises (SMEs), to increase 

⁴ The Skills Framework is part of SkillsFuture, a national movement initiated by the Singapore Government 
in 2015 to help Singaporeans in skills development and skills mastery for the future.

New entrants to the cybersecurity 
workforce will be supported by:

  Industry-oriented Curriculum   

Our universities and polytechnics 
already offer cybersecurity 
programmes for those keen to 
pursue a cybersecurity education. 
For example, the Singapore 
Institute of Technology (SIT) 
offers a Bachelor of Engineering 
with Honours in Information and 
Communications Technology 
(Information Security), and 
Singapore University of 
Technology and Design (SUTD) 
offers a Masters in Cybersecurity. 
The Government will work with 
Institutes of Higher Learning 
(IHLs) and industry partners to 
ensure that these programmes 
and curriculums continue to be 
relevant to the industry, with 
students learning and acquiring 
practical skills. 

In particular, the Ministry of 
Education (MOE) is launching a 
co-operative degree programme 
where students alternate between 
campus and company on a 
semester basis. The programme 

6th Singapore Cyber Conquest, Winner

enables students to develop a deeper 
and practical understanding of their 
field of study by integrating work 
and study. Students may even 
be hired by the company from 
the outset. CSA will be one of 
the participating agencies in this 
programme and will be working with 
the partner universities to develop 
the cybersecurity degree curriculum 
and provide on-the-job training to 
successful applicants. 

  Scholarship and Sponsorship   
  Programmes   

To strengthen the branding of 
cybersecurity, the Government 
will build on existing scholarship 
and sponsorship programmes. 
Overseas cybersecurity 
scholarships will be offered to 
promising students, and students 
with outstanding performance in 
IHLs will be given opportunities 
to further their education.
 

  Up-skill and Re-skill   
  Opportunities   

We will facilitate the conversion 
of professionals in related fields 
to cybersecurity by building on 
the existing Cyber Security 
Associates and Technologies (CSAT) 
programme. In line with SkillsFuture, 
these professionals will be able to 
up-skill and re-skill themselves and 
be cross-trained in cybersecurity 
for better job prospects.

their awareness of what 
cybersecurity professionals 
do, and how they can contribute. 

The Government will take 
the lead in introducing a 
cybersecurity scheme of 
service for the public sector, 
with competitive remuneration 
and progression prospects. 
It will also train and develop 
cybersecurity specialists across 
the public sector. 

  Internationally-recognised   
  Certifications    

Cybersecurity professionals should 
deepen their skills and keep abreast 
of evolving technologies and best 
practices. One way to do so is to 
adopt internationally-recognised 
certifications in areas such as digital 
forensics, malware analysis and 
incident response. CREST Singapore 
(Council of Registered Ethical 
Security Testers), for example, offers 
certification for practising penetration 
testers in Singapore.

  Strong Communities of Practice   

To build a common identity and 
foster trust within the profession, 
the Government will work with 
industry associations such as the 
Association of Information Security 
Professionals (AISP) to introduce 
and build strong Communities 
of Practice for cybersecurity 
professionals in Singapore.

36

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 3

37

EXTEND SINGAPORE’S 

CYBERSECURITY 

ADVANTAGE

Singapore is home to many leading global cybersecurity companies and an 
emerging cluster of local start-ups. The cybersecurity market in Singapore is 
worth about S$570 million today, based on estimates by PwC. It has the potential 
to double in value by 2020, with growth in segments such as identity access 
management, infrastructure protection and services. Singapore is well positioned 
within ASEAN and its population of 625 million to support the growing demand 
for cybersecurity products and services.

The Government is committed to building up Singapore’s cybersecurity industry. 
Besides ensuring that best-in-class cybersecurity solutions are available to 
the Government and companies in Singapore, a vibrant cybersecurity industry 
will enhance Singapore’s traditional strengths in areas such as financial and 
infocomm services. These developments will translate to better job opportunities 
for cybersecurity professionals in Singapore. 

To build a vibrant cybersecurity industry, Singapore will: 

Attract and anchor companies with advanced capabilities in Singapore to 
inject know-how and dynamism into the local cybersecurity community; 
Support start-ups to boost the development of niche and advanced solutions;
Partner with local companies that possess strategic cybersecurity 
capabilities to develop advanced solutions for Singapore; and
Develop opportunities for made-in-Singapore solutions in the 
global market and facilitate access to new market segments. 

)

$
S
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

M

(
 
e
u
a
V

l

 
t
e
k
r
a
M

C o m p o u n d   A n n u a l   G r o w t h   R a t e   o f

9 . 3 %

 

201

216

188

176

163

154

417

464

511

562

617

673

Estimated 
growth of 
Singapore’s 
cybersecurity 
market, 
2015-2020

LEGEND

Cybersecurity Services 
(e.g. IT outsourcing, consulting)

Cybersecurity Products 
(e.g. Identity access management, 
network security equipment)

Source: PwC analysis, Gartner, PwC interviews, desk research. 

  Attract and Anchor   
  Advanced Capabilities  

The Government will leverage Singapore’s 
economic hub status and attract world class 
cybersecurity companies to base advanced 
operations, engineering and R&D activities 
in Singapore. This will increase our access 
to cutting-edge cybersecurity capabilities 
and create good jobs for Singaporeans. 
The Government will also work with these 
top companies and local champions to 
strengthen the cybersecurity of our critical 
sectors and facilitate knowledge exchange 
to build up local expertise.

  Support Start-ups  

  Grow Local Cybersecurity Champions  

  Develop Market Opportunities  

Singapore’s cybersecurity ecosystem will 
benefit from more start-ups that diversify 
the industry and boost the development 
of niche and advanced solutions. The 
Government and industry will work 
together to support a strong network 
of venture capitalists, accelerators and 
entrepreneurs to help Singapore-based 
cybersecurity start-ups to grow and scale. 
This will assist in bringing ideas to the 
market easily and quickly.

The Government will grow local 
cybersecurity champions who can 
develop globally competitive capabilities 
in strategic areas of interest and sustain 
the long-term growth of a competent, 
professional workforce. The “Partnership 
for the Advancement of the Cybersecurity 
Ecosystem” (PACE) programme, initiated by 
CSA in 2016, is an example of a meaningful 
public-private partnership that co-develops 
customised solutions with industry partners 
for raising our cybersecurity posture while 
supporting workforce skills development.

We will facilitate access to new market 
segments for our cybersecurity companies 
and promote Made-In-Singapore solutions. 
Government and industry will collaborate 
to set up a cybersecurity resource centre 
for users to explore and adopt innovative 
solutions. Together, we aim to bring 
Singapore’s cybersecurity capabilities 
to the global market. 

38

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 3

39

INNOVATE TO ACCELERATE

For Singapore to be at the cutting-edge of cybersecurity, strong 
R&D capabilities, institutions and partnerships are necessary. 
These contribute to the building of resilient infrastructure and the 
generating of new economic activities. 

New cybersecurity solutions must be tested in the real world as part 
of their development process. Singapore is an ideal test-bed, as a 
small and agile city state with strong rule of law. Pilot solutions can 
be quickly implemented and scaled in Singapore. Companies and 
research labs can leverage Singapore’s global position in sectors 
such as finance and logistics to develop solutions with international 
significance. As these developed sectors will seek to innovate, 
they could also serve as ready markets to test new cybersecurity 
products and solutions.
 
Singapore will:

Support research into both technological and human-science 
aspects of cybersecurity through the S$190 million National 
Cybersecurity R&D (NCR) Programme;
Establish world-class facilities in specialised research areas and 
develop local talent to sustain the community; and
Collaborate more closely with academia and industry under 
the NCR Programme to develop innovative ideas and enhance 
translational capabilities. A stronger public-private partnership 
will ensure that R&D can address real-world problems in a more 
targeted manner, and move research products more quickly from 
the lab to the market. 

  New R&D Facilities  

 

Our universities play a central role in 
R&D. Each university will become a 
cybersecurity centre of excellence, and 
we see each already developing its own 
area of specialisation. For example, the 
Singapore University of Technology 
and Design (SUTD) has a strong focus 
on cyber-physical systems, and the 
Singapore Management University 
(SMU) specialises in mobile security. 

In 2016, we also saw the launch of several 
public-private initiatives, such as the ST 
Electronics-SUTD Cyber Security Laboratory 
developed under the Corporate Laboratory 
@ University scheme administered by the 
National Research Foundation (NRF). This 
laboratory brings together industry and 
academia under one roof to perform cutting-
edge cybersecurity research.

The Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) at SUTD is funded by the Ministry of Defence and NRF. 
It will serve as a key asset for researchers in Singapore and abroad who are studying the design 
of secure cyber-physical systems. 

  National Cybersecurity  
  R&D Programme  

Singapore’s cybersecurity R&D journey has already 
started, with the aim of translating R&D capability 
in Singapore into operational strengths. The S$130 
million NCR was launched in 2013 by the National 
Research Foundation (NRF). This was further topped 
up in 2016 by an additional S$60 million as part 
of the Research, Innovation and Enterprise 2020 
Plan (RIE 2020). The NCR Programme has already 
awarded 13 projects covering research areas such 
as cyber-physical systems security and forensics. 

  World-Class R&D Facilities and   
  Focused Talent Development  
 

Singapore will continue to establish world-class 
R&D facilities in specialised research areas 
to attract top researchers and international 
collaborators, and will promote the shared use 
of such facilities. The Government is funding 
S$8 million towards the National Cybersecurity 
R&D Laboratory at the National University of 
Singapore (NUS) that will be a shared resource 
for cybersecurity researchers from academia, 
industry and the Government. We will also 
set up programmes to groom local talent for 
a sustainable and vibrant R&D community. 

  R&D Collaborations between Government,   
  Academia and Industry  

Public and private sector agencies can embark  
on new R&D projects to examine and address 
complex problems impeding the cybersecurity 
industry’s growth. One example is the Cyber 
Risk Management (CyRiM) project on cyber 
risk insurance, which was launched in 2016 by 
the Nanyang Technological University (NTU) 
with sponsorship support from the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS) and a consortium 
of insurance industry players. The project 
brings together academic expertise, industry 

knowledge, and policy know-how to address the 
data and standards gaps required for an efficient 
cyber risk insurance market place.  
 
The Government will initiate a Cybersecurity 
Consortium, with S$1.5 million in funding over 
three years from 2016. This Consortium will bring 
together Government, industry and academia to 
collaborate on research and seek out viable and 
practical solutions with commercialisation potential.

40

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 3

41

CHAPTER 4

STRONG

INTERNATIONAL

PARTNERSHIPS

Cyber threats do not respect sovereign boundaries and cyber-attacks 
can emanate from almost anywhere in the world.
 
Malicious actors have deliberately exploited jurisdictional gaps 
between countries to their advantage.
 
Moreover, with countries increasingly connected to one other through 
trade, global logistics and financial markets, cyber-attacks disrupting 
one country can and do have serious spill-over effects on other 
countries. International collaboration in cybersecurity is thus pivotal 
to our collective security.
 
Singapore has been an active participant at international  platforms 
on cybersecurity. As an ASEAN member, we have supported and 
contributed to regional efforts to build cybersecurity capabilities. 

Through consensus, agreement, and cooperation, cyberspace can 
be a safer and more secure place for all. 

To achieve this, Singapore will: 
 
Forge international and ASEAN cooperation to counter cyber 
threats and cybercrime. We will continue working closely with the 
international community and ASEAN partners to strengthen platforms 
and procedures for cyber incident reporting and response. We will 
work with ASEAN Member States to coordinate the regional approach 
to cybercrime. We will also leverage INTERPOL’s resources to tap the 
global operational networks and capabilities to tackle cybercrime.
 
Champion international and ASEAN cyber capacity building 
initiatives in operational, technical, legislative, cyber policy and 
diplomatic areas. We will partner the international community, 
Dialogue Partners and ASEAN Member States to organise workshops, 
seminars and conference that seek to advance cooperation and build 
capabilities in these aspects . 
 
Facilitate exchanges on cyber norms and legislation. 
We will continue to participate in global and regional discussions 
on cyber norms, cyber policy and legislation, cyber deterrence, 
and cybercrime cooperation. We will host an annual Singapore 
International Cyber Week (SICW) – with the inaugural session in 
October 2016 – to catalyse, stimulate and promote exchanges on 
cybersecurity and cybercrime issues.

AND ASEAN COOPERATION 

TO COUNTER CYBER THREATS 

FORGE INTERNATIONAL

AND CYBERCRIME

The lightning-fast speed of 
cyber-attacks requires quick 
and coordinated actions both at 
national and international levels. 
Singapore will work closely with 
the international community and 
ASEAN partners to strengthen 
the platforms and procedures for 
reporting cyber incidents, sharing 
information and responding to 
possible breaches. 

Singapore, provides global 
training and coordinates 
international operations on 
cybercrime for all INTERPOL 
member countries. Singapore is 
well-positioned and committed 
to cooperating with the IGCI 
and other countries through 
INTERPOL to conduct cross-
border joint operations against 
cyber criminals⁵. 

Singapore will also partner 
international organisations 
like INTERPOL to tackle 
cybercrime and the Asia Pacific 
Computer Emergency Response 
Team (APCERT) to enhance 
cyber incident reporting and 
response linkages. 

For example, the INTERPOL 
Global Complex for Innovation 
(IGCI), which is based in 

Singapore will continue to 
contribute at existing ASEAN 
channels for cooperation such as 
the annual ASEAN CERT Incident 
Drill (ACID), ASEAN Network 
Security Action Council (ANSAC), 
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) 
Mechanisms as well as ASEAN 
cybersecurity and cybercrime 
workshops. 

  Channels for cooperation  

The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) was established in 1994 to foster constructive  
dialogue and consultation on political and security issues of common interest and 
concern, and to make significant contributions towards confidence building and 
preventive diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific region.

The multi-stakeholder ASEAN Network Security Action Council (ANSAC) 
was set up in 2012 to promote CERT cooperation and sharing of expertise. 

The ASEAN CERT Incident Drill (ACID) is an annual exercise aimed at 
strengthening cooperation among CERTs in ASEAN and its Dialogue Partners.
The exercise tests the coordination amongst the incident response teams and 
their incident handling procedures. Singapore has convened ACID since 2006.

⁵ Further details on Singapore’s international engagement efforts in dealing with cybercrime are found 
in the National Cybercrime Action Plan (NCAP), launched by the Ministry of Home Affairs in July 2016. 
The NCAP is available at www.mha.gov.sg. 

ASEAN Regional Forum Seminar, 2015: “Operationalising Cyber Confidence Building Measures”

44

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 4

45

CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL 
AND ASEAN CYBER CAPACITY 

BUILDING INITIATIVES 

FACILITATE INTERNATIONAL
AND REGIONAL EXCHANGES  

ON CYBER NORMS  
AND LEGISLATION

Cyber threats are borderless and 
no country can deal with the rapidly 
evolving threat landscape alone. 
Singapore stays committed to build 
cybersecurity capacity within 
ASEAN in operational, technical, 
legislative, cyber policy and 
diplomatic areas. Singapore will 
focus on building understanding 
and raising awareness in these areas, 
as well as conducting training and 
exercises to raise capacity. 

To do so, Singapore will partner the 
international community, Dialogue 
Partners and ASEAN Member States 

(AMS) to organise workshops, 
seminars and conferences that 
advance international and regional 
cooperation in these aspects. We will 
also support the active role played 
by the ASEAN Regional Forum 
(ARF) countries in fostering cyber 
confidence building and capacity 
building measures. 

Singapore will establish an ASEAN 
Cyber Capacity Programme from 2017 
to complement the various existing 
ASEAN initiatives. 

15th ASEAN Telecommunications and Information Technology Ministers Meeting and Related Meetings

GovernmentWare 2015 Conference

Consensus and agreement  
among nations are key to 
ensuring the success of 
cybersecurity cooperation. 
Singapore aims to be an 
active participant in this area 
and will facilitate global and 
regional dialogues on cyber 
norms building and codes 
of conduct, cyber policy and 
legislation, cyber deterrence 
and cybercrime cooperation. 

for high-level discussions among 
industry leaders and senior 
government officials from 
ASEAN and Dialogue Partner 
countries as well as relevant 
international organisations.
Singapore will host an annual 
Singapore International Cyber 
Week (SICW) to catalyse, 
stimulate and promote exchanges 
on current and emerging issues 
pertinent to the cyber community. 

For example, the annual RSA 
Conference Asia Pacific and 
Japan includes public sector 
events such as the ASEAN 
Senior Officials Roundtable on 
Cybercrime (SORC). The SORC 
provides a unique platform 

The first SICW, to be held in 
October 2016, will launch the 
inaugural ASEAN Ministerial 
Conference on Cybersecurity 
and the International Cyber 
Leaders’ Symposium as premier 
regional platforms to discuss 

key cybersecurity issues facing 
policymakers. As part of the 
SICW, the ASEAN Cybercrime 
Prosecutors’ Roundtable Meeting 
will bring together specialised 
cybercrime prosecutors from 
across ASEAN for the first 
time. The meeting provides 
an opportunity for cybercrime 
prosecutors and law enforcement 
agencies to take stock of the 
legal capacities of ASEAN. It will 
also address gaps to raise the 
overall capabilities in the region. 
Finally, the SICW incorporates 
the GovernmentWare conference, 
which has brought together 
thought leaders and practitioners 
to discuss practical cybersecurity 
issues over the last 25 years. 

46

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 4

47

This Strategy is an initiative of the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
(CSA). CSA was established under the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) and 
is managed by the Ministry of Communications and Information (MCI).

Over the course of a year, representatives from over 50 government agencies, 

business and professional associations, private companies and academic 

institutions were consulted. We are grateful to the associations which have 
engaged their members, and to the many prominent individuals who have 
graciously offered guidance and advice. Their valuable feedback served 

as a basis for this Strategy. 

