Cyber
Security Concept
of the Slovak Republic

for 2015 - 2020

DY  S

Á
L
V

 
 

D

A

R

Ú

L O VENSK

E

J
  

R

E

P
U
B

LIKY

Cyber
Security Concept
of the Slovak Republic

for 2015 - 2020

Content

Foreword 

1  Introduction 

2  Basis and Principles of Cyber Security 

2.1  Basic Terms 
2.2  Basic Principles of Cyber Security 
2.3  Current Situation in the Slovak Republic 
2.4  Purpose of the Concept 

3  Proposed Solution 

3.1  Building an Institutional Framework for Cyber Security Administration 
3.2  Creation and Adoption of a Legal Framework for Cyber Security 
3.3  Development and Application of Basic Mechanisms Providing for the Administration of Cyber Space 
3.4  Support, Formulation and Implementation of an Education System in the Area of Cyber Security 
3.5  Determination and Application of Risk Management Culture and Communication System 

Between Stakeholders 

3.6  International Cooperation 
3.7  Support of Science and Research in the Area of Cyber Security 

4  Conclusions and Recommendations 

List of annexes 

Annex no. 1:  Interpretation of Selected Practically Used Terms 
Annex no. 2:  Documents approved by the Government of the Slovak Republic in relation to the 

implementation of the National Information Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic and 
other strategic and/or conceptual documents 

Annex no. 3:  Conclusions of Reports on the Performance of Tasks of the National Information Security 

Strategy in the Slovak Republic and tasks of the Action Plan for 2008 to 2013 

Annex no. 4:  Framework Proposal of Tasks of the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Concept 

4

5

6
6
6
8
9

10
11
15
16
17

17
18
18

19

20
21

24

25
27

Foreword

The dependency of today’s society on information and communication technologies increases every 
day; over the past decade, these have changed and impacted almost every aspect of our lives. Human 
activities are slowly but surely shifting, to a large extent, from physical space to cyberspace. On the one 
hand, information and communication technologies make our lives easier, speeding up communication 
and  access  to  information  and  services.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  increasing  dependency  of 
the public and private sectors on these technologies, if insufﬁ ciently protected, renders them more 
vulnerable, making cyber security one of the most important challenges the state has to face today. 
Globalism and the signiﬁ cance of impacts of potential cyber attacks have resulted in the need for a 
conceptual and coordinated control of protection and defence of cyber space.

By  adopting  this  Concept,  the  Slovak  Republic  has  established  its  visions  and  priorities  providing 
for  cyber  security  in  the  country.  The  Concept  has  to  be  seen  as  the  “cornerstone”,  the  basic  and 
starting  document  for  the  subsequent  formulation  of  legislation,  standards,  methodology,  rules, 
security  policies  and  other  tools  necessary  for  ensuring  the  protection  and  defence  of  national 
cyber space.

The Concept, based on a strategic and methodological framework shaped in NATO, EU, OECD and UN 
documents for the area of cyber security, proposes the adoption and priority treatment of seven key 
measures; the implementation thereof will be speciﬁ ed in a material, time and ﬁ nancial plan in the 
form of a Concept Implementation Action Plan. The purpose of cyber security in the Slovak Republic, 
as seen by the Concept, should be an open, secure and protected national cyber space, i.e. the building 
of trust in the reliability and security of, without limitation, critical information and communication 
infrastructure, as well as the building of certainty that this infrastructure will fulﬁ l its functions and 
also serve national interests in cases of cyber attacks.

Cyber security ought to be perceived as one of the key components of national security. It is a complex 
ﬁ eld  involving  both  legal  and  technical  aspects  and  required  trust  and  collaboration  of  the  public 
sector,  private  sector  and  academic  institutions.  The  rights,  duties  and  tasks  of  individual  actors  in 
cyber space will be soon established by adopting and creating an institutional and legal framework of 
cyber security; the Cyber Security Act will certainly form a substantial milestone in the perception of 
cyber security in the Slovak Republic.

Cyber security can only be achieved using mutual trust and collaboration since it is only by making 
mutual efforts that we can succeed in building both an open and secure cyber space from which we all 
may beneﬁ t.

Peter Pellegrini

Speaker of the National Council 

of the Slovak Republic

Digital Champion 

of the Slovak Republic

Robert Fico
Prime Minister 

of the Slovak Republic 

4

1 

Introduction

The exponential growth in the use of information and communication technologies from the second 
half of the 20th century onwards has signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uenced development trends in society. Modern 
information  and  communication  technologies  have  substantially  broadened  the  possibilities  and 
increased the efﬁ ciency of the interaction methods between geographically remote entities from various 
ﬁ elds of the society and economy. The growing number of users of information and communication 
technologies results in an increasing dependency of both the public and the private sectors on these 
technologies, rendering them more vulnerable.

Besides the high dependency of society on information and communication technologies, the beginning 
of  the  21st  century  was  marked  by  a  signiﬁ cant  change  in  the  global  security  environment  and  an 
increasing number of asymmetrical threats with a higher degree of sophistication and impact effects. 
A wide scope of potential methods of abuse and damage to electronic information, communication and 
control systems as well as of a negative inﬂ uencing of social and economic processes in the framework 
of the international cyber environment thus included cyber threats among potentially serious global 
threats such as international terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, etc.

Critical  control,  technological,  communication  and  security  systems  are  endangered  by  new  forms 
of  attacks,  and  so  are  those  services  that  would,  if  failing  or  malfunctioning,  seriously  impact  the 
operation of the state (mostly in its main security areas). Dynamically developing modern technologies 
make it possible for additional new security threats to emerge.

The Slovak Republic must be prepared to react to a wide spectre of existing and potential threats. At 
the same time, it is aware of the fact that threats and attacks emerging in cyber space may escalate up 
to a level that would require collaboration of the allies within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(hereinafter referred to as “NATO”) under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty1 that would result in 
a collective defence and/or coordinated response. Thus, cyber security also needs to be perceived as 
a subsystem of national security and cyber space as its new operational domain. The Slovak Republic 
intends to cooperate with all relevant state and private cyber space actors, which respect identical 
values and do not restrict the freedom and safety of the use of cyber space.

This Cyber Security Concept of the Slovak Republic for the years 2015-2020 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “Concept”) deﬁ nes the starting position and the goals of the Slovak Republic in the ﬁ eld of cyber 
security. The Concept is harmonized with the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic and forms a basic 
and starting document for the subsequent creation of regulations, standards, methodical instructions, 
rules, security policies and other instruments necessary to provide for cyber security.

5

1  The North Atlantic Treaty dated 4 April 1949, the so-called Washington Treaty, establishing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

2  Basis and Principles of Cyber Security

The Concept is based on a statement and a description of the basic terms and principles, characteristics 
of the current situation of the strategic, legal and institutional frameworks in the area of cyber security 
in the Slovak Republic and on a strategic and methodological framework formed by NATO and European 
Union (hereinafter referred to as the “EU”) documents; subsequently, the Concept formulates principles, 
goals and proposed solutions.

2.1  Basic Terms

Cyber security is one of the deﬁ ning elements of the security environment of the Slovak Republic 
and a subsystem of national security. At a state level, it is a system of continuous and planned 
increasing of political, legal, economic, security, defence and educational awareness, also including 
the efﬁ ciency of adopted and applied risk control measures of a technical-organizational nature 
in cyber space in order to transform it into a trustworthy environment providing for the secure 
operation of social and economic processes at an acceptable level of risks in cyber space.

The Slovak Republic still lacks a consistent formalized terminology in the area of cyber security. The 
word cyber and its other grammatical forms do not occur in any generally binding regulation nor 
in terminological dictionaries2.

Deﬁ nitions of the practically used terms in the cyber security area and deﬁ nitions of key terms: 
cyber security, cyber space, national cyber space for the purposes of this Concept are speciﬁ ed in the 
Annex no. 1 to the Concept3. For the real performance of state administration in the area of cyber 
security and to understand the relationship between cyber security and the basic security areas 
of operation of the state4, a legally binding deﬁ nition of the meaning of these terms is of crucial 
importance5. The relation of cyber security to the basic security areas of operation of the state and 
the mutual relation between cyber security and information security are discussed in the following 
chapter of the Concept.

2.2  Basic Principles of Cyber Security

The ﬁ eld of cyber security must not be seen as an isolated problem of the Slovak Republic or an 
isolated problem of one or several elements of society. Due to its global nature, cyber security 
is a society-wide phenomenon. Cyber security must be based on a complex approach, requiring 
intense joint use of information and coordination of activities on both national and international 
levels. When building cyber security, it is necessary to pursue collaboration between the civilian 
and security units of the state, public and private sectors, as well as national and international 
institutions. Providing for an efﬁ cient and effective protection of cyber space must be ensured 
by relevant entities that are responsible for the infrastructures of individual sectors on a national 
level and by entities responsible for the operation of international infrastructures6.

The Slovak Republic is fully in line with the principles of cyber security speciﬁ ed in the strategic 
document “Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union”7 as well as with the principles speciﬁ ed 
in the “Enhanced NATO Policy on Cyber Defence”8.

2  Website of the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic.

3  The Annex is not a binding terminological dictionary for cyber security.

4  Basic security areas of operation of the state in the structure of the Report on Security of the Slovak Republic.

5  Article 2(2) of the Act no. 460/1992 Coll. the Constitution of the Slovak Republic: State bodies can act only on the basis of the Constitution, 

within its limits and to the extent and in a manner deﬁ ned by law.

6  For example: Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, ICANN; Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, IANA; Governmental 

Advisory Committee, GAC.

6

7  Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace, JOIN(2013).

8  Enhanced NATO Policy on Cyber Defence. 2014.

Characteristic Features of Cyber Security

A signiﬁ cant feature of cyber security is the fact that individual components of cyber space have 
different owners, administrators, operators, as well as users. Failure to adhere to minimum security 
rules, protection methods and minimum security measures in the area of cyber security and the lack 
of uniﬁ cation thereof increases the level of vulnerability of the operated electronic information, 
communication, and control systems and in case of a cyber attack, it may even cause risks for a 
selected part of for the whole of cyber space.

Managing security incidents and events does not only depend on the capacities of the public sector 
but it is also signiﬁ cantly dependent on the constructive cooperation of actors active outside the 
public sector.

Cyber Security as a Component of the State’s Security System 

Insufﬁ cient protection and defence against security incidents creates space for rendering society 
itself  vulnerable,  with  consequences  throughout  all  social  and  economic  processes,  i.e.  the 
state’s basic security areas of operation (hereinafter referred to as the “security areas”) may be 
seriously endangered:

•  Security interests of the Slovak Republic in foreign and defence policy.

• 

• 

• 

 Protection of constitutionality, public order, security of citizens and the state.

 Social stability of the state.

 Economic stability of the state.

•  Protection of the environment.

Cyber security is perceived as a key component of state security. The basic components forming 
and implementing the security system of the Slovak Republic are, according to the law9: foreign 
policy,  defence  planning,  civil  emergency  planning  and  coordination  and  intelligence  services. 
Currently, a bill is being prepared that will recognise the protection of the national cyber space as 
another key component of the security system of the state.

Globalism and the importance of the impacts of potential cyber attacks require a conceptual and 
coordinated control of the protection and defence of cyber space.

Cyber Security and Information Security - Relations

For  the  purposes  of  this  Concept,  the  deﬁ nition  of  the  terms  cyber  security  and  information 
security is based mostly on EU documents10. These documents imply that these are two mutually 
interconnected areas of problems, i.e. the security of the cyber environment and the security of the 
information environment, or cyber security and information security.

The  information  environment  is  one  of  the  important  real  environments11  within  a  speciﬁ c 
framework of the socio-economic environment.

9  Act  no.  110/2004  Coll.  on  Operation  of  the  Security  Council  of  the  Slovak  Republic  at  Peace  Times,  as  amended 

by the Act no. 319/2012 Coll.

10  Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to ensure a high joint level of network and 
information security. Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the regions Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace, JOIN(2013).

11  E.g..: social, work, legal, etc.

7

Cyber space is limited by the use of electronics and of the electronic spectrum to create, store, 
modify, exchange, and use data by mutually dependent and interconnected networks.

Cyber security is a system tasked to provide the information environments of the state’s socio-
economic  structures  with  secure,  protected  and  adequately  open  cyberspace,  i.e.  to  guarantee 
security  in  the  electronic  information,  communication  and  control  systems  located  in  this 
environment, the security of the data stored, processed and transmitted in the systems and of the 
services provided by these systems.

The  joint  task  of  cyber  and  information  security  is  to  provide,  in  collaboration,  for  information 
safety,  availability  of  systems  and  services,  as  well  for  the  safety  of  the  data  transmitted  by, 
processed by and/or stored in these systems in a speciﬁ c socio-economic environment.

2.3  Current Situation in the Slovak Republic

The ﬁ eld of cyber security in the Slovak Republic has not been integrally and consistently regulated 
at a national strategic level. Some attention was paid to cyber security in the document “National 
Information Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic”12 (hereinafter referred to as the “Strategy”) 
and the subsequent “Action Plan for 2009 to 2013 for the National Information Security Strategy 
of the Slovak Republic”13.

An  overview  of  documents  approved  by  the  Government  of  the  Slovak  Republic  in  relation  to 
the implementation of this Strategy as well as of other strategic and/or conceptual documents 
partially related to the area of protection of cyber space and/or cyber security in provided in Annex 
no. 2 to this Concept.

The Slovak Republic has adopted several regulations regulating the security of information and 
communication systems and information processed and/or transmitted thereby14.

The “Reports on the Performance of Tasks of the National Information Security Strategy of the 
Slovak Republic and Tasks of the Action Plan for 2008 to 2013”15 show that among the tasks of 
a non-legislative nature, positive results have been achieved in the area of information security 
mainly in the building of skills, education, prevention and readiness to managing computer security 
incidents, in the removal of the consequences thereof and the subsequent restoration of information 
systems  in  the  framework  of  central  state  administration.  The  training  of  state  administration 
specialists  is  carried  out  mostly  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  of  the  Slovak  Republic.  Increasing 
awareness and education in the area of cyber and/or information security is not generally included 
in the educational system of the Slovak Republic (primary and secondary schools and universities) 
nor in the system of forming social awareness.

Education  is  not  dealt  with  at  the  level  of  specialized  majors  but  mostly  by  special  courses  at 
selected  educational  institutions.  Differing  levels  of  capacities  and  preparedness  for  cyber 
risks still exist. What is absent is an Centre of Excellence that would focus on questions related 
to cyber security.

The  collaboration  of  the  public  sector  with  the  private  sector,  academic  institutions  and  civil 
society has not developed in the necessary scope and a framework of systematic, coordinated and 
efﬁ cient collaboration, mostly at a strategic level, is lacking.

12  The Government of the Slovak Republic approved the material (mat. no. ÚV-18175/2008) on 27 August 2008 by its Resolution no. 570/2008.

13  The Government of the Slovak Republic approved the material (mat. no. ÚV-30315/2009) on 19 January 2010 by its Resolution no. 46/2010.

14  E.g. Act no. 45/2011 Coll. on Critical Infrastructure deﬁ ning the organization and powers of state administration bodies in the area of 

critical infrastructure, Act no. 351/2011 Coll. on Electronic Communications as amended.

8

15  http://www..informatizacia.sk/narodna-strategia-pre-ib/6783s.

Cyber threats are not generally seen as a sufﬁ ciently urgent problem. It is still necessary to focus 
attention on vulnerabilities that today’s society faces more and more, to increase awareness also 
among the general public and to take steps to eliminate the threats and risks related to the use of 
modern information and communication technologies.

The most serious problem in the area of cyber security in the Slovak Republic is the fact that the 
protection of cyber space, or the cyber security of the Slovak Republic, is not yet explicitly and 
integrally regulated in valid law16.

Existing capacities and mechanisms in the area of network and information security are no longer 
sufﬁ cient to keep the pace with a dynamically changing environment of threats and to provide 
a sufﬁ ciently high and, above all, legally effective, level of protection in all areas of the state’s 
administration and of social life.

The  Slovak  Republic,  as  a  member  state  of  NATO  and  of  the  EU,  also  participates  in  the 
formulation  of  international  strategic  and  conceptual  documents,  international  policies  and 
standards  and  must  implement  the  adopted  documents17  and  transfer  them  to  national  law. 
The  Slovak  Republic  is  active  in  international  cooperation,  with  representatives  in  numerous 
international organizations as well as EU and NATO bodies. The Slovak Republic actively pursues 
its interests in this area. It regularly participates in cyber trainings (Cyber Coalition, Locked Shields, 
Cyber  Europe  and  others),  testing  the  abilities  and  reactions  of  the  Slovak  Republic  to  cyber 
attacks  each  year.  A  training  entitled  “SISE  2010  to  2013”  has  been  coordinated  on  a  national 
level. The Slovak Republic closely cooperates, without limitation, with the NATO Cooperative Cyber 
Defence Centre of Excellence in Tallinn (NATO CCD COE), the European Network and Information 
Security Agency (ENISA) and the recently created European Cybercrime Centre (EC3). In years 2013 
– 2014, the National Security Authority has fully accepted the tasks of building NATO cyber defence 
and information security in the Slovak Republic within the Forces Targets 2013 defence planning.

2.4  Purpose of the Concept

The  strategic  goal  of  cyber  security  in  the  Slovak  Republic  is  to  achieve  an  open,  secure,  and 
protected  national  cyber  space,  i.e.  building  trust  in  the  reliability  and  security  of,  above  all, 
critical information and communication infrastructure, as well as building of certainty that this will 
perform its functions and serve national interests also in cases of cyber attacks.

Basing on the current situation in cyber security in the Slovak Republic, the goal of the Concept is 
to achieve a state where:

•  Protection of national cyber space is a system operating conceptually, in a coordinated 

manner, efﬁ ciently, effectively, and on a legal basis.

• 

• 

 Security awareness of all components of society is systematically increasing.

 The private and academic sectors as well as civil society actively participate in the 
formulation and implementation of the policy of the Slovak Republic in the area 
of cyber security.

• 

 Efﬁ cient collaboration is provided for both at national and international levels.

•  The adopted measures are adequate and respect the protection of privacy and basic human 

rights and freedoms.

16  See the conclusions of the reports on performance of tasks of the Strategy and Action Plan in Annex no. 3 hereto.

9

17  These include, without limitation, the NATO Policy on Cyber Defence, 2011; NATO Cyber Defence Action Plan; Enhanced NATO Policy on 

Cyber Defence, 2014; Cyber security Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace JOIN (2013).

3  Proposed Solution

Basing on the starting points, principles and goals deﬁ ned in the previous chapter of the Concept, the 
proposed solution speciﬁ ed in this part deﬁ nes the methods and measures for the Slovak Republic to 
achieve the target condition. It deﬁ nes the method and tools to be used by the Slovak Republic to try 
to reduce the risks and threats coming from the cyber space, without restricting the beneﬁ ts of the 
use thereof. These will further serve as the basis for the Action Plan for Implementation of the Cyber 
Security Concept of the Slovak Republic for 2015 – 2020 (hereinafter referred to as the “Action Plan”) 
that will deﬁ ne speciﬁ c tasks, including the material, time and ﬁ nancial plan for the implementation 
of the Concept.

The Concept considers the following to be the basic implementation tools of the above goal:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

A cyber security control system with a legal basis (institutional, regulatory and methodical 
framework), including specialized institutions and 
area of terminology.

 High culture of risk control, information exchange between private and public sectors and 
increasing capacities of actors.

 Systematic informing and a complex education system in the cyber security area.

 Cooperation and partnerships at national and international levels of all relevant entities from 
public, private and academic sectors and 
the civil society.

 Development of an internal market with cyber security products and services, especially using 
grants, EU funds and support for newly emerging projects or start-ups, as well as support for 
research, development and innovation of industrial and technological sources of cyber security.

The Concept proposes to adopt and solve, as priorities, the following seven key measures:

•  Measure 1: Building an institutional framework for cyber security administration.

•  Measure 2: Creating and adopting a legal framework for cyber security.

•  Measure 3: Deﬁ ning and applying basic mechanisms for securing the administration 

of cyber space.

•  Measure 4: Supporting, preparing, and introducing a system of education in the area 

of cyber security.

•  Measure 5: Deﬁ ning and applying a risk control culture and a system 

of communication between the stakeholders.

•  Measure 6: Active international collaboration.

•  Measure 7: Supporting science and research in the area of cyber security.

10

3.1  Building an Institutional Framework for Cyber Security Administration

The Concept proposes the structure of cyber security administration as shown in Figure no. 1.

Government of the Slovak 
Republic, Security Council of 

the Slovak Republic, 

Committee for Cyber Security

National CERT/CSIRT

Ministry of Finance

Ministry of the Interior

Other central state 

authorities

Sector oriented authority 
for cyber security cyber 

security

Information systems 
of public administration

Information systems 
of critical infrastructure

Other information 

systems (outside ISPA and CI), 

communication systems, 

networks, etc.

Government CERT/CSIRT

CERT/CSIRT XY

Special units 

for resolving incidents

CERT  – Computer emergency response team
CSIRT – Computer Security Incident Response Team

Figure no. 1 Proposed framework structure for managing cyber security

Cyber  security  at  a  national  level  belongs  to  the  scope  of  powers  of  the  relevant  central  state 
administration body, with competences and powers deﬁ ned in general by the Competence Act and 
speciﬁ cally by a special law (Cyber Security Act). The scope and method of the exercise of public 
authority in the area of cyber security by relevant central state administration bodies and other 
state  bodies  in  the  framework  of  speciﬁ c  material  areas  of  administration  of  the  state’s  socio-
economic environment (hereinafter referred to as “material areas”) will be deﬁ ned by a special law 
(Cyber Security Act).

Complex provision for cyber security within individual material areas must be performed by the 
exercise of public authority and exercise of special activities. The Concept foresees that a National 
Incident Resolution Unit and several incident resolution units in material areas of special importance 
(hereinafter referred to as the “units”) will be formed. To use human capacities rationally and use 
the technological equipment of the unit efﬁ ciently, the Concept foresees the formation of common 
units  for  other  material  areas;  the  National  Incident  Resolution  Unit  can  hold  the  authority  in 
certain material areas. The competences and authority of the National Incident Resolution Unit and 
of the units will be deﬁ ned by the Cyber Security Act.

The Concept proposes the following framework deﬁ nition of the powers and competences of public 
administration bodies in the area of cyber security at a central level:

Central state administration body for cyber security – the authority of an existing non-sectoral 
central  state  administration  body18  extended  by  another  segment  of  state  administration.  The 
Concept recommends that the lawmaker entrusts this authority to the National Security Authority.

11

18  I.e. a state body whose powers do not relate to a speciﬁ c material area of administration of the state’s socio-economic environment. E.g.: 

Ofﬁ ce of Government of the SR, National Security Authority.

Material scope: cyber security at a national level. In this authority, it also fulﬁ ls the duties of the 
“relevant national authority for the area of network and information system security” in the sense 
of Article 6 of the Proposal for a Directive19.

Competences and responsibilities:

•  Prepares the concept of state policy in the area of cyber security and directs its 

implementation in individual administration sectors,

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Prepares drafts of generally binding regulations and methodology, prepares rules for 
accrediting incident resolution units,

 Methodically directs the preparation of operating procedures for reactions to cyber threats at 
a national level,

 Coordinates the preparation of action plans for material areas with relevant central state 
administration bodies,

 Coordinates, monitors, controls and evaluates the execution of tasks in the area of cyber 
security at a national level,

 Serves as the national contact point for the EU and NATO in the area of cyber 
security/defence,

 Provides and coordinates the execution of tasks implied by international cooperation, 
represents the Slovak Republic internationally in the area of cyber security,

 Based on documents from other sectors, processes and prepares consolidated opinions for the 
Slovak Republic in the area of cyber security,

 Prepares Reports on the state of cyber security in the Slovak Republic and submits them for 
approval to the Cyber Security Committee of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic,

 In crisis management of the Slovak Republic, proposes and submits procedures for the case of 
cyber attacks,

 Continuously monitors the national cyber space and analyses potential and current threats,

 Performs state supervision over the activities of incident resolution units.

12

19  Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to ensure a high joint level of network and 

information security in the Union.

National Incident Resolution Unit (national CERT/CSIRT) – special unit with material scope in the 
area of cyber security at a national level, subordinated to the Central state authority for cyber security 
(also fulﬁ ls the tasks of the “computer emergency response team” under Article 7 of the Proposal 
for Directive19).

Competences and responsibilities:

•  Systematically monitors the status of security and adherence to security standards in public 
administration information systems, continuously informing the Central state authority for 
cyber security,

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Provides and bears responsibility for coordinated incident resolution and/or coordinated 
reactions to cyber attacks,

 Sends early warnings, declares emergencies, announces and spreads information to relevant 
interested actors about risks and incidents,

 Ensures specialized training for incident resolution units and systematically manages training 
courses in the area of cyber security within its scope of powers,

 Ensures the execution of tasks implied by international collaboration within its 
scope of powers,

 Builds wide public awareness of the risks connected to activities performed on-line and 
organizes campaigns in the area of network and information security,

 Executes tasks of the incident resolution unit for certain material areas and/or on the basis of 
an authorization from a relevant central state administration authority.

Sector  oriented  authority  for  cyber  security  –  organizational  unit  of  existing  central  state 
authorities. Provides for cyber security within its material scope.

Competences and responsibilities:

•  Responsible for the execution of state policies in the area of cyber security within its 

scope of powers,

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Ensures the exercise of state administration in the area of cyber security within its 
scope of powers,

 Provides collaboration to the Central state administration authority for cyber security when 
forming state policies in the area of cyber security,

 Cooperates with other sector oriented authorities for cyber security,

 Performs supervision over the activities of the sector oriented incident resolution unit,

 Ensures an increase in the level of security awareness and coordinates collaboration at all 
levels of cyber security control within its scope of powers.

Incident  resolution  unit  (government  CERT/CSIRT,  CERT/CSIRT  XY)  –  special  unit  of  a  central 
state administration authority – authority with material relevance of cyber security. The physical 
establishment  of  sectoral  units  in  all  sectors  of  administration  is  not  foreseen.  However,  the 
following functionalities must be implemented in individual sectors of administration.20

13

20  The conditions of establishing of incident resolution units and the scope of their authority, competences and duties, will be set by the Cyber 

Security Act.

Competences and responsibilities:

•  Systematically monitors the status of security and adherence to security standards of 

information systems in its material area,

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Ensures and bears responsibility for the execution of reactions to incidents and/or cyber 
attacks in its area of powers,

 Prepares operating procedures for reactions to incidents within its scope of powers and 
submits them for approval to the Central state administration authority for cyber security,

 Executes immediate warnings and early notiﬁ cation of cyber threats in its scope of powers,

 Assesses the reliability and security resistance levels of security mechanisms in relation to 
new security threats and risks in its scope of powers,

 Prepares regular reports on security incidents in its scope of powers,

 Ensures professional training and systematically administers training courses in the area of 
cyber security in its scope of powers,

• 

 Cooperates with other incident resolution units.

Based on experience from international cooperation, membership in international organizations, 
as well as the experience of other countries, the efﬁ cient exercise of measures of cyber security 
requires  wide-spectre  cooperation  not  only  between  state  administration  and  territorial  self-
administration  but  also  with  the  academic  sector,  scientiﬁ c  institutions,  and  of  the  private 
sector. The Concept proposes the formation of a formal platform for collaboration on a national 
level, ensuring the participation of representatives of the corporate and academic sectors in the 
preparation  and  formulation  of  government  decisions  by  submitting  recommendations  and/or 
opinions on the development and continuous improvement of the cyber security system of the 
Slovak Republic.

14

3.2  Creation and Adoption of a Legal Framework for Cyber Security

At present, the highest priority for a substantial increase in the efﬁ ciency and effectiveness of the 
protection of cyber space in the Slovak Republic is the formal legal regulation of the cyber security 
control system. For this purpose, it is necessary to:

1.  Adopt a special Cyber Security Act, that will, without limitation:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Formally ensure the coordination of the formation and implementation of a uniﬁ ed state 
policy in cyber security,

 Explicitly establish the material powers and competences of public authorities as well as 
the scope and method of exercise of their competences,

 Explicitly deﬁ ne the powers and competences of other actors, as well as the scope and 
method of application thereof,

 Establish duties for entities using information and communication technologies 
in cyber space,

 Will guarantee the rights, legally protected interests of other legal entities and natural 
persons and will deﬁ ne their duties.

 Establish binding terminology and standards for the area 
of cyber security.

 In individual sectors, issue a methodical guidance for the practical application of the Act and of 
standards in the system of the sector’s management and operation.

2. 

3. 

15

3.3  Development and Application of Basic Mechanisms Providing for the Administration 

of Cyber Space

To ensure specialized tasks in order to render cyber space resistant, the Concept identiﬁ es and 
proposes the application and development of the following basic mechanisms:

1.  Decision-making and control mechanism – continuous cross-sectoral planning, organizing, 
coordination, implementation and control of measures aimed at minimizing cyber security 
threats and preventing their growth into crisis situations:

• 

 Preparing crisis plans for solving crisis situations,

•  Summarizing the needs and requirements necessary to solve identiﬁ ed threats and 

confronting them with the possibilities of the state, regions, legal entities and 
natural persons,

•  Designating the forces, resources and funds necessary for solving crisis situations.

2.  Prevention mechanism – protective measures aimed at acting against crisis situations arising 

and to minimize potential risks implied mostly for information and technical means of 
communication:

•  National policy of behaviour in cyber space,

•  Specialized training of professionals in the area of information and communication 

technical means as well as strengthening the security awareness of inhabitants in the 
ﬁ eld of information and communication technologies,

•  Technical/technological support – available for the general public, corresponding to the 
required protection levels, including recommendations, measures and technical measures 
including adequate software, hardware and regime standards, the settings and 
updates thereof,

• 

Intelligence activities aimed at the collection, centralisation and evaluation of intelligence 
information useful for prevention (e.g. intelligence information about cyber threats),

•  Collaboration with member states of the EU and NATO, the relevant bodies of these 
organizations and with partner states in order to continuously monitor, analyse and 
evaluate the security situation in cyber space, discover threats of crisis situations early and 
coordinate the adoption of preventive measures to eliminate such threats.

3.  Reaction mechanism – measures aimed at a qualiﬁ ed and efﬁ cient reaction in the event of 

incidents and/or crisis situations that need to be taken in cases of ongoing attacks in order to 
fence off or counterwork the attack and prevent the attacker from causing damage:

•  Defensive activities aimed at preventing the attacker from performing and/or continuing 

in the cyber attack; this involves the activation of entities active when solving crisis 
situations and if necessary, an early warning for the public, taking measures aimed at 
stopping the escalation of the crisis situation and the creation of conditions for a return to 
a stabilized situation,

•  Offensive activities aimed at weakening and/or eliminating the cyber and even physical 
capacities of the attacker and to discourage the attacker from continuing in the attacks,

• 

Intelligence activities aimed at supporting defensive and/or offensive activities (e.g. 
intelligence information about the cyber capacities of the attacker).

16

4.  Restoration mechanism – rescue measures aimed at reducing the consequences of damage 

caused by cyber attacks and return to the original state:

•  Removal of the consequences of the crisis situation and return to a stabilized state,

•  Organizational, personnel, technological and other speciﬁ c measures to avoid the re-

occurrence of the crisis situation and/or threat.

The nature of the ﬁ ght against cyber attacks implies the necessity to use all security mechanisms 
and tools with efﬁ cient cross-sectoral and international cooperation.

3.4  Support, Formulation and Implementation of an Education System in the Area of Cyber Security

The quality, efﬁ ciency and effectiveness of performance of measures and tasks in the area of cyber 
security depend substantially on the level of social awareness, education level of society, as well 
as of the abilities of the actors in the area. For this purpose, it is necessary to identify speciﬁ c tasks 
of the Action Plan for the areas of:

1.  Spreading knowledge and raising awareness.

2. 

 General educational system in the Slovak Republic at the levels of:

a. 

 Primary education,

b. 

 Secondary education.

3. 

 Specialized educational system at the levels of:

a. 

 Secondary education,

b. 

 University education,

c. 

 Experts.

3.5  Determination and Application of Risk Management Culture and Communication System 

Between Stakeholders

An efﬁ cient and secure system for on-line communication and the exchange of information between 
the entities of the control structure of cyber security as well as with other relevant actors in the 
national cyber space, with optimal setting of competences, is necessary to ensure its protection. 
This is why it is necessary, at national and sectoral levels and at the levels of key actors from the 
private sector:

• 

• 

• 

 To set up control and executive structures optimally, with clearly deﬁ ned powers 
and competences,

 To prepare and introduce relevant methodologies and standards,

 To implement relevant supporting information, communication and control systems as well as 
secure systems: exchange of information, early warning and coordinated reaction.

17

3.6  International Cooperation

Due to its global nature, cyber security requires an intense joint use of information and coordination 
of activities both at national and international levels. The Slovak Republic, as a member state of 
NATO and the EU, will participate in drawing up international strategic and conceptual documents, 
international policies and standards and will, at the same time, build the most efﬁ cient model of 
cooperation, exchange and joint use of information between CERT and CSIR-type ofﬁ ces. Besides 
active international collaboration in international organizations and structures, the Slovak Republic 
will also establish and develop bilateral collaboration with nations sharing identical values. The 
Slovak Republic will organize and participate in international cyber trainings and exercises.

3.7  Support of Science and Research in the Area of Cyber Security

In the framework of cooperation of the public sector with the private sector and the academic 
institutions,  the  Slovak  Republic  also  intends  to  support  the  development  of  cooperation  in 
research projects (including qualitative and quantitative research). It will support participation in 
national as well as European research projects and activities in the area of cyber security, stressing 
the use of funds from the Research and Innovations Operating Programme for the 2014 - 2020 
programming  period.  Research  activities  in  the  area  will  be  coordinated  by  the  central  state 
administration authority for cyber security.

The Slovak Republic also intends to support the private sector and academic institutions in the 
development and implementation of information and communication technologies aimed at the 
protection of cyber space and in the development thereof; stimulation of investments in the area 
will be a national priority.

18

4  Conclusions and Recommendations

To protect national cyber space, fulﬁ l the undertakings of the Slovak Republic as a member state of 
the EU and NATO and to fulﬁ l other international undertakings, on the basis of experience from other 
member states, in order to optimize the collaboration between public administration bodies, as well 
as between public administration and the private and academic sector and in the interest of removing 
duplicities, the Slovak Republic has decided to adopt a conceptual material for the area of cyber security 
at a national level in the form of this Concept.

The  Concept  is  the  basic  and  starting  document  for  the  subsequent  formulation  of  regulations, 
standards, methodology, rules, security policies and other tools necessary to provide cyber security. 
Since it is a deﬁ ning element of the security environment of the Slovak Republic and a subsystem of 
national security, it is necessary to evaluate and build it up continuously. The Slovak Republic perceives 
the area of cyber security as an important part of the everyday use of information and communication 
technologies; this is why it will stress the execution of measures aimed at securing it.

The  Slovak  Republic  will  regularly  evaluate  and  assess  international  law,  international  treaties, 
as  well  as  trends  and  standards  in  the  ﬁ eld  of  cyber  security  and  will  implement  these  and  apply 
them when adopting legislation in the area of cyber security. The Slovak Republic intends to actively 
participate in the preparation of law, standards and norms in the institutions of the EU, NATO and other 
international organizations.

On the basis of the adopted proposals of the Concept, it is recommended to prepare and submit to the 
sessions of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic and of the Government of the Slovak Republic:

1.  A draft Cyber Security Act that will integrally cover the area of cyber security.

2. 

 A Proposal of an Action Plan for the Implementation of the Cyber Security Concept of the 
Slovak Republic for 2015 – 2020 that will determine a material, time and ﬁ nancial plan 
for the implementation of the Concept. This document will include a material, time and 
ﬁ nancial plan of tasks for the individual central state administration bodies in the scope of 
their powers and competences within the basic security areas of operation of the state. The 
implementation of these tasks will serve to achieve the fulﬁ lment of measures of the Concept 
in the application of basic principles of cyber security. A framework proposal of tasks is 
included in Annex no. 4 to the Concept.

In  order  to  deﬁ ne,  stabilize  and  use  uniﬁ ed  terminology  related  to  cyber  security,  it  is 
recommended to:

3. 

 Discuss the terminology used in the Concept in the Cross-sectoral Terminological Commission 
of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic and subsequently to publish it in the 
Terminological Dictionary of Crisis Management.

For  non-conﬁ dential  facts,  similarly  to  the  deﬁ nitions  in  regulations  for  conﬁ dential  facts,  it  is 
recommended to establish formally, in an adequate scope:

4. 

 Requirements for physical, building, personnel and information security, as well as conditions 
of security of technical and system resources and cipher protection of information.

In  order  to  create  conditions  for  systematic  collaboration  between  the  public  administration, 
academic  institutions,  scientiﬁ c  sector  and  the  private  sector  on  ensuring  cyber  security  in  the 
Slovak Republic, it is recommended to create, at a national level:

5.  A formal cooperation platform.

19

List of annexes

Annex no. 1: Interpretation of selected practically used and key terms for the purposes of the Concept.

Annex  no.  2:  Documents  approved  by  the  Government  of  the  Slovak  Republic  in  relation  to  the 
implementation  of  the  National  Information  Security  Strategy  of  the  Slovak  Republic  and  other 
strategic and/or conceptual documents.

Annex no. 3:  Conclusions  of  Reports  on  Performance  of  Tasks  of  the  National  Information  Security 
Strategy of the Slovak Republic and the tasks of the action plan for 2008 to 2013.

Annex  no.  4:  Framework  proposal  for  the  tasks  of  the  Action  Plan  for  the  Implementation 
of this Concept.

20

Annex no. 1:  Interpretation of Selected Practically Used Terms

“Asset”21 is anything of value for an individual, organization, or public administration.

“Asymmetric  Threat”22  is  a  threat  resulting  from  the  potential  use  of  different  means  or  methods 
to  avoid  and/or  supress  the  strengths  of  the  enemy  while  using  their  weaknesses  to  reach 
an inadequate result.

“Attack”23 is an attempt to destroy, endanger, modify, put out, steal, or gain any beneﬁ t by unauthorized 
access and/or unauthorized use. It is the performance of an offensive action against a set target6.

“Critical  Information  and  Communication  Infrastructure”21  is  the  set  of  systems,  infrastructures, 
networks  and  services  of  information  and  communication  technologies  that  would,  if  disturbed, 
damaged, or unavailable, seriously impact the operation of other sectors of critical infrastructure and 
of social functions of vital importance, including national, economic and public security.

“Critical  Infrastructure”21  means  the  systems  and  services  whose  failure  and/or  incorrect  operation 
would  signiﬁ cantly  impact  the  security  of  the  state,  its  economy,  public  administration  and  as  a 
consequence, the coverage of basic life needs of the population. The following 5 sectors are often 
deﬁ ned in critical infrastructure: sector of information and communication technologies, energy sector, 
banking and ﬁ nance sector, physical distribution (i.e. mainly transport systems) and sector of services 
signiﬁ cant for people. 

“Cyber Space”24 is a virtual space without borders, comprising worldwide interconnected networks of 
hardware, software and data.

“Cyber Security”24 is a set of legal, organizational and technical measures protecting cyber space.

“Cyber  Attack”25  is  an  attack  against  an  ICT  infrastructure  in  order  to  damage  it,  destroy  it,  obtain 
sensitive  or  strategically  important  information,  or  inﬂ uence  the  decision-making  processes  of  the 
victim. Cyber attacks inﬂ uence all operating domains and are most frequently used in the context of 
those with political and/or military motivation. 

“Cyber Defence”25 is a set of active and passive measures aimed at prevention of cyber attacks and 
mitigation  of  their  consequences.  Also  the  resistance  of  an  entity  against  attack  and  the  ability  of 
efﬁ cient defence.

“Incident”21 in the environment of information and communication technologies (hereinafter referred 
to as “ICT”) means each circumstance and/or event that is normally linked to outage of a network, 
services, or reduction of the quality thereof.

“Incident  Resolution”26  means  all  procedures  supporting 
reactions to incidents.

the  analysis,  monitoring  and 

“Information Environment” is the sum of individuals, organizations and systems that collect, process, 
distribute and/or work with information.

“Information Security”23 is a set of measures to ensure the integrity, conﬁ dentiality and accessibility of 
information, networks and information and communications systems.

21  Interpretation dictionary of Cyber Security, Second updated edition under the auspices of the National Cyber Security Centre of the Czech 

Republic and the National Security Authority of the Czech Republic, © Jirásek, Novák, Požár, Praha 2013.

22  Dictionary of Military Terminology of the Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic, Bratislava, 2007.

23  ISO IEC 27000:2014 Information technology-Security techniques – Information security management systems – Overview and vocabulary

24  https://ccdcoe.org/cyber-deﬁ nitions.html

25  National Security Authority.

21

26  Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to ensure a high common level of network and information 

security in the Union, COM (2013) 48 FINAL, Brussels, 2013.

“Infrastructure”  generally  means  the  group  of  mutually  interconnected  components  that  provide  a 
framework support to the whole, i.e. mutually dependent networks and systems generally interconnected 
at various levels, including industries, institutions and distribution capacities that provide a ﬂ ow of 
products and services. These represent the material and technical facilities of the state, i.e. sectors 
carrying out economic and social system functions, such as energy, transportation, etc.

“Security Event”21 is an event that may cause and/or lead to a violation of information systems and 
technologies and rules of security policy. 

“Security Incident”21 is a violation of an imminent threat of violation of security policies, security rules, 
or standard security rules of operation of an information and communications system or of a network.

“Security Measure”21 is a protective measure ensuring security requirements are put into place on the 
system. These may be of different natures (physical protection of a device and information, personnel 
security – staff check, organizational measures – operating rules, etc.).

“Security of Information System” means the ability of a network or of an information and communication 
system to resist, at a certain reliability level, random events and/or intentional actions that endanger 
the availability, integrity and conﬁ dentiality of the saved and/or transmitted data and/or of related 
services provided by the network and information system and/or accessible using the network and the 
information system.

“Security Threat”21 is a potential cause of an unwanted event that may result in damage to system and 
its assets, e.g. destroying, unwanted accessibility, modiﬁ cation, unavailability of services, etc.

“Security Vulnerability”21 is an intentional error or an unintentional defect and/or error of software or 
hardware of infrastructure facilities that may be misused by potential attackers for damaging activities. 
These vulnerabilities are either known and published but not yet treated by the producer or hidden 
and non-discovered.

“System Resistance”21 the ability of a system to resist threats and face impacts of outages.

“Risk”26 means any circumstance and/or event that has a potentially unfavourable impact on security.

“Vulnerability”21 is a weak point of an asset or of a control that can be exploited by a threat.

22

Interpretation of Key Terms for the Purposes of the Concept

Cyber Security in General is the ability of any electronic communications network, electronic information 
and/or control system to resist, at a certain reliability level, random events and/or damaging activities 
that may negatively inﬂ uence the integrity, faithfulness, conﬁ dentiality and availability of the stored, 
processed and/or transmitted data and/or services provided by the network or by an information or 
control system and thereby to disrupt and/or negatively inﬂ uence the operability of, without limitation, 
one  of  the  sectors  of  critical  infrastructure27  and/or  one  of  the  basic  security  areas  of  operation 
of the state.

Cyber Security from a Process Viewpoint, at a state level, is the system of continuous and planned increase 
in political, legal, economic, security, defence and educational awareness that includes increasing the 
efﬁ ciency of the adopted and applied technical and organizational measures of risk management in 
cyber space in order to transform it into a trustworthy environment that will provide for safe operation 
of social and economic processes while ensuring an acceptable level of risks in cyber space28.

Cyber space is a virtual space without borders, seen as a global interactive domain in an information 
environment  that  is  characterised  by  the  use  of  the  electronic  and  electromagnetic  spectre  for  the 
creation, storage, modiﬁ cation and exchange of data and use of services. Cyber space also means a 
combined  phenomenon  of  global  connection,  de-centralized  and  continuously  growing  electronic 
information, communication and control systems, as well of the interconnection of social and economic 
processes in the form of data and information using these systems, including the data stored and/or 
processed therein.

National Cyber Space of the Slovak Republic includes the parts of the above systems of cyber space that 
are located in the territory of the Slovak Republic as well as other systems of cyber space that contain 
data and information aimed at the Slovak Republic and/or inﬂ uencing the Slovak Republic29.

Information Environment means a set of individuals, organizations and systems that collect, process, 
spread, or work with information irrespective of whether the information is in physical form, in audio 
form, or in electronic form.

Information  Security  means:  a  set  and  application  of  security  measures  and  procedures30  serving  in 
the framework of a speciﬁ c information environment, to protect information from impairment/loss, 
or  compromising  (loss  of  conﬁ dentiality,  integrity  and  other  characteristics  such  as  authenticity, 
trustworthiness, non-deniability and reliability) and to preserve the availability of information and the 
ability to work therewith in the scope of assigned authorizations.

27  Act no. 45/2011 Coll. on Critical Infrastructure as amended, states in Art.2(c) that “critical infrastructure” is a system divided into sectors 

and elements. The meaning of these components is deﬁ ned in Art. 2(a) and 2(b) of the same Act.

28  The term cyber security should also be understood as dedicated mechanisms, deﬁ ned policies, as well as processes tasked to protect 

systems and data from cyber threats and/or attacks.

29  The deﬁ nition of the contents of this term is of substantial importance from the formal law aspect as the jurisdiction of the Slovak Republic 
cannot  be  applied  in  the  framework  of  cross-border,  i.e.  global  cyber  space,  it  must  be  limited  to  a  part  thereof,  i.e.  to  the  National 
Cyber Space.

30  Security project according to the ISO 27000 standard.

23

Annex no. 2:  Documents approved by the Government of the Slovak Republic 
in relation to the implementation of the National Information Security 
Strategy of the Slovak Republic and other strategic and/or conceptual 
documents

In relation to the implementation of the Strategy, the Government of the Slovak Republic has approved, 
by resolutions:

•  No. 479/2009 Organizational, personnel, material, technical and ﬁ nancial coverage for the 

creation of a specialized unit for computer incident resolution (CSIRT.SK),

• 

• 

• 

 No. 46/2010 Draft Action Plan for 2009 to 2013 to the National Information Security Strategy of 
the Slovak Republic

 No. 136/2010 Legal intention of the Information Security Act31,

 No. 391/2009 Education system in the area of information security in the Slovak Republic.

On the basis of item B.4. of the Resolution of the Government of the Slovak Republic no. 570/2008, 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  of  the  Slovak  Republic  has  in  each  year  between  2010  and  2014  prepared 
and  submitted  to  the  Government  a  Report  on  the  performance  of  tasks  of  the  Strategy  and 
the Action Plan32.

Other  strategic  and/or  conceptual  documents  with  contents  partially  dedicated  to  the  problems  of 
protection of cyber space and/or cyber security are:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Concept of Critical Infrastructure in the Slovak Republic and Methods of Its Protection and 
Defence, approved by the Resolution of the Government of the Slovak Republic no. 120/2007.

 National Policy for Electronic Communications for 2009 - 2013, approved by the Resolution of the 
Government of the Slovak Republic no. 360/2009.

 Reports on Performance of Tasks of the Action Plan for the National Information Security 
Strategy of the Slovak Republic for 2009 to 2013, materials acknowledged by the Government of 
the Slovak Republic each year from 2010 to 2014.

 White Paper on Defence of the Slovak Republic, approved by the Resolution of the Government of 
the Slovak Republic no. 326/2013.

Report on Security of the Slovak Republic for 2012, approved by the Resolution of the Government of 
the Slovak Republic no. 325/2013.

• 

• 

• 

 Integrated Infrastructure Operating Programme for 2014 - 2020, approved by a Resolution of the 
Government of the Slovak Republic no. 171/2014.

 Preparing the Slovak Republic for the performance of tasks in the area of cyber defence, 
implied by the goals of abilities of the Slovak Republic, approved by Government Resolution no. 
497/2014.

 Report on the Security of the Slovak Republic for 2013, approved by a Resolution of the 
Government of the Slovak Republic no. 276/2014.1 2

31  Under item B.3. of Government Resolution no. 570/2008, a proposal of legal intention of the Public Administration Information Security 

24

Act was to be submitted to the Government of the Slovak Republic.

32  http://www.informatizacia.sk/narodna-strategia-pre-ib/6783s

Annex no. 3:  Conclusions of Reports on the Performance of Tasks of the 
National Information Security Strategy in the Slovak Republic and tasks of 
the Action Plan for 2008 to 2013

2009 Report

Contains no conclusion. The end of the Report contains the “Proposal of performance of tasks for 2009”

2010 Report

By comparing the results of monitoring to the results of inspections it can be stated that identical 
problematic  areas  and  critical  factors  have  been  identiﬁ ed.  The  process  of  information  security 
management  has  systematic  deﬁ ciencies  in  the  area  of  the  preparation  of  crisis  plans,  the  transfer 
of  competences  and  crisis  management.  To  remove  deﬁ ciencies  more  efﬁ ciently,  it  is  necessary  to 
speed  up  the  introduction  of  systematic  education  in  the  area  at  all  levels  and  apply  a  sanction 
mechanism  for  violations  of  Act  no.  275/2006  Coll.  on  Public  Administration  Information  Systems 
and  on  the  modiﬁ cation  and  amendment  of  other  acts  as  amended  thoroughly,  including  its 
implementing regulations.

2011 Report

The main task in the area of IB is to create a single platform for building an information society, built 
on a legal basis, providing adequate protection and trustworthiness to the digital space of Slovakia.

To reach and maintain the required condition of IB, it is necessary to solve, in 2011, the priority tasks, 
especially in the area of law, knowledge standards for IB and the coordination of exercises for cases of 
reaction and restoration after security incidents at a national level and related activities.

2012 Report

The main task in the area of IB is to create a uniﬁ ed platform of building IB, based on a legal basis, 
providing  adequate  protection  and  trustworthiness  to  the  digital  space  of  the  Slovak  Republic.  To 
reach and maintain the required condition of IB it is necessary, during the coming period, to solve the 
priority tasks especially in the area of law, knowledge standards for IB and coordination and exercises 
for  cases  of  reaction  and  restoration  after  security  incidents  at  national  and  international  level 
and related activities.

2013 Report

The main task in the area of IB is to create a uniﬁ ed platform of building IB, based on a legal basis, 
providing adequate protection and trustworthiness to the digital space of the Slovak Republic. To reach 
and maintain the required condition of IB it is necessary, during the coming period, to solve the priority 
tasks  especially  in  the  area  of  law,  knowledge  standards  for  IB  and  coordination  and  exercises  for 
cases of reaction and restoration after security incidents at national and international level and related 
activities. These activities are fully harmonized with the goals of the proposal for “Directive concerning 
measures to ensure a high common level of network and information security in the Union”; it will be 
necessary to create a legal base for the missing competences and duties of the already formed “CSIRT.
SK” unit; this is a task for the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic. The purpose is to bring the 
unit at least to the level of similar units in developed EU member states. The transposal of the directive 
in the territory of the Slovak Republic will be performed in the prepared Information Security Act that 
will also require amending other related generally binding regulations.

25

2014 Report

When comparing the status for the period of 2013 to the previous period, one can state that minor 
improvements  in  several  areas  compared  to  the  previous  period  fail  to  reﬂ ect  the  possibilities  for 
improvement. Despite improvements in certain areas, stagnation and/or worsening of situation was 
seen in most areas. This negative phenomenon can be explained by failure to adhere to the existing 
regulatory framework, lack of qualiﬁ ed staff and generally the low security awareness of entities active 
in the area of IB in public administration.

Improvement  of  the  situation  in  the  ﬁ eld  can  be  expected  after  the  introduction  of  legal  and 
organizational  measures,  standardized  procedures  and  control  mechanisms.  This  applies,  above  all, 
to  the  introduction  of  mandatory  classiﬁ cation  of  information  and  information  systems  of  public 
administration and the subsequent introduction of minimum security measures for their protection, also 
deﬁ ning legal responsibility for the suppliers of these services. Another condition for the improvement 
of  the  overall  situation  is  the  introduction  of  the  process  of  IB  management  in  organizations,  risk 
management and without doubt, an increase in security awareness and skills of personnel. Preparing 
the environment for the introduction of the required measures will require legal changes that were 
deﬁ ned in the legal intention of the Information Security Act approved by the Government; its intention 
will also be reﬂ ected in the prepared Information Security Act.

26

Annex no. 4:  Framework Proposal of Tasks of the Action Plan for the 
Implementation of the Concept

Measure 1: 
Creation of an institutional framework for cyber security control 

Responsible authority: Ofﬁ ce of the Government

Tasks:

1.  Prepare a draft of an amendment to the Competence Act referring the competence of the 

central state authority in the area of cyber security to the National Security Authority.

2. 

 Prepare a draft for the creation of a formal platform for cooperation in the area of cyber 
security at a national level.

Collaboration: central state authorities

Tasks:

3. 

4. 

 Form personnel and material and technical conditions for the exercise of competences of the 
sector oriented authority for cyber security within its scope of powers.

 Form personnel and material and technical conditions for the exercise of competences of the 
incident resolution unit.

5.  Prepare draft methodological guidelines for the exercise of competences of the incident 

resolution unit.

27

Measure 2: 
Creation and adoption of legal framework of cyber security

Sponsor: Central state authority for cyber security

Tasks:

1. 

2. 

3. 

 Form personnel and material and technical conditions for the exercise of competences of the 
central state authority for cyber security.

 Form personnel and material and technical conditions for the exercise of competences of the 
National Incident Resolution Unit.

 Prepare draft methodological guidelines for the exercise of competences of the National 
Incident Resolution Unit.

4. 

 Prepare a draft terminological dictionary for the area of cyber security.

5.  Prepare a draft of the Cyber Security Act.

6.  Prepare a draft of standards for cyber security.

Collaboration: central state authorities

Tasks:

7. 

 Submit speciﬁ c proposals and work actively in working groups created by the sponsor.

8. 

9. 

 Prepare a draft of provisions of the Cyber Security Act related to the speciﬁ cs of the 
administered sector from a cyber security viewpoint.

 Provide active expert collaboration when preparing drafts of: terminological dictionary, Cyber 
Security Act, standards for cyber security. Submit a draft of methodical guidelines for the 
exercise of competences of the sectoral incident resolution unit to the sponsor.

Measure 3: 
Developing and applying basic mechanisms for securing the administration of cyber space

Sponsor: Central state authority for cyber security

Tasks:

10.  Develop basic mechanisms for securing the administration of cyber space and ensure the 

application thereof at a national level.

Collaboration: central state authorities Tasks:

11.  Develop basic mechanisms for securing the administration of cyber space and ensure the 

application thereof at the level of the relevant administered area.

28

Measure 4: 
Support, development and implementation of an education system in the area of cyber security

Sponsor: Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport 

Tasks:

1.  Prepare a draft for the full coverage of education in the area of cyber security in the 

framework of the systems of:

a.  General education in the Slovak Republic at the levels of:

•  Primary education,

•  Secondary education,

b.  Specialized education at the levels of:

•  Secondary education,

• 

• 

 University education,

 Experts.

Collaboration: central state authorities

Tasks:

2.  Submit a proposal for the coverage of the speciﬁ c needs of the sector to the Ministry of 

Education, Science, Research and Sport.

Sponsor: Ministry of Culture

Tasks:

3. 

 Prepare a draft for the provision of the systematic spreading of knowledge in the area of 
cyber security.

29

Measure 5: 
Setting and application of a culture of management of risk and system communication 
among stakeholders

Sponsor: Central state authority for cyber security

Tasks:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

 Design and create managing and executive structures with clearly deﬁ ned powers, 
competences and set rules of mutual communication and collaboration at a national level.

 Prepare and implement a project for a system of on-line risk management and communication 
between actors providing for the operability of systems and services operating in national 
cyber space as well as its protection and security (secure systems of: exchange of information, 
early warning and coordinated reaction).

 Prepare and implement a project for a system of on-line reporting and resolving incidents 
including the users of systems and services within national cyber space.

 Prepare and implement a project for the administration and provided services of registers: 
identifying actors, their scopes of powers, competences, provided services and other 
relevant data.

Collaboration: central state authorities

Tasks:

5.  Design and create managing and executive structures with clearly deﬁ ned powers, 

competences and established rules of mutual communication and collaboration at the level of 
the administered material area.

6.  Specify the requirements for the systems listed in sections 2 and 3 of this Measure.

7. 

 In the necessary scope, provide collaboration during individual phases of the design and 
implementation of the said systems.

30

Cyber
Security Concept
of the Slovak Republic
for 2015 - 2020

