 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

National Strategy  

for Information Security in the Slovak Republic 

 
 
                                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Table of Contents 
 
1. 
2. 

3 
Introduction 
3 
Importance of the document 
2.1  Importance of information security 
3 
2.2  Information security from the perspective of EU and multinational organisations  4 
2.3  Legislation and relations to other documents 
5 
6 
2.4  Areas of information security and competences 
8 
8 
9 
9 
10 
10 
11 

3.2.1  Protection of human rights and freedoms 
3.2.2  Building awareness and competence in information security 
3.2.3  Creating a secure environment 
3.2.4 
3.2.5  Ensuring sufficient protection of state ICI and ICI supporting the state 

Improve effectiveness in information security management 

3.  Strategy 

3.1  Strategic objectives 
3.2  Strategic priorities 

critical infrastructure 

3.2.6  National and international cooperation 
3.2.7  Upgrading national competence 

3.3  Information security management structure 

3.3.1  Existing management structure 
3.3.2  Proposal for a new arrangement 

3.4  Current priorities for information security in Slovakia 

3.4.1   CSIRT.SK 
3.4.2   Coordination of standardisation activities 
3.4.3   Knowledge building and dissemination 
3.4.4   International cooperation 
3.4.5   Education and training 

4.  Delivering the strategy 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3  

Strategy implementation 
Framework schedule for the performance of tasks in 2008 
Financial resources and time schedule 

4.3.1   Financial resources for 2008 
4.3.2  Financial resources for 2009-2013 

 
 
5.  Conclusions 
 
6.   Annexes 

11 
12 
12 
13 
13 
13 
14 
14 
14 
15 
15 
16 
16 
16 
16 
19 
19 
20 

20 

6.1  Annex 1:  Legislative framework for information security in the Slovak Republic   
6.2  Annex 2: Information security worldwide - the history and the present 
6.3  Annex 3: Information security: The current state of play in the Slovak Republic 

 

1

6.4  Annex 4: CSIRT.SK  
6.5  Annex 5: Definitions

 

 

2

 

1. 
 

 

Introduction 

The purpose of this document entitled “National Strategy for Information Security in the 
Slovak Republic” (hereafter referred to as the “NSIS”) is to lay down an information security 
framework in the Slovak Republic (hereafter referred to as “SR”). With respect to the fact that 
ensuring information security (the document covers non-classified information only) requires 
a comprehensive approach, it is necessary to define its basic level, with an option of further 
upgrading in specific fields. Well-defined  information  security is important with a focus on 
the establishment of primary legislative rules in the respective area, as well as with respect to 
further steps to be taken to address the issue of information security in Slovakia. 

 
The strategy defines starting points, allocates competences and proposes aims, priorities 
and steps to be taken in order to achieve the set purpose. The document also includes a basic 
description  of  individual  tasks  with  an  aim  of  ensuring  the  protection  of  the  entire  Slovak 
digital space, with the exception of classified information falling under the competence of the 
NSA (National Security Authority). These involve, in particular, measures to avoid leakage of 
information and its unauthorised use, violation of data integrity, violation of people’s right to 
protection  of  personal  data;  measures  to  protect  against  damage  and  misuse  of  information 
and  communication  systems,  harm  to  reputation  of  public  and  private  institutions 
(defamation); as well as measures to enforce applicable Slovak and EU laws. A poor level of 
protection  of  information  and  information  and  communication  technologies  raises  doubts 
about  reliability  and  credibility  of  information  available  from  the  Internet  environment,  a 
network currently connecting computer systems in more than 250 countries around the world.  
This  world’s  largest  network  provides  today  access  to  virtually  unlimited  information 
resources, enabling their exchange and providing a multitude of services such as e-mail, file 
transfer,  etc.  On  that  account,  reliable  operating  information  systems,  reliable  information 
exchange  and  related  information  security  provide  guarantees,  to  a  certain  degree,  that 
citizens’ basic rights and freedoms and competitive development of each country are ensured. 
Implementation  of  measures  envisaged  under  this  strategy  will  also  enhance  credibility  of 
electronic services, electronic commerce, as well as competitiveness and credit of our country 
abroad. 
 
2. 
 

Importance of the document 

2.1  

Importance of information security 
 

Information  and  communication  technologies  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “ICT”)  have  a 
considerable  effect  on  the  development  of  human  society.  Interconnected  information  and 
communication  systems  form  an  information  and  communication  infrastructure  (hereinafter 
referred to as “ICI”) through which operations are currently carried out virtually in all areas of 
public life (transport, finance and banking, energy, telecommunications, healthcare and social 
security,  defence,  security,  education,  culture,  public  administration  operations,  etc.).  ICT 
extend beyond the existing ICI. Ensuring information security of a country is essential to the 
functioning  of  society.  In  a  broader  sense,  this  means  ensuring  information  security  and 
protection of the entire information space and, from the practical point of view, in particular, 
the  protection  of  the  state  ICI  and  its  information  content,  called  a  digital  space  in  this 

 

3

 

strategy.1  A  cyberspace,  whose  protection  is  ensured  by  the  NSA  and  which  also  covers 
classified  information  and  other  facts  to  be  specified  by  a  binding  regulation  (an 
EU/Commission  directive,  EU  regulation,  law,  etc.,  and/or  a  government  resolution),  has 
specific characteristics. 

 
Information  security  is  multilateral;  i.e.  it  must  take  into  account  interests  of  ICT 
system  owners,  users’  needs,  as  well  as  rights  of  natural  and  legal  persons  whose  data  are 
processed  by  the  systems.  As  far  as  users  are  concerned,  the  following  factors  are  most 
important with respect to the processing of information: purpose and content of information, 
accuracy, relevance, accessibility, authenticity, structure and quality of information. From the 
perspective of owners and operators, the most important element is a reliable access to on-line 
information resources and their protection against leakage, unauthorised use and violation of 
data integrity, as well as the authority and reputation of a system owner. 

 
ICT systems and data processed by such systems may be made dysfunctional due to a 
number  of  various  factors.  They,  for  example,  include  natural  factors,  technical  failures, 
human  errors  and  faults,  malicious  software,  intentional  attacks,  computer  crime,  and 
international terrorism.  
 

The  ICI  is  based  on  the  Internet  which  enables  mutual  communication  between 
information  resources  and  information  seekers,  either  in  public  or  commercial  sectors,  or 
among individuals. The Internet has no owner; no rules and limits are in place to regulate the 
use  of  personal  information  and  preclude  its  misuse  by  third  parties.  Serious  security 
problems are also associated with other Internet-based services, such as e-mail, file transfers, 
etc. 

  
A  failure  to  secure  information  may  consequently  result  in  irrecoverable  losses  and 
harm  the  credibility  of  an  organisation  or  country.    Given  the  fact  that  the  state  guarantees 
critical processes, its task is to take care of an overall level of competitiveness of society, thus 
preserving national welfare, including knowledge and information, therefore it cannot afford 
to have low security level criteria in place. The consequences may be devastating, particularly 
in some specific areas. The state is therefore obliged to ensure that information is protected 
against misuse, and minimise consequences where such misuse has occurred. 

2.2  

Information security from the perspective of EU and multinational organisations 
The approach to addressing security is driven by the need to resolve a problem which 
originated from scientific and technological development and has by now fully translated into 
a global social issue. Society seeks to resolve this problem and ensure both the protection of 
its valuable assets and individuals’ privacy. National governments, multinational bodies and 
organisations  associating  the  world’s  most  advanced  countries  (UN,  G8,  OECD,  ISO)  have 
also  come  to  realise  the  need  of  information  security.  Various  institutions  and  institutional 
systems have been set up to ensure the protection of information (ENISA, HLIG, CERT, etc.), 
strategic  objectives  have  been  defined  and  elaborated  on,  and  measures  have  been  taken  to 
meet the set objectives.  

                                                 
1 the term digital space corresponds to the term “cyberspace” widened by standards, norms and legislation, for which, 
however, the literal Slovak translation kybernetický priestor is not suitable due to its narrower meaning  

 

4

 

In this context, the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) was 
established,  associating  all  EU  Member  States;  Slovakia  is  represented  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance in this body. 

At  the  Lisbon  summit  in  the  year  2000,  representatives  of  states  and  governments 
agreed to make the EU “the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the 
world capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social 
cohesion,  and  respect  for  the  environment  by  2010”,  and  adopted  the  so-called  eEurope 
initiative, replaced by “i2010 initiative” (European Information Society 2010) later in 2005. 
The EU included information security among its main priorities and has published a number 
of  strategic  documents,  recommendations,  directives  and  regulations  on  the  protection  of 
personal data and computer software, electronic signature, e-commerce, combating computer 
crime, spam, etc.  

2.3 

Legislation and relations to other documents  
The  NSIS  is  based  on  the  knowledge  of  the  actual  situation  and  experience  in  the 
world and in Slovakia, on EU directives, OECD recommendations, key  international norms 
and  standards  for  information  security,  the  Slovak  legal  framework  for  the  protection  of 
information,  and  other  documents  adopted  by  the  Slovak  government  and  the  National 
Council of the Slovak Republic. They mainly involve the following regulations:  

-  Act  No.  275/2006  Coll.  on  Information  Systems  of  Public  Administration  and  on 

amendments to certain acts, as amended by Act No. 678/2006 Coll.; 

-  Act  No.  215/2004  Coll.  on  the  Protection  of  Classified  Information  and  on 

amendments to certain acts, as amended; 

-  Act No. 428/2002 Coll. on the Protection of Personal Data as amended; 
-  Act  No.  215/2002  on  Electronic  Signature  and  on  amendments  to  certain  acts,  as 

amended; 
 Act No. 618/2003 Coll. on Copyright and Rights Related to Copyright as amended; 

- 
-  Act No. 483/2001 Coll. on Banks and on amendments to certain acts, as amended; 
-  Act No. 300/2005 Coll., the Penal Code, as amended; 
-  other laws and implementing regulations listed in Annex 1. 

 

,  By  resolution  No.  522  of  13  June  2001,    the  Slovak  government  has  approved 
”Information  Society  Policy  in  the  Slovak  Republic”  thus  officially  joining  the  eEurope+ 
initiative. In accordance with the aforementioned government resolution draft “Strategy and 
Action Plan for the Development of the Information Society” was prepared and approved by 
the government resolution No. 43 of 21 January 2004. 

 
Convention  on  Cybercrime  CETS  185/2001,  issued  by  the  Council  of  Europe,  was 
ratified  and  incorporated  into  the  Slovak  Penal  Code;  Directive  No  1999/93/EC  of  the 
European Parliament and of the Council on a Community framework for electronic signatures  
was  transposed  under  the  Act  on  Electronic  Signature;  and  Directive  No  95/46/EC  of  the 
European Parliament and of the Council on the  protection of individuals with regard to the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data was transposed under the 
Act on Personal Data Protection. Various decisions and directives issued  by the Council of 
Europe are also currently valid in the area of information security. 

 

5

 

Most important strategic documents in place in Slovakia include: 

- 
- 

“Slovak Security Strategy” (National Council, September 2005). 
“Draft Concept of Critical Infrastructure in Slovakia and Method of its Protection and 
Defence” (MoE, 2007). 

-  Concept of the Protection of Classified Information in Slovakia. 

 
The  present  document  complies  with  the  relevant  underlying  international  security 
standards and norms, as well as standards issued by the MF SR, the NSA, MoH, the Slovak 
Office  for  Personal  Data  Protection,  and  the  Slovak  Office  of  Standards,  Metrology  and 
Testing (SOSMT). 

2.4   Areas of information security and competences 
No  comprehensive  information  security  strategy  has  been  adopted  in  Slovakia  so  far. 
Nevertheless, the issue of information security has been addressed in certain partial areas (in 
terms of legislation, competences, organisation and methodology). They are, in particular: 
 
Information society (MF SR) and information security in public administration falling within 
the  MF  SR  competence;  activities  pertaining  to  information  security  are  carried  out  by  the 
Committee for Information Security. The Committee is responsible for “preparation of expert 
proposals and standpoints on information security”; i.e. the Committee, inter alia, “proposes 
the  introduction  of  security  standards,  amendments  to,  or  cancellation  of,  the  existing 
applicable  security  standards  for  the  information  systems  in  public  administration”. 
(http://www.informatizacia.sk). 
 
Protection of classified information (NSA) represents in terms of information security the 
area  of  classified  information  and  systems  working  with  classified  information.  Despite 
traditional terminology used in legislation2, classified information is not classified in terms of 
confidentiality only; security requirements for its protection are complex and respect also the 
need of ensuring integrity, authenticity and availability. A dual management system is applied 
in  relation  to  classified  information  that  represents  a  cyberspace  content  and  the  part  of 
Slovak  digital  space  which  does  not  work  with  classified  information.  For  the  sake  of 
protection of Slovak digital space it will therefore be necessary to establish closer cooperation 
in the area of classified information protection and information security of the entire Slovak 
digital space. 
 
Personal data protection (the Office for Personal Data Protection) and the use of electronic 
signature  (NSA)  are  governed  by  laws3  and  the  respective  institutions  supervise  their 
compliance. 
 
Electronic commerce (MoE) is governed by Act No. 22/2004 Coll. on Electronic Commerce 
and  on  amendments  to  Act  No.  128/2002  Coll.  on  state  inspection  in  internal  market 
concerning consumer protection and on amendments to certain acts as amended by Act No. 
284/2002  Coll.  as  amended  by  Act  No.  160/2005  Coll.  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “Act  No. 
22/2004  Coll.  on  Electronic  Commerce”)  under  which  Directive  No  2000/31/EC  of  the 
                                                 
2 Act No. 215/2004 Coll. on Protection of Classified Information and on amendments to certain acts, as amended by Act No. 
638/2005 Coll. and Act No. 255/2006 Coll. and related regulations. 
3 Act No. 428/2002 Coll. on Protection of Personal Data as amended, Act No. 215/2002 Coll. on Electronic Signature and on 
amendments to certain acts 

 

6

 

and  Electronic  Business 

European Parliament and of the Council on Electronic Commerce, laying down the common 
legal  framework  of  electronic  commerce  for  all  Member  States,  was  transposed.  Provisions 
and  directives  on  electronic  commerce  are  largely  vague,  therefore  additional  legislation  is 
required.  For this purpose, the Economic Commission for Europe - United Nations Centre for 
Trade  Facilitation 
(UN/CEFACT)  officially  published 
Recommendation  No.  33  in  July  2005  in  Geneva  introducing  a  simple,  transparent  and 
effective  processes  for  global  commerce.  Processes  and  services  are  governed  by  Directive 
No 2006/123/EC of the  European Parliament and of the Council on services in the internal 
market;  all  Member  States  are  obliged  to  put  in  force  laws,  other  regulations  and 
administrative  measures  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  compliance  with  that  directive.  The 
respective measure requires that the directive be transposed into our legal system by the end 
of 2009. 
 
Computer crime (Ministry of Justice, Ministry of the Interior) – this area is covered by the 
existing  legislation  as  well.  The  Slovak  Republic  ratified  the  Convention  on  Cybercrime 
CETS  185/2001  issued  by  the  Council  of  Europe;  its  principles  were  incorporated  into  the 
Penal Code4. 
 
Copyright (Ministry of Culture) and related rights are governed by the Copyright Act5. 
 
Norms and standards6. International standardisation organisations (ISO, IEC, CEN) publish 
also norms stipulating security requirements with respect to information and communication 
systems.  Competences  for  the  publication  of  these  norms  are  divided  among  several 
institutions  in  Slovakia.  Generally  applicable  norms  are  published  by  the  SOSMT  (Slovak 
Standards  Institute  -  SUTN),  standards  pertaining  to  classified  information  and  electronic 
signature  are  defined  by  the  NSA,  and  standards  for  public  administration  information 
systems  are  published  by  the  MF  SR.  Standards  published  by  other  central  government 
authorities may also include some security aspects, e.g. standards issued by the Ministry of 
Health  pertaining  to  the  medical  records.    Coordination  of  standards  publishment  area  in 
between individual institutions is ensured through involvement of their employees in relevant 
committees of the MF SR and the SOSMT; however, standardization of information security  
is not coordinated at the institutional level. 
 
International  cooperation  in  information  security  is  necessary  in  order  to  ensure 
compatibility  of  solutions  and  sufficient  level  of  protection  of  the  global  ICI.  International 
cooperation is equally necessary due to the complexity of the area of information security as 
such, resulting in a situation where majority of countries do not have sufficient capacities to 
build  the  necessary  know-how  individually,  and  development  and  implementation  of 
necessary solutions may take undesirably long even for the most advanced countries.  

Slovakia  is  engaged  in  international  cooperation  efforts  in  information  security; 
Slovakia  is  represented  in  the  ENISA,  EU  working  groups  (OECD  working  group  for 
information security; working groups for certification of means and accreditation of systems 
and  networks  for  secure  data  transfer  in  EU  electronic  and  communication  systems,  etc.), 
NATO  working  groups,  FESA;  Slovakia  has  also  access  to  ISO  information  security 
standards under preparation. Individuals and non-state organisations are represented in other 
international organisations (IFIP TC11, etc.) as well. Using an ISO terminology, Slovakia is 
                                                 
4 Act No. 300/2005 Coll., the Penal Code,  § 247 Damage and misuse of a record on information media 
5 Act No. 618/2003 Coll. on Copyright and Related Rights as amended 
6 In the international context, the term standard means a norm; in Slovakia, the term norm describes a standardisation 
document issued by SUTN and a standard is a standardisation document issued by central government bodies 

 

7

 

so far only an observer in the majority of the aforementioned organisations; to become a full, 
active member, Slovakia still lacks expert capacities, material resources and a base to be able 
to meet tasks arising under a full membership. 

3. 

 
 
 
Strategy 
The  main  task  in  information  security  is  to  develop  an  uniform  platform  for  the 
building  of  information  society,  based  on  legal  principles  and  ensuring  adequate  protection 
and  credibility  of  Slovak  digital  space.  In  order  to  accomplish  this  task,  it  is  necessary  to 
create a National Strategy for Information Security in Slovakia as a basic national document 
and,  subsequently,  to  elaborate  on  and  implement  the  specific  tasks  defined  under  the 
strategy.  The  document  builds  on  the  principles  defined  under  A  strategy  for  a  Secure 
Information  Society  –  “Dialogue,  partnership  and  empowerment”  issued  by  the  European 
Union in 2006, the Slovak Security Strategy, and other strategic documents of most advanced 
information societies, including the US, Germany, UK, Finland, Japan, etc.  

The  NSIS  is  divided  into  three  levels.  The  first  level  specifies  long-term  strategic 
objectives in information security that cover all relevant problems Slovakia needs to resolve 
in this area.  

Strategic priorities represent the second level of the NSIS, where strategic objectives 
translate  into  specialised  areas;  at  the  third  level,  the  NSIS  defines  the  most  important 
problems that are then reflected in key tasks.  

3.1 

Strategic objectives 
European  Union  strategy  says  it  is  necessary  to  promote  global  cooperation  in 
information security and ensure that European industry is user, demanding high-level security 
products and services and, at the same time, their competitive provider as well. The second 
basic requirement of the EU is to standardise Member States’ national policies pertaining to 
information security. When seeking to meet these requirements, the principles of a democratic 
society should be observed and legitimate interests of citizens, the business sector and public 
administration taken into account.  The following strategic objectives have been set in order 
to ensure and maintain the necessary level of information security under the strategy: 

1.  prevention: to ensure adequate protection of Slovak digital space so as to prevent 

the occurrence of security incidents as much as possible; 

2.  readiness:  to  ensure  the  ability  to  effectively  respond  to  security  incidents, 
mitigate  their  impacts  and  the  time  necessary  to  restore  the  operation  of 
information and communication systems after an incident has occurred; 

3.  sustainability:  to  achieve,  maintain  and  upgrade  Slovakia’s  competence  in 

information security. 

The set strategic objectives comply with the Slovak Security Strategy, approved by the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic in September 2005, and with the ongoing building of 
information  society  in  Slovakia.  The  meeting  of  the  set  objectives  requires  that  the  state 
ensure  cooperation  of  all  government  bodies,  special  state  administration,  academia,  the 
private sector and citizens. An essential role the state plays in this intricate process is to create 
a  suitable  legislative  environment  and  provide  organisational,  material  and  financial 
resources.    Government  tasks  also  include  a  consistent  control  of  the  fulfilment  of  action 

 

8

 

plans  and  imposing  sanctions  for  their  non-fulfilment,  as  well  as  a  flexible  response  to 
changes in external conditions. 

3.2 

Strategic priorities 
A  relevant  legislative  framework  needs  to  be  completed;  competences,  technical, 
organisational  and  financial  issues,  hierarchy  and  management,  education  and  many  other 
problems should be addressed in order to meet the set strategic objectives.  The NSIS defines 
the following seven basic strategic priorities:  

1.  protection of human rights and freedoms in using NICI; 
2.  building of awareness and competence in information security; 
3.  creation of secure environment; 
4.  improvement of effectiveness in information security management; 
5.  ensurance  of  sufficient  protection  of  the  state  ICI  and  ICI  supporting  the  state 

critical infrastructure; 

6.  national and international cooperation; 
7.  enhancement of national competence. 

3.2.1  Protection of human rights and freedoms 

 
The  potential  offered  by  ICT  may  be  misused,  therefore  ways  should  be  sought  to 
protect legitimate interests of all stakeholders involved in the use of ICT. However, traditional 
regulatory  and  defence  mechanisms  that  society  developed  in  the  past  may  only  hardly  be 
carried  over  into  the  digital  space.  In  particular  ethics  and  moral,  which  are  being  formed 
gradually, belong to a private sphere of individuals, or communities at the most, and have no 
legal force.  Good legislation is necessary in order to make sure that detected crimes tending 
to  violate  human  rights  and  freedoms  are  effectively  prosecuted.  Amidst  growing  security 
problems  of  the  digital  space  (computer  crime,  organised  crime,  terrorism)  and  the 
significance of the global (as well as national) ICI for society it will be necessary to define a 
legal  framework  for  the  protection  of  digital  space  (both  at  the  international  and  national 
level).  Interests  and  rights  of  various  individuals  and  organisations  coincide  in  this  area. 
Proposed  measures  (legal  arrangements)  have  to  take  into  account  not  only  interests  of  the 
state and  ICT system owners, but also the rights of users and those parties whose data  ICT 
systems contain7.  

 
The NSIS builds on the Slovak legal framework for the protection of information, EU 
directives  and  OECD  recommendations,  taking  into  account  core  technical  standards.  A 
regulation of the supreme legal force concerning the protection of human rights in the case of 
safeguarding  the  digital  space  is  the  Charter  of  Human  Rights  and  Freedoms  under  which 
citizens are guaranteed a right to personal integrity and privacy, protection of human dignity, 
personal honour, good reputation and name, private, personal and family life, and protection 
against unauthorised collection, disclosure or other misuse of personal data. The Constitution 
of  the  Slovak  Republic  is  another  fundamental  document.  The  strategy  identifies  two  key 
tasks in the protection of human rights and freedoms: 
                                                 
7 The security of information systems and networks should be compatible with essential values of a democratic     
   society. (OECD Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and Networks) 
 

 

9

 

a)  to  pursue  democratic  principles  in  measures  designed  to  protect  Slovak  digital 

space; 

b)  to  lay  down  legislation  on  access  to  personal  data  in  such  a  way  that  no  person 
could have a right to misuse such data in the scope extending beyond the purpose 
of its processing. 

3.2.2  Building of awareness and competence in information security 

Analyses have shown that many security incidents are caused by insufficient expertise 
and knowledge of information system administrators, users, as well as information security 
managers.  On  that  account,  the  issue  of  their  qualification  and  education  needs  to  be 
addressed.  Qualification  does  not  entail  only  education  but,  above  all,  experience  in  a 
given field and expertise obtained. 
In  the  light  of  potential  threats,  it  is  necessary  to  achieve  the  required  level  of  security 
awareness  (i.e.  understanding  the  need  and  nature  of  information  security)  among  all  its 
users in order to safeguard the digital space and, subsequently, translate security awareness 
into  a  competence  (recognising  and  assuming  one’s  own  responsibility  for  information 
security  when  working  with  ICT).  The  strategy  identifies  the  following  key  tasks  to 
achieve and retain the necessary level of security awareness and competence: 

a)  to raise an awareness – using the Internet, mass media and methodology materials 
–  among  citizens,  commercial  and  non-commercial  organisations  and  public 
institutions of the risks related to the use of ICT and of means available to protect 
against threats; 

b)  to strengthen education  activities (making the information security basics part of 

informatics classes at schools); 

c)  to introduce programmes on enhancing security awareness and competence of ICT 

users, with special requirements for information security. 

 

3.2.3  Creation of secure environment 

The role of the state is to create good conditions for cooperation among all involved 
stakeholders.  It  includes,  in  particular,  laying  down  a  legal  framework,  drafting  strategic 
documents  and  methodology  materials,  determining  competences,  obligations  and 
responsibility. Another important task is to create uniform information security standards and 
coordinate  their  issuing.  The  entire  public  administration,  the  academic  and  private  sector, 
including individuals, should be involved in the preparation of conceptual documents. It is in 
the  state’s  interest  to  have  the  entire  digital  space  protected,  through  suitable  forms  of 
cooperation between owners and users. The strategy defines the following key tasks that lead 
to creating a secure environment: 

a)  to coordinate the protection of Slovak digital space and ensure national security; 
b)  to  create8  a  sufficient  information  security  legislative  framework  in  Slovakia, 
taking  into  account  human  rights  and  freedoms  and  Slovakia’s  international 
commitments (especially towards the EU); 

                                                 
8 analysis of the existing legislation and possible amendments or updates to it 

 

10

 

c)  to  assess  the  existing  competences  and  determine  responsibility/define  duties  of 

state authorities in the area of information security; 

d)  to  harmonize  STN  (Slovak  Technical  Norms)  with  the  applicable  international 
information  security  standards;  coordinate  issuing  of  information  security 
standards in Slovakia;   

e)  to  create  a  uniform  methodology  of  non-classified  information  and  information 

and communication systems security categorisation; 

f)  to  prepare  basic  ICT  security  requirements  mandatory  for  the  state  ICI,  and 
optional  for  other  NICI  components  (mainly  for  e-Health,  e-Government  system 
and KRIS), compatible with international norms and standards. 

g)  to  prepare  and  make  available  methodology  materials  with  a  goal  to  achieve  the 
required/basic  level  of  information  security  (guidelines  and  best  practices);  to 
promote  convergence  of  best-practice  based  security  procedures  applied  by  the 
state and private sector;  

h)  to promote solutions and services based on available (open) standards in order to 

i) 

improve availability of security solutions to small businesses and individuals; 
to engage the commercial sector and expert public in the process of drafting and 
reviewing  conceptual  documents,  norms  and  standards;  to  create  room  for 
knowledge and experience exchange. 

3.2.4  Improvement of effectiveness in information security management 

 In order to achieve and retain the required level of information security it is necessary 
to  coordinate  the  protection  of  organisation’s  assets  and,  at  the  same  time,  develop  an 
effective  system  of  its  management.  Improving  the  quality  of  management  requires  that 
institutions  would  be  provided  with  not  only  the  methodological  assistance  while  solving 
conceptual  issues,  but  also  with  the  support  in  solution  of  particular  urgent  problems 
(including preparation of regulations, methodology documents and trainings, as well as advice 
and  technical  assistance).  In  this  respect,  security  level  should  be  monitored  and  evaluated, 
with  respective  statistics  on  security  incidents  being  provided  to  target  groups,  in  order  to 
make management more effective. The following tasks should be set in order to resolve the 
aforementioned problems: 

a)  threat monitoring; 
b)  creation  of  an  early  warning  system  (notification  of  target  groups  about  existing 

threats, warning of possible target groups, alarm signalling); 

c)  help with security incidents solutions; 
d)  identification, recording and evaluation of security incidents; 
e)  monitoring effectiveness of measures proposed to resolve security incidents; 
f)  coordination of security strategies of individual NICI system to ensure cooperation 

in NICI management. 

3.2.5  Ensurance  of  sufficient  protection  of  state  ICI  and  ICI  supporting  the  state 

critical infrastructure 

 

11

 

The state as an owner of information and communication systems is obliged to ensure 
 
their adequate protection so that no damage is caused if they are attacked, or that such damage 
is minimal.  They mainly include systems that are part of the state critical infrastructure which 
ensures the functioning of the state, services in industry, energy sector, healthcare and social 
security,  transport,  banking,  etc.  The  Slovak  Security  Strategy,  approved  by  the  National 
Council of the Slovak Republic in 2005, implies that “the Slovak Republic will take measures 
to  reduce  vulnerability  of  critical  infrastructure  components,  with  focus  on  information  and 
communication  systems,  and  to  minimise  negative  impacts  of  attacks  against  them.  It  will 
continue its activities focused on the security and integrity of information and communication 
systems, particularly systems that are essential for the safe performance of the basic functions 
of the state.” The issue of information protection in critical infrastructure is also addressed by 
the  National  Programme  for  the  Protection  and  Defence  of  Critical  Infrastructure  in  the 
Slovak Republic, approved by government resolution No. 185/2008 of 26 March 2008. Since 
the critical infrastructure involves even non-state systems and the state is a partner to citizens 
and  private  companies  in  administrative  as  well  as  commercial  matters,  the  state  must,  in 
addition  to  the  protection  of  its  own  systems,  ensure  security  awareness  raising  among  the 
general public and promote reasonable security requirements for non-state systems. Tasks to 
ensure  sufficient  protection  of  state  ICI  and  ICT  systems  supporting  the  state  critical 
infrastructure are as follows: 

a)  to improve information security level in state institutions through the introduction 

of an information security management system; 

b)  to implement and promote the use of secure ICT-based products and services;  
c)  to  prepare  framework  conditions,  guidelines  and  recommendations  (stipulating 
binding  framework  security  requirements  (security  standards)  for  systems 
controlled  by  individual  state  authorities,  and  guidelines  on  how  to  meet  them; 
and/or recommendations for systems not controlled by state authorities). 

d)  analyse the security level of that part of the NICI which represents a component of 
the  state  critical  infrastructure,  or  supports  it;  update  adopted  or  adopt  new 
measures if necessary. 

3.2.6  National and international cooperation 
Given  the  global  nature  of  information  security,  local  solutions  often  prove 
 
insufficient.  Active 
international 
organisations,  such  as  ENISA,  OECD,  CERT,  ISO,  etc.,  is  necessary.  To  that  end,  the 
following is needed: 

the  activities  carried  out  by  key 

involvement 

in 

a)  to coordinate national efforts in the protection of Slovak digital space; 
b)  to  effectively  engage  in  international  cooperation  based  on  an  analysis  of 

Slovakia’s needs and options in the area of information security. 

3.2.7  Enhancement of national competence 
 
Highly qualified experts, reliable ICT-based products and credible IT services, along 
with  the  sponsorship  and  helpfulness  of  the  state  and  other  stakeholders,  are  important  in 
order  to  sustain  the  necessary  level  of  protection  of  Slovak  digital  space.  The  following  is 
needed in this area: 

 

12

 

a)  to  analyse  qualification  needs  in  Slovakia  with  respect  to  information  security, 
possibilities  of  curricular  and  extra-curricular  education  and  training,  and 
introduce a training system; 

b)  to promote research and development aimed at possible and existing problems in 
information security (in particular, intensified cooperation of the state, the private 
sector and academia); 

c)  to use the results of international cooperation to support economic competitiveness 
legislation  and 

information  about  problems,  solutions, 

(providing 
standards, international initiatives in information security). 

trends, 

 

3.3 

Information security management structure 

3.3.1  Existing management structure 
 
Slovakia  has  currently  a  3-tier  information  security  management  structure  in  place, 
based  on  Act  No.  575/2001  Coll.  on  organisation  of  the  activities  of  the  Government  and 
organisation of the central public administration, as amended, and on amendments to certain 
acts (the Transfer of Powers Act). The Government of the Slovak Republic, which discusses 
and  approves  strategic  and  conceptual  materials,  is  the  supreme  body.  These  materials  are 
submitted to the government by individual ministries pursuant to their powers laid down by 
relevant  laws.  The  2nd  tier  includes  a  central  government  body  responsible  for  information 
security in public  administration, currently the  Ministry of  Finance of the Slovak Republic, 
and other state authorities and offices responsible for specific aspects of information security, 
such  as  Ministry  of  Defence,  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  Ministry  of  Economy,  Ministry  of 
Culture, Ministry of Education, the National Security Authority, the Office for Personal Data 
Protection, and the Slovak Office of Standards, Metrology and Testing. The 3rd tier consists 
of  organisational  units  of  state  authorities  that  perform  particular  tasks  in  the  field  of 
information  security.  Department  of  legislation,  methodology,  standards  and  information 
system  security  of  the  Information  Society  Section  at  the  MF  SR  and  directly  coordinated 
Committee for Information Security, chaired by a director general of the Information Society 
Section,  has  both  a  specific  position.  Pursuant  to  its  statute10  the  Committee  performs 
analytical  and  conceptual  activities  and  prepares  strategic  and  technical  materials  on 
information security. 
 

3.3.2  Proposal for a new arrangement 
 

The  proposal  for  a  new  structure  builds  on  the  existing  management  structure 
“government  -  MF  SR,  other  central  government  bodies  and  authorities  that  are  presently 
competent  for  information  security.”  Based  on  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  existing  security 
processes, competences should be optimised (a material to be submitted to the government is 
under  preparation).  The  next  step  will  be  the  setting  up  of  a  national  centre  for  computer 
security  incidents,  CSIRT.SK  (Section  3.4.1  and  Annex  4).  Within  the  next  five  years,  the 
issue  of  information  security  in  Slovakia  will  need  to  be  settled  in  terms  of  applicable 
                                                 
10 Statute of the Committee for Information Security, IRA_MFSR_12.2007_ROM.kom.inf.bezpečnosť, Číslo :                 
   MF/ 14462/2007 – 23 
 

 

13

 

legislation (drafting an act on information security), organisation and staffing; due attention 
should  also  be  given  to  funding.  A  national  institution  for  information  security  of  non-
classified  segment  of  the  NICI  (a  National  Information  Security  Authority  of  the  Slovak 
Republic (NISA)) is recommended to be formed in the final stage. A more detailed approach 
to safeguarding information security in Slovakia will be included in an action plan to NSIS, to 
be prepared by the end of 2008.  

 

3.4   Current priorities for information security in Slovakia  

The current priorities in information security are driven by an unfavourable situation 
in this field in Slovakia, and by Slovakia falling considerably behind countries advanced in 
terms  of  information  society  development.  The  unfavourable  situation  is  mainly  caused  by 
poor implementation of objectives specified in strategic documents, absence of a state concept 
of information security and interoperability framework in Slovakia, legislation, competences, 
awareness, support from competent bodies and other factors.  

 

3.4.1   CSIRT.SK  
The  aim  of  this  task  is  to  prepare  a  proposal  on  how  to  ensure  organisational,  personal, 
material,  technical  and  financial  resources  for  a  contact  point  for  security  incidents,  and 
subsequent  formation  of  a  specialised  organisation  to  combat  computer  crime  and  ensure 
mutual cooperation, exchange of information and experience at the domestic level with links 
to  a  Europe-wide  environment.    The  institution  will  perform  the  tasks  specified  in  Section 
3.2.4 (the first 4 tasks in particular). It will also participate in performing tasks specified in 
Section  3.2.6,  action  plan  tasks,  etc.    This  fact  is  also  appreciated  by  international 
organisations  concerned  with  IT  security,  which  have  pointed  out  that  there  is  no  contact 
point available in Slovakia in the case of international IT security incidents. Given the lack of 
expert  capacities  in  the  field  of  information  security,  CSIRT.SK  is  expected  to  also  utilise 
personnel capacities of non-state organisations. Since this situation will only be provisional, 
CSIRT.SK  will  have  limited  powers.  It  will  later  be  necessary  to  consider  enhancing  its 
executive powers laid down by the law. 

 

3.4.2   Coordination of standardisation activities  

Standards are a means to achieve international interoperability of all solutions and the 
necessary  level  of  information  society.  Slovakia  has  no  access  to  international  standards 
under  preparation,  the  publication  of  standards  is  not  coordinated;  equally,  there  is  no 
overview of relevant international norms and no funds for their introduction into STN. Slovak 
representatives  participate  in  international  standardisation  organisations  only  sporadically. 
Problems also stem from fragmented competences, dual publication of standards and their 
mutual  incompatibility.  A  solution  could  be  to  better  allocate  competences  and  coordinate 
preparation  and  publication  of  norms  and  standards  in  key  organisations  including  MF  SR, 
MoH,  MoC,  the  NSA,  the  Geodesy,  Cartography  and  Cadastre  Authority  of  the  Slovak 
Republic,  and  the  SOSMT.    Participation  of  Slovak  representatives  in  international 
standardisation  organisations  is  necessary  when  transposing  approved  standards.    On  that 
account, an overview of standardisation activities in the field of information security needs be 
prepared with respect to: 

a)  powers of Slovak authorities in issuing of standards; 

 

14

 

b)  existing Slovak standards; 
c)  international standardisation organisations; 
d)  international standards that Slovakia should adopt; 
e)  de facto standards11, 
f)  Slovakia’s capacities for competent standardisation activity; 
g)  Slovak representation in international standardisation organisations and initiatives. 

 
Based  on  this  overview,  a  proposal  could  be  made  on  the  allocation  of  competences  in 
standardisation  activities  and  coordination  of  updates  to  existing  and/or  publication  of  new 
norms  and  standards,  as  well  as  a  mechanism  to  control  the  compliance  with  the  existing 
norms and standards.  

3.4.3   Knowledge building and dissemination  
 
Knowledge  building  and  dissemination  is  a  precondition  for  improving  employees’ 
qualification and level of expertise in information security. This mainly involves production 
of  knowledge,  which  is  a  result  of  a  creative,  scientific  and  technical  research.  Knowledge 
dissemination,  i.e.  reproduction,  is  related  to  education  and  training  in  educational 
institutions. Knowledge of information security can be categorised as follows: 

a)  general basic knowledge – on a level of a user who needs to know what to do and 

what not to do, but does not need to understand causes in detail; 

b)  general  IT  knowledge  –  on  a  level  of  an  IT  specialist,  but  not  an  information 
security  expert,  who  knows  the  system,  is  able  to  implement  and  maintain  its 
security mechanisms based on recommendations (security policies) and transform 
security requirements into system operating rules;  

c)  specialised security knowledge – on a level of an information security expert who 
can analyse the system  and its security environment, perform a risk analysis and 
propose  measures  to  eliminate  risks,  or  comprehensively  assess  system  security 
(auditor); The expert is familiar with the existing situation and trends in threats and 
security  solutions,  managerial  and  legal  aspects  of  information  security,  and  is 
capable of producing conceptual materials; 

d)  application  security  knowledge  –  on  a  level  of  an  expert  in  a  different  field 
(lawyers and investigators in particular) who, when performing his/her tasks, needs 
to  understand  the  nature  of  security  problems  and  is  able  to  cooperate  with 
specialists at all levels; 

e)  innovative knowledge – on a level of a research specialist in information security 

(or some of its sub-fields) enabling him/her to find fundamentally new solutions. 

Along with IT and expert training, language skills are equally necessary; in Slovakia, 

 
due attention should be given to education in all aforementioned categories. 

3.4.4   International cooperation 

                                                 
11 generally accepted technical norms which, formally, do not have the status of a standard (e.g. PKCS in the 
case of electronic signature and cryptology) 

 

15

 

Slovak  membership  in  the  EU,  OECD,  ISO  and  other  international  organisations 
implies obligations but also a possibility for Slovakia to participate in the policy making by 
these institutions so that their policies takes also account of Slovakia’s interests.  Bodies of 
those international institutions which perform this activity in the field of information security 
should be identified; subsequently, it is necessary to make sure that Slovakia is represented by 
qualified  experts  on  such  bodies.  Cooperation  also  requires  that  appropriate  conditions  be 
created  for  activities  performed  by,  and  ensuring  participation  of,  Slovak  experts  in  these 
specialised bodies. 

The  Committee  for  Information  Security  at  the  MF  SR  will  serve  as  a  coordination 
authority for international activities in the field of information security of the non-classified 
segment of the NICI. In addition to active involvement in international organisations, bilateral 
and  multilateral  cooperation  in  addressing  specific  problems  (e.g.  information  security 
standardisation  in  Slovakia  and  the  Czech  Republic,  recognition  of  digital  signatures,  etc.) 
will  need  to  be  facilitated  as  well.      International  cooperation  can  contribute  to  knowledge 
dissemination and increasing numbers of qualified experts in Slovakia. 

3.4.5   Education and training 

A critical factor directly affecting the ability to find and implement adequate solutions 
to security problems is people’s competence which is closely related to obtaining knowledge. 
In this respect, the following needs be analysed: 

a)  knowledge  needs  of  individual  ICT  user  categories  (lay  users,  IT  specialists  and 

information security experts); 

b)  capacity and content possibilities of in-school and other types of training (lifelong 

learning, corporate trainings, e-learning, ECDL, EUCIP, etc.); 

 

Based on that analysis, the following should be proposed: 
c)  to include information security into IT or other classes taught at secondary schools; 
d)  a lifelong learning scheme (basic and follow-up training courses) for IT specialists 

(system administrators) from the state and private sector; 

e)  to  publish  and  support  publishing  of  specialised  literature  and  methodology 

documents addressing particular issues of information security. 

Education and publication of specialised literature are directly addressed under task No. 3 in 
Section 4.2. A simplified form of the task, which should be updated, is included in the Action 
Plan for Information Society under 3.c.2.  
 
4. 

Delivering the strategy 

4.1 

Strategy implementation 
Implementation consists in approving the NSIS document by the Slovak government, 
resolving  the  key  tasks  defined  under  the  strategic  priorities,  and  preparing  a  Slovak 
information security action plan for 2008-2013 and its approval by the government. Progress 
reports, including task assessments, will be submitted to the government on an annual basis, 
along with any proposals.  

4.2 

Framework schedule for the performance of tasks in 2008 

 

16

 

The tasks defined for the forthcoming period are based on the current state of play in 
 
information  security  in  Slovakia  compared  to  the  situation  in  other  EU  Member  States  and 
other  advanced  countries  of  the  world.  They  are  proposed  in  accordance  with  key  EU/EC 
documents,  directives  and  recommendations,  and  strategic  priorities  defined  under  this 
document. 
 
The following tasks have been defined: 
 

1.  To prepare a proposal for organisational, personnel, material, technical and financial 
arrangement for the formation of a specialised unit (CSIRT.SK) to address computer 
security incidents in the Slovak Republic. CSIRT.SK will: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

collect knowledge of existing threats and possible solutions, and publish them; 
serve as an early warning centre; 
assist in addressing security incidents; 
collect information on security incidents and their effects in Slovakia; 
cooperate with similar institutions abroad; 
systematically assist in building similar units in state and private organisations in 
Slovakia; 

-  bring together experts on information security and train new experts by engaging 

them in its operations. 

Linkage between this task and other action plan tasks and key National Strategy tasks 
will be described in more detail in a “Draft action plan for 2008-2013”. 

 
2.  To prepare a legislative basis for the drafting of an act on information security in the 
Slovak  public  administration  and  draft  an  update  to  decree  of  the  Ministry  of 
Transport,  Posts  and  Telecommunications  No.  1706/M-2006  on  standards  for  public 
administration information systems, i.e. to revise its Part Five, “Security Standards”.  

 
3.  To prepare a proposal of an information security training system. The aim of this task 
is to find out what individual NICI users should know about information security, how 
to  teach  them  that,  and  prepare  a  specific  solution  for  lay  users/IT  specialists  in  the 
state administration. This task involves: 

 

 

 

a)  preparation of a feasibility study to analyse the following:  

-  how experts on information security, IT specialists and lay users are trained in 

the world; 
the current situation in information security trainings in Slovakia; 
training needs (who needs to know what, to what extent);  

- 
- 
-  who and under what conditions could provide necessary trainings; 

b)  preparation of a proposal for a training system for IT specialists from state 

- 

authorities:   
two target groups (basic training for lay users, lifelong learning for IT 
specialists to update their knowledge); 

17

 

 

 

-  drafting a proposal for the organisation and content of trainings; 
-  draft training programme; 

c)  preparation of a pilot project for the information security training of lay users/IT 

specialists from public administration.  

4.  To draft an action plan to the National Strategy for Information Security in the Slovak 

Republic for the 2008-2013 period; 

 
5.  To  prepare  an  overview  of  standardisation  activities  in  the  field  of  information 
security.  The  aim  of  this  task  is  to  summarise  all  information  security  norms  which 
Slovakia might find useful, both the existing ones and those under preparation; what is 
the  situation  with  information  security  norms  and  standards  in  Slovakia;  who  is 
responsible for their publication. Outcomes of this project could serve as a basis for 
updating STN applicable to information security; aligning and improving publication 
of  norms  and  standards  in  Slovakia;  as  well  as  for  Slovak  activities  in  international 
standardisation  organisations.  The  output  will  be  an  analytical  study  with  the 
following content: 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

a summary of relevant international standardisation organisations and Slovak 
representation therein; 
a summary of competences of Slovak organisations in standardisation 
activities; 
a summary of existing Slovak norms (currently applicable as well as to be 
cancelled); 
a list of norms which need be included into STN; 
a summary of useful standards which, however, are impossible to be included 
into STN; 
an analysis of the current state of play, shortcomings and a proposal on how to 
address the existing situation in standard-setting in the field of information 
security in Slovakia. 

Based on this overview, a proposal could be made on the allocation of competences in 
standardisation activities and coordination of updates to existing and/or publication of 
new norm and standards.   
 

6.  To  analyse  the  situation  in  information  security  in  Slovakia.    Four  basic  sources  of 

information may help to characterise the situation in information security: 

-  published studies, statistics, analyses from domestic and foreign sources; 
- 

internal analytical studies (focused either on an system or product analysis or 
on a survey into situation in selected NICI segments); 

-  data from security incident monitoring; 
-  obligatory  reports,  for  example  on  the  computer  programmes  used,  security 

solutions, security incidents, etc. 12 

                                                 
12this source of information could be used at least in the state segment of the NICI 

 

18

 

An information collection and processing system needs to be created, which will help 
to continuously create a picture of the situation in information security in Slovakia and 
prepare an annual report, including requirements for information resources, proposal 
for  the  use  of  processed  information  (what  will  be  provided  to  who,  under  what 
conditions and what will be published).  Alongside creating the system, it is necessary 
to continuously prepare information on the situation in information security in at least 
selected  areas  (malicious  software,  spam,  illegal  software)  and  publish  such 
information. 
 

7.  To  issue  methodology  documents  on  information  security.  The  first  such  document 
will  be  an  information  security  dictionary  which  should,  in  particular,  unify 
information security terminology for the purposes of drafting legislative materials and 
strategic documents. The dictionary should be updated once in 2 years.  

4.3  

Financial resources and time schedule 

 4.3.1      Financial resources for 2008 

Financial  resources  to  be  allocated  from  the  state  budget  in  2008  under  the 
proposed  material  are  covered  from  a  MF  SR  budgetary  chapter.    Individual  tasks, 
estimated personnel capacities and deadlines are shown in the table below. 
 

 

Table: General cost estimate and deadlines for 2008 
 

 

Task 

Estimated 

time capacity 
( man-hours) 

Estimat
ed costs 
(‘000 
SKK) 

Deadline  Responsib
le body 

Note 

1.  CSIRT.SK proposal 
2.  Situation overview 

concerning standardisation 
activities (situation, 
norms) 

3.  Analysis of the state of 
information security in 
Slovakia  

4.  Proposal of a training 

system, including 
implementation of a pilot 
project 

5.  Action plan to the strategy 
6.  Information 
security 

terminology dictionary 

7.  Legislative  basis  for  an 

information security act 

  Total general costs 

 
 

600 
1500 

  31. 12. 2008  MF SR 
  30. 11. 2008  MF SR 

proposal 
Study 

600 

  30. 11. 2008  MF SR 

study 

2000 

  31. 12. 2008  MF SR 

Study, system, 
pilot, 
methodologies 

 
1600 

600 

  31. 03. 2009  MF SR 
  31. 12. 2008  MF SR, 

Ministry of 

Culture 
  31. 12. 2009  MF SR 

proposal 
electronic 
issues 

proposal 

  6 000 

 

 

 

                                                                                                                                                         
 

 

19

 

4.3.2  Financial resources for 2009-2013 

 

Financial  resources  for  the  2nd  phase  of  the  tasks  for  2009  –  2013,  including 
quantification,  deadlines  and  estimated  costs,  will  be  included  in  an  action  plan  to  the 
strategy.  The funding is proposed from the state budget, the MF SR budgetary chapter and 
other chapters, and from EU Structural Funds under the Operational Programme Information 
Society (OPIS). On that account, the drawing of funds for performing proposed activities will 
need  to  be  brought  into  compliance  with  conditions  and  rules  for  the  drawing  of  Structural 
Funds; they will be provided within approved limits. Some activities are expected to be co-
financed by the private sector.  

 

5. 
 

Conclusions 

The NSIS has been prepared for a five year period, i.e. from 2008 to 2013; the funding 
is expected to be provided from the state budget, Structural Funds under OPIS and the private 
sector.    The  document  was  prepared  by  the  MF  SR  in  cooperation  with  the  academic  and 
private sector. It was subsequently discussed by an advisory body to the Minister of Finance, 
i.e.  the  Committee  for  Information  Security.  The  content  of  this  document  is  based  on 
strategic  materials  approved  by  the  Slovak  government,  and  EU/EC  directives,  regulations, 
recommendations and strategic materials. 

 
The rate of return on funds to be spent on safeguarding information security cannot be 
directly  quantified;  the  implementation  of  effective  security  solutions  reduces  the  risk  of 
security incidents which would cause losses resulting from damage to and inaccessibility of 
information and communication systems, misuse of information, or threats to the functioning 
of control, production and/or other systems. To measure whether the funds have been spent 
effectively will only be possible after the data on the number and impacts of security incidents 
before and after the implementation of security safeguards is available. So far, impacts may 
only  be  estimated  based  on  information  from  abroad13.  Effects  of  information  security, 
besides  reducing  financial  impacts  of  security  incidents,  can  be  evaluated  with  respect  to 
Slovakia’s credibility abroad and creating conditions for citizens and business entities. This 
requires  expeditious  elimination  of  security  problems  originating  from  sources  located  in 
Slovakia  (attacks  on  foreign  systems  from  computers  in  Slovakia,  dissemination  of  illegal 
content from Slovakia, international crime using the Slovak NICI) and Slovakia’s competent 
engagement in international cooperation in the field of information security.  Positive impacts 
can  also  be  felt  in  relation  to  the  implementation  of  eGovernment,  eHealth  or  eBusiness 
projects, as well as in terms of the protection of copyright, disclosure of future requirements 
for products (future standards) etc. Impacts of information security will be assessed separately 
in a joint material14 being prepared by the Ministry of Economy, part “6. Description of the 
method to analyse impacts on the building of information society”.  

                                                 
13Implementation of a EUR 570,000 worth anti-spam equipment in the Netherlands translated into an 85-percent 
reduction in spam of Dutch origin. 
14 The material entitled “Draft uniform methodology for the assessment of selected impacts” (hereinafter referred 
to as “uniform methodology”) was prepared in compliance with the Manifesto of the Government of the Slovak 
Republic, government resolution No. 833 of 3 October 2007, and the National Lisbon Strategy which includes 
impact assessment of regulations among its priorities.  
“In order to make progress in this area, the Government of the Slovak  Republic approved on 3 October 2007 
resolution No. 833 on the Better Regulation Agenda in the Slovak Republic and Programme of Action to Reduce 
Administrative Burden on Business in the Slovak Republic 2007-2012”. 
 

 

20

