 

 

REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA 

CYBER SECURITY 
STRATEGY 

ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM TO ENSURE A HIGH LEVEL OF 
CYBER SECURITY 

 

 

Strategija kibernetske varnosti 
 

1 

Document Info 

Title 

Date 

Cyber Security Strategy 

February 2016 

Participants in 
document preparation: 

  Agency for Communication Networks and Services of the Republic of 

Slovenia 

  Energy Agency of the Republic of Slovenia 

  Ministry of Defence 

  Ministry of Economic Development and Technology 

  Ministry of Education, Science, and Sport 

  Ministry of Finance 

  Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

  Ministry of Health 

  Ministry of Infrastructure 

  Ministry of Public Administration 

  Ministry of the Interior 

  Ministry of the Interior –The Police 

  National Security Council 
  Office of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for the 

Protection of Classified Information 

  Slovenian Computer Emergency Response Team (SI-CERT) 

 

Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency 

 

Index 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 3 

Analysis of the present situation ..................................................................................................... 4 

Vision ............................................................................................................................................... 6 

Cyberspace risks .............................................................................................................................. 6 

4.1  Technological Development ....................................................................................................... 7 

4.2  The Internet ................................................................................................................................ 7 

4.3  Cyber crime ................................................................................................................................. 7 

4.4 

Intelligence ................................................................................................................................. 8 

4.5  Changes of the security environment ........................................................................................ 8 

4.6 

Intrusions of privacy ................................................................................................................... 8 

Identification of stakeholders .......................................................................................................... 8 

The establishment of a comprehensive cyber security system and clear governance structure ... 8 

The areas of strategy implementation .......................................................................................... 10 

7.1  Prevention ................................................................................................................................ 10 

7.2  Response .................................................................................................................................. 10 

7.3  Awareness raising ..................................................................................................................... 10 

8 

Strategy objectives and measures for their achievement ............................................................. 11 

8.1  Strengthening and systemic regulation of the national cyber security assurance system ...... 12 

8.2  The safety of citizens in cyberspace ......................................................................................... 13 

8.3  Cyber security in the economy ................................................................................................. 13 

8.4  Providing the operation of critical infrastructure in the sector of ICT support........................ 14 

8.5  Cyber security assurance to ensure public security and combat cyber crime ......................... 14 

8.6  Development of defensive  cyber capabilities ......................................................................... 15 

8.7  Ensuring safe operation and availability of key ICT systems in the event of  

major natural and other disasters ............................................................................................ 15 

8.8  Strengthening national cyber security through international cooperation ............................. 15 

Strategy implementation risks ....................................................................................................... 16 

List of abbreviations ...................................................................................................................... 18 

9 

A 

 

 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Purpose and summary 

Slovenia’s cyber security strategy will improve the country’s cyber security assurance system, while 
also systematically regulating this area. Strengthening the overall system is necessary because of the 
ever-growing  importance  of  cyber  security  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  systems  the  whole 
society  depends  on.  Moreover,  the  state  is  encouraged  and  bound  to  do  so  by  national  and 
international strategic documents.  An efficient cyber security assurance system is not and cannot be 
cheap,  but  it  is  incomparably  cheaper  than  fixing  any  consequences  that might  arise  as  a  result of 
security incidents if such systems were missing. 

The  strategy  comprises  an  overview  of  the  situation  in  those  areas  that  are  relevant  for  cyber 
security assurance, outlining the  vision and setting objectives.  It further defines  the areas  where  it 
will be implemented, as well as the risks occurring in cyberspace. The strategy proposes the way the 
cyber security assurance system should be organised, and the measures necessary for achieving the 
set objectives. 

 

 

 

2 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

1 

Introduction 

In  modern  world,  the  use  of  information  systems  and  networks  is  constantly  increasing,  and 
therefore  the  importance  of  these  systems  for  the  successful  development  of  economic  and  non-
commercial  activities,  as  well  as  the  life  and  welfare  of  the  society  as  a  whole,  is  also  increasing. 
Network  and  information  security  contributes  to  strengthening  important  societal  values  and 
objectives  in the  society, such as human rights  and fundamental freedoms, democracy, the rule of 
law, and economic and political stability. 

On  the  one  hand,  the  increasingly  rapid  development  of  information  and  communication 
technologies (ICT) brings benefits to modern society, while on the other it gives rise to ever new and 
technologically more sophisticated cyber threats. The trend in the use of ICT for political, economic 
and  military  supremacy  is  becoming  more  and  more  pronounced.  Undoubtedly,  cyber  attacks  are 
among the most significant security threats to the modern world, and therefore, cyber security has 
become an important, integral part of national security. 

In  order  to  strengthen  the  cyber  security  assurance  system,  the  state  is  encouraged  and  bound  to 
adopt  strategic  documents  at  the  national  and  international  levels.  This  issue  is  addressed  in  the 
Resolution on the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia1, the Cyber Security Strategy 
of  the  European  Union  "Open,  safe  and  secure  cyberspace"2,  and  Draft  Directive  on  measures  to 
ensure a common high level of network and information security across the Union3. 

This strategy will help Slovenia define its measures for establishing a national cyber security system 
that  will  facilitate  a  rapid  response  to  security  threats  and  will  serve  to  effectively  protect  the  ICT 
infrastructure and information systems, thus ensuring the continuous operation of both public and 
private sectors, and, in particular, the key functions of the state and society in all security situations. 
Ensuring  the  security  of  cyberspace4  will  be  balanced  with  the  interests  of  ensuring  safety  and 
economic viability as well as human rights and fundamental freedoms. 

 

 

 

                                                                 

1 Resolution on National Security Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia. Uradni list RS (online), 2010, No. 27/2010, point 5.3.5 
Responding  to  cyber  threats  and  misuse  of  information  technologies  and  systems.  Available  at:  https://www.uradni-
list.si/1/content? id=97018. 
2  Cyber  security  Strategy  of  the  European  Union:  An  Open,  Safe  and  Secure  Cyberspace.  Digital  Agenda  for  Europe  -  A 
Europe  2020  Initiative  [online],  2013.  Available  at:  http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/eu-cyber  security-plan-
protect-open-internet-and-online-freedom-and-opportunity-cyber-security 
3 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to ensure a high common 
level of network and information security across the Union. Digital Agenda for Europe  - A Europe 2020 Initiative [online], 
2013.  Available  at:  http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/eu-cyber  security-plan-protect-open-internet-and-online-
freedom-and-opportunity-cyber-security 
4 The term cyberspace covers the information technology network, telecommunication networks and computer processing 
systems.  

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

3 

DEFINITION OF CYBER SECURITY5 

Cyber security is generally defined as: 

  a range of activities and other measures, both technical and non-technical, intended to protect 
computers, computer networks, hard- and software and the information stored and processed 
therein, including programmes and data as well as other cyberspace elements, from all threats, 
including threats to national security; 

 

 

the level of protection provided by these activities and measures; 

joint professional endeavours, including research and development to implement and improve 
these measures and increase their quality. 

2  Analysis of the present situation 

In  Slovenia,  there  have  already  been  a  few  proposals  for  systemic  regulation  of  cyber  security, 
however,  their  implementation  never  took  place.  Nevertheless,  it  became  clear  that  the  country 
needs  a  cyber  security  strategy  that  would  join  and  direct  the  efforts  of  all  stakeholders  toward 
strengthening and systematically regulating this important area. 

Currently, the operational capacities to respond to cyber threats are  distributed among SI-CERT6 as 
the  national  response  centre  for  network  incidents,  the  Information  Security  Sector  within  the  IT 
Directorate at the Ministry of Public Administration, the Ministry of Defence for defence system and 
protection against natural and other disasters, Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency (SOVA) in 
counter-intelligence  activities,  and  the  Police  within  its  IT  and  telecommunications  Office  and  the 
Criminal Police Directorate, mainly in the Centre for Computer Investigations with the capacities to 
combat cybercrime. Apart from the Police, which in the past five years has improved its capacities for 
investigating  and  preventing  cybercrime,  all  other  bodies  lack  personnel,  material  and  technical 
resources,  and  organisation.  Despite  the  shortcomings,  the  capacities  at  the  operational  level  do 
exist though a coordination body that would link the concerned stakeholders at the strategic level is 
missing. 

                                                                 

5 Dunn, M. A Comparative Analysis of Cyber security Initiatives Worldwide. V: ITU WSIS Thematic Meeting on Cyber security 
[online],  2005,  p.  4.  Available  at:  https://www.itu.int/osg/spu/cyber  security/docs/Background_Paper_Comparative_ 
Analysis_Cyber security_Initiatives_Worldwide.pdf. 
6  Slovenian  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (SI-CERT)  is  a  national  response  centre  for  dealing  with  incidents  in 
electronic  network  and  information  security,  which  has  been  operating  within  the  public  institute  ARNES  since  1995.  It 
coordinates incident resolution, provides technical advice in the event of intrusions, infections with computer viruses and 
other  abuses,  and  issues  warnings  to  network  administrators  and  general  public  on  the  current  threats  to  electronic 
networks. Currently, it also performs the tasks of Government's centre for responding to network indigents (SIGOV-CERT) 
and assists in the establishment of an independent centre that will be responsible for protecting the IT infrastructure of the 
state administration. SI-CERT is a member of the Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST), a member of the 
group of national response centres at CERT/CC, a member of a work group of the European response centres TF-CSIRT, and 
is accredited Trusted Introducer. SI-CERT is the Slovenian contact point for the security authority of the General Secretariat 
of the EU Council and the national information point for the IMPACT programme of the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU). 

4 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

According to SI-CERT data7, 2060 incidents were handled in Slovenia in 2014, which is almost a 6.4-
fold increase with respect to 2008. The increasing trend regarding the above-mentioned deficiencies 
of the cyber security assurance system raises concern. 

Cooperation of stakeholders in cyber security assurance is not formally regulated, however, response 
centres cooperate informally, unless there is a legal basis for it8. This includes providing information 
about  incidents  and  help  in  their  resolution,  the  exchange  of  experience  or  the  use  of  existing 
capacities.  An  opportunity  to  establish  cooperation  is  found,  inter  alia,  joint  participations  in  the 
implementation  of  international  cyber  security  exercises,  organised  by  the  European  Network  and 
Information  Security  Agency  (ENISA)9.  Thus,  such  cooperation  has  already  been  established  with 
some banks, telecommunication providers and electricity distributors. 

There  are  two  awareness-raising  projects:  since  2011,  SI-CERT  has  worked  to  raise  national 
awareness and holding the educational program "Safe on the Internet"10. The project’s key objective, 
which  is  targeted  at  the  general  Slovenian  public,  and  with  a  specific  set  of  content  also  at  small 
enterprises, craftsmen and sole proprietors, is to raise the awareness on the safe use of the Internet. 
The project, which is financed by the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport, is also participating in 
the campaigns of the European month of cyber security. 

Within the framework of the Centre for Safer Internet, which is run by a consortium consisting of the 
Faculty  of  Social  Sciences,  ARNES,  Slovenian  Association  of  Friends  of  Youth  and  the  Youth 
Information  and  Counselling  Centre  of  Slovenia  -  MISSS  11  and  funded  by  the  Directorate-General 
Connect of the  European Commission and the  Ministry of Education, Science  and Sport, SAFE.Si  12, 
TOM Telephone and the Web Eye projects are being carried out. The SAFE.SI program operates as a 
national  point  for  raising  awareness  among  children  and  adolescents  about  the  safe  use  of  the 
Internet  and  mobile  devices.  The  TOM  Telephone  program  also  informs  children  and  adolescents 
about the safe use of the Internet and mobile devices. Web Eye is an online reporting point, which – 
in  partnership  with  the  police,  prosecution,  Ombudsman  for  Human  Rights,  Internet  service 
providers,  public  and  other  interested  governmental  and  non-governmental organisations  –  allows 
anonymous reporting of material allegedly containing instances of the sexual abuse of a minor and 
hate speech on the Internet, and raises awareness on the problem of illegal web content. 

In the education sector, IT or cyber security is included in the higher school study programme at the 
Faculty for Security Studies of the University of Maribor, and in the curricula of study programmes at 
the Faculty of Computer and Information Science and the Faculty of Social Sciences of the University 
of  Ljubljana,  at  the  Faculty  of  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer  Science  of  the  University  of 
Maribor,  the  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences  of  the  University  of  Primorska,  the  Faculty  of  Information 

                                                                 

7 The data for 2014 and the reports for past years are available at https://www.cert.si. 
8 E.g., Article 81 of the Electronic Communications Act sets out the procedure of information exchange between AKOS and 
SI-CERT at the breach of security or integrity. Electronic Communications Act. In: Uradni list RS, 2012, No.109/2012, Article 
81. Available at: http://www.uradni-list.si/1/content?id=111442. 
9 European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) 
10 https://www.varninainternetu.si/ 
11 Youth Information and Counselling Centre of Slovenia. 
12 http://safe.si/ 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

5 

Studies  of  Novo mesto,  and  the  licensed  independent  higher  education  institution  GEA  College;  as 
part of the corporate security subject it is also included in the study programs at some other higher 
education institutions. No subject in this area is taught at the primary and secondary school levels. 

In  accordance  with  its  abilities,  Slovenia  participates  in  international  cyber  security  exercises.  In 
Cyber Europe exercises, organised by ENISA, in 2010 Slovenia took part as an observer and in 2012 
and  2014  as  an  active  participant.  Furthermore,  from  2013  on,  it  actively  participates  in  Cyber 
Coalition exercises within NATO. Participation in these exercises proved to be a good opportunity to 
check  the  capacities  for  cyber  security  assurance  at  the  national  level,  as  well  as  to  exchange 
experience  and  establish  new  connections  between stakeholders.    National cyber  security  exercise  
has not yet been carried out. 

3  Vision 

Establishing  a  comprehensive  cyber  security  system  as  an  important  integral  factor  of  national 
security will contribute to ensuring an open, safe and secure cyberspace, which will make the basis 
for smooth functioning of infrastructure, important for state bodies' operations as well as for the life 
of each individual. 

By 2020, Slovenia will establish an effective cyber security assurance system, which will prevent and 
also eliminate the consequences of security incidents. This objective comprises eight sub-objectives: 

1.  strengthening and systemic regulation of the national cyber security assurance system; 
2.  the safety of citizens in cyberspace; 
3.  cyber security in the economy; 
4.  ensuring the operation of critical infrastructure in the sector of ICT support; 
5.  cyber security to ensure public security and combat cyber crime; 
6.  development of cyber defence capabilities; 
7.  ensuring the safe operation and availability of key IC systems in the event of major natural and 

other disasters; 

8.  strengthening national cyber security through international cooperation. 

4  Cyberspace risks 

In  a  modern  society,  practically  all  social  activities  depend  on  ICT  systems,  and  with  further 
development  this  dependence  is  likely  to  increase.  Systems  interconnectivity  means  that  the 
vulnerability of one may affect the functioning of the other. As it is impossible to ensure complete 
security  against  cyber  attacks,  abuse,  fraud,  human and  technical errors,  and other  influences,  the 
approach used in determining the priority of a particular threat should be based on risk assessment.   

In  recent  years13,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  security  incidents,  advanced  targeted  attacks, 
exposure of ICT infrastructure and the abuse thereof for implementing distributed denial-of-service14 

                                                                 

13 SI_CERT reports on the network security for years 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014. Available at: https://www.cert.si. 

6 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

have been noted. Individuals are exposed to various online frauds, attempts of abuse of electronic 
banking services and malicious code. 

4.1  Technological Development 

 ICT develops extremely quickly, which indeed facilitates new innovative use , new business models 
and a variety of development opportunities, while it also requires rapid adaptation of the legislative 
and  other  social  frameworks.  Development  guidelines  suggest  the  implementation  of  cloud 
computing, data-guided economy and mass data, the Internet of Things and innovative collaborative 
business models based on them, where the limits of control and accountability for the protection of 
personal  and  other  data  are  blurred  or  at  least  poorly  defined.  In  cloud  computing,  in  addition  to 
ensuring safety and privacy, the quality of service can be questionable as well, since it is based on a 
chain of the mutual trust of all stakeholders that form the cloud,  rather than on the assessment of 
the  cloud  as  a  whole.  The  ubiquitous  mobile  networks,  the  Internet  of  Things  and  mass  data  will 
increase exposure to security threats at different levels, which cannot be resolved without a systemic 
approach to risk management and a sufficiently high level of cyber security assurance. 

4.2  The Internet 

Considering  the  important  fact  that  the  Internet  supports  the  operation  of  information  and 
communication systems in many areas, it must  be  addressed accordingly  and, being a key  support 
system, also must be suitably protected. The Internet is exposed to risks posed by humans, natural 
and  other  disasters,  and  technical  failures.  Special  attention  should  be  given  to  the  legislative  and 
regulatory framework that addresses issues related to the protection of critical infrastructure in the 
IC support sector. 

4.3  Cyber crime 

The European Agenda on Security declares cyber crime to be one of the three threats to European 
security. With the increasing growth of widespread ICT use cyber crime, which includes a wide range 
of activities, is also on the rise. On the one hand it includes offenses related to intrusions of privacy, 
identity theft, obtaining information about individuals and legal entities for the purpose of extortion, 
fraud  and  online  scams,  dissemination  of  child  pornography,  digital  piracy,  economic  espionage, 
money laundering, and counterfeiting, while on the other hand, it includes criminal offences related 
to attempts to obstruct the functioning of the Internet, ranging from mass-sending of unsolicited e-
mails  and  implementation  of  distributed  denial-of-services,  to  cyber  terrorism,  which  may  cause 
malfunctions  of  IC  infrastructure  and  systems  and  may  be  as  a  result  in  some  cases  even  life-
threatening.  Means  and  methods  used  in  cyber  crime  are  also  used  in  more  traditional  forms  of 
crime. 

                                                                                                                                                                                                        

14 DDoS (Distributed Denial-of-Service) 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

7 

4.4 

Intelligence 

Society’s  overbearing  dependence  on  ICT  has  increased  the  risks  associated  with  the  activities  of 
foreign  intelligence  services.  Various  state  or  non-state  stakeholders  may  exploit  cyberspace  to 
achieve  their  objectives,  particularly  by  carrying  out  cyber-intelligence  operations,  which  my  in 
certain segments jeopardize the political, security and economic interests of the Republic of Slovenia.  

4.5  Changes of the security environment 

Malicious hacker intrusions into the information systems of state administration or state bodies also 
pose a security risk. Malicious activity against the cyber security of critical infrastructure represents a 
form of asymmetric warfare. Such activity is all the more dangerous in connection with increasingly 
organised international terrorist networks. 

4.6 

Intrusions of privacy 

In an information society, individuals' privacy increasingly comes under attack, as it must be aligned 
with interests regarding retrieval, processing and storage of personal data by different companies for 
commercial purposes, as well as by state authorities. It is expected that with the increasing terrorist 
threats and the  implementation of measures  to prevent them trends towards greater control  and, 
consequently, the restriction of individuals' privacy in the cyberspace will also be on the increase. 

5 

Identification of stakeholders 

Public  and  private  sector  organisations  participate  in  the  cyber  security  system.  Apart  from  the 
central  coordination  of  the  national  cyber  security  assurance  system  and  all  the  national  response 
centres, an important role is played by the Electronic Communications Networks and Services Agency 
of  the  Republic  of  Slovenia  (AKOS),  telecom  operators  and  telecommunication  infrastructure 
administrators,  information  society  service  providers,  academic  and  research  community  (some 
faculties  and  research  organisations),  occupational  (chambers  of  commerce  and  industry)  and 
professional associations (Slovenian associations and sections of international association in the area 
of  information  and  communication  technologies  and  cyber  security),  and  software  vendors  that 
provide support to national authorities. 

In  a  broader  sense,  stakeholders  in  cyber  security  assurance  in  Slovenia  also  include  relevant 
organisations abroad, especially when these are cooperating with Slovenian stakeholders in response 
to security incidents. In this respect, partners within the EU and NATO are particularly important. 

6  The establishment of a comprehensive cyber security system and clear 

governance structure 

Successful  high-level  cyber  security  assurance  requires  the  effective  use  of  existing  resources  and 
appropriate multi-level organisation.  Slovenia will set up central coordination of the national cyber 
security assurance system and provide conditions for its stable operation. This coordination body will 

8 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

coordinate the cyber security assurance capabilities at the strategic level to ensure cyber security in 
the country at lower levels, and will represent a single point of contact for international cooperation. 
The  organisation  form  of  coordination  functions  will  be  determined  by  the  Government  of  the 
Republic of Slovenia. 

At the operational level of cyber security assurance, SI-CERT will operate with its capabilities  at the 
national  level,  the  Ministry  of  Defence  in  the  field  of  defence  and  protection  against  natural  and 
other  disasters,  the  police  in  ensuring  cyber  security  in  the  context  of  public  safety  and  the  fight 
against  cyber  crime,  SOVA  in  counter  intelligence,  and  the  emergent  SIGOV-CERT  in  public 
administration. 

Figure 1: Scheme of the cyber security assurance system 

The  cyber  security  assurance  system  will  also  include  other  stakeholders.  Operators  of  critical 
infrastructure in the private and public sectors are important, particularly in the energy supply sector 
(electricity  producers  and  distributors),  and  in  information  and  communication  support  (telecom 
operators, information society service providers, etc.). 

In awareness raising, education and research, the academic and research community will contribute 
to the cyber security assurance system through their higher-education programmes and courses on 
cyber  security  at  all  levels  of  education,  and  through  the  results  of  research  organisations.  The 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

9 

system  will  also  be  open  to  civil  society's  initiatives.  This  applies  primarily  to  initiatives  for 
improvements  and  assistance  in  raising  awareness  among  various  target  groups  by  professional 
associations  (Slovenian  associations  and  the  Slovenian  sections  of  international  associations  in  the 
field of information and communication technologies and cyber security). 

7  The areas of strategy implementation 

Strategy implementation will focus on preventing security incidents, responding to security incidents 
and increasing awareness of the target groups about the importance of cyber security. 

7.1  Prevention 

The  prevention  of  security  incidents  ranges  from  the  technical  design  of  information  system 
components to providing national and international legal frameworks and regulations that contribute 
to the development of safer applications and infrastructure. Furthermore, it should be ensured that 
the  design  of  programmes  and  ICT  infrastructure  include  the  safety  and  protection  of  individuals' 
privacy, and that the standards ensuring safe and smooth operation of the systems, including the use 
of encryption solutions, are observed. Risks are assessed, which serves as a basis for the preparation 
and implementation of measures to mitigate unacceptable risks, and an analysis of the implemented 
measures. The use of open-source technologies that ensure interoperability and allow best possible 
control, and which are not partially of fully closed because of patent rights, is encouraged. 

7.2  Response 

Prevention alone is insufficient for achieving a high level of cyber security. As security incidents can 
never be fully eliminated, it is necessary to provide for appropriate mechanisms to respond to them. 
It is furthermore important to take account of the experience obtained from the prevention phase, 
as well as from the past security incident response events. Experience may come from domestic and 
foreign  institutions  responsible  for  cyber  security  assurance,  and  therefore  their  best  possible 
interconnectivity is very important. Based on the experience and analysis of incidents and risks, the 
response measures are constantly updated and improved. Active cooperation is also observed in the 
preparation of standard cyber crisis response procedures at the international or global level. 

7.3  Awareness raising 

People  are  those  who  develop,  build  and  use  ICT.  Awareness  raising  and  education  may  help  to 
eliminate  the  risks  and  build  a  culture  of  safe  technology  use.  In  the  awareness-raising  phase,  the 
experience  derived  from  prevention  and  response  phases  must  be  utilised  so  that  users  are 
acquainted with actual risks and effective methods of avoiding them. The methods and contents of 
awareness  raising  (programmes)  are  adjusted  to  various  target  groups  to  the  greatest  possible 
extent. For children and adolescents, cyber security topics are included in the curriculum at different 
levels  of  education.  Adjusted  awareness-raising  programmes  for  the  remaining  population  and 
business entities are developed. The use of encryption solutions, as one of the cornerstones of cyber 
security assurance, is encouraged. 

10 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

8  Strategy objectives and measures for their achievement 

Strategy  implementation,  which  will  be  based  on  the  upgrade  and  update  of  the  existing  cyber 
security  system capabilities, will be  monitored by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, the 
central  coordination  of  the  national  cyber  security  system,  and  by  the  relevant  ministries,  in 
accordance with the grounds of jurisdiction set out in the Constitution and legislation. 

A number of measures will be carried out to reach the objectives of cyber security. If needed, during 
the implementation of the strategy, the measures can be upgraded accordingly. 

OBJECTIVES 

MEASURES 

1.  Strengthening and systemic regulation of 

  establishing a central coordination of the national cyber 

the national cyber security assurance 
system 

security assurance system; 

  human resource and technological strengthening of 

bodies at the operative level of cyber security assurance 
system along with the implementation of SIGOV-CERT; 

  regular participation in international exercises on cyber 

security and organisation of national exercises; 

  gradual upgrade of state bodies' HKOM networks with 

equipment that is appropriately approved by the 
Slovenian authorities as being safe and suitable for use; 

 

implementation of competent checks of safety and 
functionality of IT equipment within the existing and 
newly established bodies. 

2.  The safety of citizens in cyberspace; 

  regular implementation of awareness-raising 

programmes on cyber security; 

 

introducing cyber security content in education and 
training programmes. 

3.  Cyber security in the economy 

  promotion of development and introduction of new 

technologies in the field of cyber security; 

  regular implementation of awareness raising 

programmes on cyber security for business entities. 

4.  Providing the operation of critical 

  regular assessment of risks to the operation of the 

infrastructure in the sector of ICT support  

critical infrastructure of the ICT support sector, planning 
appropriate protection measures and updating risk 
assessment in this field. 

5.  Cyber security assurance to ensure public 

 

security and combat cyber crime. 

Implementation of appropriate cyber capacities to 
protect ICT systems of the police; 

  regular training on cyber security for law enforcement 
authorities participating in the development of cyber 
capacities for public security and in combating cyber 
crime; 

  regular updating of the laws and procedures in line with 

the development of ICT. 

6.  Development of defence cyber 

  development of appropriate cybercapabilities to protect 

capabilities  

defence ICT systems 

7.  Ensuring safe operation and availability of 

  ensuring conditions for the smooth operation of key ICT 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

11 

OBJECTIVES 

MEASURES 

key ICT systems in the event of major 
natural and other disasters; 

systems in the event of major natural and other 
disasters. 

8.  Strengthening national cyber security 

  ensuring conditions for the participation of Slovenian 

through international cooperation 

experts in the relevant international working bodies and 
associations in the area of cyber security. 

Table 1: Cyber security strategy objectives and actions needed to achieve them 

8.1  Strengthening and systemic regulation of the national cyber security 

assurance system 

Slovenia  will  strengthen  and  upgrade  its  existing  cyber  security  assurance  system,  including  its 
diplomatic  and  consular  network.  Due  to  the  increasing  volume  of  security  incidents,  the  existing 
capabilities of the response centres are no longer sufficient. In order to ensure the proper response, 
the capabilities  of the National Response Centre (SI-CERT and the response centre for the needs of 
the  defence  and  protection  against  natural  and  other  disaster  (cyber  capacities  of  the  Ministry  of 
Defence)  will  be  strengthened,  and  an  independent  response  centre  for  the  public  administration 
systems will be set up (SIGOV-CERT). The framework of strengthening the cyber security assurance 
system also included the preparation of a plan to respond to security incidents. 

At the strategic level of cyber security assurance system, a central coordination for comprehensive 
approach  and  coordination  of  activities  in  all  areas  of  cyber  security  will  be  set  up.  One  of  the 
functions  of  this  coordination  will  be  to  act  as  a  single  national  point  of  contact  for  international 
cooperation in the area of cyber security. 

Also  in  the  future,  Slovenia  will  regularly  participate  in  international  exercises  on  cyber  security. 
Besides  that,  it will  also carry  out  exercises  at the  national  level.  The  content  of  each  exercise  will 
possibly  be  consistent  with  the  risk  assessment  of  a  specific  treat,  however,  based  on  the  most 
realistic scenario possible. At least occasionally, exercises will be carried out with the participation of 
all stakeholder engaged in cyber security assurance. Thus, all the mechanisms, the preparedness and 
the interaction of participants will be checked. Each exercise will be followed by a detailed analysis of 
the results and drafting proposals for any improvements and, if necessary, upgrading or updating the 
security incidents response plan. 

To  achieve  the  objective  of  strengthening  and  systemic  regulation  of  national  cyber  security 
assurance system, the following measures shall be implemented: 

   establishing a central coordination of the national cyber security assurance system; 

  human resource and technological strengthening of bodies at the operative level of cyber security 

assurance system along with the implementation of SIGOV-CERT; 

  regular participation in international exercises on cyber security and organisation of national 

exercises; 

  gradual upgrade of state bodies' HKOM networks with equipment that is appropriately approved 

by the Slovenian authorities as being safe and suitable for use; 

12 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

  implementation of competent checks of safety and functionality of IT equipment within the 

existing and newly established bodies. 

8.2  The safety of citizens in cyberspace 

Each individual must be able to have access to the safest possible use of ICT, while respecting privacy 
and  human  rights.  Citizens  must  have  the  opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with  the  risks  in 
cyberspace and means of their control and the associated responsibility of each individual for their 
own  safety 
in  the  global  communications  network.  Cyber  security  assurance  should  not 
disproportionately  infringe  on  privacy  by  using  excessive  measures  or  means.  All  the  relevant  and 
interested  stakeholders  must  always  be  involved  in  the  drafting  of  the  legislation  governing 
permissible degree of intrusion into the privacy of information in a timely and equitable manner. 

Raising  user  awareness  about  the  importance  of  cyber  security  is  extremely  important,  as  it 
contributes to building or improving the culture of cyber security. Thus, users learn to independently 
take care of their own security in cyberspace. Therefore, in addition to further implementation of the 
existing  awareness  programmes,  new ones  will  be  developed.  Participation  in various  initiatives  to 
raise awareness and involve civil society in these activities will be encouraged. Effective outreach will 
focus  on  specific  target  groups  (e.g.  children  and  adolescents,  different  age  groups  of  citizens, 
business entities). 

Cyber security topics will be properly included in the curricula of schools at all levels of the education 
system.  Furthermore,  universities  should  be  encouraged  (e.g.  by  increased  demand  from  the 
economy)  to  offer  independent  study  programmes  on  cyber  security.  Key  stakeholders  in  cyber 
security  assurance  should  ensure  the  development  of  competences  and  certification  of  personnel 
that perform or will perform the tasks of cyber security assurance by continuous training. 

To achieve the objective of ensuring citizens’ security in cyberspace, the following two measures will 
be taken: 

  regular implementation of awareness raising programmes on cyber security; 

  introducing contents in the area of cyber security in the education and training programmes. 

8.3  Cyber security in the economy 

As regards ICT in the economy, Slovenia already has a lot of potential, but with adequately focused 
investments  in  research,  development  and  innovation,  further  breakthrough  is  also  possible  in  the 
field  of  cyber  security.  Cyber  security  assurance  in  the  economy  is  particularly  important  in  the 
digitalised  business  and  industry  environment.  The  state  will  co-finance  projects  and  targeted 
research  in  this  field,  which  have  the  potential  of  contributing  to  cyber  security.  The  applicable 
results of such projects and research must constantly upgrade the system of cyber security. Likewise 
in other areas, also in the area of cyber security the state will promote integration of academic and 
research  sphere  with  the  economy  at  both  national  and  international  levels.  Thus,  it  will  help  to 
create a critical mass of experts in this field, thereby creating public-private partnerships that will be 
able  to  develop  innovative  products  and  services  with  high  added  value  to  domestic  and  global 
markets. 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

13 

For  its  operation,  the  increasingly  digitalised  economy  should  be  provided  with  a  secure 
communication environment. Therefore, programmes to raise companies’ awareness about the risks 
of cyberspace and the secure use of ICT will be continued. In doing so, greater attention will be paid 
to the identified critical areas in accordance with the current analyses of the situation. Efforts for the 
development and use of standards in cyber security will be promoted. 

To achieve the objective of cyber security in the economy, the following two measures will be taken: 

  the promotion of development and introduction of new technologies in the field of cyber security; 

  regular implementation of awareness raising programmes on cyber security for business entities. 

8.4  Providing the operation of critical infrastructure in the sector of ICT support  

Critical infrastructure of ICT support sector must be designed and managed so as to provide systemic 
ICT support at various levels. The uninterrupted operation of infrastructure must be ensured, which 
requires the functioning of internet systems, as well as hardware and software that support critical 
functions in the country. Rapid and efficient mechanisms for responding to threats and debugging, 
i.e. sanation of damage resulting from security incidents, and preventive mechanisms that as far as 
possible prevent such threats and errors, are established. By establishing an independent response 
centre  for  public  administration  systems  (SIGOV-CERT),  SI-CERT  will  be  relieved  and  thus  –  with 
appropriate  reinforcement  –  able  to  focus  attention  to  providing  cyber  security  in  the  ICT  support 
sector. 

To  achieve  the  objective  of  ensuring  the  operation  of  critical  infrastructure  in  the  sector  of  ICT 
support, the following measure will be taken: 

  regular assessment of risks to the operation of the critical infrastructure of the ICT support sector, 

planning appropriate protection measures, and updating risk assessment in this field. 

8.5  Cyber security assurance to ensure public security and combat cyber crime 

Slovenia will  develop  cyber  capabilities  that will  be  able  to  independently  and  in  cooperation  with 
other countries  protect  ICT  systems in public security  (Schengen, Europol, Interpol) and to provide 
support  to  operational  police  work.  The  development  of  the  capabilities  of  the  police  and  judicial 
authorities  for  combating  cybercrime  will  be  accelerated.  Greater  attention  will  be  paid  to  the 
development  of  digital  forensics  and  care  for  adequate  qualification  of  all  law  enforcement 
authorities  operating  in  this  area.  Knowledge  of  cybercrime  suppression  is  also  important  for 
successful prosecution of the classic types of crime, as the use of services offered online and other 
networks is increasing  in performing these activities. In the development of cyber capabilities, the 
state will cooperate with industry and academic institutions. In the detection of new forms of cyber 
crime and the exchange of information, cooperation of the police with response centres, academic 
and research institutions, hardware and software producers as well as with professional associations 
in the field of ICT at national and international level will be important. Legislation and procedures in 
this  area  should  stay  abreast  of  the  rapid  development  of  ICT,  and  appropriate  technical  experts 
should be involved in their drafting. 

14 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

To  achieve  the  objective  of  cyber  security  assurance  in  the  area  of  public  security  and  combating 
cyber crime, the following measures will be taken: 

  Implementation of appropriate cyber capacities to protect ICT systems of the police; 

  regular training on cyber security for law enforcement authorities participating in the 

development of cyber capacities for public security and in combating cyber crime; 

  regular updating of the laws and procedures in line with the development of ICT. 

8.6  Development of defensive  cyber capabilities  

Slovenia  will  develop  cyber  defence  capabilities    that  will  be  able  to  independently  and  in 
cooperation  with  other  EU  and  NATO  countries  to  protect  defence  ICT  systems  and  to  provide 
support to military operations and crisis planning. Slovenia will develop its cyber defence capabilities  
independently as well as in cooperation with its EU and NATO partners, while also cooperating with 
industry and academic institutions. 

To achieve the objective of defence cyber security, the following measure will be taken: 

  development of appropriate cyber capabilities to protect defence ICT systems. 

8.7  Ensuring safe operation and availability of key ICT systems in the event of 

major natural and other disasters 

Slovenia is exposed to natural and other  disasters15,  which may also be  large-scale.  Therefore,  it is 
necessary  to  provide  adequate  resources  and  implement  measures  for  ensuring  the  smooth 
operation of ICT systems in all circumstances, even in the event of major natural and other disasters. 
Cyber security assurance measures are intended to ensure data integrity as well as the availability, 
reliability and security of access to services and data. 

To achieve the objective of ensuring safe operation and availability of key ICT systems in the event of 
major natural and other disasters the following measure will be taken: 

  ensuring conditions for smooth operation of key ICT systems in the event of major natural and 

other disasters. 

8.8  Strengthening national cyber security through international cooperation 

Given the global nature of the  Internet and thus also the problems of cyber security,  international 
cooperation  in  ensuring  cyber  security  for  Slovenia  as  a  small  country  is  indispensable.  Such 
cooperation  facilitates  good  exchanges  of  experience,  knowledge  and  best  practices,  all  of  which 
contribute to the strengthening of national security. Slovenia will therefore continue to promote the 
participation of  its  representatives  in  international  organisations  such  as the  UN,  EU,  NATO,  OSCE, 
OECD and ITU, as well as in international professional associations in this field. It will strive for the 

                                                                 

15  Resolution  on  the  national  program  for  protection  against  natural  and  other  disasters  in  the  years  2009  to  2015.  In: 
Uradni list RS, 2009, št. 57/2009. Available at: http://www.uradni-list.si/1/objava.jsp?urlid=200957&stevilka=2789. 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

15 

development  of  international  standards  of  operation  in  cyberspace  and  for  the  implementation  of 
practical  confidence-building  measures  in  cooperation  with  other  countries  and  international 
partners. At the international level, Slovenia will take an active part in knowledge transfer in the area 
of cyber security. 

To  achieve  the  objective  of  national  cyber  security  with  international  cooperation,  the  following 
measure will be taken: 

  ensuring conditions for the participation of Slovenian experts in the relevant international cyber 

security working bodies and associations. 

9  Strategy implementation risks 

The greatest risk to the strategy’s implementation is insufficient awareness about the importance of 
cyber security assurance, which goes hand in hand with low general security culture, and the lack of 
political  will  and  consensus  for  the  systemic  regulation  of  this  area  at  the  national  level. 
Unsystematic development of such an important area as cyber security assurance would entail very 
harmful  consequences  for  the  state,  which  would  be  –  in  the  event  of  large-scale  cyber  attacks  – 
difficult to remedy. 

Successful  implementation  of  the  strategy  will,  on  the  contrary,  have  a  positive  impact  on  the 
assurance of national security, with positive multiplicative effects associated with the increased level 
of security. It will also have influence on the increase of users' confidence in the Internet and thus 
the development of new services and business models associated with its use, which will be reflected 
in digital economic growth and greater social welfare. 

STRENGTHS 

WEAKNESSES 

  Operational level of cyber security assurance has 

  Strategic level of cyber security assurance has 

been established. 

not been established. 

  Quality though insufficient human resources at 

  Lack of resources (financial, human, material and 

the operational level of the system. 

technical). 

  Good results of the preventive measures 

(awareness raising programmes) implemented so 
far. 

 

Insufficient cooperation between key 
stakeholders. 

  The field lacks a regulatory framework. 

  Participation in common international exercises. 

OPPORTUNITIES 

THREATS 

 

Increased trust of users (businesses, state 
administration, individuals) in the use of the 
Internet, which increases its use (B2C, B2B, B2G, 
G2C), lowers operating costs and, consequently, 
allows digital growth. 

  The integration of existing capabilities  and the 

utilisation of synergies. 

 

Insufficient awareness of the importance of the 
area and the associated lack of political will and 
consensus for rapid and effective action and 
systemic regulation at national level. 

  The possibility of system failure in the event of 
an increase in security incidents if the system is 
not reinforced. 

Table 2: Analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats to strategy implementation 

16 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

 

Being a strategic document, cyber security strategy has no direct financial implications; it is a guiding 
principle of development activities for cyber security assurance. Financial implications will arise with 
the  implementation  of  the  strategy,  which  will  be  limited  by  the  resources  available  within  the 
respective  applicable  state  budget,  thus  having  regard  to  Article  23  of  the  Budget  Implementation 
Act, which provides that the amount earmarked for specific expenditure can only be in the amount 
specified  by  the  budget.  The  implementation  of  the  strategy  will  also  be  limited  by  the  resources 
available within the Operational Programme for the Implementation of the EU Cohesion Policy 2014 
– 2020. 

 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 
 

17 

A  List of abbreviations 

AKOS 

Arnes 

B2B 

B2C 

B2G 

CERT 

ENISA 

EU 

G2C 

Agency for Communication Networks and Services of the Republic of Slovenia 

Academic and Research Network of Slovenia 

Business to Business 

Business to Customer 

Business to Government 

Computer Emergency Response Team 

European Union Agency for Network and Information Security 

European Union 

Government to Customer 

HKOM 

State bodies communication network 

ICT 

IT 

ITU 

NATO 

OSCE 

Information and communications technology  

Information technology 

International Telecommunication Union 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization 

Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe 

SI-CERT 

Slovenian National Computer Emergency Response Team 

SIGOV-CERT 

Public Administration Computer Emergency Response Team  

SOVA 

Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency 

UN 

 

United Nations 

18 

 

Cyber Security Strategy 

