NATIONAL
CYBER SECURITY
STRATEGY

NIPO 002-14-024-X

2013NATIONAL
CYBER SECURITY
STRATEGY

THE PRIME MINISTER 

The use of Information and Communications Technologies has become wide­
spread in daily life in our country. This new scenario of possibilities offers un­
precedented development in the exchange of information and communications, 
but at the same time it entails serious risks and threats which can affect Na­
tional Security. 

 
Several factors contribute to the proliferation of criminal actions in cyberspace: 
the profitability of exploiting it in economic, political or other terms, the ease and 
 
low cost of employing the tools used to stage attacks, and the ease with which 
 
attackers can hide make it possible to carry out these activities anonymously 
 
and from anywhere in the world, with cross-cutting impacts on the public and 
private sectors and on citizens themselves. 

 
The different attacker profiles exploit technological vulnerabilities in order to 
 
glean information, steal highly valuable assets and threaten basic services that 
 
are essential to our country’s normal functioning. The peaceful enjoyment of 
certain fundamental rights enshrined in our Constitution and in international law 
can be seriously compromised as a result of actions of this kind. 

Fully conscious of the importance of the matter and committed to the devel­
opment of the Digital Society, the National Security Council has promoted the 
 
drafting of the National Cyber Security Strategy in order to provide a response 
 
to the huge challenge entailed by protecting cyberspace from the risks and 
 
threats hovering over it. 

The National Cyber Security Strategy is adopted under, and aligned with, the 
 
National Security Strategy of 2013, which includes cyber security in its twelve 
 
areas of action. 

The adoption of the present strategic document highlights the collective capa­
 
bilities and the commitment of a nation determined to guarantee its security in 
cyberspace. For Spain, advances in the field of cyber security furthermore con-
 
tribute to enhancing our economic potential, as they promote a more secure 
environment for investment, job creation and competitiveness. 

THE PRIME MINISTER 

 

 

 

 

 

The National Cyber Security Strategy is the frame of reference of a comprehen­
sive model based on the involvement, coordination and harmonisation of all the 
 
State actors and resources, and on public-private collaboration and citizen par­
ticipation. Likewise, as cyber security is transnational, cooperation with the Eu­
ropean Union and other international organizations with responsibilities in this 
 
field is an essential part of this model. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To achieve its objectives, the Strategy establishes an organisational structure 
 
that is integrated into the framework of the National Security System. This 
 
structure will underpin the single action of the State in accordance with princi­
ples shared by the actors concerned and in an appropriate institutional frame­
work. 

This dependence on cyberspace requires us to devote all the necessary means 
 
to placing our capabilities at the service of cyber security. The environment is 
 
dynamic and we face many uncertainties and challenges. Only if we are firmly 
 
committed to the security of cyberspace will the competitiveness of our econo­
my and Spain’s prosperity be a possibility. 

Mariano Rajoy Brey
 

Prime Minister of Spain
 

Contents
 

•   
	 Executive Summary  ............................................................................... 1
 
 
• 	 Chapter 1
  
Cyberspace and security  .........................................................................7
 
	 Chapter 2
  
•   
Purpose and guiding principles of cyber security in Spain  ....................13
 

•   	 Chapter 3
  

Objectives of cyber security  ..................................................................19
 

•   	 Chapter 4
  

Lines of action of National cyber security  ....................................... 29
 

•   	 Chapter 5
  

Cyber security in the National Security System  ....................................41
 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

v 

Executive 

Summary
 

Executive Summary
 

Executive Summary
 

The  National  Cyber  Security 

 
Strategy  is  the  strategic  document 
 
 
that  provides  the  Spanish  Government 
with a basis for developing the provisions 
 
of  the  National  Security  Strategy  on  the 
 
protection of cyberspace in order to im­
plement cyber threat prevention, defence, 
 
detection,  response  and  recovery  actions 
 
against cyber threats 
 

 

The  Strategy  consists  of  five  chap­

 

 

 

ters. The first, entitled Cyberspace and 
 
 
its security, outlines the characteristics that 
define  cyberspace,  the  opportunities  it 
 
provides  and  the  security  implications  of 
 
depending on it. This chapter shows how 
 
 
the  particular  characteristics  which  are 
common to cyber threats and the high de­
pendence  of  the  economy  and  essential 
 
services  on  cyberspace  result  in  an  in-
crease  in  risks  and  threats  with  a  poten­
tially serious impact on National Security. 

The  second  chapter  deals  with  the 
 
Purpose and guiding principles of cyber secu­
rity in Spain. It establishes as a purpose the 
 
 
setting of general guidelines for the secure 

use of cyberspace through a comprehen­
sive  vision  that  involves  the  coordination 
 
of the Public Authorities, the private sec­
tor and citizens and channels international 
 
initiatives in this field, respecting domestic 
 
and international law and in line with other 
 
national  and  international  strategic  docu­
ments. 
 

 

The guiding principles of cyber security 
 
are national leadership and the coordination 
 
of efforts; shared responsibility; proportionali­
ty, rationality and efficiency; and international 
 
cooperation  as  an  extension  of  the  basic 
 
principles of the National Security Strate­
gy.These principles underline the need for 
 
development planning of the current con­
text,  with  special  emphasis  on  protecting 
 
the  constitutional  values  as  an  element 
 
common to all four principles. 

 

 

 

In the third chapter, the Strategy ex­
amines the Cyber security objectives in great­
er  detail. An  overall  objective  is  to  ensure 
that Spain makes secure use of the Informa­
tion 
 
Systems, 
strengthening  cyber-attack  prevention,  de-

and  Telecommunications 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

3

fence,  detection,  analysis,  investigation,  recov-
ery  and  response  capabilities. The  National 
Cyber Security Policy must serve this pur-
pose.

The Strategy goes on to set up six spe-
cific objectives: 1) for the Public Authori-
ties, to ensure that the Information and Tel-
ecommunications  Systems  used  by  them 
have the appropriate level of security and 
resilience; 2) for companies and critical infra-
structures,  to  foster  the  security  and  resil-
ience of the networks and information sys-
tems used by the business sector in general 
and by operators of critical infrastructures 
in particular; 3) in the judicial and police field 
operations,  to  enhance  prevention,  detec-
tion,  response,  investigation  and  coordina-
tion  capabilities  vis-à-vis  terrorist  activities 
and  crime  in  cyberspace;  4)  in  the  field  of 
sensitisation, to raise the awareness of citi-
zens, professionals, companies and Spanish 
Public Authorities  about  the  risks  derived 
from cyberspace; 5) in capacity building, to 
gain and maintain the knowledge, skills, ex-
perience  and 
technological  capabilities 
Spain needs to underpin all the cyber secu-
rity objectives; and 6) with respect to inter-
national collaboration, to contribute to im-
proving  cyber  security,  supporting  the 
development of a coordinated cyber secu-
rity  policy  in  the  European  Union  and  in 
international organisations, and to collabo-
rate in the capacity building of States that 

so require through the development coop-
eration policy.

Chapter four lays down the Lines of 
Action  of  National  Cyber  Security.  Interde-
pendently, and in connection with the ob-
jectives established in the previous chapter, 
the  Strategy  guides  the  action  aimed  at 
achieving the objectives set out.

The fifth and last chapter is devot-
ed to Cyber security in the National Se-
curity System and establishes the organi-
sational structure at the service of cyber 
security. Under the direction of the Prime 
Minister,  the  structure  is  comprised  of 
three  bodies.  One  already  exists  –  the 
National  Security  Council  as  the 
Government  Delegated  Commission  for 
National Security – and two are new: the 
Specialised  Cyber  Security  Com-
mittee, which will support the National 
Security Council by assisting the direction 
and coordination of the National Security 
Policy  in  cyber  security  matters  and  by 
fostering  coordination,  cooperation  and 
collaboration  among  Public  Authorities 
and  between  them  and  the  private  sec-
tor;  and  the  Specialised  Situation 
Committee which, with the support of 
the Situation Centre of the National Se-
curity Department, will manage cyber se-
curity  crisis  situations  which,  on  account 
of  their  cross-cutting  nature  or  extent, 

4

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT

exceed  the  response  capabilities  of  the 
 
 
usual  mechanisms. The  two  Specialised  manner. 

 

Committees will act in a complementary 
 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

5

 

Cyberspace
and its 
 
security 

Chapter 1 
 
Cyberspace 
and its security 

Chapter 1 
 
Cyberspace and its security 

T he  development  of  Information  and  Communications Technologies  (ICT)  has  given 

rise to a new space in which relations are conducted and in which the speed and ease 
with which information and communications are exchanged have overcome the barriers 
of distance and time. Cyberspace, the name given to the global and dynamic domain com­
posed of the infrastructures of information technology – including the Internet – networks 
and information and telecommunications systems, has blurred borders, involving their users 
in  an  unprecedented  globalisation  that  provides  new  opportunities  but  also  entails  new 
challenges, risks and threats. 

Our society’s degree of reliance on ICT and cyberspace is growing daily. Knowledge of 
its threats, managing the risks and building an appropriate prevention, defence, detection, 
 
analysis, investigation, recovery and response capability are essential elements of the Na­
tional Cyber Security Policy. 
 

 

“The development of ICT has given rise to a new space in which 

relations are conducted and in which the speed and ease with which 
information and communications are exchanged have overcome the 

barriers of distance and time” 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

9

The attacks derived from these threats, known as cyber attacks, generally share a number 

 

 

of common characteristics: 

Characteristics of cyber attacks 

Low Cost 

many of the tools used by attackers can be obtained free of charge or at a very low 
cost. 

Ubiquity and ease of execution 

the execution of attacks is independent of the location of the aggressors, and in many 
 
cases considerable technical knowledge is not necessary. 

Effectiveness and impact 

if the attack is well designed, it may achieve its desired objectives.The absence of 
cyber security policies, insufficient resources and lack of awareness and skills can 
facilitate this adverse outcome. 
 

 

Reduced risk for the attacker 

ease of concealment means that it is not easy to attribute a cyber attack to its real 
perpetrator or perpetrators.This, coupled with a disparate or non-existent legal 
framework, makes it difficult to prosecute the action. 
 

 

The host of potential attackers increases the risks and threats that can seriously jeopard­

ise the services provided by the Public Authorities and the Critical Infrastructures and the 
activities of companies and citizens. Furthermore, there is evidence that certain countries 
have military and intelligence capabilities to carry out cyber attacks that place National Se­
curity at risk. 

Cyber security is a necessity of our society 
 
and our economic model. Given the influence
 
 
of  Information  and  Telecommunications  Sys-
tems  on  the  economy  and  public  services,
 
 

“Cyber security is a necessity 

 

of our society and our
economic model”
 

 

10

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

Spain’s stability and prosperity largely depend on the security and reliability of cyber space 
– qualities which can be jeopardised by technical causes, natural phenomena or deliberate 
aggressions. 

Risks and threats to national Cyber Security 

FOREIGN STATES

TECHNICAL CAUSES

NATURAL PHENOMENA

HACKING

CONFLICTS

ORGANISED CRIME

TERRORISM

CYBERSPACE

DOMESTIC THREATS

SABOTAGE

HACKTIVISTS

INDIVIDUALS ACTING ALONE

CRIME

ESPIONAGE

TERRORIST 

ORGANIZATIONS

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 11

  

Purpose
and guiding
 
principles of
 
cyber security
in Spain 

 

Chapter 2
 
Purpose 

 
and guiding principles 
 
of cyber security 
in Spain 

Chapter 2 
 
Purpose and guiding principles 
 
of cyber security in Spain 

S pain requires secure and reliable Information and Telecommunications Systems, both 

for its physical infrastructure (equipment and networks) and the intangible component 
(computer programmes, models or procedures).These systems, while allowing citizens and 
companies access to cyberspace, store valuable information and support strategic services 
for our nation that are essential to the correct functioning of our society. 

 

The purpose of the National Cyber Se­

“The purpose of the National 

 

and  progress 

through 

Cyber Security Strategy 
promoted by the National 

curity Strategy promoted by the National 
Security  Council  is  to  establish  general 
guidelines for the secure use of cyberspace, en­
couraging a comprehensive vision, the applica-
tion of which helps guarantee our nation’s secu­
rity 
appropriate 
coordination  and  cooperation  among  all  the 
Public Authorities  and  with  the  private  sector 
and citizens, with utmost respect for the princi­
ples enshrined in the Constitution and in the provisions of the Charter of the United Na­
tions on the peace keeping and international security; and in consonance with the National 
Security  Strategy  and  initiatives  developed  in  the  European,  international  and  regional 
framework. 

Security Council is to establish 
guidelines for the secure use of 

cyberspace” 

It  likewise  encourages  Spain’s  presence  in  international  organisations  and  forums  by 

channelling international initiatives and efforts to protect cyberspace. 
 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

15 

Guiding Principles 

The National Cyber Security Strategy, in tune with the basic principles of the 
National Security Strategy and as an extension of them, is underpinned and inspired by the 
following Guiding Principles: 

National 

 
leadership and
coordination 

of efforts 

the  scope  and  complexity  of  the  challenges  of  cyberspace  require,  in  addition  to  determined 
national  leadership,  appropriate  coordination  of  the  capabilities,  resources  and  responsibilities 
involved.  Both  tasks  are  undertaken  by  the  Prime  Minister,  who  will  direct  and  supervise  the 
National Cyber Security Policy in the framework of the National Security Council.  

Shared 

responsibility 

 
All the public and private agents with responsibilities in these matters, also including citizens, 
must feel involved in cyber security. For this purpose, intense coordination of the different 
 
bodies  of  the  Public  Authorities  is  necessary  together  with  appropriate  public-private 
 
cooperation capable of ensuring the compatibility of initiatives and fostering the exchange of 
 
information. 

 
Proportionality, 
rationality and 

effi ciency 

 

it  is  necessary  to  manage  the  risks  derived  from  the  use  of  technology  in  a  dynamic 
manner, balancing opportunities and threats and ensuring proportionality in the protection 
measures adopted, which must be confidence-building elements and not hindrances to the 
development of new services. 

 

International 
cooperation 

the cross-border nature of threats makes it essential to promote global cooperation, as many of 
the possible measures will only prove effective if they are adopted internationally with appropriate 
cooperation and coordination between the different countries. 

16

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

They all respect and strengthen the protection and full enjoyment of the fundamental 
freedoms enshrined in our Constitution and in international instruments as important as 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms. The Spanish Government undertakes to develop policies which, by improving 
the security of the Information and Telecommunications Systems used by citizens, profes­
sionals and companies, preserve the fundamental rights of them all, especially in the most 
 
underprivileged sectors. 

 

 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

17 

  

Objectives
  
of 
cyber security 

Chapter 3 
 
Objectives of 
cyber security 

Chapter 3 
 
Objectives of cyber security 

OVERALL OBJECTIVE 

To ensure that Spain uses Information and Telecommunications Systems se­
curely  by  strengthening  prevention,  defence,  detection  and  response  capa­
bilities vis-à-vis cyber attacks. 
 

T o achieve a secure cyberspace, a National 

 
Cyber Security Policy will be promoted by 
 

developing  an  appropriate  regulatory  frame­
work and fostering a Structure that brings to­
gether and coordinates all the institutions and 
 
agents  with  responsibilities  in  this  area. This 
 
Structure will be based on the principle of effi­
ciency and sustainability in the use of resources, 
 
guaranteeing  the  optimal  prevention,  defence, 
 
detection,  analysis,  investigation,  recovery  and 
 
response  capabilities  of  the  Information  and 
 
Telecommunications  Systems  vis-à-vis  possible 
 
cyber attacks. 

 

 

 

“To achieve a secure cyberspace, 
a National Cyber Security Policy 
will be promoted by developing 

an appropriate regulatory 
framework and fostering a 

Structure that brings together 

and coordinates all the 

institutions and agents with 
responsibilities in this area” 

The strengthening of cyber security will provide the Public Authorities, the industrial and 
business sector, the scientific community and citizens in general with greater confidence in 
the use of ICT. For this purpose the public organisations responsible will work in coordina­
tion with the private sector and citizens themselves to guarantee the security and reliability 
of the systems that underpin the so-called Information Society. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

21

Also, in defence of national interest, the National Cyber Security Policy will be aligned 
with initiatives similar to those of the countries in our neighbourhood and with the Euro-
pean and international organizations with responsibilities in this area, particularly the EU 
Cyber Security Strategy. 

Finally, in order to ensure the protection of the systems and the resilience of the services 
of  the  Public Authorities  and  Critical  Infrastructures, as  well  as  the  availability  of  reliable 
products, it will be necessary to bolster, give impetus to and strengthen the national cyber 
security research and development capabilities of the ICT. 

 

In this connection Spain, continuing with its policy of technological diversification and 

neutrality, will endeavour to use components that are certified as conforming to interna­
tionally recognised standards. 

The considerations of this overall objective will apply to the rest of the objectives. 

OBJECTIVE I 

To ensure that the Information and Telecommunications Systems used by the 
Public Authorities have an appropriate level of cyber security and resilience 

A considerable part of the ICT systems of the Spanish Public Authorities, the information 

contained in them and the services they provide constitute strategic national assets. 

It is therefore essential to foster the implementation of a coherent and comprehensive 
national framework for policies, procedures and technical standards that help ensure the 
protection  of  public  information  and  its  sys­
tems and services, and of the supporting net­
works. This framework will be a key to devel­
oping  and  implementing  services  that  are 
increasingly secure. 

implementation of a coherent 
and comprehensive national 

“It is essential to foster the 

 

Adapting the systems of the Public Authori-
ties to this reality involves establishing security 
services in them, improving and exercising their 
ability  to  prevent,  detect,  respond  to  and  re­
cover from incidents, developing new tools and 
keeping the legal system up to date. 

22  NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

framework for policies, 
procedures and technical 

standards that help ensure the 

protection of public 

information” 

Likewise, in addition to improving the capabilities of the military, Defence and intelligence 

systems, it is necessary to bolster the security of the strategic Information and Communica­
tion Systems, adapting them to the new risks and threats of cyberspace. 

The Public Authorities will be actively involved in a process of continuous improvement 
with respect to protecting their ICT systems.The authorities are required to set an example 
in the management of cyber security. 

 

OBJECTIVE II 

To foster the security and resilience of the Information and Telecommunica­
tions Systems used by the business sector in general and the operators of 
Critical Infrastructures in particular 

When  applying  the  principle  of  shared  re­

sponsibility, the Public Authorities must maintain 
close relations with the companies that manage 
Information  and  Telecommunications  Systems 
relevant to national interests, exchanging knowl-
edge in order to facilitate appropriate coordina­
tion between both and a mutual understanding 
of the cyber security environment. 

“Ensuring the Protection 
 
of Spain’s Technological 
 

Heritage” 
 

In  this  connection  special  mention  should  be  made  of  actions  aimed  at  ensuring  the 
Protection of Spain’s Technological Heritage, which is taken to mean those tangible or non-
tangible assets which underpin the intellectual and industrial property of the business sector, 
 
shape our present and condition future development. 

It is also interesting to determine the impact that potential interruption or destruction of 
the networks and systems that provide essential services to society may have on Spain. As 
the private sector owns a good many of these systems, the measures adopted in cyber se­
curity must be aligned with the requirements laid down in the regulations on the Protection 
of Critical Infrastructures in order to achieve a comprehensive set of measures to be ap­
plied to the relevant sectors. 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

23

OBJECTIVE III 

To enhance prevention, detection, reaction, analysis, recovery, response, re­
search and coordination capabilities vis-à-vis terrorist activities and crime in 
cyberspace 

ICT are a means, an end or a combination of 

“It is essential to strengthen 
international judicial and 

police cooperation, 

establishing appropriate 

instruments for collaboration 

and the exchange of 
information and the 

harmonisation of national 

 

both,  used  by  terrorist  and  criminal  organisa­
tions to achieve their objectives. To this should 
be added the growing possibility of using cyber­
space as an objective in itself to perpetrate at­
tacks against essential services or Critical Infra­
structures. In both cases it is necessary to bolster 
the  prevention, detection, reaction, analysis  re­
covery, response, investigation and coordination 
mechanisms relating to these kinds of crimes. 

 

 

 

legislation” 

The police and judicial action of the State in 
cyber security matters must be adapted to the 
patterns of conduct and types of crime commit­
ted by terrorists and criminals in cyberspace, whose objectives – but not methods – usu­
ally coincide with traditional ones. 

To effectively address these threats, which often extend beyond States’ borders, it is es­

sential to strengthen international judicial and police cooperation, establishing appropriate 
instruments for collaboration and the exchange of information and the harmonisation of 
national legislation, and developing and maintaining sound and effective regulations. 

Likewise, it is necessary to foster citizen collaboration, facilitating procedures for the ac­

cess to and transmission of information of interest to the police. 

Success in combating terrorism and crime in cyber space requires putting in place the 

mechanisms needed to improve the capabilities of the police institutions and relevant judi­
cial bodies. 

24

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

OBJECTIVE IV 

To raise the awareness of citizens, professionals, companies and Spanish Pub­
lic Authorities about the risks derived from cyberspace 

The  Spanish  Government,  recognising  the 

importance  of  building  and  maintaining  confi­
dence  in  the  Information  and Telecommunica­
tions  Systems  used  by  citizens,  professionals, 
 
companies and public sector bodies, will under­
take  the  information  and  sensitisation  actions 
needed to ensure that they are all aware of the 
risks of operating in cyberspace and have knowl­
edge of, and access to, tools that make its pro­
tection possible. 

“Companies must be aware of 
the responsibility of ensuring 
the security of their systems, the 
protection of their clients’ and 
suppliers’ information and the 
reliability of the services they 

provide” 

At the same time, companies must be aware of the responsibility of ensuring the secu­
rity of their systems, the protection of their clients’ and suppliers’ information and the reli­
ability  of  the  services  they  provide.  Maintaining  consumer  confidence  is  essential  to  the 
success of the digital economy.The same is true of the Public Authorities and their relation­
ship with citizens. 

 

 

 

 

 

Therefore, an essential function is to promote a sound cyber security culture which pro-
vides all actors with the necessary awareness and confidence to maximise the benefits of 
the Information Society and reduce to a minimum their exposure to the risks of cyberspace 
by adopting reasonable measures to guarantee the protection of their data and the secure 
connection of their systems and equipment. 

The  effective  management  of  the  risks  derived  from  cyberspace  must  be  built  on  a 
sound culture of cyber security.This requires users to be sensitive to the risks entailed by 
operating in this domain, and to be familiar with the tools for protecting their information, 
 
systems and services. 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

25

OBJECTIVE V 

To gain and maintain the knowledge, skills, experience and technological ca­
pabilities Spain needs to underpin all the cyber security objectives 

Given the strategic importance of security in cyberspace, an absolute priority is to have 
qualified personnel at all levels: government, management, operational, technical and judicial 
bodies. 

“It is necessary to foster and 
effectively maintain R&D&I 

activity in cyber security” 

 

 
Furthermore, it  is  important  to  foster  and 
 
boost the technological capabilities required for 
 
reliable  national  solutions  that  enable  systems 
 
to  be  adequately  protected  from  different 
threats. 

To achieve this confidence, it is necessary to 
foster and effectively maintain R&D&I activity in cyber security. For this purpose the group 
of agents involved in ICT must be appropriately coordinated, facilitating collaboration be­
tween companies and public research bodies and promoting projects for the evaluation and 
certification of security. 

The qualification of the personnel in charge of the direction, management and imple­

 

mentation of cyber security is a fundamental objective, especially in the Public Authorities 
and Strategic and Critical Infrastructures of national interest.What is more, the use of veri­
fied security products is a significant additional element of protection. 

 

OBJECTIVE VI 

To contribute to improving cyber security in the international sphere 

The development of a coordinated cyber security policy in the European Union and in 

the international Security and Defence organisations in which Spain takes part will be fos­
tered and supported, and collaboration will be carried out in capacity building of States that 
so require through the development cooperation policy, helping them to implement a cyber 
security culture. 

26

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

Cooperation  will  be  fostered  in  the  frame­
work of the EU and with international and re­
gional organisations such as the European De­
fence  Agency  (EDA),  the  European  Union 
Agency for Network and Information Security 
(ENISA), the European Cybercrime Centre at­
tached to EUROPOL, the United Nations (UN), 
 
the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in  Europe  (OSCE),  the  North  Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO), and the Organization for 
Economic  Cooperation  and  Development 
(OECD), among others. 

“The development of a 

coordinated cyber security policy 
in the European Union and the 

international Security and 
Defence organisations will be 

promoted and supported” 

Together with the countries belonging to our strategic environment, efforts aimed at 
achieving a secure and reliable cyberspace will be promoted by strengthening international 
collaboration, creating confidence relationships for the exchange of essential cyber security 
information and data and the development of cooperation and development initiatives. Ac­
tions designed to promote the adoption of international cyber security standards and their 
progressive raising will likewise be carried out. 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

27

To ensure that Spain uses 

Information and 

Telecommunications Systems 

securely, by strengthening 

prevention, defence, detection, 
analysis, investigation, recovery 
and response capabilities vis-à-vis 

cyber attack. 

OVERALL 
OBJECTIVE 

OBJECTIVE 

I 

To ensure that the Information and Telecommunications 
Systems  used  by  the  Public  Authorities  have  the 
appropriate level of cyber security and resilience. 

OBJECTIVE 

II 

To foster the security and reslilience of the Information 
and  Telecommunications  Systems  used  by  the  business 
sector in general and operators of Critical Infrastructures 
in particular. 

OBJECTIVE 

III 

To  enhance  prevention,  detection,  reaction,  analysis, 
recovery,  response, 
investigation  and  coordination 
capabilities  vis-à-vis  terrorist  activities  and  crime  in 
cyberspace. 

OBJECTIVE 

IV 

To  raise  the  awareness  of  citizens,  professionals, 
companies and Spanish Public Authorities about the risks 
derived from cyberspace. 

OBJECTIVE 

V 

To  gain  and  maintain  the  knowledge,  skills,  experience 
and technological capabilities Spain needs to underpin all 
the cyber security objectives. 

OBJECTIVE 

VI 

To contribute to 
improving cyber 
security in the 
international 

sphere 

28 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

  
Lines of 
action of 
  
National 
  
cyber security 

Chapter 4 
Lines of action 
 
 
of National 
cyber security 

Chapter 4 
 
Lines of action of 
 
National cyber security 

The National Cyber Security Strategy for achieving the above objec­
tives is based on the following Lines of Action: 

LINE OF ACTION 1 
Capability to prevent, detect, respond to and recover from cyber 
threats 

Increase prevention, defence, detection, analysis, response, recovery and coordination 
 
capabilities vis-à-vis cyber threats, placing particular emphasis on the Public Authorities, 
 
Critical Infrastructures, military and Defence capabilities and other systems of national in­
terest. 

The Spanish Government will adopt the relevant measures in this line of action, in­

cluding: 

 

•  Broaden and improve capabilities to detect and analyse cyber threats in order to 
 
enable attack procedures and origins to be identified and the necessary intelligence to 
be gathered for a more effective defence and protection of national networks. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Broaden and strengthen capabilities to detect and respond to cyber attacks di­

 
rected against national, regional or sectorial targets, including citizens and companies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Guarantee the coordination, cooperation and exchange of information between 
 
the Central Government, the Autonomous Regions, Local Authorities, the private sector 
and the EU and international bodies with responsibilities in this field in order to ensure 
continuous awareness raising, training and response capability through the System for the 
Exchange of Information and Reporting of Incidents. 

 

 

 

 

 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

31

•  Ensure  the  cooperation  of  organisations  with  responsibilities  in  cyber  security, 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

especially between the Government CERT of the National Cryptology Centre (CCN­
CERT), the Armed Forces Joint Cyber Defence Command (MCCD), and the CERT for 
Security and Industry.The CERTs of the Autonomous Regions, those of private institu­
tions and other relevant cyber security services must be coordinated with the above­
mentioned depending on the responsibilities of each one, establishing the appropriate 
instruments for this purpose. 

 

 

 

 

•  Develop prevention and detection instructions and keep them updated, including 
 
procedures for responding to crisis situations and specific contingency plans vis-à-vis cy­
ber security incidents that are national in scope, ensuring they are integrated into the 
National Security System. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Develop and implement a Programme of Simulation Exercises for Cyber Security 
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Incidents, in order to assess and improve the actions carried out in this field. 
 
 

•  Broaden and continuously develop the Cyber Defence capabilities of the Armed 
 
Forces allowing them to appropriately protect their Networks and Information and Tel­
ecommunications Systems, as well as other systems which affect National Defence.The 
implementation of the Joint Cyber Defence Command will be consolidated and it will be 
encouraged to cooperate with the different bodies with the capability to respond to 
cyber incidents in aspects of common interest. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•  Boost military and intelligence capabilities to deliver a timely, legitimate and pro­

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

portionate  response  in  cyberspace  to  threats  or  aggressions  that  can  affect  National 
Defence. 

32 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

LINE OF ACTION 2 

Security of the Information and Telecommunications Systems that  
underpin the Public Authorities 

Ensure the implementation of the National Security Scheme, strengthen detection ca

pabilities and improve the defence of classified systems. 

This line of action covers the initiatives needed to protect the Information Systems of 
the Central Government, the Autonomous Regions, the Local Authorities and bodies 
related or attached to them, as well as the Information and Telecommunications Systems 
and infrastructures common to them all.  

For this purpose, the Spanish Government will adopt the following measures, among 

others: 

•  Ensure  the  full  implementation  of  the  National  Security  Scheme  and  establish  the  

necessary procedures for being regularly apprised of the state of the main security vari
ables of the systems involved. 

•  Broaden   and   improve   the   capabilities   of   the   Government   CERT   –   CCN-CERT   

and particularly of its Detection and Early Warning Systems.  

•  Strengthen  the  security  structures  and  surveillance  capability  of  Information  Sys

tems, particularly those that handle classified information.  

•  Optimise  the  model  whereby  the  Spanish  Government  bodies  interconnect  with  

public voice and data networks, maximising their efficiency, availability and security. 

•  Strengthen   the   implementation   and   security   of   the   common   and   secure   infra

structure in the Spanish public administration system (SARA network),  boosting its use 
and its security and resilience capabilities. 

•  Develop  new  secure  horizontal  services  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  of  the  

Directorate for Information and Communication Technologies of the Central Govern
ment,  the body responsible for coordinating,  directing and rationalising the use of ICT in 
the Central Government. 

•  Step  up  national  activities  aimed  at  developing  and  evaluating  products,  services  
and systems in order to obtain their certification by specifically supporting those which 
underpin national security needs. 

•  Give  impetus  to  the  creation,  dissemination  and  application  of  Best  Practices  in  

Cyber Security matters within the domain of the Public Authorities. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

33 

­
­
­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 3 

Security of the Information and Telecommunications Systems that  
underpin Critical Infrastructures 

Foster the implementation of the regulations on the Protection of Critical Infrastructures 

and of the necessary capabilities for protecting essential services. 

It is necessary to increase the resilience of Spain’s Critical Infrastructures to prevent 

potential disruptions to the normal functioning of the essential services, which could af
fect Spanish people’s daily activity.  

In this connection, the Spanish Government will adopt the following measures among 

others:  

•  Ensure  the  implementation  of  the  regulations  on  the  Protection  of  Critical  Infra

structures in order to achieve a security that embraces both physical and technological 
aspects. To this end the incorporation of suitable cyber security measures into the differ
ent plans established will be evaluated. 

•  Broaden   and   improve   the   capabilities   of   the   CERT   for   Security   and   Industry,  
boosting collaboration and coordination with the National Centre for the Protection of 
Critical  Infrastructures,  with  the  different  bodies  with  the  capability  to  respond  cyber 
security incidents and with the operational units of the State Law Enforcement Agencies.  
•  Encourage  private-sector  involvement  in  the  Programmes  of  simulation  Exercises  

for Cyber Security incidents.  

•  Develop  simulation  models  that  allow  the  interdependence  of  the  different  Criti

cal Infrastructures and the risks accumulated by them to be analysed. 

34 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

­
­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 4 

Capability to investigate and prosecute cyber terrorism and cyber 
crime 

Strengthen capabilities to detect, investigate and prosecute terrorist and criminal activi

ties in cyberspace on the basis of an effective legal and operational framework. 

This line of action is focused on combating terrorism and crime that operate in cyber
space, which plays a dual role as both an instrument that facilitates their activities and a 
direct target of their action. This concept also includes organisations which use technol
ogy for their own financing or for profit, making crimes and money-laundering possible.  
The Spanish Government will take relevant measures in this line of action, among 

them:  

•  

Incorporate  into  the  Spanish  legal  framework  solutions  to  problems  that  arise  in  
connection with cyber security in order to establish types of criminal offences and the 
work of the departments with responsibilities in this area. 

•   Broaden  and  improve  the  capabilities  of  the  bodies  responsible  for  investigating  
and prosecuting cyber terrorism and cybercrime and ensure that these capabilities are 
coordinated with activities in the field of cyber security by exchanging information and 
intelligence through the appropriate channels of communication.  

•   Strengthen  international  police  cooperation  and  foster  citizen  collaboration,  es

tablishing instruments for the exchange and transmission of information of interest to the 
police.  

•   Ensure  that  legal  professionals  have  access  to  information  and  resources  that  pro
vide them with the necessary level of knowledge in the judicial field to apply the associ
ated legal and technical framework more effectively. In this connection cooperation with 
the General Council of the Judiciary, the State Lawyer’s Office, the State Prosecutor’s 
Office, the Computer Crime Prosecutor’s Office and the General Council of Spanish 
Lawyers is particularly important. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

35 

­
­
­
­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 5 

Security and resilience of ICT in the private sector 

Boost the security and resilience of infrastructures,  networks,  products and services us

ing instruments of public-private cooperation. 

This  line  of  action  is  designed  to  improve  the  security  and  resilience  of  networks,  

products and services used by the industrial sector in developing its activity by strength
ening public-private collaboration with the industrial sector and in particular with the ICT 
security sector. The participation of professional Colleges and Associations, among others,  
will be valued. 

The Government will develop the following measures, among others:  

•  Foster  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sectors,  promoting  the  ex

change of information on vulnerabilities, cyber threats and their possible consequences,  
especially in relation to protecting systems of national interest.  

•   Promote   cooperation   with   the   industry   sectors   and   cyber   security   services   in  

order to jointly improve detection,  prevention,  response and recovery capabilities vis-à­
vis the security risks of cyberspace, giving impetus to the active involvement of service 
providers and the development and adoption of codes of conduct and good practice.  

•   Foster  the  development  of  standards  in  cyber  security  through  the  national  and  
international standardisation and certification bodies and institutions, and promote their 
adoption. 

36 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 6 

Knowledge, skills and R&D&I 

Promote  the  training  of  professionals,  give  impetus  to  industrial  development  and 

strengthen the R&D&I system in cyber security matters. 

This line of action envisages initiatives that need to be undertaken in order to achieve 

and maintain an appropriate level of training in cyber security for professionals (knowl
edge and skills) and to boost Spanish industry and R&D&I.   The Spanish Government will:  

•  Develop  a  Framework  for  Cyber  Security  Knowledge  in  the  technical,  operational  

and legal fields. 

•  Extend   and   broaden   talent   recruitment,   advanced   research   and   training   pro

grammes in cyber security in cooperation with Universities and specialised centres.  

•  Establish  mechanisms  that  allow  the  cyber  security  priorities  and  demands  of  the  
public authorities to be identified at an early stage in order to incorporate them into 
previous initiatives. 

•  Foster  the  industrial  development  of  cyber  security  products  and  services  through  
instruments such as, among others, the State Plan for Scientific and Technical Research 
and Innovation and initiatives for supporting its internationalisation.  

•  Promote   the   national   coordination   and   stimulation   of   the   industrial   and   cyber  

security services sector in order to improve competitiveness, internationalisation, identi
fication of opportunities,  elimination of barriers and regulatory guidance,  among other 
activities.  

•  Promote  cyber  security  certification  activities  in  accordance  with  the  internation

ally recognised norms and standards, incorporating these criteria into processes for the 
development and acquisition of products or systems.  

•  Promote   models   and   techniques   for   analysing   cyber   threats   and   measures   for  
protecting products,  services and systems,  as well as their specification,  evaluation and 
certification. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

37 

­
­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 7 

Cyber security culture 

Raise the awareness of citizens, professionals and companies about the importance of 
cyber security and the responsible use of new technologies and the services of the Informa
tion Society. 

The Spanish Government will adapt, foster or develop related measures, including: 

•  Give  impetus  to  sensitisation  activities  to  ensure  that  citizens  and  companies  have  
access to information about vulnerabilities and cyber threats and about the best way of 
protecting their technological environment.  

•  Promote  the  development  of  Cyber  Security  Awareness-Raising  programmes  in  
collaboration with public- and private-sector agents, fostering the necessary coordination 
and rationalisation of efforts through bodies with responsibilities in this field.  

•  Foster  the  mechanisms  for  supporting  companies  and  professionals  in  the  secure  
use of ICT, bolstering knowledge in security matters, promoting the adoption of tools, the 
dissemination of regulations and the use of good practices.  

•  Advise  on  and  support  the  development  of  education  modules  for  sensitisation  in  

cyber security, aimed at all levels of teaching. 

38 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

­
LINE OF ACTION 8 

International commitment 

Promote a secure and reliable international cyberspace, in support of national interests. 

Technological globalisation and its opportunities and risks make it necessary to align 
the initiatives of all countries that pursue a secure and reliable cyberspace. These inter
national efforts must envisage the drafting and adoption of global standards, the expan
sion of the capabilities of the international legal system and the development and promo
tion of best practices in assessing the situation, warning and response to cyber incidents. 

Within this line of action, the Spanish Government will develop the following meas

ures, among others:  

•  Enhance  Spain’s  presence  at  international  and  regional  organisations  and  forums  
on cyber security, supporting and taking an active role in the various initiatives and coor-
dinating the position of the national agents involved. 

•  Promote  legislative  harmonisation  and  international  judicial  and  police  coopera
tion in combating cybercrime and cyber terrorism,  supporting the negotiation and adop
tion of international conventions on these matters. 

•  Foster  the  signing  of  agreements  within  international  organisations  and  with  prin
cipal partners and allies, in order to strengthen cooperation in cyber security and de
velop a coordinated approach for combating cyber threats.  

•  Give  impetus  to  the  establishment  of  international  channels  of  information,  detec

tion and response. 

•  Promote  the  coordinated  participation  of  public  institutions  and  the  private  sec

tor in international exercises and simulations.  

• 

In  the  scope  of  the  EU,  collaborate  in  harmonising  national  legislations,  implement

ing the EU Cyber Security Strategy and promoting an international policy in cyberspace.  
•  Foster  cooperation  with  NATO  in  Cyber  Defence,  particularly  with  respect  to  

responding to cyber incidents and exchanging technical information on threats and vul
nerabilities, while promoting actions within the Organization aimed at highlighting Cyber 
Defence as one of its priorities. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

39 

­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
LINE OF ACTION 

CONTENT 

Capability  to  prevent,  detect, 
 
respond  to  and  recover  from 
cyber threats 

Increase  prevention,  defence,  detection,  analysis,  response,  recovery 
and coordination capabilities vis-à-vis cyber threats, placing particular 
emphasis  on  the  Public  Authorities,  Critical  Infrastructures,  military 
and Defence capabilities and other systems of national interest. 

Security  of  the  Information 
and  Telecommunications  Sys
tems  that  underpin  the  Public 
Authorities 

Ensure the implementation of the National Security Scheme, strength
en  detection  capabilities  and  improve  the  defence  of  classified  sys
tems. 

Security  of  the  Information 
and  Telecommunications  Sys
tems  that  underpin  Critical 
Structures 

Foster  the  implementation  of  the  regulations  on  the  Protection  of 
Critical Infrastructures and of the necessary capabilities for protecting 
essential services. 

Capability  to  investigate  and 
prosecute cyber terrorism and 
cybercrime 

Strengthen capabilities to detect, investigate and prosecute terrorist 
and criminal activities in cyberspace on the basis of an effective legal 
 
and operational framework. 

Security  and  resilience  of  ICT 
in the private sector 

products 
resilience 
and 
security 
the 
Boost 
 of 
networks, 
infrastructures, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and services using instruments of public-private cooperation. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Knowledge, skills and R&D&I 

Promote the training of professionals, give impetus to industrial devel
opment and strengthen the R&D&I system in cyber security matters. 

7 

Cyber security culture 

Raise  the  awareness  of  citizens,  professionals  and  companies  about 
the  importance  of  cyber  security  and  the  responsible  use  of  new 
technologies and the services of the Information Society. 

8 

International commitment 

Promote a secure and reliable international cyberspace, in support of 
national interests. 

40  NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

­
­
­
­
­
Cyber security

 
in the 
 
National 
 
Security
 
System 

Chapter 5 
Cyber security  
in the National  
Security System 

Chapter 5 
 
Cyber security 
 
in the National Security System 

T he comprehensive vision of cyber security enshrined in this Strategy, the detected risks 

and threats that affect it and the stated objectives and lines of action for providing an 
appropriate joint response to preserving cyber security in accordance with the principles 
that underpin the National Security System explain the need for an organisational structure 
tailed to these purposes, which will consist of the following components under the direction 
of the Prime Minister: 

 

A.	  The National Security Council; 
 
B.	  The Specialised Cyber Security Committee; 
 
 
C.	  The Specialised Situation Committee, which is unique to the whole National Secu­

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
rity System. 

Organisational structure of cyber security 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

43 

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF CYBER SECURITY 

a) National Security Council: 

The National Security Council, which is the Delegated Commission of the Government 

 

for National Security, assists the Prime Minister in directing the National Security Policy. 

b)   Specialised Cyber Security Committee: 

The Specialised Cyber Security Committee will support the National Security Council in 

performing its functions, particularly in assisting the Prime Minister in directing and coordi­
nating the National Security Policy in the field of cyber security. It will furthermore strength­
en coordination, collaboration and cooperation relations among the different Public Au­
thorities with responsibilities in cyber security matters and between the public and private 
sectors, and will facilitate the Council’s decision making by analysing, studying and proposing 
initiatives at both the national and the international levels. 

The composition of the Specialised Cyber Security Committee will reflect the spectrum 
of areas covered by the departments, bodies and agencies of the Public Authorities with 
responsibilities in cyber security matters, in order to coordinate actions that need to be ad­
dressed jointly with the aim of raising security levels. 

Other relevant private-sector actors and specialists whose contribution is deemed nec­

essary may take part in the Committee. 

In compliance with its functions, the Specialised Cyber Security Committee will be sup­

ported  by  the  National  Security  Department  as  a Technical  Secretariat  and  permanent 
 
working body of the National Security Council. 

44  NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

c)   Specialised Situation Committee: 

The Specialised Situation Committee will be convened to manage crisis situations in the 
field of cyber security which, on account of the significant cross-cutting nature or the extent 
and impact of their effects, exceed the effective response capabilities of the usual mecha­
nisms,  while  always  respecting  the  responsi­
bilities assigned to the different Public Author­
ities in order to guarantee an immediate and 
effective  response  through  a  single  body  in 
charge of the strategic and political direction 
of the crisis. 

“The Specialised Cyber Security 
Committee and the Specialised 
Situation Committee will act in 
a complementary manner, each 
in its own area of responsibility, 
but under the same strategic and 
political direction of the National 
Security Council chaired by the 

Prime Minister” 

The  Specialised  Cyber  Security  Commit-
tee and the Specialised Situation Committee 
will act in a complementary manner, each in 
its  own  area  of  responsibility,  but  under  the 
same  strategic  and  political  direction  of  the 
National  Security  Council  chaired  by  the 
Prime Minister. 

The Specialised Situation Committee will be supported by the Situation Centre of the 
National Security Department in order to ensure it is interconnected with the operational 
centres involved and to provide an appropriate response in crisis situations, facilitating their 
monitoring and control and the transmission of decisions. 

To ensure the effective fulfilment of its functions of supporting the Specialised Situation 
Committee, the Situation Centre of the National Security Department may be reinforced 
with specialised personnel from ministerial departments or bodies with responsibilities in 
this area, who will make up the specific Coordination Cell in the field of Cyber Security. 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT  45 

 

IMPLEMENTATION 

The setting up of the Specialised Cyber Security Committee and the Specialised Situa­

tion Committee and the harmonisation of their functioning with the existing bodies will be 
carried out gradually through the approval of the necessary legal provisions and readjust­
ments of the existing ones, in order to achieve the coordinated and efficient functioning of 
these components of the National Security System. 

46 

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 2013  PRESIDENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 

www.lamoncloa.gob.es
 

