 
 

 

 

DATE 
4 July 2006 
 
 
 
 
 

 

REPORT NUMBER 
PTS-ER-2006:12 
ISSN 1650-9862 
 
FILE REFERENCE 
06-3280 
 

 

Strategy to improve Internet 
security in Sweden 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 

Foreword 
The National Post and Telecom Agency (PTS) has been assigned by the 
Government to submit proposals on a strategy to improve Internet security in 
Sweden. This report is PTS's proposal. 

Today, the Internet is a tool and forum for most of us, both in working and 
everyday life. A characteristic feature of such an everyday infrastructure as the 
Internet has become may be that we take it and its functions for granted. It is 
noticed only when there are problems. It can be compared to our roads – we 
hardly think about them being there as long as they are whole and lead us to 
where we want to go. If, however, there are potholes in the carriageway or when 
roads are closed, forcing us to choose another route, we react.   

The Internet is a more invisible infrastructure, where normally we do not even see 
the physical part of the infrastructure. The logical part of the Internet, such as, for 
example, a functional domain name system, is even more abstract to us as users of 
the Internet. However, it is just as important to achieve preparedness in order to 
be able to deal with any potholes in the infrastructure of the Internet, both the 
physical and the logical, as it is to continuously maintain our roads and other vital 
public infrastructures. The report 'Strategy to improve Internet security in 
Sweden' is directed at these issues.   

Security issues concerning the Internet are a complex area – as is clearly shown by 
this report. Not only do they relate to issues of vulnerability and protection of the 
complex physical and logical levels of the infrastructure, but they also raise issues 
regarding the responsibility of the government, the operators and Internet users. 
This strategy points out the importance of addressing these issues now to ensure 
that the proposed vision, expressed in this report, becomes a reality – that in ten 
years the Internet will be secure, rapid and have high accessibility for everyone in 
Sweden.  

This report was prepared by the following staff at PTS: Helena Bäckström, Frida 
Nilsson (Project Administrator), Kajsa Ritzén Frisell, Lars Hedensjö, Christoffer 
Karsberg (Project Manager), Anders Rafting, Björn Scharin (Acting Project 
Manager), Roland Svahn and Eric Wedin.  

Stockholm, July 2006 

 

 
Katarina Kämpe 
Acting Director-General 
 

 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

   

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Contents 
Summary .......................................................................................................................9 
1  PTS has been assigned by the Government to submit proposals on a 

strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden ............................................11 
1.1  The formal assignment from the Government............................................11 
1.2  The aim of the strategy is to facilitate and clarify future work to 
secure the infrastructure of the Internet .....................................................11 
1.3  Scope and delimitation of the strategy .......................................................12 
1.4  Definition of the Internet and the Internet infrastructure.............................13 
1.5  Method to prepare the strategy ..................................................................14 
1.6  Reading instructions – structure of the strategy.........................................14 
2  Preconditions and current situation.................................................................16 

4 

3.1  The vision is that in ten years the Internet will be secure, rapid and 
3.2  The goal is to secure critical functions within the Internet 

2.1  The Riksdag and Government have for a long time emphasised IT 
issues where the Internet and security have been dealt with as part 
of the IT Policy............................................................................................16 
2.2  Public commitment .....................................................................................18 
2.3  Private commitment....................................................................................20 
2.4 
International work for Internet infrastructure security .................................21 
2.5  System of rules relevant to Internet infrastructure......................................23 
3  Vision and goals for improved Internet security in Sweden ..........................25 
have high accessibility................................................................................25 
infrastructure...............................................................................................25 
Trends and threat profiles affecting the infrastructure of the Internet .........26 
4.1  Society is becoming increasingly dependent on the Internet.....................26 
4.2  Society is becoming increasingly vulnerable to IT attacks .........................26 
4.3  The discovery of vulnerabilities in protocols and programs is 
increasing ...................................................................................................27 
4.4 
Laws, legal proceedings and policies do not keep pace with 
developments in technology and globalisation...........................................27 
4.5  Convergence of networks, terminals and services is continuing to 
increase ......................................................................................................27 
4.6 
Inadequate security in user environments constitutes an ever-
increasing risk.............................................................................................28 
4.7  The competence gap is widening in pace with the increase in 
complexity...................................................................................................29 
4.8  Developments in the market involve increased internationalisation...........29 
4.9  More wireless networks and services.........................................................29 
The adoption of strategic positions to increase the security of the 
Internet infrastructure ........................................................................................31 
5.1  Protect the Internet's physical infrastructure ..............................................31 
5.2  Protect the Internet's logical infrastructure .................................................31 
5.2.1 
Increase resistance to disruption in the domain name 
system.........................................................................................32 
5.2.2 
Increase resistance to disruption to the exchange of traffic 
between Internet operators .........................................................32 
5.3 
Information for users and buyers to enhance security awareness.............33 
5.4  Enhance assumption of responsibility for user security .............................33 
5.5  Promote national development of knowledge ............................................34 
5.6  Further enhance Swedish participation in international work.....................34 
5.7  Develop crisis management regarding the Internet infrastructure .............35 
6  Action plan to implement the strategic positions adopted ............................36 
6.1  Measures to protect the Internet's physical and logical infrastructure .......36 

5 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

5 

Strategy to improve Internet security in SwedenContents 
 

6.1.1 
6.1.2 
6.1.3 

6.1  Measures to protect the Internet's physical and logical infrastructure........38 
Produce recommendations to providers of content services 
for increased accessibility ...........................................................39 
Promote the use of DNSSEC in name servers ...........................39 
Produce recommendations for more secure traffic 
exchange between Internet operators.........................................39 
6.2  Measures for information to users ..............................................................40 
Information about vulnerabilities..................................................40 
6.2.1 
Develop advice for ordering Internet services.............................40 
6.2.2 
6.2.3 
Coordinate and intensify information initiatives towards 
users............................................................................................40 
Educate trainee teachers in Internet security..............................41 
6.2.4 
6.2.5 
Further develop PTS's website for Internet security....................41 
security........................................................................................................41 
6.3.1  Work with specified requirements for good function and 
technical security.........................................................................41 
Follow up the Internet operators' functional capacity ..................42 
6.3.2 
6.3.3 
Provide the Internet operators with a legal possibility of 
impeding the dissemination of harmful traffic..............................42 
6.3.4 
Investigate the requirements for increased responsibility for 
providers of software and equipment ..........................................42 
6.4  Measures to promote the improvement of knowledge................................43 
Inform stakeholders about the financing sources available ........43 

6.3  Measures to enhance the assumption of responsibility for user 

6.4.1 
6.4.2  Work to ensure that funds are allocated within the 

6.5.1 
6.5.2 

6.5.3 
6.5.4 
6.5.5 
6.6.1 
6.6.2 
6.6.3 
6.6.4 

framework of the EU's research programmes relating to the 
Internet infrastructure ..................................................................43 
6.5  Measures to enhance Swedish participation in international work.............43 
Increase Swedish coordination and participation in 
international fora..........................................................................43 
Clarify Swedish distribution of responsibility in conjunction 
with international contacts concerning security of the 
Internet infrastructure ..................................................................43 
Further develop operative international networks for 
incident management ..................................................................44 
Continue active participation in review of EU directives..............44 
Increase participation in standardisation work ............................44 
6.6  Measures to improve capacity for crisis management ...............................44 
Increase exchange of experience, follow-up and learn from 
major disruptions .........................................................................45 
Produce a coordinated continuity plan for the Internet 
infrastructure in Sweden..............................................................45 
Investigate alternative forms of communication for 
operations managers during crises .............................................46 
Investigate alternative information channels from Sitic to 
users concerning the status of the Internet in conjunction 
with disruptions to the Internet ....................................................46 
7  Plan for management of the strategy................................................................47 
7.1  Aim of the management plan......................................................................47 
7.2  Decision makers, periodicity and implementation ......................................47 
7.3  Feedback reports........................................................................................47 
Literature .....................................................................................................................49 
 

6 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

 
Appendices 
Appendix 1 – Abbreviations and concepts ................................................................... 55 
Appendix 2 – Organisations that are relevant to Internet security ............................... 59 
Appendix 3 – The operators' responsibility for security of their services ..................... 69 
Appendix 4 – CIIP Directory, national Swedish contact points .................................... 71 
 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

7 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Summary 
The National Post and Telecom Agency (PTS) has been assigned by the 
Government to submit proposals on a strategy to improve Internet security in 
Sweden. The aim of the strategy is to facilitate and clarify future work to secure 
Internet infrastructure. The strategy is directed at those parts of the infrastructure 
that are unique to the Internet. The point of departure for security within the 
Internet infrastructure is the providers' responsibility for networks and services on 
the basis of market requirements. Public commitment is based on there being 
demands that the market cannot satisfy. PTS is the sector authority for electronic 
communications, which also includes the Internet. 

PTS's proposed vision is that in ten years' time, the Internet will be secure, rapid 
and have high accessibility for everyone in Sweden.  

The goal of a strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden is to secure critical 
functions in the Internet infrastructure, which, if they were not maintained, would 
cause substantial disruption or interruption and in this way impede or prevent the 
use of the Internet for large groups of individual users or vital public businesses, 
authorities or organisations. 

Trends and threat profiles: 

•  Society is becoming increasingly dependent on the Internet 
•  Society is becoming increasingly vulnerable to IT attacks 
•  Vulnerabilities in protocols and programs are increasingly being 

discovered 

•  Laws, legal proceedings and policies do not keep in pace with 

developments and globalisation 

•  Convergence in networks, terminals and services is continuing to increase 
• 

Inadequate security in user environments constitutes an ever-increasing 
risk 

•  The competence gap is widening in pace with increased complexity 
•  Developments in the market involve increased internationalisation 
•  More wireless networks and services 
 

Strategic positions adopted: 

•  The physical infrastructure of the Internet should be protected against 

accidents, disruption, wiretapping and manipulation of information during 
transmission 

•  Resistance to disruption in the domain name system should be increased 
•  Resistance to disruption to the exchange of traffic between Internet 

operators should be increased 

•  Users and buyers should be trained and informed to enhance security 

awareness 

•  The assumption of responsibility for user security should increase among 

Internet operators and the providers of software and equipment 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

9 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

•  National awareness of Internet infrastructure should be promoted. This 
should be done in a broader context regarding information security. The 
comprehensive approach and coordination of research should be 
improved 

•  Swedish participation in international fora should be increased. This 

should be done in collaboration between the private and public sector 

•  Crisis management regarding the Internet infrastructure should be 

improved 

The action plan comprises a number of measures within the framework of the 
strategic positions adopted, showing the allocation of responsibility, level of 
importance, timeframe and estimated cost for the respective measure. 

The management plan lays down the administrative rules concerning how the 
strategic positions adopted and the action plan should be attended to. For 
example, the management plan contains guidelines regarding how often the action 
plan should be updated and which party is responsible for this. 

 
 

10 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

1 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

PTS has been assigned by the Government to 
submit proposals on a strategy to improve Internet 
security in Sweden  

PTS has been assigned by the Government to submit proposals on a strategy to 
improve Internet security in Sweden. 

The aim of the strategy is to facilitate and clarify future work to secure the 
infrastructure of the Internet.  

The strategy is directed at those parts of the infrastructure that are unique to the 
Internet as well as information, the situations relating to responsibilities, the 
development of knowledge, international work and crisis management. 

The strategy has been prepared on the basis of the orientation of the IT Bill, 
previous surveys, trend analysis exercises, literature reviews and contacts with 
trendsetting people within the area. 

The report describes the preconditions for the strategy, the current situation, 
proposals for a vision and objectives, trends and threat profiles, strategic positions 
adopted, measures including, among other things, division of responsibility, and 
also the management of the strategy. 

The formal assignment from the Government 

1.1 
The National Post and Telecom Agency (PTS) has by its Terms of Reference for 
the budget year 20061 been given the following assignment by the Government:  

"PTS shall provide proposals for a strategy to improve Internet security in 
Sweden in accordance with the orientation of the Government Bill 'From an IT 
policy for society to a policy for the IT society' (Government Bill 2004/05:175). 
This proposal shall also contain proposals for an action plan, division of 
responsibility and the management of the strategy. The proposal shall be reported 
to the Government (Ministry of Industry, Employment and Communications) no 
later than 31 July 2006." 

1.2 

The aim of the strategy is to facilitate and clarify future 
work to secure the infrastructure of the Internet 

The aim of the strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden is to facilitate and 
clarify future work to secure the infrastructure of the Internet. 

The Government has concluded2 that the structure of the Internet is basically 
robust and has great opportunities of being able to function even under severe 
conditions and in the event of disruptions to telecommunications. Although the 

                                                 
1 Terms of Reference for the budget year 2006 regarding the National Post and Telecom Agency, 
etc. within area of expenditure 22, Communications, and area of expenditure 6, Defence, and 
emergency preparedness against vulnerability (Riksdag Communications 2005/06:81 and 
2005/06:82) 
2 In the Government Bill 'From an IT policy for society to a policy for the IT society', 
Government Bill 2004/05:175 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

11 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Internet is basically a robust electronic communications system, it is not possible 
to resolve the security problems that apply to the Internet once and for all. It is 
therefore important to conduct long-term work in order to monitor, promote and, 
where appropriate, influence this security work. 

Scope and delimitation of the strategy 

1.3 
A proposed strategy has been drawn up that describes the overall long-term 
approach to improve the Internet security in Sweden. The orientation of the 
strategy is in line with the Government Bill 'From an IT policy for society to a 
policy for the IT society' (Government Bill 2004/05:175). This means, among 
other things, that the strategy is directed at the physical and logical infrastructure.   

The strategy is directed at those parts of the infrastructure that lie outside the 
'transmission level', see Figure 1, and those parts of the infrastructure that are 
unique to the Internet, for example exchange points for Internet traffic and 
servers in the domain name system.  

 

 
Application level 
User's equipment,  
services, information 
 
 
IP level (Internet) 
Internet operator's  
network – service to user 
 
 
Transmission level 
Several logical connections  
for data communications  
and telecommunications 
 
Cable level 
Cables (for example  
'optical fibre', copper wire)  
and antennae 
 
Ducting level 
Pipes for cables and masts  
for antennae 

 

 

 

  Figure 1: The levels of the Internet infrastructure3 

PTS's strategy 'Robust electronic communications' deals with the overall 
infrastructure for electronic communications. 4 As the Internet also makes use of 
the infrastructure at the underlying levels, for example mobile masts and 
backbone networks, work within the framework of the robust electronic 
communications strategy that is conducted at these levels also affects the Swedish 
part of the Internet. The robust electronic communications strategy also takes 
into consideration the importance of robust time, among other things for 
frequencies in communication networks, traceability and realtime services such as 
IP-based telephony and IPTV. 

                                                 
3 The IT Policy Strategy Group's working group for IT infrastructure and broadband, illustrations 
of the IT infrastructure. 
4 Strategy for robust electronic communications for the yers 2006 to 2008, National Post and 
Telecom Agency, 2006 (PTS-ER-2006:19) 
 

12 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

According to the orientation of the IT Bill, this strategy also relates to 
information, development of knowledge and international work. In this context, 
'information' means informing users so that they do not expose themselves to 
unnecessary risks and protect their environments so that they do not constitute a 
threat to the infrastructure of the Internet. However, the strategy does not cover 
measures that must be implemented by users to secure information that is 
transmitted via the Internet through, for example, encryption, secure 
identification, or measures to combat disruptive operations that do not constitute 
a direct threat to the Internet infrastructure.  

In conjunction with the production of the strategy, PTS has identified a need for 
two further important areas in addition to those stated in the IT Bill: the 
responsibility for end-user security (see Section 5.4) and crisis management (see 
Section 5.7). These areas have been assessed to be of strategic importance for 
achieving the objective of the strategy (see Section 3.2). 

'In Sweden' means that the strategy itself is limited to cover the nation. The 
Government has stated that this involves creating an information-base for and 
implementing measures that are feasible in Sweden. However, the strategy should 
be oriented towards taking into account international work. The Internet in 
Sweden is also dependent on several functions that are located abroad. Taken 
overall, the term 'in Sweden' may be said to constitute a restriction on the 
opportunities of Swedish stakeholders to react to and influence the area, taking 
into consideration the international situation. 

Definition of the Internet and the Internet infrastructure  
1.4 
The Internet is a global, worldwide, logical network that has been established 
through the physical and logical linking of a large number of networks that are 
owned and managed by various private and government stakeholders. The lower 
levels of the network infrastructure hierarchy, for example fibre, copper, radio and 
transmission and which are used for Internet traffic, are also used in most cases 
for traffic for other applications, for example, fixed and mobile telephony, virtual 
private networks and various IP-based qualitative services. As networks and 
network equipment used for the Internet in this manner are shared with other 
services with guaranteed accessibility and quality according to contracts, the 
resources for the transmission of Internet traffic from termination point to 
termination point are variable and unpredictable. 

All computers linked to the Internet are able to communicate with all other 
computers on the Internet by all using the IETF standard Internet Protocol (IP) 
for relay of traffic. IP technology means that the relayed traffic is split up into 
packets. The packets' route through the network (routing) is managed by special 
equipment, 'routers', and is based on a number of different criteria. For traffic 
within one operator's network, a routing decision is made on the basis of technical 
parameters, such as distance, delay and capacity. However, traffic exchanged 
between operators' networks, which occurs within public or private exchange 
points, is controlled by decisions based on the operator’s policy. A policy for the 
exchange of traffic with another operator may contain preferences for a particular 
route on the basis of a business contract, the type of traffic, load distribution, etc. 
External routing, that is to say the exchange of traffic between operators, is 
conducted in 'border routers' or 'border gateways', located at the extremity of the 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

13 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

networks, and is effected in accordance with a global IETF standard, the Border 
Gateway Protocol (BGP).  

A very important function within the infrastructure of the Internet is the domain 
name system (DNS). All computers on the Internet are identified with the aid of a 
unique IP address, which is used to relay packets on the Internet to the correct 
computer. For the sake of readability, an IP address is expressed as strings of 
numbers separated by full stops. The DNS translates these to a more user-friendly 
form, for example www.pts.se, so that you do not have to remember complex 
combinations of figures. These 'domain names' are easy to write and memorise 
when, for example, you want to link up to websites or send electronic mail. 

Method to prepare the strategy 

1.5 
The IT Bill is the point of departure for the preparation of this strategy together 
with PTS's previous investigations5 in the field and the knowledge that has been 
accumulated in conjunction with these assignments. PTS has also taken into 
account the Government Bill regarding 'Cooperation in crisis – for a more secure 
society'. PTS has supplemented the information-base with a review of the relevant 
literature in the field. During the initial phase, trend analysis work was conducted 
with the futures analysis business Kairos Future to identify trends and threats 
against the infrastructure of the Internet. Informal consultation with a number of 
trend-setting people in the field has taken place regarding visions, goals, trends 
and strategic positions adopted. 

Reading instructions – structure of the strategy 

1.6 
The proposed strategy contained in this report basically comprises two parts: the 
strategic positions adopted (Chapter 5) and the action plan (Chapter 6). These two 
parts are linked by a management plan (Chapter 7), an administrative document 
which, among other things, regulates how the strategy should be practically 
managed.  

Chapter 2 describes the investigations that have preceded this report, the 
allocation of public and private commitments, the international work and the 
structure of the current system of rules within this field.  

Chapter 3 describes PTS's proposal for a vision for the Internet and objectives for 
the infrastructure of the Internet from a security perspective. 

Chapter 4 deals with the trends and threat profiles that can be distinguished by 
PTS relating to the infrastructure of the Internet.  

Chapter 5 presents the strategic positions adopted, that is to say how PTS 
considers that Sweden should work in the long-term in order to secure the 
infrastructure of the Internet.  

                                                 
5 Internet in Sweden – Is it robust? (PTS-ER-2003:1), Den Internationella förvaltningen av 
Internet (The international management of the Internet) (PTS-ER-2003:23), Secure TLDs - Top 
Level Domains (PTS-ER-2004:19), Swedish strategy to secure the Internet infrastructure (PTS-
ER-2005:7) 

14 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Chapter 6 presents PTS's proposals for an action plan, comprising a number of 
measures within the framework of the strategic positions adopted. This chapter 
opens with a summary of the measures with an allocation of responsibility, level 
of importance, timeframes and estimated cost for the respective measure. The 
action plan has a shorter life cycle than the strategic positions adopted and will 
consequently be updated more regularly.  

Chapter 7 contains the management plan, which lists the administrative rules 
about how the strategic positions adopted and the action plan should be attended 
to. For example, the management plan contains guidelines about how often the 
action plan should be updated and who is responsible for this.  

Appendix 1 contains explanations of abbreviations and terms. 

Appendix 2 describes the international and Swedish organisations that are relevant 
to the work to improve Internet security. 

Appendix 3 contains a discussion about the operators' responsibility for the 
security of their services.  

Appendix 4 contains PTS's proposals to update the contact list of the CIIP 
Directory.6 

                                                 
6 The CIIP Directory is a globally-recognised contact list for various security functions in various 
countries, which is managed by the UK authority responsible for network security, the National 
Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre (NISCC). 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

15 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

 

Preconditions and current situation 

2 
The Riksdag (Swedish Parliament) and Government have been considering the 
Internet and security within IT policy for a long time. The 'IT Bill' of 2004 
proposed that the policy goal for the information society should be a sustainable 
society for all. Sub-objective three of three comprises accessibility and security 
and guides this report.  

The success of the Internet results to a large extent from the initiatives and work 
of private organisations to develop functions for the Internet. The point of 
departure for security within the Internet infrastructure is the providers' 
responsibility for networks and services on the basis of market requirements. 
Public commitment is based on there being market imperfections that cannot be 
satisfied by the market. 

As a sector authority, PTS is responsible for electronic communications, including 
the infrastructure of the Internet in Sweden. 

2.1 

The Riksdag and Government have for a long time 
emphasised IT issues where the Internet and security have 
been dealt with as part of the IT Policy 

IT affects all sectors of society, and the core of the policy for the information 
society is those issues with a more general and cross-border significance. 

What we now call the policy for the information society was often referred to in 
the early 1990s as the data policy. Government Bill 1984/85:220, 'Data policy', 
dealt with computer technology in working life, technical developments, 
education and personal privacy. The main orientation of Government Bill 
1995/96:125, 'Measures to broaden and develop the utilisation of information 
technology', was education, the legal system and the provision of information 
resources to society. In the work with the predecessor to the current Government 
'IT Bill' (Government Bill 1999/2000:86) 'An information society for all', the 
Government formulated the IT policy objective to be that Sweden should be the 
first country with an information society for all. Confidence, accessibility and 
competence in the use of IT were to be given priority.   

Following the Government Bill 'An information society for all', an evaluation of 
the IT policy pursued over the years has been conducted by, among others, the 
National Financial Management Authority (ESV). This shows, where this applies 
to the IT infrastructure, that Sweden has come a long way in its work to establish 
a properly functioning IT infrastructure to cover the entire country. It also shows 
that Government initiatives have contributed to a good foundation for 
enterpreneurship in sparsely populated areas as well as in other regions.  

It was proposed in the Government Bill 'From an IT policy for society to a policy 
for the IT society' (Government Bill 2004/05:175) that the objective of the policy 
for an information society should be a sustainable information society for all. The 
Riksdag approved the Government Bill on 25 January 2006. Prioritised tasks, or 
sub-objectives, include quality, sustainable growth, and accessibility and security. 

16 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

The sub-objective 'quality' means that IT should contribute to an improved 
quality of life and to improving and simplifying everyday life for people and 
businesses. The sub-objective 'sustainable growth' means that IT should be used 
to promote sustainable growth. The sub-objective 'accessibility and security' 
involves making an effective and secure physical IT infrastructure with high 
transmission capacity available in all parts of the country, among other things to 
provide people with access to interactive public e-services. 

Examples of initiatives that have been taken on the part of the Government are 
also referred to in the Bill. Among other things, preconditions were created for 
electronic communications between authorities and citizens, criminality and 
disreputable operations were combated, initiatives were effected to enhance 
information security, e.g. RAKEL, and for the provision of information resources, 
and the development of broadband was also promoted. Where this applies to 
RAKEL, for example, which is a radiocommunication network for, among others, 
the police, rescue and ambulance services, it is of importance for information 
security as it creates the preconditions for alternative communication routes. 

In the Bill 'Cooperation in crisis – for a more secure society' (Government Bill 
2005/06:133), the Government reported on its strategy for the security of society. 
This strategy aims to form a framework for society’s overall work to improve 
security. The Government reported on, among other things, how the structure for 
crisis management should be improved by proposing that one authority should be 
given the multisectoral responsibility for crisis management. The Government Bill 
also explained the Government's view on an advanced strategy in the field of 
information security and a national programme for security research. The various 
interim reports of the 'Information Security Inquiry' have been taken into account 
in this connection. 

PTS has previously conducted investigations regarding the security of the Internet 
infrastructure. The inquiry 'Internet in Sweden – is it robust?' tested how well the 
Internet works independently of functions abroad. Practical trials were conducted 
in conjunction with this inquiry regarding the important parts of the DNS for 
Sweden and a national exchange point for Internet traffic. The inquiry 'The 
international management of the Internet' describes how the management of the 
most important common resources is effected. The inquiry 'Secure TLDs - Top 
Level Domains' contains a survey of the functions in the operation and the 
administration that are important for good DNS security. The 'Swedish strategy to 
secure the Internet infrastructure' forms the basis of a large part of the orientation 
of the IT Bill as regards the security of the Internet infrastructure. In addition to 
these inquiries, which were conducted by PTS on the assignment of the 
Government, PTS has tested the name server operators’ use of DNSSEC and has 
conducted a preliminary study with simulations of vulnerabilities in traffic 
exchange on the Internet. 

Sweden's IT Incident Centre at PTS, Sitic, continuously monitors and publishes 
information about vulnerabilities in protocols and programs that are of 
importance to Internet infrastructure and its users. Sitic has also implemented a 
distributed intrusion detection system that publishes up-to-date information about 
attack attempts directly on Sitic's website. Sitic reacts to incidents on the basis of 
the information available, for example information about preventive measures is 
published. In addition to this, Sitic has implemented a distributed system 'The 
state of the Internet, to survey problems with the links between the major 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

17 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Swedish Internet operators. These results have been published on Sitic's website. 
In order to further improve the operative activity, international contacts have 
been extended and improved, which facilitates more effective intervention in the 
event of an incident. 

Public commitment 

2.2 
The general reasons that are referred to for public commitments within the 
various fields normally originate from economic theories regarding the 
Government's role in the social economy. The financial justification for public 
commitments is based to a large extent on the basis that there are a number of 
imperfections in the market that must be corrected through public stakeholder 
initiatives. These involve needs that the market cannot satisfy for various reasons. 
The armed forces, police and rescue services represent typical examples of 
collective utilities. 

The point of departure for public commitment is that individuals, i.e. both private 
persons and businesses, have a fundamental responsibility to protect life and 
property and to implement preventive measures. This means that harmful effects 
may be reduced if certain fundamental security measures have already been taken 
by the party who is responsible for the operation. This means, in its turn, that it is 
important to encourage all stakeholders in society to implement the security 
measures that are possible and to exercise supervision of compliance with 
applicable provisions within the area. 

Crisis management at a social level basically has the same character as the 
operations above and is dealt with more extensively in both 'Vulnerability and 
security in a new era' (Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2001:41, p. 
76) and partly in Government Bill 2005/06:133. It is stated in these documents, 
among other things, that public involvement should, in the first instance, relate to 
those crisis situations where only the public bodies or those municipalities 
affected are able to assume the overall responsibility to manage, coordinate and 
prioritise the measures that need to be implemented in order to counter the crisis. 
However, this does not mean that public bodies should themselves take on a 
general financial responsibility for all of the measures that may be required in 
order to counter this kind of crisis situation.  

The Government's commitment as regards the infrastructure of the Internet is 
based on the current overall IT policy objective that Sweden should be a 
sustainable information society for all. As a basis for this, there is a policy for the 
information society and this is effected through governmental responsibility for 
certain infrastructure, for the coordination of public resources and services, for 
legislation and also through support for development and new approaches.  

The point of departure regarding security within the Internet infrastructure is that 
it is the service provider (the operator) who is in charge of the electronic 
communications that is responsible for his network and the quality of the service. 
This is done on the basis of the requirements imposed by the market, see Section 
2.3.  

The sub-objective that guides this report is in the first instance 'accessibility and 
security' (contained in Government Bill 2004/05:175), primarily as regards the 
objectives for the IT infrastructure.  

18 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

The Government Bill emphasises the importance of facilitating new technology 
by maintaining technology neutrality as far as this is possible, in order to promote 
competition between the various kinds of networks and by attempting to make 
the existing infrastructure accessible to all (which has also represented a 
precondition for government support for the development of broadband 
networks). Openness and interoperability are also mentioned as being important 
so that access to services is not impeded by technical or commercial lock-ins or 
exclusions. Furthermore, information security, among other things regarding the 
function security of the Internet, is referred to as an important social issue as well 
as the Internet being organised and managed in a functional and reliable way and 
the security of the network being carefully monitored. 

PTS is the sector authority for electronic communications, which also includes the 
Internet. It is PTS's vision that everyone in Sweden should have access to 
efficient, affordable and secure communications. PTS has a supervisory 
responsibility according to the Electronic Communications Act (2003:389 – 
EkomL). The point of departure for PTS's work with quality and security within 
electronic communications is to promote competition within the market, the 
procurement of security-enhancing measures, coordination between the 
government and industry, and also regulation and supervision. 

Through The Electronic Communications Act, PTS can impose requirements on 
the Internet operators that their operations should satisfy reasonable requirements 
for good function and technical security. PTS can also work to make it easier for 
the consumer to obtain information about the quality of services. The work of 
PTS aims to make it easier for the user to make rational choices. 

An Act on national top-level domains for Sweden on the Internet entered into 
force on 1 July 2006. The aim of the Act is to ensure that, through insight and 
supervision, the Government has the opportunity to ensure the efficient and 
secure administration of the top-level domain for Sweden. PTS is the supervisory 
authority under the Act. The management of risks linked to the Internet's 
functionality lies outside Sweden's control to a greater extent than is the case for 
other infrastructures. Nor is any individual country or organisation responsible for 
the security of the Internet, and this imposes demands on international 
coordination. Government influence does not inevitably ensure that the Internet 
is more reliable, but it may explain what responsibility rests upon those 
administering a top-level domain and can if necessary create a legal basis for being 
able to implement measures in the area.  

In accordance with the above, PTS is procuring measures to enhance security and 
has recently published its Strategy for robust electronic communications for the 
years 2006 to 2008 (PTS-ER-2006:19).  

In general, activities are implemented to manage the issues that have been 
identified as important within the various policy areas in the IT Bill. The Ministry 
of Justice has conducted a review regarding the system of rules that surround 
offences taking place in IT environments or with IT aids. The Swedish 
Emergency Management Agency (SEMA) is responsible for the development of 
RAKEL. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

19 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Private commitment 

2.3 
There are historic reasons for the private sector's large part in the work with the 
development, management and security of the Internet. In fact it was the 
American armed forces that started the development of a network for data traffic 
during the 1960s and 1970s, at that time in the first instance as an internal 
research project, but gradually the civil American authorities assumed the 
responsibility for supporting this research. Operators who were previously only 
engaged in offering fixed telephony and leased lines have been afforded greatly 
increased business opportunities through the Internet and there are currently tens 
of thousands of Internet operators around the world. 

The success of the Internet depends to a great extent on the initiatives of private 
organisations for the development and standardisation of functions for the 
Internet. In 1998, the US Government transferred the management and the 
security protection of the Internet's critical intellectual resources, such as IP 
addresses and domain names, to the civil organisation ICANN. Blocks of IP 
addresses are allocated to five regional Internet registries, 'Regional Internet 
Registries' (RIR) by the organisation IANA, which, on the assignment of ICANN, 
looks after the operative aspects of their activities. The RIRs are private 
organisations funded by the membership fees of RIR customers, i.e. operators 
and large businesses. The blocks of IP addresses allocated by each RIR are then 
allocated in their turn to Local Internet Registries (LIR), which normally comprise 
the Internet operators. Then, these LIRs allocate addresses to the users and 
distributors of Internet communications. The RIRs are active within many areas 
regarding the implementation of new technology and they are endeavouring to 
establish good relations with industry. A significant part of the RIRs’ operations 
involves disseminating knowledge about how traffic exchange between the 
Internet operators should be conducted in a robust and secure way. This is done, 
among other things, by arranging regular conferences and courses. 

A considerable part of the responsibility for the security of the Internet 
infrastructure lies with the Internet operators who, within the framework of 
commercial feasilibility in a market that is subject to competition, implement 
measures to protect their respective parts of the infrastructure against disruptive 
or destructive incidents. Competition is a driving force for operators to maintain 
good preparedness to rectify disruptions and faults that arise. Since the telecom 
market was deregulated in 1992, Sweden has acquired a competitive market where 
security is a competition factor together with price and quality. It is thereby the 
individual operator who assumes the responsibility in their network, in the 
contract in relation to the end-user, for good functionality and technical security, 
together with the responsibility for network sustainability and accessibility. Rights 
and obligations, including function and security, are primarily regulated by 
contracts concluded between the end-user and the operator. 

End-users are also responsible for the security of their environments and their 
behaviour on the Internet, and it is clear that one of the major threats to the 
infrastructure of the Internet is the inadequate security of end-user equipment and 
the capacity of this equipment to withstand attacks and intrusions together with 
inadequate security awareness on the part of users. This weak security means that 
end-user equipment can be exploited as a platform in coordinated attacks against 
the arbitrary functions of the infrastructure, for example the DNS or a service 
server for telephony. 

20 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Network equipment suppliers have recently made increased efforts to introduce 
security mechanisms, as have the dominant suppliers of software for end-user 
equipment.  

Various private organisations play a very important role in society with regard to 
research, development and standardisation work on security and security related 
to the Internet and its infrastructure. Other organisations function as discussion 
fora and disseminators of knowledge by, for example, arranging courses and 
seminars. A large contribution is made here regarding the exchange and 
dissemination of information about security enhancement methods and tools to 
both producers and consumers of Internet services.  

Appendix 2 includes a more comprehensive description of the organisations that 
play an important role in the work with the security of the Internet infrastructure. 

International work for Internet infrastructure security 

2.4 
The function of the Internet lies outside national control to a greater extent than 
is the case for other infrastructures, and the responsibility is divided between 
many different stakeholders, both national and international.  

The US Government has traditionally played a signficant role in the organisation 
and management of the Internet. During the latter part of the 1990s, this 
management started to be transferred from the US Government to ICANN. 
There are a number of advisory committees linked to ICANN in which industry 
and the public can participate. Sweden is active within the international advisory 
committee, the Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC). This committee has 
been assigned to support ICANN with advice on a number of issues relating to 
government affairs, in particular where the policy of ICANN could have 
implications for national laws or international treaties or agreements.  

At a global level, there is cooperation on IT policy measures and positions to be 
adopted as a follow-up of the UN World Summit on the Information Society 
(WSIS).7 The overall objective is to bridge the digital divide, and the single largest 
issue relates to the management of the Internet, primarily the management of 
certain of the Internet's critical resources, DNS and IP numbers. The 
management of these parts is critical from a security perspective and Sweden is 
actively working to ensure that the prevailing system shall not be jeopardised but 
is internationalised in the long term. Work is being carried out within the 
framework of several different international organisations and coordination is 
normally conducted through the EU. The Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
where all stakeholders involved in the management of the Internet have an 
opportunity to discuss, among other things, global security-related issues, was 
born as a result of the work of WSIS. 
Sweden is also active within the framework of the work conducted by the OECD 
as regards the production of reports with follow-ups and analyses of development 
within, among other things, the area of IT.  

                                                 
7 The UN World Summit on the Information Society was conducted in two stages. The first was 
held in Geneva in 2003 and the second in Tunis in 2005. The implementation and follow-up of 
measures of importance for, among other things, the infrastructure of the Internet is in progress. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

21 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Several Swedes are participating in the international standardisation work. Work is 
primarily being conducted within the private sector through the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF). 

In 2004, the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 
which works with issues of network security and information security within the 
EU, was established. ENISA works, among other things, within the following 
areas: 

•  Risk analysis and risk management 
•  Monitoring standardisation 
•  Encouraging and initiating cooperation between incident management 

functions8 

•  Producing and encouraging the use of recommendations9 
•  Awareness enhancing measures 

A Communications Committee, COCOM, and a European group of regulatory 
authorities, ERG, have been established within the EU to ensure that the system 
of rules for electronic communications will function as intended. Their aim, 
among other things, is to encourage cooperation and collaboration between the 
countries and the EU Commission. The EU Commission also has a high level 
advisory group, the High Level Group on Internet Governance (HLIG), with one 
representative from every Member State, which prepares EU positions regarding 
current issues concerning the global management of the Internet. 

Article 23 of the Directive on universal services10 imposes a requirement that the 
fixed telephony network is accessible in the event of a catastrophic network 
collapse. There is also an opportunity for Member States to implement further 
measures to protect public order and security in accordance with the Framework 
Directive.11 Set against the background that the Swedish regulation should, among 
other things, be interpreted against the provisions in the applicable Directive, it 
may be of interest to study how a selection of other Member States has chosen to 
implement the provisions of the EU. One such comparative study12 shows that 
most Member States have implemented Article 23 in some form regarding 
network integrity and also the provisions relating to good function and technical 
security. Finland in particular has more extensive technical regulations in the form 
of requirements regarding, among other things, maintenance, performance and 
electricity supply. Others require a risk and vulnerability analysis to be 
implemented by those operators affected. In certain cases, there are requirements 
for operators to inform users about the quality of the service. 

                                                 
8 That is to say the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) 
9 Referred to as 'Best Practice' 
10 Directive 2002/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 on 
universal service and users' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services  
11 Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on a common regulatory 
framework for electronic communications networks and services 
12 Utredning and länderinformation rörande driftavbrott (Survey and country information 
concerning operational interruption and requirements for good technical function and security, 
etc.) 

22 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

The 'i201013 – A European Information Society for growth and employment' is 
the initiative that replaces the former strategic orientation eEurope 2005. This 
initiative is the first to push through the renewed Lisbon Strategy. Security is an 
important part of the i2010 Initiative. The EU Commission has produced a 
communication14 on a European strategy for a secure information society within 
the framework of i2010, which aims to update the 2001 Communication on 
Networks and Information Security. There are three areas of focus in order to 
counter security threats against the information society in Europe: specific 
security measures, the regulation of electronic communications and combatting IT 
crime. The forthcoming communication, the Strategy, involves a joint effort using 
all three of these focuses.  

As regards national strategies, few countries have produced a corresponding 
strategy to the strategy that is presently proposed. However, there are a number of 
countries that have produced security strategies, which, among other things, 
include the area of the Internet, for example the Netherlands,15 Canada,16 
Norway17 and the USA.18 There are also countries that have worked with these 
issues in conjunction with their e-government strategies, for example New 
Zealand.19 The New Zealand strategy has been produced as a risk analysis where 
the various threats have been analysed together with the impact that they may 
have, among other things, directed at the infrastructure and confidence in the 
Internet. In the American strategy, emphasis has been placed on five prioritised 
areas: national incident management, national risk management, awareness 
enhancement measures, security of public administration and national and 
international cooperation. This strategy mentions, among other things, the need 
for security in BGP and DNS in conjunction with the infrastructure of the 
Internet. 

System of rules relevant to Internet infrastructure 

2.5 
Chapter 1, Section 1 of The Electronic Communications Act states that the 
objective of the Act is, among other things, that private individuals, legal entities 
and authorities should have access to secure and efficient electronic 
communications. Secure communications means that communications should be 
operationally secure. 

                                                 
13 COM(2005) 229 final, Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European 
Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions 
'i2010 – A European Information Society for growth and employment'. 
14 COM(2006) 251 Communication from the Commission to the Council, The European 
Parliament, The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions – 
A Strategy for a Secure Information Society – “Dialogue, partnership and empowerment” 
15  A safer Internet for all, KWINT (Kwetsbaarheid op Internet) an initiative of Ministry of 
Economic Affairs (NL), 2004  
16 Government of Canada Position Paper on a National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure 
Protection 
17  National strategy for information security – challenges, priorities and measures, Ministry of 
Defence, Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Justice and the Police (Norway), 2003 
18 The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, Department of Homeland Security (USA), 2003  
19 Trust and Security on the Internet - Keeping the Internet safe for e-government in New 
Zealand, November 2004 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

23 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

The supervisory authority may, according to Chapter 1, Section 8 of The 
Electronic Communications Act, issue regulations for the peacetime planning of 
the needs of the Total Defence for electronic communications. This right to issue 
regulations only applies to the need of the Total Defence for peacetime planning 
for situations of war, and not any general planning of stable and sustainable 
infrastructure solutions, even if these can of course generate synergy effects for 
peacetime planning. 

According to Chapter 1, Section 9 of The Electronic Communications Act, the 
supervisory authority may order a party that provides electronic communications 
networks or electronic communications services that are of particular importance 
from the public perspective to take into account in a particular way the needs of 
the Total Defence for electronic communications during times of alert. This 
obligation thereby only applies to networks and services that are of particular 
importance and requires a decision by the supervisory authority. As this obligation 
should take into account the needs of the Total Defence, it may be difficult to 
implement more general measures under this provision to improve the 
infrastructure or stability among several networks or services. These obligations 
only arise when a decision or regulation has been issued.  

Society's increased use and dependence on electronic communications reduce the 
tolerance for interruption and disruption. Chapter 5, Section 6 a of The Electronic 
Communications Act states that fundamental requirements are imposed on good 
function and technical security and on sustainability and accessibility in the event 
of extraordinary events during peacetime concerning all kinds of electronic 
communications. This provision deals with a fundamental level of operational 
security, a certain minimum of guaranteed security and covers all providers of 
public communication networks or public communications services. This 
provision has been made to ensure that users should be able to rely on 
communications functioning at a basic level. 

The increased use of the Internet for critical social functions makes it increasingly 
important that the addressing system, the domain name system, which is used to 
translate domain names into IP addresses, is robust. On 1 July 2006, the National 
Top-level Domains for Sweden on the Internet Act (2006:24) entered into force. 
The Act provides the supervisory authority with the opportunity for insight and 
supervision regarding the administrator who controls the Swedish national top-
level domain, .se. The scope of this supervision covers various areas, including 
monitoring that the operation is managed in a secure and efficient way and that 
databases that are fundamental to the operation are transferred to the supervisory 
authority. The Act does not cover the possibility of the supervisory authority 
replacing the administrator of the Swedish national top-level domain, but rather 
provides powers to order compliance with the authority's supervisory decision, 
backed up by a default fine. 

24 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

3 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Vision and goals for improved Internet security in 
Sweden 

PTS's proposed vision is that in ten years the Internet will be secure, rapid and 
have high accessibility for everyone in Sweden.  

The goal of a strategy to improve the security of the Internet in Sweden is to 
secure critical functions in the Internet infrastructure which, if they were not 
maintained, would cause substantial disruption or interruption and in this way 
impede or prevent Internet use for large groups of individual users or for vital 
public businesses, authorities or organisations. 

3.1 

The vision is that in ten years the Internet will be secure, 
rapid and have high accessibility  

PTS's proposed vision is that in ten years the Internet will be secure, rapid and 
have high accessibility for everyone in Sweden. 

The Internet contributes to the promotion of democracy, sustainable economic 
growth, increased competition and the consumers' position in the Swedish 
market. A secure, rapid and accessible Internet simplifies everyday life and 
improves the quality of life for citizens. Important everyday tasks that previously 
required a great deal of citizens' time can now be efficiently conducted over the 
Internet: communications with authorities, financial transactions, global, social 
and economic contacts and the purchase of goods and services. The Internet is 
used as a carrier for a long list of services such as telephony, web, radio and 
television. Individuals feel confident that Internet-based services and legal, 
financial and social interactions function securely and rapidly. Security is an 
obvious quality that is incorporated into communications networks, software and 
equipment, which makes the user's environment and communications secure. 

3.2 

The goal is to secure critical functions within the Internet 
infrastructure 

The goal of a strategy to improve the security of the Internet in Sweden is to 
secure critical functions in the Internet infrastructure that, if not maintained, 
would cause substantial disruption or interruption and in this way impede or 
prevent the use of the Internet for large groups of individual users or for vital 
public businesses, authorities or organisations. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

25 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

 

4 

 

Trends and threat profiles affecting the 
infrastructure of the Internet 

Trends and threat profiles: 
•  Society is becoming increasingly dependent on the Internet. 
•  Society is becoming increasingly vulnerable to IT attacks. 
•  The discovery of vulnerabilities in protocols and programs is increasing. 
•  Laws, legal proceedings and policies do not keep pace with developments 

in technology and globalisation. 

•  Convergence in networks, terminals and services is continuing to increase. 
• 

Inadequate security in user environments constitutes an ever-increasing 
risk.  

•  The competence gap is widening in pace with the increase in complexity.  
•  Developments in the market involve increased internationalisation.  
•  More wireless networks and services. 

This chapter describes a number of trends that PTS has identified through trend 
analysis work. The chapter does not describe what is aimed for, but is a 
description of possible developmental tendencies.  

Society is becoming increasingly dependent on the Internet 

4.1 
Society is on the whole completely dependent on secure and functional 
communications over the Internet. The Internet is critical for industry and is an 
important driving force for the growth of Sweden. Many businesses base their 
entire operations on the Internet, not least within the financial sector, and the 
Internet is used, among other things, as infrastructure for controlling processes 
within industry. The public sector has also taken great strides towards greater use 
of the Internet and thereby also increased dependency on the Internet, among 
other things with substantial investments in automated self-services. A large 
proportion of the payments made by the public are conducted through bank 
services that are arranged via the Internet, with a strong concentration during the 
last five days of every month. For a large number of Swedes, the Internet 
comprises an important channel for both information and communication. With 
increasingly rapid Internet connections for households, the use of services 
requiring broadband is increasing and thereby the total quantity of traffic on the 
Internet is increasing rapidly.  

This increased dependency has led to an increase in the number of governments 
that are interested in the international administration of the Internet, including the 
administration of the critical functions of the Internet. 

Society is becoming increasingly vulnerable to IT attacks 
4.2 
As society becomes increasingly dependent on IT generally and the Internet in 
particular, it becomes increasingly interesting for organised criminality to attack 
society through systematic technical attacks instead of via more traditional means. 

26 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

These attacks are no longer conducted only by individual hackers wishing to test 
their skills, but also by more organised groups whose aim is financial gain or who 
have ideological motives. This may result in demands for increased technical 
robustness and more stringent legislation and similarly increased demands on risk 
and vulnerability analyses. It may also result in increased demands by society for 
police surveillance and intelligence services. 

4.3 

The discovery of vulnerabilities in protocols and programs 
is increasing 

There is an increasing interest in vulnerabilities. Increasing numbers of 
vulnerabilities have been discovered in pace with the creation and use of more 
protocols and programs. Certain vulnerabilities create more of a threat than 
others, depending upon which protocol or program has the vulnerability and also 
the kind of vulnerability involved. As a result of the exploitation of vulnerabilities, 
more people are demanding protocols and programs that are more secure. 

Vulnerabilities can be created on different occasions and be of varying kinds, 
which in its turn can result in various forms of exploitation. Vulnerabilities can be 
created by the definition of how a protocol should function or when various 
programs introduce support for managing a protocol. Vulnerabilities can also be 
created in programs without deriving from the management of a protocol. 

4.4 

Laws, legal proceedings and policies do not keep pace with 
developments in technology and globalisation 

Laws and legal proceedings often have a tendency to get out of step with rapid 
technological development and increased globalisation. Increased globalisation 
also imposes increased demands on the harmonisation and adaptation of the 
Swedish system of rules. 

Legislation in Sweden does not necessarily mean that the measures implemented 
have such a great effect, as the Internet is borderless. Issues of jurisdiction and 
enforcement are of great importance in this context. Increasing globalisation in 
combination with the inadequate coordination of laws and policies can result in 
insecurity. This results in the user becoming increasingly dependent upon 
information about the quality of services in order to be able to make well-
informed choices. 

4.5 

Convergence of networks, terminals and services is 
continuing to increase 

A clear trend today is that services such as telephony, radio and television are 
converging to an increasing extent towards using the same physical infrastructure 
with traffic based on IP. Convergence is taking place within the infrastructure, 
services and user equipment. Converging physical networks reduce alternative 
traffic routes and can thereby increase vulnerability, for which reason certain 
categories of users should evaluate the risks and vulnerabilities that may exist and, 
for example, ask what would happen if the only route out does not function and 
consider having alternative traffic routes as a supplement. 

Businesses and authorities who wish to have greater accessibility and security are 
welcoming the offers of the operators and are paying for technical measures that 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

27 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

operators are making within the infrastructure in order to achieve increased 
security and accessibility. If an increasing proportion of resources within the 
infrastructure is used for profitable prioritised traffic, there is a risk that 
accessibility and quality will deteriorate for other users. Inadequate network 
neutrality can therefore be perceived as a threat by users who rely on their traffic 
not being discriminated against. 

The Internet currently has a large number of users, and the most popular 
applications are e-mail, searching for and gathering information and interactive e-
services like booking travel, Internet banking, file sharing and interactive games. A 
further application, which is advancing, is the making of calls over the Internet. 
As the use of voice communication (corresponding to traditional telephony), 
which uses the Internet for part of the transmission, is spreading primarily among 
private individuals, and is also substituting fixed telephony, this also further 
increases dependency on a functional Internet as disruptions and interruptions to 
the telephony service could constitute a threat to life and health for individual 
users. Telephony is making increasing use of critical resources within the 
infrastructure of the Internet, such as DNS and exchange points. 

4.6 

Inadequate security in user environments constitutes an 
ever-increasing risk 

One of the greatest problems on the Internet today is inadequate security in the 
environments of individual Internet users. Computers that are insufficiently 
protected can be taken over and remotely controlled without the user's knowledge 
and thereby can be exploited as platforms for overload and disruptive attacks 
against, among other things, critical parts of the Internet infrastructure. This not 
only means a risk to the integrity or property of the individual user, but also to the 
general function of the Internet. A denial of service attack against critical parts of 
the Internet infrastructure can have consequences for users of the Internet 
throughout the world. This imposes demands that all Internet users assume a 
greater responsibility for their own behaviour on the Internet and security in their 
own environment. However, currently existing security problems are complex, 
and it is often necessary for users to have extensive understanding and knowledge 
in order for them to be able to act securely on the Internet and secure their own 
environment. 

Another group of users are those organisations offering services via the Internet, 
for example Internet banks and other financial institutions, and who administer 
their own network connected to the Internet. Many problems can arise that may 
lead to the organisation becoming isolated from the Internet, which can have 
great consequences for society. An organisation that administers is own network 
in the form of its own AS (autonomous system) needs, for example, a good 
knowledge of BGP (Border Gateway Protocol) so that it does not by mistake 
create major problems for many other Internet users. 

A third group of users are public administrations who are large users of the 
Internet. Public administration uses the Internet as a channel to automatically 
provide and gather information to and from central registers and systems. E-mail 
and web services are used as an essential communication medium between 
citizens and authorities in Sweden and internationally. As a major purchaser of 
various products and services for Internet use, the Government has a great 
opportunity to influence the market in conjunction with procurement procedures 

28 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

as regards the security of hardware, software and services. Security services are 
first offered when demand becomes so great that it justifies the suppliers' 
additional costs for development and implementation. Therefore, the 
Government, as well as the municipalities and county councils, also assumes an 
important role in this context. In order to be able to make full use of this strong 
position, it is necessary that the Government improves the competence of 
Government procurement officers and imposers of specifications as regards 
Internet security. 

4.7 

The competence gap is widening in pace with the increase 
in complexity 

Dependence on the Internet is constantly increasing and, as a consequence of this, 
society is becoming increasingly susceptible to IT attacks. The development 
towards increased convergence and the use of new technologies with increasing 
intelligence within the terminals mean that users' terminals constitute higher risk 
and a risk that the competence gap will widen in pace with this complexity. The 
increased complexity of networks, services and user terminals means that only a 
few people have a clear overall picture. 

One development that can entail a risk of increased complexity is the migration to 
IPv6. It is probable that the previous version, IPv4, will coexist with IPv6 within 
the foreseeable future by means of complex solutions. IPv6 has achieved great 
dissemination in certain parts of the world, for example in Japan, South Korea 
and India. In Sweden, IPv6 has only been used on a small scale so far, but it is 
likely that it will achieve increased use in the future.  

The increased complexity is a consequence of increased functionality and security. 
This not only applies to the Internet, but in principle to all further developments. 
One example, in addition to IPv6, is Secure DNS, where the function increases 
not only security, but also complexity owing to key administration, etc.  

4.8 

Developments in the market involve increased 
internationalisation 

The monitoring of the operation and the management of serious faults and 
disruptions to the network require staff with high skills that are available around 
the clock. For reasons of cost and efficiency, operators are endeavouring to 
automate and centralise the operations and the monitoring. As borders are 
becoming increasingly open, this means that many international operators may to 
a greater extent locate their operational centres abroad, but also conversely that 
they wish to locate central nodes, important for other countries, in Sweden. 

Centralisation and remote control of traffic makes local, regional and international 
electronic communications increasingly dependent on functional links to a few 
nodes, nodes that are sometimes placed outside the borders of Sweden.  

More wireless networks and services 

4.9 
Connection to the Internet nowadays also includes wireless forms of connection.  
These connections can be made both by local wireless networks and by mobile 
telephony networks. Wireless networks comprise both commercial services and 
open access points and can provide new opportunities for anonymity on the 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

29 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

network. Wireless technologies are also increasingly becoming a supplement to 
the operators' backbone networks. 

The development of technology has resulted in a number of wireless standards 
that offer the consumer mobile communications, a greater geographical mobility 
and an opportunity to be constantly connected via terminals of various kinds such 
as, among other things, laptop computers, mobile telephones and handheld 
computers, etc. 

This trend means that new services are being developed, for example positioning, 
increased mobility and flexibility, and access to several connection technologies 
and an increasing number of options. The risks that can accompany increased 
wireless use, in comparison to fixed networks, include the sensitivity of 
communications to disruption and greater opportunities for wiretapping if the 
traffic is unprotected. The anonymity made possible by wireless networks is 
attractive to those who wish to attack services or the network.  

30 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

5 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

The adoption of strategic positions to increase the 
security of the Internet infrastructure 

Strategic positions adopted: 
•  The physical infrastructure of the Internet should be protected against 

accidents, disruption, wiretapping and manipulation of information during 
transmission. 

•  Resistance to disruption in the domain name system should be increased. 
•  Resistance to disruption to the exchange of traffic between Internet 

operators should be increased. 

•  Users and buyers should be trained and informed to enhance security 

awareness. 

•  The assumption of responsibility for user security should increase among 

Internet operators and providers of software and equipment. 

•  The national development of knowledge regarding the Internet 

infrastructure should be promoted. This should be done in a broader 
context regarding information security. The comprehensive approach and 
coordination of research should be developed. 

•  Swedish participation in international fora should be enhanced. This 

should be done in collaboration between the private and public sector. 

•  Crisis management regarding the Internet infrastructure should be 

developed. 

Protect the Internet's physical infrastructure 

5.1 
The physical infrastructure of the Internet should be protected 
against accidents, disruption, wiretapping and manipulation of 
information during transmission. 
It is very important to secure physical transmission (in networks, exchange points 
and other equipment) so that it functions continuously in accordance with 
operator requirements. Furthermore, measures must be taken against accidents, 
mistakes and against unauthorised people having the opportunity to disrupt 
functions within the infrastructure as well as wiretapping or altering information 
during transmission. Equipment for services that are important to society on the 
Internet should be physically protected against disruption and interruption. 

The number of weak points must be minimised through analysis and measures in 
conjunction with rollout and development. There should, to the greatest extent 
possible, be redundancy for equipment and connections as the opportunities to 
protect the various parts of the network against accidents and physical attack are 
limited. 

Protect the Internet's logical infrastructure 

5.2 
The logical infrastructure of the Internet comprises, among other things, a large 
number of protocols and programs. Many vulnerabilities have been identified 
within these and more will be discovered in the future. One ambition for a more 
secure Internet should be concentrated on identifying which protocols and 
programs are critical for the Internet's function. The protocols that this strategy 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

31 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

focuses on are the protocols for the domain name system and traffic exchange 
between operators. 

Increase resistance to disruption in the domain name system 

5.2.1 
Resistance to disruption in the domain name system should be 
increased. 
An international hierarchy, the domain name system (DNS), is used for 
addressing on the Internet. Use of the Internet is made difficult or impossible 
without access to DNS. 

DNS is the world's most distributed database, where the various parties look after 
their own part of the database. This local administration eases work to keep the 
database up-to-date at the same time as control functions are required to ensure 
that information that is entered is correct. It is relatively easy to falsify information 
and this can result in users ending up on the wrong website or e-mail being sent 
to the wrong destination. Nor can satisfactory DNS services be maintained in the 
event of overload of DNS that is caused by a party presenting the query 
submitting, with a malicious intent, repeated enquiries to DNS in large numbers. 
There are other ways in which the DNS service can be attacked, for example by 
attacking the name servers' connection to the Internet, or attacks can also be 
made against the name servers themselves. If the attack is aimed at knocking out 
the name servers’ capacity to answer enquiries, the attacker must knock out all 
capacity to achieve complete success. It is therefore important that the name 
servers for a zone have surplus capacity to be able to resist attacks, at the same 
time as there is a need to be able to actively filter out attacks of this kind. A party 
presenting a query to the Internet's Domain Name System (DNS) should be able 
to verify where the information comes from and that the information has not 
been altered en route.  

5.2.2 

Increase resistance to disruption to the exchange of traffic between 
Internet operators 

Resistance to disruption to the exchange of traffic between 
Internet operators should be increased. 
The very feature that makes the Internet the global network that it is, is that traffic 
can move between the networks of different operators. Large quantities of traffic 
exchange between various operators may mean that Internet traffic can be 
wrongly directed through a malicious action or mistake so that users do not reach 
the website they are looking for or e-mail does not arrive. There are weaknesses 
and vulnerabilities in the protocols that are used for traffic exchange, which can 
be exploited for attacks. Even if the protocols themselves are not attacked, denial 
of service attacks can have severe consequences, for example by overloading the 
router's process capacity, memory or connections so that the function is 
completely or partially disabled.  

Moreover, there is some risk that false routers are connected at the operators' 
borders, and can act so that traffic is relayed to the wrong destination. There is 
currently considered to be only a relatively slight probability of a threat against 

32 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

border routers being carried out, but this may be expected to increase. In certain 
cases, the consequences can be very severe and can result in the Internet 
becoming more or less inaccessible. This area is complex and few have the 
competence to maliciously disrupt traffic between operators. However, mistakes 
and insiders can cause extensive disruptions. In order to counteract disruption to 
the exchange of traffic, Sweden should, above all else, work to ensure that 
improved recommendations are drawn up that optimise the use of existing 
solutions and, in the longer term, promote the introduction of methods for 
governing traffic exchange between the operators that make traceability possible.  

An organisation, for example a business that communicates via the Internet 
through the technology of the Border Gateway Protocol, needs to have access to 
special competence to avoid inadequacies in management causing disruption to 
accessibility to the Internet for themselves and others. 

5.3 

Information for users and buyers to enhance security 
awareness 

Users and buyers should be trained and informed to enhance 
security awareness.  
Everyone who uses the Internet in some way is a part of the Internet and thereby 
influences security on the Internet. Internet users in Sweden are a very large and 
heterogeneous group including everyone from the home user to major companies 
or public authorities. In order to achieve a more secure Internet and to avoid 
Internet users unknowingly becoming a threat to Internet infrastructure, the 
knowledge and attitudes of users towards security on the Internet must be 
improved.  

The security awareness of users will not play a decisive role for the infrastructure's 
security in the longer term. Security for the infrastructure should as far as possible 
be an integral part of the system and services, but it is necessary during a 
transitional period that individual Internet users also become security-conscious 
users. 

In order to ensure a good level of protection, it is also important that major 
companies and public authorities have appropriate procurement skills, which is 
crucial so that the organisation, in its contractual situation with, for instance, 
operators, knows what requirements should be imposed. In order to promote a 
more secure Internet in Sweden, it is particularly important that the government is 
well-informed as a buyer, when determining specifications, and user of programs 
and equipment for Internet services. 

Enhance assumption of responsibility for user security 

5.4 
The assumption of responsibility for user security should increase 
among Internet operators and providers of software and 
equipment. 
The responsibility for security is divided between several different stakeholders, 
and users also of course have a responsibility for security in their environment 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

33 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

and their behaviour on the Internet. However, it may be questioned why such a 
large part of the security responsibility currently lies with the users. Set against the 
background of the development in progress on the Internet and the nature of the 
Internet, with increasing processor power and intelligence in the terminals, 
Internet operators and providers of software and equipment should be given both 
a greater opportunity and a greater obligation to implement measures in various 
ways so as to limit the extensive risks for the user in the services and products 
that they supply.  

It would be desirable to regulate obligations as little as possible and for 
development to be primarily conducted on a voluntary basis. 

Promote national development of knowledge 

5.5 
The national development of knowledge regarding the Internet 
infrastructure should be promoted. This should be done in a 
broader context regarding information security. The 
comprehensive approach and coordination of research should be 
developed. 
The increasing dependence of society on the Internet imposes demands for 
increased security. These demands mean that more resources are necessary for 
research about security on the Internet. The research that is currently in progress 
in Sweden within the field of information security is mainly focussed on academia 
or stakeholders in close cooperation with universities and colleges. Collaboration 
between business and the university world is conducted through, among other 
things, joint projects. There are also a number of good examples of research that 
is being conducted by industry with the aid of grants from organisations.  

The funding of information security research in Sweden is spread over a number 
of different financiers, including public authorities, foundations, businesses and 
foreign stakeholders. 

5.6 

Further enhance Swedish participation in international 
work 

Swedish participation in international fora should be enhanced. 
This should be done in collaboration between the private and 
public sector. 
Owing to the borderless structure of the Internet, Internet security work is 
primarily conducted in the international arena within the framework of several 
different bodies, among others IETF, ICANN, CENTR, ETSI, UN, ITU, EU 
and OECD. The WSIS process has contributed by enhancing our knowledge and 
interest in policy issues, security issues and international standardisation, not least 
within developing countries. As regards standardisation, these bodies currently 
only represent the public interest to a limited extent. 

34 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Parts that are of substantial importance for the function of the Internet lie to a 
great extent outside Sweden's control, and work with standardisation and policy 
issues is divided among several different stakeholders, both nationally and 
internationally. Collaboration is required if security work relating to the Internet is 
to be successful and to achieve converged electronic communications in the long 
term where technology and the legal system function efficiently regardless of the 
service and national borders. In this way, a more secure Internet will be achieved 
in Sweden and Sweden will contribute to a more secure Internet from a global 
perspective as well as deal with IT incidents that arise without unacceptable 
disruption to society.  

5.7 

Develop crisis management regarding the Internet 
infrastructure 

Crisis management regarding the Internet infrastructure should 
be developed. 
Stakeholders who work with the Internet infrastructure have in most cases some 
form of crisis management routines for this infrastructure and the functions that 
are owned and managed by the respective stakeholder. However, there are no 
comprehensive, compiled and coordinated routines for mitigating the 
consequences in the event of serious disruption. 

It is worth emphasising that the development of the capacity for crisis 
management should not be affected at the expense of preventive work with 
robustness which, by it being conducted, reduces the risk of crises and reduces 
interruption times in conjunction with the disruptions that nonetheless arise. 
However, there is reason to coordinate planning regarding how very extensive 
crises should be dealt with. 

  

 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

35 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

6 

Action plan to implement the strategic positions 
adopted  

PTS has prepared a draft action plan in order to realise the strategy that has been 
produced within the Government assignment 'Strategy to improve Internet 
security in Sweden'. This action plan comprises a number of measures within the 
framework of the strategic positions adopted.  

The action plan is introduced with a summary of the measures showing the 
allocation of responsibility, level of importance, timeframe and estimated cost for 
the respective measure. Thereafter, a description of the respective measure is 
provided. 

This chapter presents PTS's draft action plan with a number of measures within 
the framework of the strategic positions adopted, as described in Chapter 5.  

The summary shown below shows all of the measures that are reported in this 
chapter. 

The party responsible states the stakeholder(s) responsible for the measure in 
question being implemented and performed in the manner intended.  

The level of importance states whether a measure is ongoing, planned or proposed. If 
it is proposed, it is weighted as important or very important. The precondition for 
the implementation of a proposed measure may be a decision at government level. 
The measures that PTS is prepared to implement involve a separate assignment 
and, when appropriate, funding may be required to implement the measure. 

The timeframe states the period within which a measure is planned to be 
implemented: within one year, two years, three years or four years. Otherwise, it is 
expressed as continuous. 

Costs state the estimated cost of the proposed measures, that is to say those that 
are not ongoing or planned. The estimation of cost has been made within the 
following intervals: 
Low:  
Medium:   SEK 500 000 – 1 500 000  
High:  
Costs for continuous measures are estimated on an annual basis. 

Above SEK 1 500 000 

Below SEK 500 000 

Measure 

Party responsible  Level of importance  Timeframe  Costs 

6.1  Measures to protect the Internet's physical and logical infrastructure  

Produce recommendations 
to providers of content 
services for increased 
accessibility 

PTS 

Planned 

< 2 years 

- 

36 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

 

Measure 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Party 
responsible 

Level of 
importance 

Timeframe  Costs 

Promote the use of DNSSEC in 
name servers 

Produce recommendations for more 
secure traffic exchange between 
Internet operators 

PTS 

PTS 

6.2 Measures for information to users 

Planned 

< 2 years 

Ongoing 

< 2 years 

Provide information about 
vulnerabilities 

PTS/Sitic 

Ongoing 

Continuous 

Develop advice for ordering Internet 
services 

II Foundation 

Ongoing 

< 2 years 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Coordinate and intensify 
information initiatives towards users 

PTS 

Very important 

Continuous 

High 

Educate trainee teachers in Internet 
security  

Universities and 
colleges 

Important 

< 2 years 

High 

Further develop PTS's website for 
Internet security 

PTS 

Important 

< 2 years 

Medium 

6.3 Measures to enhance the assumption of responsibility for user security 

Work with specified requirements 
for good function and technical 
security 

Follow up the Internet operators' 
functional capacity 

PTS 

PTS 

Ongoing 

< 1 year 

Planned 

< 2 years, 
thereafter 
continuous 

- 

- 

Provide the Internet operators with a 
legal possibility of impeding the 
dissemination of harmful traffic 

Investigate the requirements for 
increased responsibility for providers 
of software and equipment 

Government 

Very important  < 2 years 

Low 

Government 

Very important  < 3 years 

High 

6.4 Measures to promote the improvement of knowledge 

Inform stakeholders about the 
financing sources available  

Relevant 
authorities 

Important 

Continuous 

Low 

Work to ensure that funds are 
allocated within the framework of 
the EU's research programmes 
relating to the Internet infrastructure 

Government 

Important 

Continuous 

Low 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

37 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

 

Measure 

Party 
responsible 

Level of 
importance 

Timeframe  Costs 

6.5 Measures to enhance Swedish participation in international work 

Increase Swedish coordination 
and participation in 
international fora 

Clarify Swedish distribution of 
responsibility in conjunction 
with international contacts 
concerning security of the 
Internet infrastructure 

Further develop operative 
international networks for 
incident management 

Continued active participation 
in review of EU directives 

Increase participation in 
standardisation work 

PTS 

Very important 

Continuous 

High 

Government 

Very important 

< 1 year 

Low 

PTS/Sitic 

Ongoing 

Continuous 

Government 

Ongoing 

< 2 years 

- 

- 

PTS  

Important 

Continuous 

High 

6.6 Measures to improve capacity for crisis management 

Increase exchange of 
experience, follow-up and learn 
from major disruptions 

Produce a coordinated 
continuity plan for the Internet 
infrastructure in Sweden 

Investigate alternative forms of 
communication for operations 
managers during crises 

Investigate alternative 
information channels from Sitic 
to users concerning the status 
of the Internet in conjunction 
with disruptions to the Internet 

PTS/Sitic 

Ongoing 

Continuous 

- 

PTS 

PTS 

Very important 

< 4 years 

High 

Important 

< 4 years 

Medium 

PTS/Sitic 

Planned 

< 2 years 

- 

 

6.1 

Measures to protect the Internet's physical and logical 
infrastructure 

This section describes the measures that affect those parts of the infrastructure 
that are unique to the Internet. Measures to protect the electronic 
communications infrastructure are in the main primarily dealt with by PTS's 
strategy Robust electronic communications – Strategy for the years 2006 to 2008. 

38 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

6.1.1 

Produce recommendations to providers of content services for 
increased accessibility 

The providers of vital public services, for example Internet banking services and 
e-government services, should ensure that the breakdown of an individual cable 
does not result in the services becoming inaccessible to the surrounding world, for 
example by using duplicate Internet connections that are physically separate. A 
domain name holder should implement measures to enhance accessibility to name 
servers that refer to addresses on the Internet that should be reachable by the 
surrounding world, for example web servers and e-mail servers. Examples of such 
measures are that the domain name holder should always have at least two 
domain name servers for his domain, preferably with different operators. 

PTS has previously participated in the production of the Swedish Urban Network 
Association's recommendations on robust nodes and robust networks. PTS also 
intends to conduct work to produce recommendations on, for example, the 
location of web servers in physically protected environments, secure traffic 
exchange for those with autonomous systems (AS) for duplicate Internet 
connections, routines to deal with operational disruptions, the management of 
denial of service attacks, and increased security when managing domain name 
servers. 

Promote the use of DNSSEC in name servers 

6.1.2 
DNS information that is transferred using the current technical solutions cannot 
be guaranteed to be either correct or genuine, that is to say, can be said with 
certainty to come from an intended source. This can be ensured by using 
DNSSEC. After almost ten years of work producing a standardised solution for a 
more secure DNS, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has been able to 
approve DNSSEC as a standard,20 paving the way for the introduction and the 
initiation of DNSSEC. 

PTS will promote the opportunities for users to increase the security of the DNS 
service in various ways by supporting DNSSEC in name servers. In order to 
stimulate the introduction and use of DNSSEC, PTS intends to arrange seminars 
for Internet operators and those domain name holders with high security 
requirements. PTS also intends to inform the public about what DNSSEC 
protects against and, on the basis of the experience that PTS gains from the tests 
conducted, to provide easily accessible instructions about the measures and steps 
that an organisation must implement for the use to get started. 

6.1.3 

Produce recommendations for more secure traffic exchange between 
Internet operators 

The fundamental weakness in traffic exchange between Internet operators is 
attributable to the inability to get a guarantee regarding who originally advertised a 
certain route through the network for a particular address area. As a consequence 
of this, neither the authenticity nor the correctness of the routing information can 
be checked. The IETF has worked for a number of years within a Routing 
Protocols Security Working Group to produce cryptographic methods to resolve 
these problems, though without yet being able to propose any standard. Even if a 

                                                 
20 RFC 4033, 4034 and 4035 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

39 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

standard had existed by this time, there would be problems with a new standard as 
security would still be weak as long as it was not introduced by all operators. No 
one wants to be the first with an introduction and resistance is significant, as a 
security method of this kind involves increased complexity and an increased 
loading on routers and connections. Internet operators are commercial 
organisations where this kind of security is not yet part of their business plan and, 
in addition to this, will require increased financial and staff resources. 

In order to conclude the advice and instructions, 'Best Common Practices', PTS is 
investigating vulnerabilities in the Internet border routing system in Sweden (the 
interdomain routing system) oriented towards physical experiments and 
simulations of attacks against the routing system. By analysing the results of these 
studies, a measurable profile of the consequences can be obtained as well as a 
basis for the assessment of impact on functions that are important to society. Our 
ambition is that the results shall contribute to clarifying the extent to which 
security problems can be resolved through the application of enhanced and 
updated 'Best Common Practices' in the operation. 

6.2 

Measures for information to users 

Information about vulnerabilities 

6.2.1 
It is important for users of programs and protocols to monitor vulnerabilities of 
the programs and protocols that they are using. Vulnerabilities that affect their 
own systems can be more rapidly avoided if they are detected at an early stage.  
Sitic will continue to monitor and publish vulnerabilities that are important for 
organisations in society. Good planning and the well thought-out management of 
computer resources can sometimes, without the need for program corrections, 
reduce the risk of someone exploiting a vulnerability. Sitic will continue to publish 
preventive advice and demonstrate good examples in the preventive work. In 
addition to this, a public tool for searching and sorting vulnerability information 
will be published on Sitic's website. In this way, those interested in technical 
matters can be given a simple means of access to several sources within the area 
of vulnerability. 

Develop advice for ordering Internet services 

6.2.2 
It is essential for large businesses and authorities to have appropriate procurement 
skills, as it is crucial for the organisation to know what requirements to impose in 
contractual relationships with, for instance, operators. PTS is prepared to 
contribute to the work that was started by the II Foundation on the 
modernisation and adaptation of the Recommendations that were produced by 
the IT Commission's 'General specification of Internet service'. The intention of 
the specification is to provide support to buyers when specifying requirements in 
conjunction with procurement and when drawing up service level agreements 
between service providers and their customers. The Government should also use 
the Recommendation to ensure that secure Internet services are available for 
public administration.  

6.2.3 
Coordinate and intensify information initiatives towards users 
The Government should appoint a coordinating function for information 
initiatives on Internet security directed at households, schools, small and medium-

40 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

sized businesses and organisations, etc. Young people are large consumers of the 
Internet and are inclined to take risks with downloading, etc., when surfing. 
Therefore, information work directed at youngsters about secure behaviour on 
the Internet is important to achieve a more secure Internet. PTS is prepared to 
assume a coordinating role and to intensify its information work. PTS also intends 
to support various initiatives in the future to enhance security awareness, such as, 
for example, the Surfa Lugnt (Surf Securely) campaign.21 

Educate trainee teachers in Internet security 

6.2.4 
The awareness of users about and their attitudes towards security on the Internet 
must be improved in order to achieve a more secure Internet. In order to be able 
to reach users at an early stage, security aspects should constitute a natural part of 
education-related Internet use. This imposes requirements on the teachers who 
conduct educational activities, for which reason training as regards security on the 
Internet should form part of teacher college training courses, for example in a 
manner corresponding to the work of the Knowledge Foundation22 on IT in 
teacher college training courses. PTS considers that this is important and 
anticipates that it will contribute to improving Internet security.  

Further develop PTS's website for Internet security 

6.2.5 
PTS's website for Internet security contains information adapted for target groups 
about security on the Internet for households, small and medium-sized business 
and organisations, and also small and medium-size authorities.23  

The website has a section called 'For the workplace', which is directed at small and 
medium-sized businesses, authorities and organisations. It contains more 
advanced information about, for example, system configuration and remote 
connections.  

In order for the website to be an up-to-date source of information and contribute 
to the target group becoming more security-conscious and better buyers, it is 
important for the content to be developed in this respect and for it to be kept up-
to-date on the basis of the target group's needs. 

PTS will also implement, when the occasion arises, marketing of the website as a 
whole with the aid of editorial publicity, but has identified a need to supplement 
this with advertising campaigns on bought channels, primarily on the Internet. 

6.3 

Measures to enhance the assumption of responsibility for 
user security 

6.3.1  Work with specified requirements for good function and technical 

security 

PTS can impose requirements on Internet operators for their operations to satisfy 
reasonable requrements on good functionality and technical security by applying 

                                                 
21 See http://www.surfalugnt.se 
22 IT in Schools (ITIS) and the Knowledge Foundation initiative for IT in teacher college training 
courses (10 June 2005) 
23 See http://www.pts.se/internetsakerhet 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

41 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

current legislation, for example Chapter 5, Section 6 a of the Electronic 
Communications Act (2003:389), and verification of compliance with the act.  

PTS is also working to make it easier for users to get information about service 
quality. A well-informed user has greater opportunities to make conscious and 
soundly-based choices. Information about service quality is an important way to 
ensure that the consumer and other end-users have a greater opportunity to 
optimise their choice of operator, not only on the basis of price but also on the 
basis of the quality aspects. 

Follow up the Internet operators' functional capacity 

6.3.2 
It is important that the functional capacity of Internet operators is actually 
maintained, thereby creating confidence in the Internet as a communication 
system. The suppliers who are responsible for operation of the infrastructure and 
the operators who provide services on the network have the primary 
responsibility of protecting the network against disruptive attacks. If competition 
in the market functions properly, quality requirements will in the first instance be 
defined by the interaction between the market stakeholders. If users are 
demanding certain qualities, such as reliability and security for the services that 
they request, services that are characterised by security and reliability can become 
a means of competing. PTS will monitor developments and the functional 
capacity that the Internet operators actually have. 

6.3.3 

Provide the Internet operators with a legal possibility of impeding the 
dissemination of harmful traffic 

Internet operators should be given a legal opportunity to implement emergency 
measures, such as filtering electronic messages that jeopardise the system or the 
function of the network, such as denial of service attacks. Internet operators have, 
as The Electronic Communications Act is worded today, limited opportunities to 
implement emergency measures in respect of a customer's communication 
without their consent, for example in a situation where he has been adversely 
affected by Trojans or other programs that send mass e-mails or participate in the 
overload of web services. The same circumstances apply in cases where the 
customer is exposed to corresponding attacks himself. Such a legal opportunity 
should be combined with an information requirement about the measures that are 
implemented. The detailed proposed change of The Electronic Communications 
Act, which was submitted in PTS-ER 2005:7, Swedish strategy to secure the 
Internet infrastructure, is still valid (see Appendix 1 of PTS-ER 2005:7 under the 
heading 'Filtering issues'). 

A discussion concerning the operators' responsibility for security in their services 
is contained in Appendix 3.  

6.3.4 

Investigate the requirements for increased responsibility for providers 
of software and equipment 

Taking into consideration ongoing developments with increasing processor power 
and intelligence in terminal equipment, together with the increased use of 
broadband for Internet connections, providers of software and equipment should, 
in addition to the Internet operators, be given a greater opportunity and 
obligation to limit the extensive risks for the user in the services and products that 
they supply. It is necessary to investigate further the preconditions for such 

42 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

opportunities and obligations. It is proposed that the Government, or the party 
appointed by the Government, should investigate the responsibility of software 
and equipment manufacturers for user security on the Internet. This survey 
should be conducted with participants from the sector. 

6.4 

Measures to promote the improvement of knowledge 

Inform stakeholders about the financing sources available 

6.4.1 
The authorities that are involved should inform and encourage important research 
projects to seek money from the various funding sources available, for example, 
Vinnova, the Knowledge Foundation and the II Foundation. Furthermore, the 
relevant authorities should improve their information about the possibilities of 
applying for funding via the EU research programmes in the field.  

6.4.2  Work to ensure that funds are allocated within the framework of the 

EU's research programmes relating to the Internet infrastructure 

The Government should, in conjunction with the orientation discussions for how 
funds from the EU research programmes (primarily IST and ESRP)24 should be 
allocated, prioritise and point out the importance of security in the Internet 
infrastructure and work to ensure that funds are allocated for these purposes to a 
greater extent than today. 

6.5 

Measures to enhance Swedish participation in international 
work 

6.5.1 
Increase Swedish coordination and participation in international fora 
Swedish participation in international fora that are working with Internet security 
needs to be intensified, taking into consideration the borderlessness of the 
Internet and the functions that lie outside national control. The Government 
should appoint a coordinating function to ensure that joint guidelines are 
prepared for Swedish positions on issues that are of strategic importance for the 
security of the Internet, which should apply both nationally and internationally. 
This coordination responsibility should include consideration being taken to the 
work of the relevant organisations on Internet-related issues and to jointly discuss 
with the relevant stakeholders current issues in this international work. PTS 
should assume this role as the authority responsible for the electronic 
communications sector. PTS is prepared to coordinate Swedish participation and 
increase its participation in international fora, for example ENISA, FIRST, 
ICANN/GAC, Internet Governance Forum (IGF), OECD and ITU. 

6.5.2 

Clarify Swedish distribution of responsibility in conjunction with 
international contacts concerning security of the Internet infrastructure 

More intense international cooperation regarding 'CIIP' (Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection) is in progress with Swedish participation. Work is in 
progress within the International Watch & Warning Network (IWWN) and within 
other fora. Officers responsible for policy at ministry level are taking part in this 

                                                 
24 Information Society Technologies and European Security Research Programme 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

43 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

international cooperation. Sweden does not currently have any representation at a 
corresponding level on policy matters. An international coordination document, 
known as the CIIP Directory, that includes the contact details of national bodies 
dealing with the CIIP, represents an important document for use in these 
contexts. The Government should indicate which stakeholders should constitute 
the international contact points for policy issues and other subject and expert 
areas. See PTS's proposal, contained in Appendix 4. 

6.5.3 

Further develop operative international networks for incident 
management 

PTS intends to continue to further develop an operative international network 
through Sitic. Preconditions will be improved to effectively monitor vulnerabilities 
and active threats and to stop attacks through these international fora. 
Opportunities to continue to improve the security of the logical infrastructure will 
be increased through national and international forms of cooperation25  for 
incident management functions (CERT). 

Continue active participation in review of EU directives 

6.5.4 
Sweden is actively participating in the review of the EU Directives that form the 
basis of The Electronic Communications Act. It is important that the 
Government emphasises in this review work the matters considered to be of 
urgency in order to ensure that the work to secure the Internet infrastructure 
progresses.    

Increase participation in standardisation work 

6.5.5 
International standards are gaining increasing importance for national growth. 
Harmonisation in respect of technical security requirements and operative security 
levels is a constantly ongoing and important process. Standardisation is naturally 
being pursued by the private sector in the first instance. The public sector is 
participating to a limited extent, which may mean that the public interest is not 
always sufficiently represented. PTS is prepared to increase its participation in this 
process at a comprehansive level. 

Measures to improve capacity for crisis management 

6.6 
Collaboration between the various stakeholders, both from the public and private 
sector, is a fundamental precondition for functional crisis management. 
Collaboration must be prepared before a crisis arises to enable effective crisis 
management to be implemented.  

                                                 
25 Important CERT cooperations include, among others,. FIRST (Forum of Incident Response 
and Security Teams), TF-CSIRT (Task Force - Collaboration of Security Incident Response 
Teams), EGC (European Government CERTs) and NCF (Nordiskt CERT - forum). Other 
organisations and forms of cooperation that are important to security work include ENISA 
(European Network Information Security Agency) and IWWN (International Watch and 
Warning). 

44 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

6.6.1 

Increase exchange of experience, follow-up and learn from major 
disruptions 

An investigation of a major disruption is initially dealt with by the or those 
organisations that have been adversely affected. There may be a need for extra 
resources in conjunction with such a study in order to be able to interpret the 
course of events. Sitic has the capacity to contribute in the follow-up and also has 
an extensive network of contacts, which could possibly bring the person 
investigating the matter into contact with additional valuable people or 
information to further clarify the course of events.  

An investigation of a disruption is often also valuable for others besides the 
organisation that has been adversely affected. Important experience from the 
disruption that is documented in the follow-up should be communicated to other 
organisations, primarily to those dealing with the same kind of IT environment. 
Sitic offers a function to exchange information regarding incidents. An important 
aspect of this function is that the party making the report and the organisation 
that has been adversely affected remain anonymous and that no information is 
passed on that could lead to the party making the report or the organisation that 
has been adversely affected being traced. According to a survey in the Hidden 
Statistics Inquiry,26 which was conducted in 2005, it transpired that two out of 
three organisations were unaware of Sitic. In order to facilitate the reporting of 
incidents by organisations to Sitic, awareness of Sitic needs to increase. Sitic will 
continue to follow up major disruptions. 

6.6.2 

Produce a coordinated continuity plan for the Internet infrastructure in 
Sweden 

The coordination of the Swedish reponse in the event of serious disruptions to 
the functions of the Internet should be improved. Crisis management should be 
conducted as a collaboration between the public sector, private sector and other 
organisations.  

A continuity plan exists to reduce the damage that has been caused by 
interruptions. This continuity plan ensures that external resources can be allocated 
in conjunction with extensive disruptions. The cause of a disruption can, for 
example, be the result of a natural disaster, accident, equipment fault or malicious 
disruptions. 

A 'principle of responsibility' applies in the event of crises in Sweden. The 
principle of responsibility means that the party who is normally responsible for a 
particular function in society also has this responsibility in the event of a crisis. 
The principle applies to both the public and the private sector.   

This measure aims to produce a coordinated plan for serious events affecting the 
Internet. The intention of the plan is to cover major disruptions, i.e. disasters, that 
affect several stakeholders simultaneously. As the authority responsible for the 
sector, PTS is prepared to lead this activity. The stakeholders of most interest for 
this activity are major owners of the infrastructure and organisations that manage 
important logistic services. PTS has good experience of exercises within the sector 
                                                 
26 Mörkertalsundersökningen 2005 – Svenska organisationer om IT-säkerhetsincidenter (Hidden 
statistics inquiry 2005 – Swedish organisations on IT security incidents) (File reference 05-
9152/59) 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

45 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

and is prepared to test the plan together with the relevant stakeholders when the 
plan is approved. 

6.6.3 

Investigate alternative forms of communication for operations 
managers during crises 

The parties maintaining the important parts of the Internet infrastructure need to 
have the opportunity, in the event of major disruptions or crises, to communicate 
regarding the disruption or crisis on a channel other than the channel adversely 
affected by the disruption so that they can jointly deal with the situation. PTS is 
prepared to investigate whether there is such a need. 

6.6.4 

Investigate alternative information channels from Sitic to users 
concerning the status of the Internet in conjunction with disruptions to 
the Internet 

It may be necessary, in the event of a major interruption or disturbance within the 
infrastructure of the Internet, to provide users with information about the 
situation on a channel other than the one that has bee adversely affected by the 
disruption, for example the Internet. Sitic is currently continually providing 
information about security-related problems on the Internet, primarily via the 
Internet and in exceptional cases, depending upon the situation, via journalists 
and the media. PTS intends to investigate the need for information about 
disruptions or crises via channels other than the Internet, for example via radio or 
text television.  

 

 
 

46 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Plan for management of the strategy  

7 
The management plan prescribes the administrative rules concerning how the 
strategic positions adopted and the action plan should be managed. For example, 
the management plan contains guidelines about how often the action plan should 
be updated and who is responsible for this. 

Aim of the management plan 

7.1 
PTS's draft management plan aims to prescribe the administrative rules 
concerning how the strategy, i.e. the strategic positions adopted and the action 
plan, should be revised and administered with the aim of keeping the strategy up-
to-date.  

The strategic positions adopted are probably relatively long-term, but may need to 
be updated in pace with developments.  

The action plan comprises concrete measures within the framework of the 
strategic positions adopted and will function as a living document that may be 
amended when prioritisations are made or where specific areas need to be 
illustrated. The action plan shall be continuously followed up.  

Decision makers, periodicity and implementation   

7.2 
Changes to the strategic positions adopted should be decided by the government. 
The strategic positions adopted are updated according to perceived needs and it is 
proposed that this is done through a special assignment by the Government to 
PTS. 

The updating of the action plan is decided by PTS and is conducted by PTS every 
other year. 

Feedback reports 

7.3 
The status of the implementation of the measures contained in the action plan is 
reported to the Government annually in conjunction with PTS's annual report.  

 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

47 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

 

48 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

Literature 
 
A safer Internet for all, KWINT (Kwetsbaarheid op Internet) an initiative of 
Ministry of Economic Affairs (NL), 2004  

Act (2002:833) on Exceptional Circumstances in Peacetime in Municipalities and 
County Councils 

The Civil Defence Act (1994:1720) 

COM(2005) 229 final, Communication from the Commission to the Council, the 
European Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the regions 'i2010 – A European Information Society for growth 
and employment'. 

COM(2006) 251 Communication from the Commission to the Council, the 
European Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the regions – A Strategy for a Secure Information Society – 
'Dialogue, partnership and empowerment' 

Committee of Inquiry Terms of reference 2006:36 - Förbättrad samordning av 
utvecklingen av standarder och grundfunktioner inom IT-området (Improved 
coordination of the development of standards and basic functions within the field 
of IT) 

Den internationella förvaltningen av Internet – vilka organisatoriska alternativ 
finns (The international management of the Internet – What organisational 
alternatives are there), National Post and Telecom Agency, 2003 (PTS-ER-
2003:23)  
Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on a 
common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and 
services  
Directive 2002/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 
March 2002 on universal service and users' rights relating to electronic 
communications networks and services  

Förordningen om åtgärder för fredstida krishantering och höjd beredskap 
(2002:472). (Measures for Peacetime Crises Management and Times of Alert 
Ordinance)  

General specification of Internet service, the ICT Commission, 2000  

Government Bill 1984/85:220 on Data Policy 

Government Bill 1995/96:125 Measures to broaden and develop the utilisation of 
information technology 

Government Bill 1999/2000:86 An information society for all. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

49 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Government Bill 2001/02:10 Continued Renewal of the Total Defence 

Government Bill 2001/02:158 Samhällets säkerhet och beredskap (The security 
and emergency preparedness of society) 

Government Bill 2002/03:110 The Electronic Communications, etc. Act  

Government Bill 2004/05:175 From an IT policy for society to a policy for the 
information society.  

Government Bill 2005/06:133 Cooperation in crisis – for a more secure society. 
Government of Canada Position Paper on a National Strategy for Critical 
Infrastructure Protection 
Internet in Sweden – is it robust? – Internets uppbyggnad och användning, 
Internets beroenden av funktioner utomlands (The structure and use of the 
Internet and the Internet’s dependence on functions abroad), National Post and 
Telecom Agency, 2003 (PTS-ER-2003:1) 

Internet-Draft Generic Threats to Routing Protocols A. Barbir, S. Murphy, Y. 
Yang, 2004  

Ministry Publications Series 1994:53 Motiv för offentliga åtaganden (Reasons for 
general government commitments) 

Ministry Publications Series 2006:1 A strategy for Sweden's security 

Mörkertalsundersökningen 2005 – Svenska organisationer om IT-
säkerhetsincidenter (Hidden Statistics Inquiry – Swedish organisations on IT 
security incidents), National Post and Telecom Agency, 2005 (File reference 05-
9152/59) 

National strategy for information security – challenges, priorities and measures, 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Justice and 
the Police (Norway), 2003 

The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, Department of Homeland Security 
(USA), 2003  

RFC 1771 A Border Gateway Protocol 4, Y. Rehkter, 1995. 

RFC 3833 Threat Analysis of the Domain Name System (DNS), D. Atkins, R 
Autein, 2004  

RFC 4033 DNS Security Introduction and Requirements, R. Arends, R. Austein, 
M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, 2005 

RFC 4034 Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions, R. Arends, R. 
Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, 2005 

50 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

RFC 4035 Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions, R. Arends, R. 
Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, 2005 

RFC 4271 A Border Gateway Protocol 4, Y. Rehkter, T. Li, S. Hares, 2006.  

Robust networks– recommendations – laying robust networks. Ducting, cables 
and connection points. The Swedish Urban Network Association (Svenska 
stadsnätföreningen), 2005.  

Robust nodes – recommendations – Design of physical security for nodes in open 
neutral broadband networks, The Swedish Urban Network Association (Svenska 
stadsnätföreningen), 2004  

Secure Operation of Top Level Domains – What functions are vital to ensure a 
high degree of security in the domain name system, National Post and Telecom 
Agency, 2004 (PTS-ER-2004:19) 

Security Information to Internet Users – final report, National Post and Telecom 
Agency, 2005 (PTS-ER-2005:33) 

Strategy for robust electronic communications for the years 2006 to 2008, 
National Post and Telecom Agency, 2006 (PTS-ER-2006:19)  

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2001:41 Vulnerability and security 
in a new era 

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2003:27 
Informationssäkerhetsutredningen – delrapport 1 om signalskydd (Information 
security Inquiry – Preliminary report 1 on signal protection) 

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2003:59 Toppdomän för Sverige 
(Top-level domains for Sweden) 

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2004:32 Informationssäkerhet i 
Sverige och internationellt – en översikt (Information security in Sweden and 
internationally – an overview) 

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2005:42 Secure information 

Swedish Official Government Reports – SOU 2005:71 Information security 
policy – organisational consequences 

Swedish strategy to secure the Internet infrastructure, National Post and Telecom 
Agency, 2005 (PTS-ER-2005:7) 

Terms of Reference for the budget year 2006 regarding the National Post and 
Telecom Agency, etc. within area of expenditure 22, Communications, and area of 
expenditure 6, Defence, and emergency preparedness against vulnerability 
(Riksdag Communications 2005/06:81 and 2005/06:82) 

Top-level domains for Sweden on the Internet Act (2006:24)  

National Post and Telecom Agency 

51 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden 
 

Trust and Security on the Internet - Keeping the Internet safe for e-government 
in New Zealand, November 2004 

Utredning och länderinformation rörande driftavbrott (Survey and country 
information concerning operational interruption and requirements for good 
technical function and security, etc.), Survey by Bird & Bird Advokat HB on the 
assignment of the National Post and Telecom Agency, 2005 

Vilket informationsbehov har Internetanvändare vid störningar i Internettrafiken? 
(What information needs do Internet users have in the event of disruptions to 
Internet traffic?), National Post and Telecom Agency, 2003 (PTS-ER-2003:34) 

52 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden

 

 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

53 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden - APPENDIX 1

Appendix 1 – Abbreviations and concepts 
 

ARN 

AS  

BGP  

CERT 

CIIP 

National Board for Consumer Complaints (Allmänna 
reklamationsnämnden) 

Autonomous systems 

Border Gateway Protocol  

 Computer Emergency Response Team: An international generic 
term for organisations dealing with and preventing the 
occurrence of IT incidents in the form of security problems. 
They are usually found, for example, within organisations with 
large IT environments, at Internet operators or within the 
government to deal with IT incidents at a national level.  

Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. Equipment, 
technical systems and communication routes that may be 
deemed critical for the functioning of society. 

CIIP Directory   The aim of the CIIP Directory is that it should constitute a 

reference document with national contacts within the CIIP area. 
This document was initiated at the G8 'CIIP Experts 
Conference' in March 2003 and is administered by the British 
National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre, NISCC. 
The CIIP Directory currently contains government contact 
points for 18 countries. 

DNS  

Domain Name System  

DNSCHECK   DNSCHECK is a tool that has been produced by the II 

Foundation to enable a domain name holder to check whether 
his .se domain is correctly configured. 

DNSSEC  

The IETF standard DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) 
provides the user with the possibility of cryptographically 
verifying whether the DNS lookup is correct and in this way be 
able to detect and avert an attack.   

Domain 

A level in the domain name hierarchy. 

Domain name   A name that corresponds to an IP address, for example pts.se. 

DoS attack  

 Denial of Service attack: An attack that impedes accessibility, 
usually executed through intentional overloading. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

55 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 1 
 

EGC  

ENISA 

ESPR  

ETSI 

FIRST  

European Government CERTs, an informal group comprising 
European sister organisations, whose aim is to develop efficient 
collaboration within the area of information security. 

 European Network and Information Security Agency. 

ESPR (European Security Research Programme) is a European 
research programme within the framework of the seventh 
framework programme oriented towards security research. 

European Telecommunications Standards Institute. ETSI is an 
independent not-for-profit organisation. ETSI is responsible for 
information and telecommunications standardisations within 
Europe. 

Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) is an 
international forum for CSIRTs who jointly deal with IT 
security incidents and encourage preventative measures within 
this area. 

FM-CERT 

The Swedish Armed Forces Computer Emergency Response 
Team. 

FMV 

Defence Materiel Administration (Försvarets materielverk) 

FMV CSEC 

An operational branch within the Defence Material 
Administration, the Swedish Certification Body for IT Security. 

FRA 

GAC  

ICANN 

IETF  

IP  

National Defence Radio Establishment (Försvarets radioanstalt) 

 Governmental Advisory Committee: An advisory body to 
ICANN with national representatives who contribute with their 
respective countries' view on DNS. 

 Internet Corporation for Assigned names and Numbers: Is 
responsible, among other things, for policies concerning the 
allocation of IP numbers and domain names. 

 Internet Engineering Task Force: International standardisation 
body for the internet protocols.  

 (Internet Protocol) communications protocol that deals with 
the addressing, routing and transmission of IP packets on the 
Internet on what is known as the network level. 

IP address  

 Numerical address for a computer or other equipment in an IP 
network. This address is normally written as four whole 
numbers separated by full stops (for example 123.45.67.8) 

IPv4  

Internet Protocol, version 4 (32-bit IP addresses).  

56 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

IPv6  

IST  

ITU  

IWWN 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden - APPENDIX 1

Internet Protocol, version 6 (128-bit IP addresses).  

Information Society Technologies. The EU's framework 
programme for research and technical development regulates 
how the IST should prioritise its research activities. The aim in 
this area is for the European general public to gain access to the 
services of the information society.  

 International Telecommunications Union: A collaborating body 
within the UN for telecommunications issues. 

International Watch and Warning (IWWN) comprises 
17 Member States and aims to improve international 
coordination of common interests within the area of Watch & 
Warning. 

KBM 

Swedish Emergency Management Agency 
(Krisberedskapsmyndigheten) 

KK-stiftelsen 

The Knowledge Foundation (Stiftelsen för kunskaps and 
kompetensutveckling) 

NCF  

OECD  

Pharming 

Phishing 

RAKEL 

RPS 

Sitic 

Nordic CERT Forum (NCF) is a regional forum for 
government and academic CSIRTs in the Nordic countries. 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is a 
collaborating body for developed western industrial countries. 
The OECD was formed in 1960 with the aim of promoting 
economic development and growth in the Member States. 

 Pharming is an advanced form of phishing. A perpetrator can 
arbitrarily redirect a visitor from one website to another by 
manipulating the translation between the IP address and the 
domain name.   

 A kind of spam mail that aims to gather sensitive information 
from Internet users.  

Radiocommunications for Effective Management 
(Radiokommunikation för effektiv ledning) 

National Police Board (Rikspolisstyrelsen) 

Sweden's IT incident centre (Sitic) is an independent 
organisation that supports society in the event of threats to IT 
security. Sitic is part of the National Post and Telecom Agency 
(PTS). Sitic assesses and provides information on an ongoing 
basis about threats to IT security that risk affecting authorities, 
county councils, municipalities and businesses. Sitic provides a 
function for information exchange in respect of IT incidents 
between organisations in society and disseminates information 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

57 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 1 
 

 

SLA  

Spam 

SOTI 

S-BGP 

S-BIT 

TF-CSIRT  

to society about new problems that can disrupt IT systems. 
Sitic also provides information and advice about preventive 
measures and compiles and issues statistics as a basis for 
continual improvements in preventive work. 

(Service Level Agreement) a service guarantee in the form of 
an agreement where, for example, a business providing an 
Internet service undertakes to maintain a certain quality of its 
service with an obligation to pay compensation if the service 
provider does not satisfy the contractual requirements. 

Spam is the same as junk mail; undesired e-mail messages. 

The area of cooperation 'technical infrastructure'; an area of 
collaboration for authorities within, among other things, 
electronic communications, power and water supplies for the 
planning and coordination of emergency preparedness 
measures. 

The sender of BGP information can be validated through the 
Secure Border Gateway Protocol (S-BGP), produced by BBN 
Technologies (i.e. there is no standard), at the same time as 
unauthorised changes of information cannot be made without 
being detected. 

The coordination office for crime-related IT incidents; 
coordination function between the National Criminal Police 
and the Swedish Security Service (SÄPO). 

Task Force – Collaboration of Security Incident Response 
Teams. TF-CSIRT endeavours to promote cooperation 
between CSIRTs (Computer Security Incident Response 
Teams) in Europe. Its main objectives involve creating a 
forum for the exchange of experiences and knowledge, 
establishing pilot services for European CSIRTs and 
establishing new CSIRTs. TF-CSIRT has been established to 
support cooperation between CSIRTs in Europe.  

Top-level domain   Level in the DNS hierarchy that lies immediately below the 

highest level, that is to say root.  

WSIS 

World Summit on the Information Society 

58 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2

Appendix 2 – Organisations that are relevant to Internet 
security 
The following section first describes the most important international 
organisations that, in their work to administer, develop and standardise the 
Internet, allocate a large proportion of their resources to security work. Thereafter 
follows a description of those Swedish organisations of importance for Internet-
related security work. 

International organisations 

ICANN 
In 1998, a white paper from the USA government established a private 
foundation called the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, 
(ICANN) in order to meet the worldwide demand for a civil organisation to 
administer the names and addresses, etc. of the Internet. ICANN is a private 
sector, non-profit corporation based in Los Angeles. Its role is to be responsible 
for the administration and security of the domain name system (DNS), the 
allocation of address space in the Internet Protocol, the coordination of new 
parameters for the Internet Protocol as well as being responsible for the Internet's 
root server system. A number of advisory committees help ICANN by providing 
it with information. The most important of these committees are the 
Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC), whose members are government 
representatives, the Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC), where 
experts work with security issues concerning DNS and routing, and the Root 
Server System Advisory Committee (RSSAC) that works with security regarding 
DNS root servers. The committees themselves are not entitled to represent 
ICANN. The members of ICANN's board are elected by the various support 
groups and advisory committees. The ICANN board consists of 15 voting 
members, including the organisation's president, and six observers, non-voting 
'liaisons'. 

ISOC 
The Internet Society (ISOC) is an international organisation working to enhance 
the availability and utility of the Internet. ISOC, which was founded in 1992, is a 
non-profit society formally based in the USA. In pace with the development of 
the Society, national sub-branches, 'Chapters', have been established in many 
countries. ISOC-SE is the Swedish sub-branch. ISOC's goals are a stable and 
flexible expansion of the Internet, access to the Internet for everyone, open, 
unrestricted and ethical use of the Internet and increased knowledge about the 
Internet among decision makers, in industry, within organisations and among 
individuals. ISOC is working both with the technologies of the Internet and with 
its effects on society. Development of the Internet architecture and the technical 
standards for the network forms an important part of this technical work. ISOC 
is, among other things, the organisation home for the groups responsible for the 
development of Internet standards, for example IETF. ISOC also attends to 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

59 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2 
 

research and training, as well as the worldwide dissemination of information. 
ISOC makes a special contribution by supporting the spread of the Internet in 
developing countries, among other things through training and other support 
projects. The board of ISOC comprises people from all over the world. Many of 
them have made great contributions to the development of the Internet and 
Internet technology. 

IETF 
Standardised methods and protocols are a prerequisite for functioning 
communications over the Internet. Traditionally, the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF) has carried out the work to produce these, which has been 
described as a process of drawing up joint documents rather than building up an 
organisation27. Among other things, the IETF arranges discussions about the 
various issues concerning the Internet and has been organised so that all 
interested parties can participate in the work of the organisation. Standardisation 
documents for the Internet – 'RFCs' (Request for Comments) – are drawn up by 
working groups. These working groups are primarily in the form of mailing lists 
and can be joined by anybody. Each mailing list has its own rules and aim, which 
are laid down when the group is set up. RFCs vary in importance as shown by 
their designation in the document, such as 'full standard', 'best current practice', 
'experimental' or 'informational'. There are approxiately 400 RFCs.  

The IETF has been publishing various standards in different subjects since the 
end of the 1960s and the documents cover a large number of issues. Among 
others, there are RFCs dealing with the use of domain names, server operations 
and recommendations in respect of operational security. The group is disbanded 
when the aim of the group is achieved, which often means the publication of an 
RFC. The IETF also arranges conferences where participants meet face to face. 
However, decisions made on these occasions are not more important than those 
made on the mailing lists, in fact rather the opposite. Decisions are made by a 
'rough consensus', that is to say practically all participants on the mailing list 
should give their consent or at least not oppose a decision. The IETF has a 
secretariat with employees who primarily arrange conferences and maintain a 
register of 'Internet Drafts', that is to say proposals for RFCs.  

IAB 
The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) is ISOC's advisory body for technical 
issues. The IAB has been commissioned to attend to the overall development of 
the Internet and is not unlike a coordinator for the various rather autonomous 
groups and processes aiming to maintain and develop the Internet's technical 
systems. The IAB draws up agreements with, for example, RFC Editor and IANA 
about the information these are responsible for, and is also an 'appeals body' if 
somebody considers that there is something wrong with the IETF process. The 
IAB appoints representatives for IESG and IRTF is its direct subsidiary body. 

                                                 
27 See  'Vem gör vad i Internetsverige? Nätet och aktörerna (Who does what on the Internet in 
Sweden? The network and stakeholders), ISOC-SE 

60 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2

The members of IAB are formally elected by ISOC, but in practice the same 
process is used as in the election of IESG members, NomCom.  

IRTF 
Where the IETF attends to application protocols and resolving specific problems, 
the task for 'The Internet Research Task' (IRTF) is repsonsibility for long-term 
basic research within the area of the Internet. The work is carried out by Research 
Groups (RG). The IRTF reports to the IAB.  

IESG 
The Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) can be said to be IETF's 
management team. Its main task is to examine how the working groups have 
reached their conclusions and other RFC proposals. Objections from two of the 
group members are enough to stop an RFC proposal. A very important task of 
the IESG is to ensure that the various standards do not conflict. The IESG 
comprises 'Area Directors' (AD). Each one is elected for a period of two years 
with responsibility for a particular subject field, for example security or routing. At 
present, there are eight fields. Area Directors are formally elected by the IAB, but 
in practice the IAB always approves the proposal of the special election 
committee, NomCom.  

RFC Editor 
The RFC Editor is one or more people who, in collaboration with the IESG, have 
the main function of determining which Internet Drafts should become RFCs. 
The RFC Editor should also ensure that all RFCs are set up in a uniform manner 
and that there is a reliable archive of all of the RFCs. The RFC Editor is 
commissioned by the IAB. At present, the IAB has a contract with the ISI 
Department of the University of Southern California (USC) for this assignment.  

IANA 
It is the task of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) to keep a 
check on all of the parameters and values that are needed for different Internet 
standards. The most important is the allocation of IP numbers and domain 
names. The IANA is a technical function within the organisation ICANN, which 
is now IANA's client. However, the technical management of the Internet 
Protocol is left to the IETF/IESG/IAB. A description of what IANA is working 
on can be found in RFCs and a MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) between 
ICANN and IETF. 

Verisign 
The private security company, Verisign, which among other things is a publisher 
of certificates for digital signatures, has an important role as regards DNS security. 
Through a contract with the US Department of Commerce, they are responsible 
for the operational management of the master name server for the most critical 
part of the DNS, namely the root zone file which includes all of the top-level 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

61 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2 
 

domains, for example .se and .com. Updates for the root zone files are distributed 
from Verisign to the thirteen root server bodies for root. 

In 1999, Verisign (previously NSI or Network Solutions) was divided into two 
different functions. One part is Network Solutions, a registrar where you can 
register domain names in many top-level domains, the other is Verisign Global 
Registry System (VGRS), which manages the DNS for '.com' and '.net'.  

RIPE 
Réseaux IP Européens (RIPE) is a collaborative organisation for Internet 
operators in Europe, other parts of the former Soviet Union, western parts of 
Asia up to and including Afghanistan, and Africa down to around the equator. 
RIPE aims to coordinate work so that the European part of the Internet 
functions effectively. Tbe bulk of the work is done in various working groups. An 
important part of RIPE's operation is to create instructions for the regional 
registry, RIPE NCC, which exists within RIPE's area. Other registries can be 
found in North America (ARIN), South America (LACNIC and Asia (APNIC). A 
fifth has recently been established in Africa (AFRINIC). They are given 
responsibility by IANA for allocating IP numbers in their areas. RIPE NCC 
allocates just over 1 000 local registries, which in their turn give IP numbers to 
end-users. 

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
The W3C is an international body with the aim of developing the World Wide 
Web. One university in the USA, one in Europe and one in Japan act as joint 
hosts for the consortium. Timothy Berners-Lee, the creator of the web, is the 
Director of the W3C. The W3C was founded in 1994 and is thereby considerably 
younger than the IETF. The W3C is working on developing joint protocols for 
the web and has an important role as an archive of specifications of, for example, 
all of the different versions of the web's code language HTML and its various 
commands. The W3C manages, for example, XML, SOAP and thereby the 
foundation for many web services. The W3C also develops software to 
demonstrate the new opportunities that are available on the web. In addition to 
this, the consortium organises meetings and conferences. Only organisations and 
businesses can become members of the W3C. The consortium is careful to 
remain neutral between the various businesses and organisations.  

International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
The ITU is an international organisation for the global coordination of 
telecommunication networks and services. The ITU was founded in 1865 and has 
been the UN's specialised agency within the field of telecommunications since 
1947. The organisation is based in Geneva, Switzerland. One of the ITU's tasks, 
among others, is to maintain and extend international cooperation for the rational 
use of telecommunications of all kinds and to promote technical development 
within the field.  

The main work of the ITU is divided into three different sectors:  

62 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2

The Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) mainly works to coordinate the radio 
spectrum and wireless services. 

The Development Sector (ITU-D) is focussed on encouraging the use and 
dissemination of telecommunications networks and services in developing 
countries. 

The Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is working to develop 
standards within the telecommunications field. There are currently approximately 
2 800 Recommendations.  

Furthermore, the ITU is responsible for the allocation of country codes (CC) for 
countries, geographical areas and for global telecommunications services. These 
allocations follow the principles referred to in Recommendation E.164, published 
by ITU-T. The organisation is governed by a constitution, a convention 
administrative council. The Plenipotentiary Conference (PP) is the supreme 
authority according to Article 7 of the Constitution. According to Article 3 of the 
Constitution, the Member States take on the duties of the Constitution and the 
Convention. In order to take part in the work of the ITU-T, it is necessary to be a 
member. There are three different categories of members: 

•  Member States – the same as the States that contribute work with the UN, 

currently amounting to 191. 

•  Sector Members – primarily made up of businesses from private industry, 

for example telecom operators and equipment manufacturers.  

•  Associates – Small companies that are only entitled to take part in the 

work of a selected single work group.  

Over 450 private businesses are members of the ITU. Technical work within the 
ITU is carried out by thirteen study groups.  

Swedish organisations 

The Internet Infrastructure Foundation (II Foundation or IIS)  
The II Foundation has two main functions: first, to manage and develop the 
Internet's Swedish top-level domain, .se; second, to promote the development of 
the Internet infrastructure in Sweden. The II Foundation was founded in 1997 on 
the initiative of ISOC-SE for this purpose, as the .se domain had started to grow 
more and more rapidly and needed a stable organisation that could take long-term 
responsibility. At the same time, the Foundation launched the wholly-owned 
operations company NIC-SE to look after the daily operational and administrative 
management of .se. There was a reorganisation in 2006 when NIC-SE was 
dissolved as a private company and in conjunction with this the II Foundation 
took over the operational management of the .se domain. Since 2004, the II 
Foundation has been annually giving out grants to selected natural or legal 
persons in order to promote initiatives within Internet security and development 
and support projects that do not normally receive money from research councils, 
research foundations and other research funding bodies.  

National Post and Telecom Agency 

63 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2 
 

ISOC-SE 
The Swedish sub-branch of the Internet Society (ISOC-SE) is a not-for-profit 
association, whose aim is to develop the Internet. It is the Swedish branch of the 
Internet Society (ISOC), which is an international not-for-profit association 
working both with the network infrastructure and with issues about how the 
Internet influences working life, school and leisure time. Members of the ISOC-
SE can be either individuals or organisations. The aim of the Society is to 
disseminate information about the Internet's function, technologies and 
regulations as well as acting as a forum where members can exchange experiences 
with each other and with non-members. Other main tasks are to act as a 
consultation body and to actively monitor important inquiries. A number of 
working groups look after certain specific subjects and the Society collaborates 
with other Internet-related organisations. The ISOC-SE has been actively engaged 
in the work to establish an organisation for domain name management in Sweden 
and appoints two board members to the II Foundation.   

TU-stiftelsen  
The sole purpose of the Stiftelsen for telematikens utveckling (The Foundation 
for Telematic Development –  the TU Foundation) is to be owner of the Netnod 
Internet Exchange in Sweden AB. The structure of the foundation has been 
chosen to create stable and long-term ownership structure for Netnod AB.  In 
this way, it is guaranteed that national Internet exchange points are operated and 
developed in a competition-neutral and independent way.  

Netnod AB 
Netnod Internet Exchange in Sweden AB (Netnod) establishes and operates 
exchange points for the exchange of traffic on the Internet between the various 
operators' parts of the network. Netnod was established as a competition-neutral 
and independent organisation for these exchange points. Netnod AB is owned by 
the TU Foundation. The purpose of the exchange points is to ensure high 
reliability in the central parts of the Internet in Sweden. For a long time, a large 
part of the Internet traffic in Sweden had travelled through the exchange point in 
Stockholm (previously called D-GIX). This was doubled in 1997 to reduce 
vulnerability and exchange points in Gothenburg, Malmö, Sundsvall and Luleå 
have now been established. Each operator pays a fixed annual charge for 
connection to an Internet exchange point. This charge is calculated to cover the 
operational costs of the exchange point as well as enabling the establishment of 
new exchange points. Netnod consults the Internet operators with national 
coverage in Sweden about all important issues. This occurs, among other ways, 
through participation in SOF (see below). 

SOF 
Svenska Operatörers Forum (The Swedish Operators Forum – SOF) is a 
collaborating body for the main operators on the Internet in Sweden. SOF mainly 
works with issues concerning national Internet exchange points, interconnection 
and other functions and operational issues that are necessary for the Internet to 

64 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2

function well in Sweden. SOF worked informally for many years, but became a 
not-for-profit association in May 1999. SOF is represented in the II Foundation 
and has been a reference body for the Swedish Agency for Public Management's 
Internet inquiry. SOF can also be described as the counterpart to Netnod, the 
company that manages the national exchange points in Sweden. SOF is principally 
composed of operators with a direct connection to the national Internet exchange 
points on the network. 

Autonomica 
Autonomica is the company that, on the assignment of its owner Netnod, looks 
after the operation of the Internet exchange points in Sweden. Autonomica is also 
responsible for the operation of one of the DNS root servers located in Sweden, 
as well for as a series of joint competition-neutral services in the Swedish branch 
of the Internet. Among others, several experts on the DNS system and advanced 
routing work at the company. 

SUNET 
Before commercial suppliers had started to use Internet technology and had 
established themselves as suppliers of Internet services, the universities had 
shown the way by connecting their computer network to the Internet. The 
Swedish University Computer Network (SUNET) linked together the country's 
universities and colleges. Following a Government initiative, many of the 
country's museums and libraries also gained access to the Internet via SUNET. 
SUNET offers those organisations that are connected all of the normal Internet 
services, including Multicast and the transmission of e-mail as fax. Furthermore, 
the organisation has some popular content services, for example a large and 
popular FTP archive (ftp.sunet.se) where software and other files can be 
downloaded, an electronic catalogue of e-mail addresses and a web catalogue of 
web addresses that are grouped by subject. SUNET is managed by a board mainly 
made up of representatives from higher education. Administratively, SUNET 
answers to the Swedish Research Council. Umeå University has been assigned 
responsibility for the coordination and development of SUNET and the 
responsibility for SUNET's information services. KTH has been assigned 
responsibility for the operation along with Telia, who has been assigned to look 
after the basic supervision. SUNET is a part of the Nordic university computer 
network, NORDUnet, which links together the university computer networks of 
Nordic countries with high capacity connections. This is then connected to the 
rest of the Internet. In addition to basic Internet services, NORDUnet operates a 
DNS root name server with Netnod. The operation and supervision of 
NORDUnet is looked after by KTHNOC (see below).  

KTHNOC 
The KTH Network Operation Center (KTHNOC) is a competence centre at the 
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. KTHNOC has operational and 
developmental responsibility on the assignment of customers and is responsible, 
among other things, for parts of the central operation of the Swedish University 
Computer Network, SUNET, and the Nordic equivalent, NORDUnet. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

65 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2 
 

KTHNOC has played a significant role in the development of the Internet in 
Sweden, principally through having had operational responsibility for the first 
operator exchange point in the country for a number of years.  

SNUS 
The Swedish Network Users’ Society (SNUS) is a not-for-profit association for 
Swedish network users aimed at increasing network knowledge in Sweden and 
thereby our national competiveness. SNUS is principally aimed at the technical 
aspects of network use. SNUS works to disseminate knowledge, mainly through 
working groups, seminars, test reports and a member magazine. Its aim is to 
increase the understanding of network technology, propel the development of 
interconnection and collaboration within the field and test which technical 
solutions function in reality. SNUS is based on individual membership. Businesses 
can also be members, but this is going to be phased out. SNUS is most well 
known for its interoperability tests. These are large tests where manufacturers, in 
the full glare of publicity, test whether their hardware and software products can 
interact as intended with other products. 

SSNf 
The Swedish Urban Network Association (SSNf) is an independent trade 
organisation for network owners who are actively engaged in the development of 
a broadband infrastructure. The association was founded in 1998 and the 
members are municipalities and companies that own or operate communications 
networks that are accessible by everyone. It also has members in the operator and 
supplier areas of the telecommunications and data communications sector. SSNf 
looks after the interests of network owners where there is a need to work towards 
an alternative, independent infrastructure for the telecommunications and data 
communications market that stimulates competition between service providers in 
all parts of the country. The Association also looks after the interests of network 
owners in its capacity as an advisory body on legislation and standardisation issues 
and follows developments within technology and the market. The Association 
also offers its members the opportunity to exchange experiences on matters such 
as operation and maintenance, operating reliability and documentation.  

BitoS  
Branschföreningen för innehålls- och tjänsteleverantörer på onlinemarknaden i 
Sverige (The Trade Association for Content and Service Suppliers on Online 
Markets in Sweden – BitoS) brings together businesses that develop and sell 
services via the Internet and in other electronic environments. The work of BitoS 
primarily takes place through various work groups that fund their operations 
themselves. The Association has the task of working for a clear, flexible and 
technology-independent set of rules and regulations facilitating the establishment 
of a market subject to free competition and based on open solutions. The 
Association is also working towards members following good business practices. 
BitoS represents and markets the trade relating to content services and also acts as 
an advisory body. The Association has (through petitions, among other things) 
run a campaign against the Personal Data Act and the threat to freedom of 

66 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 2

expression on the networks that this Act constitutes. Another important issue for 
BitoS is to create an instrument to measure visits on websites and other values 
that are important to develop the Internet as a medium for business.  

IT-företagen 
IT-Företagen is a trade organisation for companies that develop, manufacture and 
sell IT products and IT services. IT-Företagen has approximately 500 member 
companies. IT-Företagen promotes the increasing use of IT in Sweden and 
provides vital support to the development of individual member companies by 
promoting business opportunities and removng barriers. IT-Företagen is one of 
the member organisations of the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. Any 
company that is a member of IT-Företagen is also a member of the 
Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. 

The Industry Security Delegation of the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise 
The Industry Security Delegation (NSD) is a forum for the exchange of ideas, 
experience and knowledge for issues relating to security. This is to promote better 
security and risk awareness in business and among the public. Work within the 
NSD aims to encourage risks being assumed on a well-informed basis through the 
exchange of experiences, increased knowledge, continuous awareness of reality 
and contacts with stakeholders within the field of security. 

Confederation of Swedish Enterprise 
The Confederation of Swedish Enterprise represents just over 55 000 small, 
medium-sized and large businesses. It is organised into 51 trade and employer 
associations. The Confederation is made up of members of the associations of the 
Confederation of Swedish Enterprises. The Security Issues Section of the 
Confederation of Swedish Enterprises arranges regular courses, some of which 
are organised in collaboration with the Confederation's Security Delegation.  

SIG Security 
SIG Security is a non-profit association and comprises 1800 members with a 
board that is elected at the annual general meeting of the association. SIG 
Security, which was founded in 1980, is an interest group for people active within 
the field of information security, and members are found in all sectors of society. 
The association's area of operation is to foster understanding about and provide 
inspiration for work concerning information security. 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

67 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 3

Appendix 3 – The operators' responsibility for security of 
their services 
It is stated in Chapter 6, Section 3 of The Electronic Communications Act that a 
party that provides a public electronic communications service shall implement 
appropriate measures to ensure that the data processed is protected. Article 4 of 
the Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the 
protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (referred to below 
as 'the Directive') deals with the obligation of service providers to implement 
appropriate technical and organisational measures measures to safeguard security 
of their services, which could possibly comprise measures to prevent the 
dissemination of virus and malicious codes.28 Article 4 has been implemented in 
Sweden through Chapter 6, Section 3 of The Electronic Communications Act. 
This provision has been formulated so that it refers to security of 'data processed' 
and not as the provision is formulated in the Directive, 'security of its services'. It 
has thereby been given a significantly more limited scope of application than in 
the Directive.29 As Chapter 6, Section 3 of the Act is worded, it is unclear whether 
the provision could possibly be used to filter virus traffic, for example, as it does 
not appear to be obvious that this contributes to enhancing the security of the 
'data processed'. 

The report PTS-ER 2005:7, 'Swedish strategy to secure the Internet 
infrastructure', concludes that there are currently few opportunities for operators 
to implement active measures, such as the filtering of communications, unless 
they have obtained the consent of all of the users affected. This report also 
proposes that operators should be given an opportunity to implement such 
measures.  
In Sweden's standpoint for the forthcoming review of the EU's systems of rules 
and regulations for electronic communications, including the recommendations 
on relevant markets – response to the European Commission's 'Call for input' of 
25 November 2005, of 8 February 2006, it has been pointed out that the 
opportunity of filtering should be investigated. Filtering in this context refers to 
the opportunity of all operators to implement necessary measures from a security 
perspective, such as, for example, the filtering of computer viruses, overload 
attacks, etc. 
Whether this should really only be an opportunity or, in the event of a certain 
minimum level of security, should instead constitute an obligation, may be 

                                                 
28 The possibility of filtering and impeding Spam under the Directive is dealt with, for example in  
ENISA's 'Survey on Industry Measures taken to comply with National Measures implementing 
Provisions of the Regulatory Framework for Electronic Communications relating to the Security 
of Services', Ref. number ENISA/TD/SP/06/0055, published in February 2006.     
 
29 It can be noted that Article 3 of the Directive should be applied to 'the processing of personal 
data' in connection with electronic communications services, even if it can be discerned, according 
to the preamble under item 20, that the aim of the legislator is to provide the service provider with 
some scope for action and a requirement to as such maintain the security of the service.  
  

National Post and Telecom Agency 

69 

 
Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 3 
 

discussed. As regards the general measures required to ensure that the services 
and networks satisfy reasonable function and security requirements, such 
requirements may be regulated by general obligations. As pointed out above, 
Article 4 of the Directive includes an obligation for operators to implement 
appropriate technical and organisational measures to safeguard security of their 
services, which could possibly comprise measures to prevent the spreading of 
viruses and malicious codes. The aim of the Directive appears to be to impose 
upon operators the responsibility for impeding, discovering and responding to 
unacceptable behaviour, unintentional interruption and other disruptions in 
communications. Chapter 6, Section 3 of The Electronic Communications Act 
refers to the security of 'data processed', which means that it is unclear whether 
the provision could be possibly used to filter, for example, virus traffic, as it does 
not seem obvious that this contributes to enhancing security for the 'data 
processed'. It could possibly be argued that an operator should not only have an 
opportunity to implement measures, as in the current case, but should also have 
an obligation to implement, in any event, such measures as are necessary. 
Amending Chapter 6, Section 3 of the Act so that it corresponds more closely 
with the Directive could possibly provide the supervisory authorities with an 
opportunity to impose such requirements.  

As regards more specific and active measures, such as the filtering of traffic, it 
may also be considered that operators should have an obligation to implement 
measures, as the efficient prevention of dissemination requires that several 
providers are implementing similar measures. A later review and analysis of both 
the action of the stakeholders and the general level of security may give PTS cause 
to revert to these adjustments.   

70 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 4

 

 

 

 

 

Appendix 4 – CIIP Directory, national Swedish contact 
points 
The purpose of the 'CIIP-directory' is to provide a reference document of 
national contacts in the field of Critical Information Infrastructure Protection 
(CIIP). The document was initiated by the G8 'CIIP Experts Conference' in 
March 2003 and is administered by the British infrastructure security authority, 
the National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre, NISCC. The CIIP 
directory currently contains the government contact details for 18 countries. 

No.  Area of expertise 

Stakeholder 
responsible 

Contact 

Alert & Warning 

PTS 

1 

2 

Threat 

3 

Vulnerability 

4 

Industry 

PTS 

RPS 

KBM 

PTS 

FRA 

KBM 

PTS 

Sitic 

Sitic 

S-BIT 

KBM 

Sitic 

FRA 

KBM 

PTS 

5 

Policy 

Government Offices 

Ministry of Industry, 
Employment and 
Communications 

6 

7 

8 

9 

R & D 

Sharing 

Crime 

SCADA 

KBM 

PTS 

KBM 

RPS 

KBM 

FRA 

KBM 

PTS 

KBM 

S-BIT 

KBM 

FRA 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

71 

Strategy to improve Internet security in Sweden  - APPENDIX 4 
 

No.  Area of expertise  Responsible 
stakeholder 

10  Assurance 

11  Standards 

12  Resilience 

13  Exercises 

FMV 

KBM 

KBM 

FMV 

PTS 

KBM 

PTS 

KBM 

PTS 

Contact 

FMV (CSEC) 

KBM 

KBM 

FMV (CSEC) 

PTS 

SOTI 

PTS 

KBM 

PTS 

14  Defence 

Swedish Armed Forces   FM CERT 

 

 

72 

National Post and Telecom Agency 

