Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport DDPS 

 

  

  

 

 

National strategy for the protection of 
Switzerland against cyber risks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19.06.2012 (rev.) 

 

 

 

1/42 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
SUMMARY .................................................................................................................. 3 
1 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 5 
2  CYBER RISKS ...................................................................................................... 9 
2.1  Methods .......................................................................................................... 9 
2.2  Players and motives ..................................................................................... 10 
3  EXISTING STRUCTURES .................................................................................. 12 
3.1  Private sector and operators of critical infrastructure .................................... 12 
3.2  Confederation ............................................................................................... 14 
3.3  Cantons ........................................................................................................ 21 
3.4  Population ..................................................................................................... 22 
3.5 
International cooperation .............................................................................. 23 
3.6  Legal basis ................................................................................................... 23 
3.7  Conclusion .................................................................................................... 26 
4  SYSTEM FOR PROTECTING AGAINST CYBER RISKS ................................... 28 
4.1  Overriding goals............................................................................................ 28 
4.2  Framework conditions and prerequisites ...................................................... 29 
4.3  Spheres of action and measures .................................................................. 30 
4.3.1  Sphere of action 1: Research and development .................................. 31 
4.3.2  Sphere of action 2: Risk and vulnerability analysis .............................. 32 
4.3.3  Sphere of action 3: Analysis of the threat situation .............................. 33 
4.3.4  Sphere of action 4: Competence building ............................................. 35 
4.3.5  Sphere of action 5: International relations and initiatives ..................... 36 
4.3.6  Sphere of action 6: Continuity and crisis management ........................ 38 
4.3.7  Sphere of action 7: Legal basis ............................................................ 40 
4.3.8  Coordination unit for implementing the strategy ................................... 41 

 

 
 

 

 

2/42 

 

 

 

 

 

SUMMARY 
Information and communication infrastructure has fundamentally changed the private sector, 
state  and society. The  use  of  cyberspace (e.g.  Internet  and  mobile  networks)  has  brought 
many  advantages  and  opportunities.  However,  digital  networking  also  exposes  information 
and communication infrastructure to criminal, intelligence, politico-military or terrorist abuse 
or  functional  impairment.  Disturbances,  manipulation  and  specific  attacks  carried  out  via 
electronic networks are the risks that an information society entails. It is to be expected that 
these risks will tend to increase in the future. 
As  the  protection  of  information  and  communication  infrastructure  from  cyber  threats  is  in 
Switzerland's  national  interest,  the  Federal  Council  commissioned  the  national  strategy for 
the  protection  of  Switzerland  against  cyber  risks.  The  Federal  Council  is  pursuing  the 
following strategic goals:  
  Early identification of threats and dangers in the cyber field 
  Improvement of the resilience of critical infrastructure 
  Effective reduction of cyber risks, especially cyber crime and cyber sabotage 
This  strategy  also  takes  account  of  several  parliamentary  proposals  calling  for  stronger 
measures against cyber risks. 
Essential basic conditions and prerequisites for reducing cyber risks are and remain acting 
with personal responsibility, national cooperation between the private and public sector, and 
cooperation  with  foreign  countries.  The  mutual  exchange  of  information  on  a  permanent 
basis is to create transparency and trust. The state should intervene only if public interests 
are at stake or if acting in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.  
Dealing  with  cyber  risks  is  to  be  understood  as  part  of  an  integrated  business,  production 
and administration process in which all players from the administrative and technical levels 
up to top management must be included. An effective approach for handling cyber risks is 
founded on the principle that a great many existing tasks and responsibilities of authorities, 
the private sector and the population exhibit cyber-specific aspects. The rationale underlying 
the national strategy is that every organisational unit, be it political, economic or social, bears 
responsibility  for  identifying  these  cyber  aspects,  addressing  the  risks  entailed  in  their 
particular processes and reducing them insofar as possible. The decentralised structures in 
the public and private sector are to be strengthened for these tasks, and existing resources 
and processes are to be used consistently.  
The ongoing combination of technical and non-technical information is necessary to analyse 
and  assess  cyber  risks  comprehensively  in  order  for  it  to  be  possible  to  disseminate  the 
findings from the investigations. 
A  crisis  situation  is  characterised  by  a  successful  attack  with  considerable  consequences 
and  requires  a  specific  form  of  crisis  management  from  the  players  involved,  including 
criminal prosecution. 
 
Against this background, this strategy proposes a series of concrete measures with seven 
spheres of action:  
 
 
 

 

 

3/42 

 

 

 

 

 

Sphere of action 1 
Research and development 
Sphere of action 2 
Risk and vulnerability analysis 

Sphere of action 3 
Analysis of the threat landscape 

Sphere of action 4 
Competence building 

Sphere of action 5 
International relations and 
initiatives 

Sphere of action 6 
Continuity and crisis 
management 

Sphere of action 7 
Legal foundations 

Measures 

1  New risks in connection with cyber crime are to be researched 

Measures 

2  Independent evaluation of systems 

Risk analyses to minimise risks in collaboration with authorities, ICT 
service providers and system suppliers 

3  Testing of ICT infrastructure for systemic, organisational and technical 

vulnerabilities 

Measures 

4  Establishment of a picture of the situation and its development 
5  Review of incidents for the further development of measures 
6  Case overview and coordination of inter-cantonal clusters of cases 

Measures 

7  Establishment of an overview of the competence building offering and 

identification of gaps 

8  Filling of gaps in competence building and increased use of high-quality 

offerings 

Measures 

9  Active participation of Switzerland in the area of Internet governance 
10  Cooperation at the international security policy level 
11  Coordination of those involved in initiatives and best practices relating to 

security and assurance processes 

Measures 
12  Strengthening and improving resilience to disturbances and incidents 
13  Coordination of activities, primarily with those directly involved, and 

support of decision-making processes with the relevant expertise  

14  Active measures to identify the perpetrator and possible impairment of its 

infrastructure in the event of a specific threat 

15  Establishment of a plan for management procedures and processes to 

ensure timely problem-solving 

Measures 
16  Evaluation of existing legislation on the basis of measures and 

implementation concepts and priorisation of immediate adjustment needs 

 
The designated federal agencies should implement the measures within the context of their 
existing mandate by the end of 2017. Partners from authorities, the private sector and society 
are  to  be  involved  in  this  implementation  process.  A  coordination  unit  will  verify 
implementation of the measures as well as the need for further provisions to minimise risk. 
This coordination unit should be established in a federal agency.  
 
 

 

 

 

4/42 

 

 

 

 

 

this  also  means 

INTRODUCTION 

1 
Global digital networking has created unforeseen possibilities, both good and bad. The state, 
the private sector and society make use of information and communication infrastructure and 
to  cyberspace  (Internet,  mobile  networks  and  applications,  e-business,  e-
access 
government,  computer-based  control  programmes).  However, 
that 
vulnerability and exposure to disruptions, manipulations and attacks have increased. Like the 
benefits,  the  possibilities  that  information  and  communication  infrastructure  provides  for 
criminal, intelligence, terrorist or military abuse or impairment are practically unlimited. It is 
likely that the underlying trend towards more networking, and thus the growing complexity of 
information and communication infrastructure, will continue. 
Switzerland's  functioning  as  a  holistic  system  (state,  private  sector,  traffic,  energy  supply, 
communication, etc.) depends on a growing number of mutually networked information and 
communication  facilities  (computers  and  networks).  This  infrastructure  is  vulnerable. 
Country-wide or long-lasting disruptions and attacks could have severe adverse effects for 
Switzerland's  technical,  economic  and  administrative  performance.  Such  attacks  can  be 
launched  by  a  variety  of  perpetrators  and  have  various  motives:  individual  perpetrators, 
political activists, criminal organisations intent on fraud or blackmail, state spies or terrorists 
who  want  to  disrupt  and  destabilise  the  state  and  society.  Information  and  communication 
technologies  (ICT)  are  particularly  attractive  as  targets  not  only  because  they  offer  many 
possibilities  for  abuse,  manipulation  and  damage,  but  also  because  they  can  be  used 
anonymously and with little effort. 
Protecting1 information and communication infrastructure from such disturbances and attacks 
is in Switzerland's national interest. Although measures have been taken in recent years to 
reduce cyber risks2, it has become evident that these have not been sufficient for all cases. 
Because  it  is  to  be  expected  that  there  will  be  an  increase  in  disruptions  and  attacks  on 
information and communication infrastructure (thereby affecting further facilities as well), the 
Federal  Council  instructed  the  Federal  Department  of  Defence,  Civil  Protection  and  Sport 
(DDPS)  on  10  December  2010  to  prepare  a  national  strategy  for  the  protection  of 
Switzerland against cyber risks. This strategy is to demonstrate what these risks look like at 
present, how well Switzerland is equipped to counter them, where the shortcomings lie and 
how they can be eliminated in the most effective and efficient manner. This national strategy 
for the protection of Switzerland against cyber risks is the result of that work3. 
 

                                            

1   This  refers  to  all  measures  to  protect  information  and  communication  infrastructure  against  unauthorised 
penetration and impairment of its functions, but not the fight against the dissemination of illegal content such 
as child pornography. The focus is on technical aspects, not on debating content such as false and misleading 
information and propaganda. 

2   Risks are defined according to the extent of damage expected and the likelihood of threats and dangers oc-

curring. Both are taken into account in the strategy. 

3   The  strategy  takes  into  account  various  parliamentary  procedural  requests  calling  for  stronger  measures 
against cyber risks: 08.3100 – Burkhalter motion: National strategy for fighting Internet crime; 08.3101 – Frick 
postulate: Protecting Switzerland more effectively against cyber crime; 10.3136 – Recordon postulate: Analy-
sis of the cyber war threat; 10.3625 – SKI-NR motion: Measures against cyber war; 10.3910 – postulate of the 
FDP – The Liberals: management and coordination unit for cyber threats; 10.4102 – Darbellay postulate: Con-
cept to protect Switzerland's digital infrastructure. 

5/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Cyber risks are manifold; the private sector, society and the state are exposed to them. An 
effective strategy for protecting against cyber risks therefore has to be comprehensive and 
include  all  essential  players,  in  both  the  public  and  private  sector,  operators  of  critical 
infrastructure  (CI),  users  and  producers.  This  strategy  for  the  protection  of  Switzerland 
against cyber risks is directed primarily at federal bodies and was prepared in collaboration 
with  representatives  from  all  departments,  various  CI  operators,  ICT  service  providers, 
system suppliers and the private sector. It describes the roles of the various players and the 
type of collaboration required for better protection against cyber risks. It thus forms the basis 
for closer cooperation with the cantons in the implementation phase. 
A  great  deal  of  services  are  offered  and  used  through  electronic  channels  today. 
Consequently,  the  presence  of  all  Internet  players  and  their  dependence  on  critical 
infrastructure  are  growing4.  The  private  sector  is  thus  very  vulnerable  to  cyber  risks,  e.g. 
attacks with the intent to commit fraud or obtain financial gain, or industrial espionage. It is 
thus essential to include the private sector, particularly CI operators, ICT service providers 
and system suppliers, in a strategy aimed at protecting against cyber risks. 
  Cyber  attacks  on  critical  infrastructure  can  have  particularly  severe  consequences,  as 
they can compromise vitally important functions or trigger fatal chain reactions. Therefore, 
(often  private)  CI  operators  play  a  key  role  as  providers  of  important  services  with 
overriding security implications.  

  State  authorities  and  administrations  at  all  levels  (Confederation,  cantons,  communes) 
can also be victims of cyber attacks. They can be affected in their legislative, executive or 
judiciary  functions,  but  also  as  operators  and  users  of  critical  infrastructure  or  research 
institutions.  

  Cyber risks also affect the population with all individual users of private and professional 
information  and  communication  systems  as  well  as  critical  infrastructure.  An  effective 
strategy against cyber risks must also take individual behaviour and the respective risks 
into account. 

First  and  foremost,  the  individual  players  are  themselves  responsible  for  maintaining  and 
optimising protective measures for minimising cyber risks. This lies in the nature of things: 
cyber risks are inherent in existing tasks, responsibilities and processes. It is therefore in the 
best  interests  of  users  to  devise  and  implement  tailor-made  solutions  for  area  or  branch-
specific  problems.  This  approach  also  corresponds 
to  Switzerland's  characteristic 
decentralised economic and state structure. The state provides subsidiary services to protect 
against cyber risks, e.g. by means of the exchange of information and intelligence findings. 
Where  area-specific  action  under  one's  own  responsibility  is  neither  effective,  efficient  nor 
practicable, the state should provide additional subsidiary services to protect against cyber 
risks  and  support  the  other  players.  This  strategy  should  show  where  the  weaknesses 
currently lie with regard to cyber risks. It describes where the state and other players are to 
provide services in order to raise the level of protection in Switzerland. 
It has to be noted that efforts to ensure protection can collide with other equally legitimate 
interests.  A  comprehensive  information  base,  including  technical-operational  and  strategic-

                                            

4   Critical infrastructure refers to infrastructure whose disruption, failure or destruction would have serious impli-
cations for society, the private sector and the state. It includes, for example, control and switchgear for energy 
supply or telecommunications. An inventory of critical infrastructure will be compiled by the national strategy 
for the protection of critical infrastructure. 

 

 

6/42 

 

 

 

 

 
political  data,  is  required  for  making  informed  decisions.  For  example,  protection  and 
economic  efficiency  considerations  can  get  in  the  way  where  the  establishment  of 
infrastructure redundancies and overcapacity would be beneficial in terms of protection but 
would  run  contrary  to  economic  considerations.  Moreover,  economic  liberalisation  has 
changed  the  initial  situation  in  that  a  growing  number  of  IC  operators  (e.g.  energy, 
telecommunications)  have  been  fully  or  at  least  partially  privatised  and  are  thus  primarily 
bound  by  market  logic.  A  second  area  where  conflicts  of  interests  can  arise  is  personal 
rights.  Efforts  to  improve  protective  mechanisms  in  cyberspace,  e.g.  by  means  of  stricter 
controls or surveillance, must be weighed against the protection of privacy. This strategy also 
has the task of taking these considerations into account and demonstrating how measures 
can be taken cautiously. 
Special  crisis  management  is  required  if  a  crisis  scenario  featuring  a  successful  attack  or 
lasting  disruption  with  serious  consequences  has  arisen.  The  focus  is  on  the  interplay  of 
actions within the existing structures, which have to be conducted with regard to politically 
directed  measures  throughout  the  country  and  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  criminal 
prosecution. Determining the cause and improving the affected infrastructure's resilience are 
also part and parcel of managing the crisis. For this purpose, CI operators and relevant ICT 
service  providers  or  system  suppliers  are  integrated  into  the  process  on  the  basis  of 
agreements. 
The strategy for the protection of Switzerland against cyber risks has interfaces with other 
projects  that,  at  the  federal  level,  are  also  concerned  with  security  issues  and  are 
thematically related. These activities need to be closely coordinated during implementation. 
The most important projects are as follows: 
Federal Council's strategy for an information society in Switzerland 
The Federal Council's strategy for an information society in Switzerland was adopted by the 
Federal Council on 9 March 2012. One of the focus areas of the Confederation's activity is 
"security  and  confidence".  The  objectives  pursued  with  this  include  extending  security 
powers,  protecting  against  cybercrime  and  increasing  the  resilience  of  information  and 
communication  technologies  (ICT)  and  of  critical  infrastructure.  The  associated  concept, 
which was approved by the Federal Council back in 2010, foresees measures to raise the 
awareness  of  the  population  as  well  as  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  regarding 
security-conscious and legally compliant use of ICT.  
National strategy for the protection of critical infrastructure 
The  Federal  Office  for  Civil  Protection  (FOCP)  was  instructed  by  the  Federal  Council  to 
coordinate work in the area of critical infrastructure protection (CIP). Based on the Federal 
Council's  CIP  basic  strategy  of  June  2009,  the  FOCP  is  to  compile  a  list  of  Switzerland's 
critical  infrastructure  (SCI  inventory),  whereby  critical  ICT  infrastructure  is  also  identified. 
Furthermore,  guidelines  are  to  be  prepared  to  improve  the  integral  protection  of  critical 
infrastructure.  The  CIP  basic  strategy  is  currently  being  expanded  to  form  a  national  CIP 
strategy and will be submitted to the Federal Council together with this strategy. 
Legislation on information security in the Confederation 
With its decree of 12 May 2010, the Federal Council instructed the DDPS to prepare a formal 
legal  basis  for  information  protection  and  information  security  in  order  to  ensure  and 
safeguard  the  confidentiality,  availability,  integrity  and  authenticity  of  data  and  information. 
This new legislation should primarily set out the information security principles for all federal 
authorities  and  govern  responsibilities  in  a  uniform  manner.  Specifications  will  thus  be 

 

 

7/42 

 

 

 

 

 
established  for  dealing  with  data  and  information  that  require  protection.  The  consultation 
procedure is planned for the end of 2012.  
Federal Council's report in fulfilment of the Malama postulate (Internal security. Clarification 
of powers)  
The Malama postulate requested the Federal Council to clarify in a report the constitutional 
division  of  powers  and  the  actual  allocation  of  tasks  between  the  Confederation  and  the 
cantons with regard to internal security. In the process, it was evaluated whether the existing 
division of powers is appropriate and sufficient in view of the current challenges. The Federal 
Council adopted the report on 2 March 2012.  
 

 

 

 

8/42 

 

 

 

 

 

2  CYBER RISKS 
Cyber risks are real and manifold. Even if there are no precise details, only rough estimates 
of how great the risks are, how frequently cyber attacks or technical disruptions occur and 
how  severe  the  actual  damage  or  damage  potential  really  is,  the  trend  of  recent  years  is 
undisputed and clear: incidents where states, companies and individuals have been attacked 
and damaged via data networks are increasing in both number and quality. 
This  is  a  consequence  of  the  growing  integration  of  information  and  communication 
infrastructure, of the mutual dependencies and the complexity of the supporting processes. 
With  growing  complexity,  these  systems  also  become  more  susceptible  to  errors  and 
interference,  and  the  potential  attack  opportunities  increase.  It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that 
cyber attacks are becoming more professional and dangerous. Aside from known cases, it 
has to be assumed that a large number of attacks go unreported or undetected, whereby the 
high  number  of  unrecorded  cases  is  also  related  to  the  loss  of  reputation  feared  by  the 
companies attacked.  
 

2.1  Methods 
Cyber attacks are carried out on computers, networks and data. They are aimed at disrupting 
the integrity of the data or the functioning of the infrastructure and restricting or interrupting 
their  availability.  They  also  seek  to  compromise  the  confidentiality  or  authenticity  of 
information by means of unauthorised reading, deletion or modification of data, connections 
or  server  services  are  overloaded,  information  channels  spied  upon  or  surveillance  and 
processing systems are manipulated in a targeted manner.  
Many  different  tools  are  used  by  cyber  attackers.  Malware  can  be  deployed  in  a  targeted 
manner  and  installed  on  third-party  computers  without  the  user's  knowledge  in  order  to 
undermine  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and  authenticity  of  data.  The  malfunction  of 
insufficiently  protected  and  maintained  operating  systems  and  applications  (e.g.  Internet 
browser  or  specialist  applications)  enables  the  attackers  to  take  control  of  the  affected 
computers. These computers can thus be controlled remotely via the Internet, and systems 
can have additional malware installed that is capable of accessing stored data and enabling 
the attackers to modify or delete the data, or to transfer it to themselves. Data such as users' 
keystrokes can be recorded and transferred to the attackers, or undesired access to unsafe 
websites can be initiated. In this way, credit card numbers, e-banking access codes or other 
confidential data can be stolen from the user. However, attackers also exploit organisational 
weaknesses  in  company  security  concepts  in  order  to  break  into  protected  systems. 
Perpetrators  are  often  able  to  break  into  the  corresponding  systems  via  data  processing 
procedures  and  insecurely  designed  or  poorly  maintained  systems  (e.g.  leaving  the  initial 
password).  
Manipulated  computers  are  also  used  by  attackers  to  send  coordinated  and  widely 
distributed batch requests to server services. The availability of data is thus disrupted. Such 
attacks are referred to as distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. 
In  many  cases,  classical  espionage  methods  are  used  in  order  to  compromise  the 
confidentiality of data (e.g. social engineering, theft or physical intrusion). Users of computer 
systems  are  tricked  into  providing  information  on  security  measures,  storage  media  are 
stolen  or  infrastructure  is  changed  in  situ  by  manipulating  the  configuration.  Sabotage 

 

 

9/42 

 

 

 

 

 
methods can also be used in order to attack industrial control systems5 in a targeted manner 
using malware that has been specifically developed for that purpose. 
Attackers enjoy several advantages in cyberspace, enabling them to protect themselves and 
their  attacks  from  (early)  discovery  and  (successful)  prosecution:  anonymity,  geographic 
distance,  legal  barriers,  eradication  of  traces  by  forging  technical  data  and  the  increasing 
technical complexity of their methods of attack. Based on the identified methods and tools, it 
is often impossible to unambiguously attribute attacks to the perpetrators and conclude what 
their motives are. All attackers have the same methods and tools at their disposal, but these 
can serve various purposes and serve other clients. 
The  most  frequent  cyber  attacks  can  be  carried  out  by  attackers  quite  simply,  as  the 
resources  and  technical  know-how  required  can  often  be  obtained  easily  and  at  low  cost. 
Most attacks are uncoordinated acts of vandalism, espionage and fraudulent acts online that 
usually  cause  only  limited  damage  (e.g.  reputational  damage)  and  can  be  remedied  quite 
easily.  Although  protection  against  such  attacks  is  important,  this  strategy  focuses 
particularly  on  attacks  with  the  potential  for  greater  damage  that  can  directly  or  indirectly 
severely compromise the ability of the private sector, state and society to function properly. 
More major damage can also be inflicted with specific attacks on particularly well-protected 
targets. Such attacks are much more costly and require substantially more effort.  
It is unrealistic to think that absolute protection against cyber attacks can be achieved. That 
is  why  it  is  essential  for  reactive  and  preventive  capabilities  to  be  in  harmony;  these 
capabilities  have  to  be  geared  towards  an  approach  aimed  at  minimising  risks,  limiting 
damage and restoring the initial situation.  
 

2.2  Players and motives 
The perpetrators are individuals, groups and states. They differ significantly in their intentions 
and in their technical and financial resources. 
State  or  state-financed  players  generally  have  greater  financial,  technical  and  personnel 
resources  and  are  better  organised,  which  explains  their  relatively  high  potential  for  doing 
damage. With their attacks, they seek to spy on, blackmail or compromise a state, individual 
authorities,  the  armed forces, the  private  sector  or  research  institutions.  They  can  also  be 
intent  on  acting  in  other  ways  against  national  or  economic  interests  in  order  to  pursue 
political  power  and  economic  interests.  Foreign  companies,  institutions  and  persons  in 
Switzerland are also at risk. 

In  October  2009,  espionage  malware  was  discovered  in  the  Federal  Department  of 
Foreign Affairs. It reached the network via e-mail and remained undetected for a long 
time. The armament companies RUAG and Mowag were attacked in a similar manner 
a few years earlier. In June 2010, Stuxnet malware was discovered. It had allegedly 
been  developed  to  damage  Iran's  uranium  enrichment  plants  by  inserting  a  software 
error in their SCADA systems. Because of its technical complexity, it is assumed that 
only state players could have launched this attack. 

                                            

Internationally, so-called SCADA systems (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) are talked about. These 
ICT systems are used for monitoring and controlling technical processes.  

10/42 

 

5  

 

 

 

 

 

 
Organised crime players are considered to pose a similar threat, as they usually also have 
professional  organisations,  major  financial  resources  and  specific  capabilities  at  their 
disposal.  Their  intention  to  achieve  personal  gain  and  their  massive,  sustained  and 
organised  cyber  attacks  on  the  economy  (e.g.  the  financial  system)  and  individuals  can 
cause considerable economic damage and jeopardise the credibility of the rule of law.  

Among  others,  the  ZeuS  Trojan6  has  been  used  against  online  banking  clients  for 
many years. The malware is introduced into the IT infrastructure of private persons via 
forged  or  manipulated  websites.  The  attackers  can  subsequently  pirate  telebanking 
services and thereby divert money from accounts. 

Attacks on public and private sector websites by so-called "hactivists" have been becoming 
increasingly  important  recently.  These  non-governmental,  individual  or  loosely  organised 
groups  which  can  potentially  attack  on  a  massive  scale  have  good  technical  skills.  The 
potential  for  damage  resulting  from  massive  attacks  by  these  players  is  considered  to  be 
medium to high. "Hactivists" seek to interrupt services, cause financial damage and destroy 
reputations in order to mobilise public attention for their concerns.  

In  December  2010,  the  hacker  group  "Anonymous"  called  for  an  attack  on 
PostFinance. As a result, its Internet services were interrupted for an entire day. This 
was  triggered  by  the  closure  of  the  postal  giro  account  of  WikiLeaks  founder  Julian 
Assange. In 2007, Russian activists launched a massive attack on Estonian information 
and  communication  infrastructure  because  of  the  relocation  of  a  Soviet  military 
monument in Tallinn. For several days, the e-government offering and online services 
of  numerous  companies  could  no  longer  be  used.  Furthermore,  websites  of 
government offices and firms were defaced with pro-Russian slogans. 

Terrorists  use  cyberspace  to  spread  propaganda,  radicalise  followers,  recruit  and  train 
members,  raise  funds,  plan  campaigns  and  provide  information  on  them.  Up  to  now,  the 
focus has been on using information and communication infrastructure, but not on attacking 
it: terrorists still aim mainly at carrying out serious physical attacks against life and limb as 
well as infrastructure by conventional means. Cyber attacks motivated by terrorism with very 
high  consequential  physical  damage  appear  unlikely  from  today's  perspective.  However,  it 
cannot  be  excluded  that  terrorists  could  try  to  launch  cyber  attacks  on  a  country's  critical 
infrastructure  in  the  future.  Even  if  Switzerland  was  not  a  direct  target,  the  cross-border 
implications  (e.g.  electric  power  failure  or  financial  market  disruptions)  could  affect 
Switzerland.  

There has been no concrete example of cyber terrorist attacks to date. However, the 
websites  of terrorist  organisations  and  of  organisations  associated  with terrorism  are 
continually  being  monitored  for  calls  for  violence  and  indications  of  imminent  attacks 
(e.g. Jihad websites). 

Moreover, unforeseeable events or accidents such as system breakdowns due to premature 
wear  and  tear,  overloading, faulty  construction, poor  maintenance  or the  consequences  of 
natural  disasters  can  also  lead  to  infrastructure  breakdowns  or  disruptions  with  similarly 
serious effects. 
 

 

                                            

6   Software with malicious functions (also called malware or malicious software). 

11/42 

 

 

 

 

 

3  EXISTING STRUCTURES 
This section sets out the structures Switzerland already has for reducing cyber risks, as well 
as the roles of the individual players.  
 

 

 

3.1  Private sector and operators of critical infrastructure 

Those concerned7 
Switzerland  as  a  business  location  is  characterised  by  a  strong  service  sector.  Trade 
relations  and  other  business  activities  are  based  on  information  and  communication 
infrastructure along the entire value added chain. Data is stored and processed on company-
owned  and  external  computers.  Communication  and  payment  transactions  are  based  on 
Internet  services  (e.g.  e-mail,  Internet  telephony,  e-banking  and  stock  exchange  trading). 
Contracts  are  increasingly  concluded  electronically  (Internet  trading,  tender  procedures, 
etc.). This  illustrates the  extent  of  our  private  sector's  dependency  on  correctly  functioning 
ICT and other critical infrastructure such as power supply. Consequently, protection against 
cyber risks is of national importance for Switzerland as a business location. 
Critical  infrastructure  ensures  the  availability  of  essential  goods  and  services.  Extensive 
disruptions  or  breakdowns  of  such  infrastructure  would  have  serious  implications  for  the 
functioning  of  the  state,  the  private  sector  and  society.  Protecting  critical  infrastructure  – 
including against cyber risks – is thus important. CI operators cannot regard the risks merely 
according  to  purely  economic  principles;  they  have  to  make  further-reaching  efforts  to 
minimise  the  risks.  This  is  why  they  are  already  subject  to  some  special  rules;  however, 
concrete  and  binding  requirements  regarding  protection  standards  for  the  ICT  used  are 
generally  missing.  Depending  on  the  criticality  and  vulnerability  of  given  infrastructure,  as 
well  as  the  threat  situation,  requirements  for  security  standards  and  other  risk-reduction 
measures  should  be  set  more  comprehensively  and  precisely  in  association  with  the 
competent public authorities. 
The manufacturers and providers of ICT products and services bear significant responsibility 
for the security of their products and thus also for the cyber security of their clients.  
For the most part, private sector players act under their own responsibility and at their own 
discretion. In order to gain an overview, companies selected for preparing the strategy were 
questioned on their current assessments, measures and difficulties, as well as their outlook 
for the future with regard to cyber security. 

Perception of the problem 
Cyber  risks  are  indisputably  a  major  issue  for  companies.  However,  the  risk  assessments 
and measures taken differ considerably not only from one sector of the economy to another, 
but  also  within  sectors  and  branches,  as  well  as  within  companies 
themselves. 
Consequently,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  a  simple  sector-specific  classification  of  the 
perception of the problem.  

                                            

7   The  DDPS  questioned  representatives  from  the  private  sector  and  operators  of  critical  infrastructure  (incl. 
umbrella organisations and associations) about the measures they are taking or have already taken, where 
deficiencies and difficulties lie and what factors influence their protective measures (e.g. financial considera-
tions). The surveys gave a uniform picture on the whole. 

 

 

12/42 

 

 

 

 

 
There  are  companies  that  are  highly  aware  of  the  problem.  These  include  mainly  large 
companies that have significant resources in terms of capital, personnel, infrastructure and 
specific  expertise  (e.g.  forensics,  risk  and  crisis  management,  computer  emergency 
response  teams).  In  most  cases,  these  companies  operate  internationally  and  have  large 
networks.  Companies  active  primarily  in  the  area  of  security  (e.g.  the  armament  industry) 
have an  increased need for protection and for the most part are independently capable of 
warding off uncoordinated cyber attacks to which Switzerland is exposed on a daily basis.  
CI operators are also highly aware of the problem. According to the survey, they expect the 
requirements for security standards to be defined more comprehensively and more precisely 
– in conjunction with the supervisory authorities – depending on how critical and vulnerable 
given infrastructure is. 
The  largest  group  is  comprised  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  with  average 
awareness  of  the  problem.  They  usually  use  commercially  available  security  infrastructure 
and  concepts  (e.g.  firewalls,  anti-virus  programs).  Their  ability  to  improve  their  protective 
measures in cyberspace is limited primarily by their financial resources.  
The last group consists of companies whose awareness of the problem is low. They lack the 
resources  for  protective  measures  against  cyber  risks  or  do  not  understand  the  need  for 
them.  

Measures 
Very few of the private sector players questioned would be capable of warding off a targeted 
high-intensity cyber attack (with regard to simultaneity, complexity, potential for damage and 
duration).  
Many  companies  have  security  standards  (e.g.  ISO  2700x,  NERC)  and  apply  these.  They 
also take technical and organisational precautions (e.g. operation of autonomous systems, 
deployment  of  security  officers).  Moreover,  measures  are  taken  to  enhance  the  security 
awareness of staff; however, the decision-makers are often neglected. The measures put in 
place  help  ensure  that  weaknesses  within  the  company  are  identified  and  protective 
measures are improved continually over the long term. However, the vast majority of small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises  do  little  in  the  area  of  security.  The  acceptance  of  risks  is 
often  determined  by  purely  economic  considerations.  Cyber  risks  are  an  integral  part  of 
overall business processes and thus cannot be tackled in an isolated fashion or solely on a 
technical level. Furthermore, the information base for making decisions is often incomplete, 
and  cyber-specific  details  are  marginal.  In  order  to  achieve  a  level  of  protection  that  is  as 
complete as possible and does not distort competition, companies and CI operators expect 
uniform requirements and standards to be prepared and implemented in cooperation with all 
those who are responsible and affected.  
Optimising  the  exchange  of  information  between  private  sector  players,  particularly  CI 
operators,  ICT  service  providers,  system  suppliers,  and  the  authorities  is  decisive  for 
resolving problems and minimising damage. Up to now, however, there has apparently been 
little  cooperation  beyond  company  boundaries  (incl.  authorities).  The  large  economic 
associations have given too little attention to cyber security and their role in this regard. The 
survey showed that there is a need to further develop and consolidate forms of cooperation 
between  the  private  sector  and  the  authorities  in  order  to  exchange  information  on  the 

 

 

13/42 

 

 

 

 

 
situation and take crisis management measures8. Unfortunately, detected cyber attacks are 
often  kept  secret,  thereby  depriving  other  potential  victims  of  a  timely  warning.  The 
companies  and  CI  operators  questioned  are  calling  for  forms  of  cooperation  that  would 
largely  be  based  on  voluntary  participation. While  individual  responsibility  remains  central, 
cooperation should help to close gaps jointly and to obtain situation-relevant information in 
order to enhance one's own risk management.  
Over  the  past  few  years,  progress  has  been  made  in  terms  of  cooperation  between  CI 
operators,  ICT  service  providers,  system  suppliers  and  the  Confederation  to  reduce  cyber 
risks.  There  is  cooperation  for  long-term  strategic  planning,  risk  analysis  and  continuity 
management, primarily  with the Federal Office for National Economic Supply, the cantons, 
critical  infrastructure  components,  ICT  service  providers  and  system  suppliers.  In  addition, 
there is a functioning public private partnership (PPP) between the Confederation's Reporting 
and  Analysis  Centre  for  Information  Assurance  (MELANI),  the  cantons  and  the  private 
sector, whereby MELANI assists CI operators in Switzerland with their information assurance 
processes and promotes the exchange of information on cyber attacks between companies. 
Due to scarce human resources, MELANI's basic mandate can be accomplished only to a 
limited extent. Consequently, it is necessary to address as a matter of priority the extent to 
which MELANI is to cover the growing support needs of infrastructure operators in the future 
and the implications this will have on its resources. 
Tight profit margins and intense international competition mean it is impossible to set more 
stringent security requirements that apply only to Switzerland. The additional costs generated 
would  put  the  Swiss  economy  at  a  competitive  disadvantage.  It  is  thus  expected  that 
protective requirements and implementation solutions are to be developed in an international 
context. International cooperation is to be intensified not only in the area of standards and 
regulations, however, but also with regard to risk identification and joint crisis management. 
This  process  should  include  not  only  state  players,  but  also  private  sector  representatives 
(especially CI operators, ICT service providers and system suppliers) and society in general. 
The lack of specialists and the acquisition and retention of expertise are a great challenge. 
The  companies  and  CI  operators  questioned  expect  the  research  and  development  of 
expertise, along with the recruitment and training of specialists, to be promoted. 
 

3.2  Confederation 
In  recent  years,  the  Confederation  has  taken  various  measures  to  strengthen  the  Federal 
Administration's  security  system  and  means  to  counter  cyber  attacks.  At  the  federal  level, 
various  units  are  responsible  for  addressing  preventive  and  reactive  tasks  in  the  area  of 
cyber security: 

 

Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland (OAG) 

                                            

8   Cf. study entitled "The evaluation and development of the Reporting and Analysis Centre for Information As-
surance in Switzerland (MELANI)", published by the ETH Zurich in 2010. The study examines the effective-
ness of MELANI, compares it with international information assurance models and derives development op-
portunities and recommendations.  

14/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The OAG is the investigating and prosecuting authority of the Confederation. It is responsible 
for  the  prosecution  of  offences  that  are  subject  to  federal  jurisdiction  (the  vast  majority  of 
offences are subject to cantonal jurisdiction) and for international cooperation. 

 

Federal Data Protection and Information Commissioner (FDPIC) 

The FDPIC is a supervisory and consultation unit for federal bodies and private persons. The 
role  consists  primarily  in  explaining  the  Swiss  Data  Protection  Act  and  its  implementing 
ordinances. The  commissioner  advises  on  both  legal  issues  and  technical  aspects  of  data 
protection. 

Special Task Force for Information Assurance (SONIA) 
The Special Task Force for Information Assurance is made up of decision-makers from both 
the administration and the private sector (CI operators). It is led by the Federal Delegate for 
IT Steering and convenes at the request of MELANI in the event of national crises in the area 
of information assurance. At present, SONIA is only partially operational, as the last exercise 
in 2005 showed that its structure, processes and organisation were not functional in practice. 
In  a  crisis,  the  designated  members  of  its  staff  would  already  be  engaged  in  overarching 
crisis management processes. 

Reporting and Analysis Centre for Information Assurance (MELANI) 
MELANI  is  a  body  that  is  managed  jointly  by  the  ISB  (MELANI  Steering  and  Government 
Computer  Emergency  Response  Team,  GovCERT9)  and  the  Federal  Intelligence  Service 
(Operations and Information Centre). MELANI provides subsidiary support for the information 
assurance  of  critical  infrastructure  by  providing  information  on  incidents  and  threats.  It 
procures technical and non-technical information, evaluates it and forwards the relevant data 
to CI operators. In this way, MELANI assists in the risk management process within critical 
infrastructure,  for  instance  by  assessing  situations  and  analysing  the  early  recognition  of 
attacks or incidents, evaluating their implications and if necessary examining malware. 
MELANI currently provides its services to a limited number of clients, consisting of selected 
companies  that  operate  critical  infrastructure  for  Switzerland  (approximately  100  members 
such as banks, telecommunications companies and energy providers). Regarding the rest of 
the  private  sector  and  the  population  at  large,  MELANI  offers  support  in  the  form  of 
checklists,  instructions  and  learning  programmes.  In  the  event  of  a  crisis,  MELANI  is 
responsible  for  alerting  and  providing  management  support  to  the  Special  Task  Force  for 
Information  Assurance  (SONIA).  However,  the  basic  mandate  of  MELANI  cannot  be 
performed in full at the moment due to insufficient human resources. 

 

Federal Department of Justice and Police (FDJP) 

Federal Office of Police (fedpol) 

                                            

9   CERT  are  organisations  that  are  responsible  for  multi-case  technical  analyses.  They  collect  and  evaluate 
technical information within the overall context of a sequence of incidents. They also act as coordinators. At 
federal level, this organisation is called GovCERT, which also assumes a coordinating role in the event of in-
ternational incidents.  

15/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Federal Criminal Police (FCP) 
The  FCP  is  the  Confederation's  investigating  authority.  Its  area  of  responsibility 
includes criminal and judicial police tasks that serve to identify, combat and prosecute 
any  offences  committed.  It  is  also  responsible  for  ensuring  cooperation  between 
domestic and foreign partners and in particular pursues technical developments in the 
area of cybercrime. It ensures that technical and forensic expertise is maintained and 
developed in this field. The FCP serves as judicial police if an incident occurs under 
the jurisdiction of the Federal Administration. If the responsibility of the Confederation 
or a canton has not yet been clarified, it can conduct preliminary investigations. It also 
acts as coordinator for cases concerning several cantons. 

Cybercrime Coordination Unit Switzerland (CYCO) 
CYCO is a unit that is managed jointly by the Confederation and the cantons and is 
responsible for detecting Internet offences in good time, preventing redundancies in 
prosecution and analysing Internet crime10. It is part of fedpol. It is the central contact 
point  for  persons  wishing  to  report  suspicious  Internet  content.  After  a  preliminary 
check and data backup, the reports are passed on to the competent law enforcement 
authorities in Switzerland and abroad. CYCO is at the disposal of the general public, 
authorities  and  Internet service  providers  for  criminal,  legal  and  technical  questions 
relating to Internet crime. It also actively monitors the net for criminal content, e.g. in 
the  field  of  crimes  against  children  and  economic  crime  (credit  card  fraud,  e-mail 
phishing, etc.). Moreover, it is responsible for developing investigation techniques and 
– with the support of the cantons and the federal authorities active in this area – for 
gaining  a  nationwide  overview  of  proceedings  and  monitoring  the  development  of 
legislation regarding Internet crime. It is also the contact point for foreign units with 
similar duties. Together with MELANI, CYCO ensures the exchange of cyber-relevant 
information between law enforcement authorities and the intelligence service.  

International Police Cooperation (IPC) 
Among other things, the IPC is responsible for contacts with national and international 
partners that are cultivated via fedpol's Operations Centre. It is also responsible for 
strategic and operational cooperation with international police units and organisations 
(EUROPOL, INTERPOL, UN, OSCE, Council of Europe). 

Operations Centre of the Federal Office of Police 
The Operations Centre of the Federal Office of Police is the permanent contact point 
for  foreign  authorities.  Among  other  things,  it  supports  national  and  international 
criminal  investigations  in  cases  of  computer  crime.  The  contact  point  can  take  no 
measures itself in the areas of legal advice, mutual assistance, collection of evidence, 
data  back-up  or  criminal  investigation.  However,  as  contact  point,  its  mission  is  to 
facilitate  contact  between  the  competent  authorities  in  Switzerland  (in  particular 
CYCO) and abroad. 

Strategic Cooperation 

                                            

10   Cf.  the  administrative  agreement  for  a  coordinated  approach  to  combating  Internet  crime  of  19  December 

2001 and rules of procedure for the Cybercrime Coordination Unit Switzerland (CYCO) of 30 March 2011. 

16/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The  main  task  of  the  Strategic  Cooperation  Division  is  to  develop  international 
cooperation  with  police  partners.  In  agreement  and  coordination  with  the  specialist 
units of fedpol, it represents the Federal Office of Police at bilateral and multilateral 
conferences and committees, which enables it to observe developments in the fight 
against cybercrime, for example. 
 

 

Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport (DDPS) 

In  Switzerland, 

Federal Intelligence Service (FIS)  
FIS  uses  intelligence  resources  to  procure  information,  which  is  then  analysed,  evaluated 
and  disseminated. 
terrorism,  violent  extremism, 
proliferation,  attacks  on  critical  infrastructure  and  illegal  intelligence;  abroad,  it  focuses  on 
security  policy  issues,  including  proliferation,  terrorism,  armed forces  development,  as  well 
as defence technology and arms trade, and strategic analyses. As these fields increasingly 
involve cyber aspects, FIS also follows the development of the cyber risk situation. Together 
with the Federal IT Steering Unit (FITSU), FIS manages the intelligence part of the Reporting 
and Analysis Centre for Information Assurance (MELANI).  

it  concentrates  on 

Federal Office for Civil Protection (FOCP) 
The purpose of civil protection is to protect the population and its vital needs in the event of 
disasters and emergencies or armed conflict and thus to significantly help limit and deal with 
the  effects  of  harmful  incidents.  Disasters  and  emergencies  can  also  result  from  severe 
cyber attacks or other ICT disruptions. Consequently, these dangers are also factored into 
work  relating  to  the  "Switzerland's  risks"  study,  which  serves  as  a  planning  basis  for  civil 
protection. Within the scope of the programme for the protection of critical infrastructure and 
as instructed by the Federal Council, the FOCP coordinates the work on the compilation of 
an SCI inventory, which consists in registering critical ICT infrastructure and security-relevant 
ICT applications in the other CI sectors. As the Confederation's reporting and analysis centre 
for  exceptional  incidents,  the  FOCP's  National  Emergency  Operations  Centre  (NEOC)  is 
imperatively dependent on IT systems and communication networks that function and thus 
on a reliable power supply also in crises. In the future, management communication between 
federal and cantonal units (POLYCONNECT/POLYDATA) is to be conducted via crisis and 
power-resistant networks that are protected with corresponding encryption. The warning and 
alert  system  (POLYALERT)  is  also  switching  to  crisis-resistant  technology  based  on 
Switzerland's secure radio network (POLYCOM) at the moment. 

Defence sector 
The defence sector of the DDPS is responsible for defence, support for civilian authorities 
and peace-building. 
The following organisations in particular are responsible for defence-related protection tasks:  

Information Security and Facility Protection (ISFP)  
The  ISFP,  which  is  part  of  Armed  Forces  Staff,  is  in  charge  of  the  DDPS's  integral 
security. In particular, it is responsible for regulations relating to the security of persons, 
information, IT and property (material and real estate). 

 

 

17/42 

 

 

 

 

 
In  this  role,  it  prepares  security  regulations  in  order  to  safeguard  the  confidentiality, 
availability,  integrity  and  traceability  of  information  and  data,  as  well  as  the  availability 
and integrity of ICT resources. 
It runs the coordination unit for the protection of information in the Federal Administration 
and is the contact point for national and international questions regarding the protection 
of classified information. On the basis of some international agreements (particularly with 
the EU), the ISFP is considered the national security authority for all information security 
issues.  
It  is  playing  a  leading  role  in  the  drafting  of  an  act  on  information  security  in  the 
Confederation. 

Armed Forces Command Support Organisation (AFCSO) 
The  AFCSO  is  the  ICT  service  provider  for  the  armed  forces  in  all  situations,  which 
entails a high degree of availability and security. It runs the Electronic Operations Centre 
(EOC), which provides services for intelligence services. The EOC employs cryptologists 
and runs the Computer Network Operations sector (CNO), which thus has the technical 
skills  to  analyse  threats  and  incidents  and  to  conduct  operations.  The  AFCSO  also 
operates the Military Computer Emergency Response Team (milCERT), which monitors 
the  ICT  infrastructure  that  is  relevant  for  the  armed  forces.  The  AFCSO  supports 
primarily the armed forces, but also political leaders, and keeps corresponding resources 
available. 

Military Intelligence Service (MIS) 
Within  the  armed  forces,  respectively  the  defence  sector,  the  MIS  is  responsible  for 
obtaining information for military consumers. The MIS provides the intelligence basis for 
operations with the help of the intelligence network and in close collaboration with the 
Armed Forces Joint Staff and involved units.  
The MIS cultivates international contacts with military intelligence services and agencies 
(e.g. NATO). It thus serves as an information provider for the FIS and supports it with 
findings on cyber risks and cyber aspects in the military environment. Furthermore, the 
MIS is in charge of counter espionage and its cyber aspects within the scope of military 
operations abroad. 
 

Federal Department of Finance (FDF) 

Federal IT Steering Unit (FITSU) 
The Federal IT Steering Unit (FITSU) issues ICT requirements and takes the central lead in 
IT services that are used in the Federal Administration (e.g. telecommunications). It manages 
GovCERT, as well as the strategic part of MELANI. In a crisis, it leads SONIA. In the event of 
an attack on the Federal Administration's information and communications infrastructure, the 
FITSU can take additional security measures.  

Federal Office of Information Technology, Systems and Telecommunication (FOITT) 
The  FOITT  is  a  provider  of  IT  and  telecommunications  services  for  the  Federal 
Administration and runs its own Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT), which 
collaborates closely with MELANI and other units in the Federal Administration. The FOITT's 

 

 

18/42 

 

 

 

 
CSIRT  continually  monitors  the  ICT  resources  of  the  Federal  Administration  for  attack 
patterns and has very substantial experience in dealing with extensively designed attacks on 
the Confederation's infrastructure. However, if the number of tasks or the intensity of attacks 
or potential for damage increases, the FOITT does not have the necessary human resources 
for service provision.  

 

financial  and  non-financial  repercussions 

Risk management in the Confederation 
Risk management was introduced in the Confederation in 2005. Today, the objectives and 
principles  of  risk  management  and  the  various  risk  management  functions  in  the 
Confederation are set out in the directives on the Confederation's risk policy of 24 September 
201011. To ensure uniform implementation of risk management in the Federal Administration, 
the Federal Finance Administration (FFA) set out the details in a uniform and binding manner 
in guidelines of 21 November 2011. 
Risks refer to events and developments that have a certain likelihood of occurring and would 
have  significant  negative 
the  Federal 
Administration in terms of fulfilling its objectives and performing its tasks. The specialist units 
in the administrative units and departments are responsible for the early detection of these 
risks. Identified risks are analysed and evaluated. Based on the identified risk exposure, the 
necessary  measures  are  taken  in  order  to  prevent  risks  insofar  as  possible,  or  at  least  to 
reduce  them.  Such  task-related  federal  risk  management  is  essentially  implemented  in  a 
decentralised manner in the administrative units and departments.  
The  specialist  units  in  the  administrative  units  and  departments  are  tasked  with  the  early 
recognition of and defence against cyber attacks on the Federal Administration. As all federal 
departments  and  administrative  units  are  affected,  the  risk  of  "cyber  attacks  on  the 
Confederation's  ICT  systems"  is  managed  as  an  interdisciplinary  risk  at  the  level  of  the 
Federal Council. 
 
Federal Department of the Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications (DETEC) 

for 

Federal Office of Communications (OFCOM) 
OFCOM  deals  with  telecommunications  issues  among  other  things.  In  this  area,  OFCOM 
carries out all sovereign and regulatory tasks. In particular, it supervises telecommunications 
in  general,  including  Internet  service  providers  (ISP).  It  is  also  responsible  for  address 
elements in the telecommunications sector, including the contract under administrative law 
with  the  register  operator  Switch  for  the  administration  of  the  .ch  domain,  as  well  as  the 
associated supervision and the electronic signature foundations. OFCOM is also extremely 
active  at  the  international  level,  particularly  in  the  area  of  Internet  governance  and 
international  policies.  Furthermore,  OFCOM  coordinates  –  at the  national  and  international 
level  –  the  activities  conducted  within  the  scope  of  the  Federal  Council's  strategy  for  an 
information society in Switzerland. 

Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) 
The Swiss Federal Office of Energy SFOE is the competence centre for energy supply and 
energy  use  issues.  It  creates  the  prerequisites  for  sufficient,  crisis-resistant,  widely 

                                            

11   Federal Gazette 2010 6549 

 

 

19/42 

 

 

 

 
diversified,  economic  and  sustainable  energy  supply,  and  ensures  compliance  with  high 
security standards during the production, transport and use of energy. 

 

With  the  growing  use  of  ICT  in  energy  production  plants  and  the  power  grid,  the  cyber 
aspects in these fields are also becoming increasingly important. 

Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA) 
The  FOCA  is  responsible  for  legislation  and  supervision  of  airports,  airlines  as  well  as  air 
traffic control in Switzerland, for instance. Due to the increasingly close attention paid to the 
possible  effects  of  a  cyber  attack  on  aviation,  provisions  to  minimise  cyber  risks  are more 
frequently  being  integrated  into  various  sets  of  regulations.  The  FOCA  is  responsible  for 
integrating  these  regulations  into  the  national  aviation  safety  programme,  and  implements 
them in consultation with the industry. 
 

Federal Department of Economic Affairs (FDEA) 

National Economic Supply (NES) 
The NES is a militia organisation with a full-time staff organisation and a secretariat (Federal 
Office for National Economic Supply, FONES). It has a management organisation consisting 
of  private  sector  representatives.  The  ICT  infrastructure  (ICT-I)  area  of  the  NES  is 
responsible  for  providing  the  country  with  the  necessary  information  infrastructure  (data 
production,  transfer,  security  and  availability)  and  telecommunications,  in  particular  with 
countries abroad. It defines which Swiss supply infrastructure is systemically important and 
establishes  a  continuity  and  crisis  management  system  for  it.  The  ICT-I  area  continuously 
observes  and  analyses  the  general  risks  associated  with  data  transfer  security  and 
availability.  It  takes  measures  to  ensure,  in  the  event  of  an  emergency,  suitable 
telecommunications with mobile partners abroad which are important for national economic 
supply.  It  prepares  measures  to  ensure  vital  information  and  communication  infrastructure 
and  establishes  the  necessary  preparedness  for  universal  service.  It  also  represents  the 
area-specific interests of national economic supply in international organisations. 

 

Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (FDFA) 
The Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (FDFA) formulates and coordinates Swiss foreign 
policy as instructed by the Federal Council. 
The  department's  Directorate  of  Political  Affairs  monitors  security  policy  developments 
abroad  in  the  area  of  new  types  of  threat  and  maintains  relations  with  international 
organisations  such  as  the  UN,  the  OSCE,  the  EU,  the  Euro-Atlantic  Partnership  Council 
(EAPC) and NATO, which are increasingly dealing with cyber threats within the scope of their 
security policy dimension. It also establishes contact with these organisations and discusses 
the cyber threat issue bilaterally with other states, thereby creating a political foundation for 
Switzerland's cooperation in dealing with this type of threat. 
The Directorate of Public International Law deals with the impact of cyber threats on public 
international law.  
 

 

 

20/42 

 

 

 

 

 

Findings 
The  structures  at  federal  level  for  handling  cyber  risks  have  been  organised  in  a 
decentralised manner up to now. Relatively little has been spent and the resources are often 
insufficient for assuming additional tasks. Tasks are usually assigned to those organisational 
units  whose  mandates  have  significant  cyber  aspects.  This  approach  has  the  great 
advantage that precisely those units required for managing an incident can be involved on a 
case-by-case  basis.  As  every  attack  on  ICT  infrastructure  is  different,  this  flexible  form  of 
emergency  organisation  is  of key  significance  and  corresponds to the  assumption  that  the 
cyber problem is not a distinct phenomenon, but has to be dealt with within the framework of 
existing  processes.  Furthermore,  this  approach  promotes  synergies  and  prevents  the 
establishment  of  complex  bodies  before  a  problem  and  its  actual  magnitude  have  been 
clarified. The existing system thus works well from a reactive viewpoint. Certain anticipatory 
and  preventive  capabilities  exist,  but  they  are  insufficient  (e.g.  human  and  financial 
resources; sharing of intelligence, technical and police information in support of the private 
sector, CI operators, ICT service providers, system suppliers and research; risk analyses and 
the ensuing definition of security requirements, sustainability). It is thus understood that the 
decentralised structures at federal level have to be reinforced and possible synergies have to 
be used more effectively in order to be able to identify cyber risks comprehensively and to 
meet the requirements during major cyber attacks and disruptions. 

 

3.3  Cantons 
Like the private sector, the cantons are also very heterogeneous. There are cantons that are 
hardly larger than medium-sized cities based on their population. There are also substantial 
economical  and  structural  differences.  The  services  they  provide  and  their  structures  and 
activities  (e.g.  health,  transport,  energy)  thus  vary  just  as  much  as  their  needs  regarding 
dealing  with  dangers  and  threats.  Consequently,  it  is  understandable  that  not  all  cantons 
have  the  same  qualitative  and  quantitative  ability  to  combat  risks,  particularly  those  in 
cyberspace. 
Within  their  territory,  the  cantons  are  responsible  for  maintaining  public  order  and  safety. 
Only  those  cantons  that  have  a  large  police  force  and  cultivate  close  ties  with  the  private 
sector  and  organisations  active  in  the  security  field  (e.g.  customs,  security  services  of 
neighbouring  countries)  are  capable  of  anticipating  problems  in  the  area  of  cyber  crime, 
collecting  the  necessary  information  and  conducting  extensive  investigations.  However,  no 
canton is in a position to do this systematically. All cantons are thus dependent on subsidiary 
support from the Confederation, particularly for coordination and intelligence issues. 
The  cantons'  preventive  measures  for  minimising  cyber  risks  are  a  necessary  part  of  a 
comprehensive concept, as each canton operates critical infrastructure. Most of them have 
organisational  and  control  structures,  security  delegates  in  various  services,  forensic  IT 
police or specialised management cells for a crisis situation. Like at the federal level, these 
means  are  often  inadequately  coordinated  and  are  insufficient  for  comprehensively 
countering  current  cyber  risks.  The  problem  is  aggravated  in  smaller  cantons,  which  are 
often forced to delegate specific services to third parties.  
Furthermore,  the  legal  regulations  with  regard  to  information  technologies  are  frequently 
either  insufficient  or  not  well-known  enough.  Classification  systems  (internal,  confidential, 

 

 

21/42 

 

 

 

 

 
secret)  are  practically  not  applied,  and  sensitive  data  (personal,  police  or  legal  data)  is 
managed on insufficiently protected systems. 
Already today, some cantons raise the awareness of their inhabitants in terms of prevention 
with specific campaigns on the dangers of the Internet, e.g. in schools. In the inter-cantonal 
context,  Swiss  Crime  Prevention  is  making  efforts  along  the  same  lines.  Many  cantons, 
however, are still inactive and rely in this area on the individual, uncoordinated initiatives of 
teachers or educational institutions. In addition, the ICT sector's programme offering is not 
used much because its existence is partly unknown.  
The  cantons  have  management  organisations  at  their  disposal  for  responding  to  cyber 
attacks. These staff units regularly conduct exercises with partners (e.g. military commands 
of  territorial  regions)  and  are  capable  of  dealing  with  the  effects  of  all  types  of  crisis. 
However, they are not specifically oriented towards cyber risks and would often be incapable 
of competently supporting the private sector and the population in the event of major cyber 
attacks. 
For implementing the national strategy for the protection of Switzerland against cyber risks, 
the  cantons  and  the  Confederation  have  at  their  disposal  several  instruments  capable  of 
making a valuable contribution in this area:  
  Switzerland's Haus der Kantone, with several inter-cantonal governmental and directors' 
conferences for justice, police, civil protection, education, finance, health, etc., and other 
institutions such as Swiss Crime Prevention 

  Swiss Security Network, currently being established, which will coordinate and streamline 

the security efforts of the cantons and the Confederation 

  Programme  for  the  harmonisation  of  police  information  technology  in  order  to  reconcile 

the various applications and thus facilitate the work of the police 

  Cybercrime Coordination Unit Switzerland, jointly financed and run by the Confederation 
and the cantons, which monitors cyberspace and provides the cantons with information for 
launching police investigations 

  In addition to state agencies and bodies, there is the Swiss Police Association ICT, which 
networks the various police forces and the private sector's ICT directly and according to 
specialist  area.  As  a  platform,  the  congress  it  organises,  the  Swiss  Police  IT  Congress 
(SPIK), makes an important contribution to the exchange of information on police IT and 
the management of cyber risks. 
 

3.4  Population 
Regarding  the  private  use  of  information  and  communication  systems,  individual  users 
themselves are generally responsible for security precautions. In most cases, they use the 
security  tools  available  on  the  end-user  market  (e.g.  virus  scanners  and  routers  with 
integrated firewall, wireless local area network encryption).  
Measures to generally improve security on private ICT systems and individual training and 
information offerings are not coordinated and are not based on a common security standard. 
As part of their work, growing portions of the population use computers within companies or 
public  authority  units  that  have  access  to  particularly  sensitive  data.  To  minimise  risks, 
heightened  awareness  and  safe  conduct  are  generally  needed,  as  is  the  case  with  other 
prevention activities. 

 

 

22/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 International cooperation  

3.5 
The  FDFA's  Directorate  of  Political  Affairs  promotes  international  contacts  between 
Switzerland  and  states  and  international  organisations  that  are  grappling  with  cyberspace 
threats, thereby creating the prerequisites for Switzerland to cooperate internationally.  
The  Directorate  of  Public  International  Law  of  the  Federal  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs 
monitors  international  developments  at  the  level  of  public  international  law,  namely  the 
connection between the use of cyber means in inter-state conflicts and humanitarian law.  
As part of various initiatives, international regulations are currently being discussed. These 
should  make  it  possible  to  institutionalise  the  permanent  exchange  of  information  on 
technologies, protective measures, risk development and perpetrators. They should also lead 
to more efficient administrative and mutual assistance in criminal proceedings, and enable 
the development and implementation of joint security measures.  
Within  the  scope  of  implementing  the  results  of  the  UN  World  Summit  on  the  Information 
Society,  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU)12  took  the  lead  in  coordinating 
international efforts in the field of cyber security and established a roadmap for its activities 
and goals. Switzerland is involved in this work. 
In  recent  years,  many  countries  have  adopted  comprehensive  cyber  strategies  (e.g. 
Germany, France, the Netherlands), although previously they were only engaged in selected 
bilateral  and  multilateral  activities  and  fields.  There  are  individual  states  that  have  since 
deployed a wide range of instruments to protect themselves against cyber risks (e.g. national 
strategies,  measures  and  defence  centres  with  management  structures).  A  periodic 
comparison  with  these  strategies  is  advisable.  This  is  particularly  the  case  because 
Switzerland has chosen an approach which does not seek simply to resolve deficiencies in 
the  perception  of  cyber  aspects  and  the  lack  of  operational  cooperation  within  existing 
business,  production  and  administrative  processes  by  creating  a  central  coordination 
platform; it is seeking to do so within the competent and responsible units and structures at 
all levels.  
 

3.6  Legal basis  
Myriad  federal  acts  and  ordinances  currently  form  the  legal  basis  for  cyberspace.  This  is 
logical, as increased networking and greater use of means of communication also mean that 
existing  tasks  and  responsibilities  entail  more  cyber  aspects,  a  fact  that  is  reflected  in  the 
respective acts and ordinances. The problem is that there is almost no coordination of these 
legal provisions, and in some cases they are still incomplete. 
The information protection requirements for the Federal Administration and the armed forces 
have  been  summarised  by  the  Federal  Council  in  the  Information  Protection  Ordinance 
(InfoPO)13, which is valid until 31 December 2014. However, Parliamentary Services, federal 
courts, the Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland as  well as cantonal offices which 
receive information from the Confederation are not included, or only to a limited extent.  

                                            

12   For information on ITU cyber security activities, see: http://www.itu.int/cybersecurity/ 
13   SR 510.411 Ordinance of 4 July 2007 on the Protection of Federal Information 

 

 

23/42 

 

 

 

 

 
The  Federal  Administration's  IT  security  is  only  summarily  regulated  in  the  Federal 
Information Technology Ordinance (FITO)14. Most principles and security requirements can 
be  found  as  directives  (directives  of  the  Federal  IT  Council  regarding  IT  security  in  the 
Federal Administration of 27 September 2004)15.  
The Federal Act on Data Protection (DPA)16 and the Ordinance to the Federal Act on Data 
Protection  (DPO)17  contain  generally  applicable  minimum  requirements  for  data  protection 
when  dealing  with  personal  data.  These  apply  to  both  the  Confederation  and  the  private 
sector. 
The  Federal  Act  on  Measures  to  Safeguard  Internal  Security  (ISA)18,  which  addresses 
primarily  measures  for  detecting  and  combating  terrorism,  prohibited  intelligence,  violent 
extremism  and  violence  at  sports  events,  also  contributes  to  information  security  within 
federal authorities with its security screening of people.  
The Federal Act on Responsibilities in the Area of the Civilian Intelligence Service (CISA)19 
regulates some of the tasks of the Confederation's Civilian Intelligence Service, particularly 
the procurement of security policy relevant information from abroad and its evaluation for the 
attention  of  the  departments  and  the  Federal  Council,  as  well  as  the  assumption  of 
intelligence tasks in the area of internal security. 
The Armed Forces Act (ArmA, particularly Articles 99 and 100)20 and the Ordinance on the 
Armed Forces Intelligence Service (AFISO, particularly Articles 4, 5, 6)21 form the basis for 
cultivating contact with other military intelligence services working in the area of cyber risks, 
among other things. Furthermore, they form the legal basis for preventive and intervention 
issues for the Armed Forces Self-Protection Unit which is being created. 
With its decree of 12 May 2010, the Federal Council instructed the DDPS to prepare formal 
legal foundations for the protection of information and information security. The protection of 
information and information security are now to be governed uniformly in a special act. The 
act to be passed must not only ensure the confidentiality of information, but also protect its 
integrity, availability and traceability, as well as the security of the resources with which this 
information is processed.  

                                            

14   SR  172.010.58  Ordinance  of 9  December 2011  on  Information  Technology and  Telecommunications in the 

Federal Administration 

15   Directives of the Federal IT Council (FITC) on Information Security in the Federal Administration of 27 Sep-

tember 2004 (as at 1 November 2007) 

16   SR 235.1 Federal Act of 19 June 1992 on Data Protection (DPA), as at 1 January 2011  
17   SR 235.11 Ordinance of 14 June 1993 to the Federal Act on Data Protection (DPO), as at 1 December 2010 
18   SR 120 Federal Act of 21 March 1997 on Measures to Safeguard Internal Security 
19   SR  121  Federal  Act  of  3  October  2008  on  Responsibilities  in  the  Area  of  the  Civilian  Intelligence  Service 

(CISA), as at 1 January 2010 

20   SR  510.10  Federal  Act  of  3  February  1995  on  the  Armed  Forces  and  the  Military  Administration  (Armed 

Forces Act, ArmA), as at 1 January 2011 

21   510.291 Ordinance of 4 December 2009 on the Armed Forces Intelligence Service (AFISO), as at 1 January 

2010 

 

 

24/42 

 

 

 

 

the 

implementing  ordinances, 

regulations  and  guidelines, 

 
Together  with 
the 
Telecommunications Act (TCA)22 ensures that both the population and the private sector are 
offered  manifold,  affordable,  high-quality  telecommunications  services  that  are  competitive 
nationally  and  internationally.  According  to  the  article  stating  the  purpose  of  the  TCA,  the 
universal  service  must  be  "reliable".  Binding  quality  requirements  regarding  the  universal 
service  result  from  the  Ordinance  on  Telecommunications  Services  (OTS)23  and  the 
corresponding  OFCOM  regulations.  Furthermore,  the  TCA  should  ensure  "trouble-free 
telecommunications that respect personal and intellectual property rights".  
The TCA  and  the OTS each  include  a  chapter on  "important  national  interests"  containing 
various  security-related  provisions.  Based  on  these,  OFCOM  has  issued  guidelines  that 
recommend  measures  concerning  the  security  and  availability  of  telecommunications 
infrastructure and services.  
Regarding the security of telecommunications services, it must also be stated that the legally 
required  measures  refer  solely  to  the  technically  faultless  functioning  of  installations.  The 
TCA  provides  for  the  "security  and  availability  of  telecommunications  infrastructure  and 
services". Moreover, reliability and the absence of disruptions are laid down in the act and in 
other 
thus 
telecommunications and information technologies – are to be protected from external threats 
or natural phenomena is not defined in legislation24.  
The  National  Economic  Supply  Act  (NESA)25  and  the  associated  ordinances26  govern  the 
precautionary measures for national economic defence as well as measures for ensuring the 
country's supply of vital goods and services during serious shortages which the private sector 
is  incapable  of  facing  alone.  The  ICT  infrastructure  (ICT-I)  area  is  responsible  for 
safeguarding  the  information  infrastructure  (e.g.  data  security  and  transmission)  and 
international telecommunications. A draft for an extensive revision of the National Economic 
Supply  Act  is  currently  being  prepared.  The  new  orientation  provides  for  switching  from  a 
security  logic  to  a  risk  approach,  increasing  the  resilience  of  vital  economic  branches  and 
shifting the focus from goods to services.  
The Federal Act on the Surveillance of Postal and Telecommunications Traffic (SPTA)27 and 
the  Swiss  Criminal  Procedure  Code  (CrimPC)28  allow  for  the  monitoring  of  post  and 
telecommunications, including e-mail, in the case of well-founded suspicions. The retroactive 
collection of transaction and billing data and the identification of participants are also legally 
permissible.  

ordinances.  Precisely 

services 

how 

telecommunications 

– 

and 

                                            

22   SR 784.10 Telecommunications Act of 30 April 1997 (TCA), as at 1 July 2010 
23   SR 784.101.1 Ordinance of 9 March 2007 on Telecommunications Services (OTS), as at 1 March 2012 
24   Crisis and Risk Network (CRN), Center for Security Studies (CSS) (2011): "The Legal Basis for the Protection 

of Critical Infrastructure in Switzerland" (in progress; assigned by the FOCP) 

25   SR 531 Federal Act of 8 October 1982 on the National Economic Supply (NESA), as at 1 January 2011 
26   SR 531.11 Ordinance of 6 July 1983 on the Organisation of the National Economic Supply (as at 6 July 2003); 
SR 531.12 Ordinance of 2 July 2003 on the Preparatory Measures for the National Economic Supply (as at 22 
July 2003) 

27   SR  780.1  Federal  Act  of  6  October  2000  on  the  Surveillance  of  Postal  and  Telecommunications  Traffic 

(SPTA), as at 1 January 2011 

28   SR 312.0 Swiss Criminal Procedure Code of 5 October 2007 

25/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which entered into force in Switzerland on 
1  January  2012,  obliges  the  contracting  states  to  criminalise  computer  fraud,  data  theft, 
document  forgery  with  the  aid  of  a  computer  and  penetration  of  a  protected  computer 
system.  The  Convention  governs  how  evidence  in  the  form  of  electronic  data  can  be 
collected and stored during a criminal investigation. The investigating authorities should be 
able  to  access  electronic  data  rapidly  in  order  to  prevent  its  forgery  or  destruction  in  the 
course  of  the  proceedings.  The  Swiss  Criminal  Code  and  its  criminal  law  provisions, 
particularly  the  provisions  of  so-called  computer  criminal  law  in  the  Swiss  Criminal  Code 
(SCC)29, especially Articles 143, 144bis and 272-274 are applicable in cybercrime cases. The 
Council  of  Europe  Convention  also  governs  international  cooperation  between  states  in 
criminal matters (e.g. mutual assistance and extradition). Cooperation between the various 
countries should be organised rapidly and efficiently.  

3.7  Conclusion 
The  analysis  of  existing  structures  shows  that  there  are  many  capabilities  present  in  the 
private  sector  (particularly  major  ICT  service  providers  and  system  suppliers),  in  the 
Confederation and in the cantons that make it possible to comprehend the cyber aspects of 
existing missions and responsibilities and thus identify the associated risks. There are also 
approaches and concepts for improving the cyber security situation and means that enable 
the exchange of information and coordination between individual players. Large companies, 
cantonal  police  forces  and  the  Confederation  have  units  with  specialist  expertise.  Various 
Swiss research institutions also run projects relating to cyber security and the identification 
and assessment of cyber risks. Often, however, all the stakeholders from the technical and 
operating level to the strategic and political level are not included in the processes, or they 
abstain deliberately. 
Surveys with representatives from the private sector and CI operators also show that large 
gaps  and  weaknesses  exist  for  dealing  with  cyber  attacks.  Therefore,  the  capabilities  and 
perceptions at the various levels vary considerably; they are often inadequate, only partially 
coordinated  and  largely  dictated  by  commercial  interests.  The  measures  planned  or 
introduced 
risk  assessments  and  are 
correspondingly  heterogeneous.  They  lead  to  uncoordinated  approaches;  the  exchange  of 
information  between  the  players  barely  functions  and  is  often  limited  to  a  single  entity  or 
area. 
Cyber security deficiencies are often due to a lack of financial and human resources. This 
applies not only to the private sector, but also particularly to the Confederation, where human 
resources are insufficient, with the result that even in a normal situation core tasks can only 
be performed in a sketchy manner. Another problem is the generally perceived lack of ICT 
specialists. 
In  terms  of  cooperation  between  the  private  sector  and  the  authorities,  there  are  various 
weak points and a need for clarification regarding the distribution of tasks, capabilities and 
powers.  The  analysis  of  existing  structures  showed  in  particular  that  the  Federal 
Administration  lacks  sufficient  means  for  identifying  risks  and  comprehensively  evaluating 
information  and  situation  assessments  for  the  private  sector,  CI  operators  and  authorities. 
Consequently,  satisfactory  cyber  risk  protection  cannot  be  achieved  due  to  an  insufficient 
exchange  of  information.  Moreover,  cooperation  with  critical  ICT  service  providers  and 

improve  cyber  security 

to 

reflect  differing 

                                            

29   SR 311.0 Swiss Criminal Code of 21 December 1937 

 

 

26/42 

 

 

 

 

 
system  suppliers  is  not  systemised  enough.  In  addition,  synergies  between  existing  public 
authority units must be better utilised, and the reporting systems and lines of communication 
must be examined with regard to the exchange of information and its efficiency. Furthermore, 
there  is  a  lack  of  risk  analyses  and  definitions  for  ICT  infrastructure  security  requirements 
derived  from  such  analyses,  as  well  as  the  ensuing  distribution  of  responsibilities  and 
additional costs. 
Too often, the Internet is still regarded as a legal vacuum by a whole range of players and 
day-to-day security in its use is insufficient. In particular, criminal prosecution authorities do 
not always have sufficient means and capabilities to take efficient action against offences. In 
addition, the interfaces and the exchange of information with preventive units in the area of 
minimising cyber risks have not been clarified enough in order to achieve a successful mix of 
preventive and repressive measures. 
Overall, it can be noted that the current system is scarcely in a position to actively ward off 
major, targeted cyber attacks or to eliminate their consequences in the necessary timeframe 
if  they  are  severe.  The  companies  and  CI  operators  questioned  are  therefore  calling  for 
minimum  security  requirements  to  be  defined  and  implemented  in  conjunction  with  the 
authorities and for the measures to improve the security situation, deal with attacks and raise 
awareness  to  be  better  coordinated.  Moreover,  the  Confederation  is  also  being  asked  to 
institutionalise the exchange of information, provide a comprehensive and up-to-date picture 
of the cyber situation, and ensure more extensive subsidiary support. 
The  various  legal  foundations  in  existence  reflect  the  cyber  aspects  of  existing  tasks  and 
responsibilities.  Accordingly,  a  solution  in  the  form  of  a  single  cyber-specific  act  is 
inappropriate. The existing body of laws therefore has to be adapted on an ongoing basis to 
cyberspace developments within their scope by means of revisions.  
Furthermore, increasing international networking and cooperation to minimise cyber risks can 
be observed. 
Based  on  this  recognised  need  for  action,  this  strategy  proposes  a  series  of  concrete 
measures, which are presented below.  

 

 

 

 

27/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4  SYSTEM FOR PROTECTING AGAINST CYBER RISKS 

4.1  Overriding goals 
The Federal Council recognises that the cyber problem is primarily linked to its influence on 
existing  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  authorities,  the  private  sector  and  society.  Minimising 
cyber risks is thus a matter for the relevant responsible parties. 
The Federal Council wishes to promote the opportunities and advantages cyberspace entails 
for Switzerland's economy, politics and population. However, it also notes that developments 
in this area are associated with risks, and that corresponding measures to minimise these 
are necessary. 
This national strategy governs the application of the described measures in times of peace 
and thus explicitly excludes war.  
With the national strategy for the protection of Switzerland against cyber risks, the Federal 
Council pursues the following overriding goals:  
  Cyber risks are to be recognised and evaluated at an early stage in order for risk reducing 
and preventive measures to be taken in cooperation with all those involved in the private 
sector, political circles and society 

  The  resilience  of  critical  infrastructure  to  cyber  attacks  –  in  other  words,  the  ability  to 
resume normal operations as quickly as possible – is to be increased in cooperation with 
their  operators,  ICT  service  providers,  system  suppliers  and  the  Confederation's 
programme to protect critical infrastructure (CIP programme) 

  Prerequisites are to be ensured for an effective reduction of cyber risks, particularly, cyber 

crime, cyber espionage and cyber sabotage, and where necessary created anew 

These goals can be achieved in the existing decentralised structures in various ways. In any 
case,  acting  with  personal  responsibility  in  the  different  private  sector  areas  as  well  as 
dialogue  and  cooperation  between  the  private  sector  and  the  authorities  are  essential 
prerequisites. The exchange of information on a permanent basis should create transparency 
and trust, and the state should intervene only if public interests are at stake and if acting in 
accordance with the principle of subsidiarity. 
Dealing  with  cyber  risks  is  an  interdisciplinary  task that  has  to  be  assumed  by  the  private 
sector, CI operators, ICT service providers, system suppliers, as well as cantonal and federal 
authorities.  This  must  be  understood  as  part  of  an  integrated  business,  production  or 
administration  process.  All  players  from  the  administrative  and  technical  levels  up  to  the 
strategic and political levels must be included in these processes. An effective approach to 
dealing with dangers and threats stemming from the Internet presupposes recognition that 
existing tasks and responsibilities of authorities, the private sector and the population have 
cyber  aspects.  Every  organisational  unit  in  political  circles,  the  private  sector  and  society 
bears responsibility for recognising these cyber aspects and integrating the resulting risks in 
their  processes  in  order  to  reduce  them. To  this  end,  the  existing  decentralised  structures 
should have the necessary powers and possibly be strengthened in order to fully assume the 
cyber-specific aspects of their tasks and responsibilities.  
 

 

 

28/42 

 

 

 

 

 

4.2  Framework conditions and prerequisites 
Legal basis 
As the cyber problem concerns existing tasks and responsibilities, it is necessary to check in 
a  first  step  whether  the  existing  legislation  takes  this  into  account.  If  a  need  for  action  is 
detected, the first concern will be to integrate necessary provisions in current and planned 
laws (e.g. Intelligence Service Act). The need for regulation required by cyberspace should 
thus  be  closely  coordinated  with  planned  legislative  projects  and  those  already  under  way 
(e.g. legislation on information security, the Intelligence Service Act, the National Economic 
Supply Act, the Federal Act on the Surveillance of Postal and Telecommunications Traffic, 
the Convention on Cyber Crime, etc.). 
Adapting  the  legal  basis  to  the  rapid  developments  in  cyberspace  and  cyber  risks  is  an 
ongoing process. Wherever necessary, legal opinions are to be sought for complex issues. 
The  legal  basis  for  prosecution  (in  particular  the  Criminal  Code,  the  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure,  cantonal  police  laws  and  the  regulation  of  jurisdiction)  and  units  involved  in 
prevention (Federal Intelligence Service and cantonal police forces) are to be examined with 
regard  to  the  specific  challenges  posed  by  cyberspace  (e.g.  geographic  distances,  speed 
and  transience  of  traces  and  thus  the  usability  of  evidence  in  court).  The  key  issue  is  to 
determine how acts carried out via electronic networks can be detected at an early stage and 
be  prevented  or  effectively  investigated.  Particular  attention  must  be  paid  to  achieving  a 
balance between the protection of privacy and the protection of public and internal security.  
Furthermore, the responsibilities of operators of (computer) systems and networks, (network) 
infrastructure and service providers, as well as any other players active on the Internet are to 
be  examined.  Here  too,  the  data  protection  obligation  has  to  be  legally  and  politically 
weighed  against  the  right  of  all  parties  to  process  data  in  order  to  enable  cooperation  to 
protect information and communication infrastructure as well as private and public persons. 
 
Exchange of information and prevention 
The  cyber  aspects  of tasks  and  responsibilities  and  the  ensuing  risks  must  be  recognised 
and analysed. This is the duty of the relevant authorities within the framework of exchanges 
with  players  from  the  private  sector  and  society.  Close  cooperation  between  private  and 
public  players  in  the  form  of  public  private  partnerships  (PPP)  was  confirmed  as  being 
expedient by the Federal Council in 2003 and 2007, and it is to be pursued further30. 
To achieve a comprehensive picture of the situation, technical and non-technical information 
has  to  be  collected  in  a  coordinated  manner,  analysed  and  evaluated.  The  findings  from 
investigations are subsequently put at the disposal of all players. In doing so, it is important 
that already existing partnerships between intelligence and technical capabilities are further 
intensified within the scope of MELANI in favour of CI operators and the private sector. 
The  state  is  expected  to  have  the  means  to  provide  subsidiary  support  to  the  responsible 
units if these are no longer capable of taking the necessary measures themselves.  
 
Cooperation with other countries 

                                            

30   Cf. FCD 2003 and 2007 

 

 

29/42 

 

 

 

 

 
Cyber  risks  are  transnational.  International  cooperation  is  essential  for  a  well-founded  and 
realistic risk analysis. Exchanges of experience, research and development work, incident-
specific information as well as details of training and exercises should thus be strengthened.  
Efforts to protect cyberspace from abuse with internationally agreed rules and standards are 
in Switzerland's best interests as a technologically advanced country. Consequently, within 
the  scope  of  international  state  and  non-state  organisations,  Switzerland  is  involved  in  the 
pursuit of solutions at the political level, opportunities for cooperation, as well as agreements 
under international law to reduce cyber risks. Structural global networking problems, as well 
as the establishment and influencing of international standards, rules and norms are ideally 
addressed  in  global  forums.  Accordingly,  Swiss  interests  in  terms  of  the  private  sector, 
authorities and society are to be introduced already at this level. 
The  same  applies  for  the  expansion  of  cooperation  on  joint  crisis  management.  Through 
greater cooperation in the area of intelligence, the exchange of information with relevant ICT 
service  providers  and  system  suppliers,  technical  analysis  and  prosecution  (mutual  and 
administrative assistance), Switzerland can increase its ability to act and the effectiveness of 
its measures. In doing so, it is indispensable to involve non-state players at the respective 
levels  such  as  associations,  interest  groups,  international  working  groups  or  non-
governmental organisations. 
 
Prosecution 
Within the scope of prosecution, information about cyberspace offences which is admissible 
in court is to be gathered, perpetrators prosecuted, offences punished and cooperation with 
foreign law enforcement authorities ensured. Especially with regard to the Federal Council's 
anti-crime strategy prioritisation for 2012-2015, criminal prosecution authorities are required 
to focus on cyber attacks as severe crimes against the state and as a special form of 
economic crime. 
 
Armed forces 
The armed forces, as Switzerland's strategic reserve, must fulfil their missions whatever the 
form  of  operation.  Therefore,  they  take  measures  to  protect  their  own  infrastructure  and 
ensure leadership in times of crisis with infrastructure that is resilient to disruption. Findings 
from the activities of the armed forces and access to disruption-resilient infrastructure can be 
made available upon request to other authorities and operators of critical infrastructure. 
In  this  sense,  the  armed  forces  are  closely  linked  with  the  civilian  sector,  and  when 
developing  their  ability  to  minimise  cyber risks, they  are  to  harmonise  implementation  with 
other authorities.  
 

4.3  Spheres of action and measures 
When  implementing  the  measures  to  improve  Switzerland's  protection  against  cyber  risks, 
the  political  and  economic  usefulness,  proportionality  and  effectiveness,  as  well  as  the 
decentralised state and economic structure of Switzerland are to be taken into account. This 
implies for all players that they understand the extent of the cyber aspects of their particular 
tasks and responsibilities and with which socio-economic and political partners measures to 
minimise risks must be adopted. 

 

 

30/42 

 

 

 

 
Spheres  of  action  and  measures  that  should  help  reduce  cyber  risks  are  subsequently 
defined.  These  spheres  of  action  are  described  over  a  risk  management  and  protection 
cycle31.  While  the  risk  management  and  protection  cycle  comprises  five  sub-processes 
(identification,  analysis  and  evaluation;  performance  target  and  planning;  measures; 
implementation; checking and verification), this strategy addresses only the first three steps 
for each sphere of action (identification, analysis and assessment; performance target and 
planning; measures). 
 

 

Identification, 
analysis and 
evaluation 

Checking and 
verification 

(4.3.8) 

Performance 
target and 
planning 

Implementation 

Measures 

 
The  measures  are  implemented  by  the  competent  players  in  administration,  the  private 
sector  and  society.  Insofar  as  the  implementation  steps  concern  federal  units,  they  are 
described.  These  are  primarily  initial  implementation  steps  at  the  federal  level  in  order  to 
initiate  implementation  planning  at  all  levels  in  cooperation  with  the  relevant  partners from 
administration, the private sector and society.  
The coordination unit which has to be created is responsible for checking and verifying the 
measures implemented, in close cooperation with the responsible units. 
  
4.3.1  Sphere of action 1: Research and development 

Identification, analysis and evaluation  
New risks in connection  with cyber crime are to be researched so that informed decisions 
can  be  made  at  an  early  stage  in  the  private  sector  and  political  and  research  circles. 
Research  focuses  on  technological,  social,  political  and  economic  trends  that  could  affect 
cyber risks. Research and development processes are initiated or conducted independently 
by players in the area of science, the private sector, society and authorities. 

                                            

31   The risk management and protection cycle leans heavily on the protection cycle that is used in the national 

strategy for the protection of critical infrastructure (at the FOCP) and applied to national economic supply 

 

 

31/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Performance targets and planning 
It  is  essential  for  each  area  of  responsibility  to  have  the  ability  to  identify,  evaluate  and 
analyse  risks  associated  with  cyber  issues  in  their  own  area.  This  is  to  be  achieved  in 
cooperation  with  those  responsible  for  the  Federal  Council's  strategy  for  an  information 
society  in  Switzerland  (DETEC-OFCOM),  the  national  strategy  for  the  protection  of  critical 
infrastructure (DDPS-FOCP) and federal risk management. 
 
Measures 
Measure 1 
The responsible federal units discuss both current developments regarding cyber risks and 
those  to  be  researched  with  one  another  as  well  as  with  players  outside  the  Federal 
Administration,  and  when  needed  they  carry  out  research  internally  or  issue  research 
mandates.  
Implementation  
The  individual  federal  units  are  responsible  for  departmental  research  in  their  area  of 
responsibility.  The  education,  research  and  technology  steering  committee  (ERT  steering 
committee)  instructs  the  agencies  to  prepare  multi-year  trans-sectoral  programmes  for 
departmental  research  in  their  policy  areas  (research  concepts).  These  research  concepts 
provide information on the planned focus areas of departmental research. They specifically 
take into account the existing research priorities of the universities, the support programmes 
carried out by the Swiss National Science Foundation on behalf of the Confederation, as well 
as the activity of the Innovation Promotion Agency. 
 
 
4.3.2  Sphere of action 2: Risk and vulnerability analysis 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
All  competent  public  authority  units,  CI  operators,  ICT  service  providers,  system  suppliers 
and  associations  (in  terms  of  a  merging  of  branches)  must  identify  at  their  level  the  risks 
arising  from  cyber  aspects,  and  evaluate  and  analyse  their  probability  of  occurrence  and 
potential implications.  
 
Performance targets and planning 
The responsible players from political circles, the private sector and society must have the 
means and capabilities to be able to identify cyber risks at an early stage, assess the threat 
situation  and  examine  the  implications  for  their  area  in  the  form  of  joint  risk  analyses. 
Implementation takes place in cooperation with those in charge of federal risk management, 
the  "national  strategy  for  the  protection  of  critical  infrastructure"  and  work  relating  to  the 
"Switzerland's risks" study. 
 
Measures 

 

 

32/42 

 

 

 

 

 

Measure 2 
Risk and vulnerability analyses are to be carried out at all levels (Confederation, cantons and 
CI operators) in collaboration with ICT service providers and system suppliers. These include 
independent  and  regular  examination  of  systems  by  operators.  The  development  of 
(sectoral)  risk  analyses  requires  close  cooperation  with  the  authorities.  (FDEA,  FDF, 
DETEC)  
Implementation 
Within the scope of the revision of the NESA32, the FDEA is adapting its powers in order to 
be able to carry out needs-oriented risk and vulnerability analyses with all sub-sectors of the 
Federal Office for National Economic Supply (FONES), involving the competent authorities 
(primarily DETEC and FDF) depending on the situation. If CI operators are not captured by 
the  national  economic  supply  system,  they  are  to  be  contacted  through  the  respective 
competent  authorities,  which  will  adapt  their  sector-specific  legislation  accordingly  if 
necessary. An approach that is as uniform as possible is to be used for conducting risk and 
vulnerability  analyses.  The  relevant  authorities  (primarily  in  DETEC  and  FDF)  are  to  be 
involved when implementing the findings.  
The results are consolidated in cooperation with MELANI to form a comprehensive analysis 
of the threat situation.  
 
Measure 3 
The  authorities,  CI  operators  and  research  institutions  examine  their  ICT  infrastructure  for 
vulnerabilities 
ICT  service  providers  and  system  suppliers. 
Vulnerabilities include systemic, organisational and technical weaknesses. The findings are 
consolidated  and  evaluated,  and  published  in  corresponding  reports  if  they  are  of  public 
interest33. (FDEA, FDF, DDPS, DETEC) 
Implementation 
Together  with  ICT  service  providers,  the  Federal  IT  Steering  Unit  (FITSU)  in  the  FDF  will 
compile  an  evaluation  concept  by  mid-2015  for  the  periodic  examination  of  the  Federal 
Administration's  ICT  infrastructure  with  regard  to  systemic,  organisational  and  technical 
weaknesses.  This  will  be  implemented  by  the  competent  service  providers  and  those 
responsible in the departments' general secretariats.  
The evaluation concept can be given as a recommendation or to support the private sector 
and CI operators in their own evaluations. 
The results are consolidated in cooperation with MELANI to form a comprehensive analysis 
of the threat situation.  
 
4.3.3  Sphere of action 3: Analysis of the threat situation  

in  collaboration  with 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
                                            

32   SR 531 Federal Act of 8 October 1982 on the National Economic Supply 
33   In accordance with the Information Protection Ordinance, cryptographic measures and products for the protec-
tion of classified (CONFIDENTIAL / SECRET) information must be authorised by the Specialist Unit for Cryp-
tology of the DDPS 

33/42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Incidents  of  national  importance  and  of  particular  relevance  are  to  be  identified,  evaluated 
and analysed. The ensuing findings are to be processed at the appropriate level and made 
available to the respective areas of responsibility. 
 
Performance targets and planning 
The players from political circles, the private sector and society must have the means and 
capabilities  to  be  able  to  identify,  evaluate  and  analyse  the  threat  situation  in  close 
cooperation with those responsible. If necessary, a reporting authorisation for the responsible 
units, CI operators and the private sector should be examined. 
 
Measures  
Measure 4 
Intelligence,  police,  forensic  and  technical  information  about  cyber  threats  and  the  risk 
situation  is  obtained  from  open  and  classified  sources  and  then  evaluated  and  analysed. 
Within  the  scope  of  MELANI's  public  private  partnership  model,  these  findings  are  to  be 
collected,  globally  evaluated,  analysed  and  merged  to  portray  and  give  updates  on  the 
situation, as well as be combined with scenarios for how the situation could possibly develop. 
These results are made available to the responsible players concerned. (FDF, DDPS) 
Implementation 
The Federal Intelligence Service will have to cover the cyber aspects of its mandate in order 
to  manage  and  follow  up  on  incidents  relating  to  ICT  resources  that  are  relevant  to  state 
security. This is accomplished with the inclusion of the AFCSO as the FIS technical service 
provider  and,  where  appropriate,  the  MIS.  The  findings  flow  via  MELANI  into  the  overall 
analysis of the threat situation. 
The technical capacities for 24/7 surveillance of federal networks are to be built up within the 
service providers (CERTs) by the end of 2015. The findings flow via MELANI into the overall 
analysis of the threat situation. 
MELANI  strengthens  the  voluntary  exchange  of  information  with  CI  operators  and  its 
international  partners.  This  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  need  for  forensic  capabilities,  a 
greater  flow  of  information  and  an  enhancement  of  the  exchange  of  information  with  CI 
operators and the private sector. Additional capabilities and capacities are created by means 
of systematic cooperation with relevant ICT service providers and system suppliers. 
 
Measure 5 
The Confederation, the cantons and CI operators are to follow up on relevant incidents and 
examine possibilities for developing their own measures for dealing with incidents in relation 
to cyber risks. This generally occurs individually within the framework of their own mandate. 
Within the scope of MELANI's public private partnership, these findings are to be collected, 
globally evaluated, analysed and made available to the players concerned, particularly those 
responsible for risk and vulnerability analyses. (FDF, DDPS) 
Implementation 
MELANI strengthens the voluntary exchange of information between CI operators, relevant 
ICT service providers and system suppliers, and supports the follow-up of relevant incidents. 

 

 

34/42 

 

 

 

 

 
This leads to an increase in the need for forensic capabilities, a greater flow of information 
and an enhancement of the exchange of information with CI operators and the private sector.  
The Federal Intelligence Service will have to cover the cyber aspects of its mandate in order 
to  manage  and  follow  up  on  incidents  relating  to  ICT  resources  that  are  relevant  to  state 
security. This is accomplished with the inclusion of the AFCSO as the FIS technical service 
provider. The findings flow via MELANI into the overall analysis of the threat situation. 
The technical capacities for 24/7 surveillance of federal networks are to be built up within the 
service  providers  (CERTs).  The  findings  flow  via  MELANI  into  the  overall  analysis  of  the 
threat situation. 
 
Measure 6 
An overview of cases (offences) that is as comprehensive as possible is to be compiled at 
national  level  and  inter-cantonal  clusters  of  cases  are  to  be  coordinated.  The  information 
obtained from the case overview and the findings on clusters of cases, particularly from the 
technical and operational analysis of prosecution in criminal proceedings, is to be integrated 
in the overall picture of the situation. (FDJP)  
Implementation 
In  cooperation  with  the  cantons,  the  FDJP  is  to  submit  a  concept  for  managing  a 
comprehensive overview of cases (offences) by the end of 2016. This concept also includes 
the  clarification  of  interfaces  with  other  players  in  the  area  of  minimising  cyber  risks, 
coordination with the situation picture and the resources and legal adjustments required at 
federal and cantonal level for implementing the concept.  
The information obtained from the overview of cases (offences) and the findings on clusters 
of cases from the technical and operational analysis of prosecution in criminal proceedings 
flow via MELANI into the overall analysis of the threat situation. 
 
4.3.4  Sphere of action 4: Competence building 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
All players from the private sector, society and the authorities are to be made aware of cyber 
risks and receive training so that they can recognise risks and take measures to minimise 
their risk exposure.  
 
Performance targets and planning 
In order to raise awareness of cyber risks and foster the correct handling thereof, awareness 
campaigns  and  training measures  are  to  be  prepared  –  taking  account of  already  existing 
approaches and initiatives – and then implemented in the respective areas of responsibility. 
This is closely coordinated with the implementation of the Federal Council's strategy for an 
information society in Switzerland. 
 
Measures 

 

 

35/42 

 

 

 

 

 

Measure 7 
An overview of existing competence building options is to be created to serve as a basis not 
only for detecting gaps but also for providing players from the private sector, administration 
and  the  civilian  sector  with  information  tailored  to  their  needs  on  options  with  regard  to 
dealing with cyber risks. (FDF, DETEC, FDFA) 
Implementation 
The coordination unit for implementing the strategy supports the preparation of an overview 
of the formal and informal training offering for the tailored strengthening of competencies in 
cyberspace, and identifies high-quality examples and gaps. The preparation of the overview 
and  the  identification  of  high-quality  examples  and  gaps  will  take  until  the  end  of  2013  in 
coordination with the efforts to implement the Federal Council's strategy for an information 
society  in  Switzerland  and  the  cantons.  The  FDFA  provides  information  on  the  offering 
concerning international organisations and institutions. The competence building options and 
high-quality examples will be published in a suitable format by the middle of 2014.  
 
Measure 8 
Recognised gaps in the competence building offering for dealing with cyber risks are to be 
addressed and greater use of existing high-quality options is to be promoted. (FDF, DETEC) 
Implementation 
In  agreement  with  the  Federal  Council's  strategy  for  an  information  society  in  Switzerland, 
the  cantons  and  the  private  sector,  the  coordination  unit  for  implementing  the  strategy 
coordinates  the  drafting  of  an  implementation  plan  for  increasing  the  use  of  existing  high-
quality  training  on  dealing  with  cyber  risks  and  for  creating  new  formal  and  informal 
competence building options by mid-2014. These options, for example campaigns or training 
guidelines, extend from the administrative and technical level to the strategic level.  
 
4.3.5  Sphere of action 5: International relations and initiatives 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
Internet governance34 functions  in  accordance  with  the  principles  defined at  the  UN World 
Summit  on  the  Information  Society  (WSIS)  in  Geneva  (2003)  and  Tunis  (2005).  A  multi-
stakeholder approach is taken, i.e. with the involvement of various interest groups and public 
authority  units  acting  in  their  respective  roles.  All  relevant  and  responsible  players 
(authorities, private sector and society) can be part of this process. The rules for the use and 
administration of the Internet are fundamental for the possibilities, obligations and rights of 
citizens, companies and states in a networked, free and competitive world. Due to the global 
and diverse nature of the Internet, regulations can be decided and enforced unilaterally by 
individual states only to a very limited extent. This also applies to the formulation of policies, 
best  practices  and  bodies  establishing  de  facto  security  standards  for  products  and 
processes. 

                                            

34   Tunis Agenda for the Information Society (WSIS 2005), §34  

 

 

36/42 

 

 

 

 

the 

Internet  should  not  be 

 
In particular, the interests of small states such as Switzerland can be defended globally only 
with "proactive" diplomacy and by putting forward positions in the global network in a good 
and coordinated manner. 
 
Performance targets and planning 
Structural problems of global networking are ideally addressed globally. Accordingly, Swiss 
interests  relating  to  the  private  sector,  society  and  authorities  are  to  be  put  forward  in  a 
coordinated manner insofar as possible.  
Although  the  administration  of  core  Internet  resources  is  to  continue  according  to  liberal 
principles,  it  is  to  be  less  dominated  by  the  interests  of  the  few  countries  involved  in  the 
Internet  industry.  The  common  guidelines  are  to  be  jointly  issued  and  imposed  by 
governments. The stability and availability of the Internet should be ensured for all, and the 
freedom  of  citizens  and  companies  on 
restricted 
disproportionately.  
With  regard  to  the  creation  of  international  best  practices,  policies  and  agreements  in  the 
area  of  safety  and  security  standards,  as  well  as  in  the  security  policy  environment,  it  is 
essential  when  putting  forward  Switzerland's  interests  for  a  coordinated  approach  to  be 
adopted, particularly by economic players and public authority units. 
 
Measures 
Measure 9 
Switzerland  (private  sector,  society,  authorities)  actively  and  in  a  coordinated  manner 
advocates  Internet  governance  that  is  compatible  with  the  Swiss  concept  of  freedom  and 
(personal) responsibility, universal service, equal opportunities, human rights and the rule of 
law. Switzerland is also committed to reasonable internationalisation and democratisation of 
Internet management. Its experience in the democratic decision-making process enables it to 
bring added value to consensus building. (DETEC, FDFA, DDPS, FDF) 
Implementation 
DETEC represents Switzerland and its interests in the relevant processes and institutions in 
the  area  of  Internet  governance.  It  coordinates  and  defines  Switzerland's  interests  and 
positions  in  the  area  of  Internet  governance  with  the  relevant  federal  units.  Moreover, 
DETEC runs a multi-stakeholder exchange platform ("Plateforme Tripartite") which is open to 
all  interested  members  of  Switzerland's  administration,  private  sector,  civil  society  and 
academia, and integrates their interests appropriately. 
In  international  bodies  and  events  relating  to  security  policy  that  have  a  direct  or  indirect 
influence  on  Internet governance,  the  relevant  players  are  represented by  the  FDFA,  FDF 
and DDPS.  
In  collaboration  with  the  departments  involved,  DETEC  and  the  FDFA  are  compiling  an 
overview  of  the  priority  events,  initiatives  and  international  bodies  concerning  Internet 
governance for the end of 2013.  
 

 

 

37/42 

 

 

 

 

 

Measure 10 
Switzerland cooperates at the international security policy level so as to counteract the threat 
in cyberspace together with other countries and international organisations. It monitors the 
respective  developments  at  diplomatic  level  and  promotes  political  exchanges  within  the 
framework of international conferences and other diplomatic initiatives. (FDFA, DDPS) 
Implementation 
In collaboration with the DDPS, the FDFA represents Switzerland at the diplomatic level and 
defends the security policy interests of our country vis-à-vis international organisations and 
other  states.  It  champions  initiatives  under  international  law  aimed  at  keeping  cyberspace 
free from conflicts. 
 
Measure 11 
Operators,  associations  and  authorities  coordinate  their  efforts  to  influence  these  bodies 
within the scope of private and state initiatives, conferences and standardisation processes 
related to security and safety. (DETEC, FDFA, DDPS, FDF) 
Implementation 
MELANI and DETEC reinforce the exchange of information on international approaches and 
initiatives  among  CI  operators,  ICT  service  providers,  system  suppliers  and  associations. 
MELANI and DETEC thus promote the coordinated inclusion of Switzerland as a business 
location in these international bodies. If desired, MELANI and DETEC ensure participation in 
agreement with the departments, particularly the FDFA.  
 
4.3.6  Sphere of action 6: Continuity and crisis management 

regular 

reactive 

interventions  without 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
The activities of the various players are to be coordinated across all levels. 
Civilian everyday life is characterised by normal operation of the entire ICT infrastructure. In 
this  situation,  the  Federal  Administration,  society  as  well  as  the  private  sector  and  CI 
operators  are  the  permanent  targets  of  attacks  that  must  be  recognised  or  detected  and 
warded  off  with  countermeasures.  The  focus  is  on  preventive  measures  in  terms  of 
infrastructure  and  operations,  with 
relevant 
consequences.  
A  crisis  is  characterised  by  a  successful  attack  or  sustained  disruption  with  grave 
consequences that can affect the entire country in extreme cases. Depending on its intensity, 
a crisis increases the management rhythm within existing crisis and continuity management 
structures. The focus is on the interplay of actions which, depending on the circumstances, 
have to be accompanied at the national level by politically motivated technical measures. In 
this regard, determining the cause of a crisis is part of crisis management. CI operators and 
relevant ICT service providers and system suppliers are integrated into the decision-making 
process on the basis of agreements. 
 
Performance targets and planning 
Individual  and  sector-based  risk  analyses  are  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  sectoral  agreements 
and continuity planning. These are to be prepared or coordinated in close cooperation with 

 

 

38/42 

 

 

 

 

 
the operators and regulatory authorities. For crises, the corresponding plans are to be drawn 
up  in  close  coordination  with  the  authorities  and  private  sector  representatives,  and 
agreements  made  where  necessary.  This  is  done  in  cooperation  and  consultation  with 
federal risk management and the national strategy for the protection of critical infrastructure. 
Alone  or  in  cooperation  with  partners  from  abroad,  Switzerland  should  be  in  a  position  to 
actively identify and ward off attacks which affect or could affect Swiss  interests, and thus 
support  reactive  crisis  management.  The  responsible  units  are  empowered  to  conduct 
targeted operations to obtain information on attack infrastructure. This should be provided for 
in  the  relevant  legislation  (e.g.  Intelligence  Service  Act)  and  submitted  to  the  political 
decision-makers.  
 
Measures 
Measure 12 
Players  from  the  private  sector,  society  and  authorities  are  to  cooperate  closely  and  use 
continuity  management  to  strengthen  and  improve  resilience  to  disruptions  and  incidents. 
(FDEA, FDF, DDPS, DETEC) 
Implementation 
Within the scope of the revision of the NESA, the FDEA is adapting its powers in order to be 
able  to  carry  out  needs-oriented  risk  and  vulnerability  analyses  with  all  sub-sectors  of  the 
Federal Office for National Economic Supply (FONES), involving the competent authorities 
(primarily DETEC and FDF) depending on the situation. The results are to be incorporated in 
corresponding continuity and crisis management plans. If CI operators are not captured by 
the  national  economic  supply  system,  they  are  to  be  contacted  through  the  respective 
competent  authorities,  which  will  adapt  their  sector-specific  legislation  accordingly  if 
necessary. 
 
MELANI  supports  and  reinforces  the  voluntary  exchange  of  information  with  CI  operators, 
ICT  service  providers  and  system  suppliers  in  support  of  continuity  and  resilience  on  the 
basis of self-help. This leads to an increased need for forensic capabilities, a greater flow of 
information and the strengthening of the exchange of information with CI operators and the 
private  sector.  Additional  capabilities  and  capacities  are  created  by  means  of  systematic 
cooperation with relevant ICT service providers and system suppliers. 
 
Measure 13 
In  a  crisis,  activities  should  be  coordinated  primarily  by  MELANI  with  the  players  directly 
affected.  The  decision-making  processes  within 
the  existing  crisis  and  continuity 
management  structures should  be  supported  with  specialist  expertise  in  order  to  ensure  a 
coherent approach to managing the crisis. The legality of prosecution has to be taken into 
account in the process. The national and international exchange of information plays a key 
role in crisis management and must thus be ensured and coordinated. (FDEA, FDF, DDPS, 
FDJP) 
Implementation 
To  support  the  affected  players  in  a  crisis,  MELANI  supports  and  boosts  the  voluntary 
exchange  of  information  with  CI  operators  and  its  international  partners,  and  ensures  the 

 

 

39/42 

 

 

 

 

 
involvement  of  police  units.  This  leads  to  an  increased  need  for  forensic  capabilities,  a 
greater  flow  of  information  and  the  strengthening  of  the  exchange  of  information  with  CI 
operators and the private sector. Additional capabilities and capacities are created by means 
of systematic cooperation with relevant ICT service providers and system suppliers. 
 
Measure 14 
In the event of a specific threat, active measures are foreseen for identifying the perpetrators 
and their intentions, as well as for investigating the perpetrators' abilities and compromising 
their infrastructure. (DDPS, FDJP) 
Implementation 
The  Federal  Intelligence  Service  is  to  cover  the  cyber  aspects  of  its  mandate  in  order  to 
manage  and  follow  up  on  incidents  relating  to  ICT  resources  that  are  relevant  to  state 
security. This is accomplished with the inclusion of the AFCSO as the FIS technical service 
provider  and  the  MIS  as  interface  with  military  partner  services,  international  military 
alliances and their agencies. This should be provided for in the relevant legislation (primarily 
the Intelligence Service Act) and submitted to the political decision-makers. 
The findings of the threat situation analysis by MELANI and the possibilities for investigating 
and convicting the perpetrators inherent in the legal remit regarding prosecution influence the 
measures. 
 
Measure 15 
It  is  to  be  ensured  that  cyber  aspects  are  factored  into  management  procedures  and 
processes within existing structures that serve to increase the management pace in order to 
achieve  timely  problem  solving  in  the  event  of  a  crisis.  This  occurs  in  agreement  with  the 
national strategy for the protection of critical infrastructure and the departments. (FCh) 
Implementation 
If  the  Federal  Chancellery  (FCh)  is  instructed  by  the  Federal  Council  to  provide  it  with 
proposals relating to "early crisis identification" and "crisis management" within the scope of 
government reform, it must involve the responsible partners in cyber risk issues.  
 
4.3.7  Sphere of action 7: Legal basis 

Identification, analysis and evaluation 
Myriad  federal  acts  and  ordinances  currently  form  the  legal  basis  for  cyberspace.  The 
problem is that there is almost no coordination of these legal provisions, and in some cases 
they are still incomplete. 
Within  the  scope  of  implementing  the  measures,  the  administration's  options  for  issuing 
binding stipulations beyond its units concerning the reduction of cyber risks are to be clarified 
if need be. 
 
Performance targets and planning 
The  legal  foundations  in  existence  reflect  the  cyber  aspects  of  existing  tasks  and 
responsibilities. Accordingly, a solution in the form of a single cyber-specific act for the whole 
of Switzerland is inappropriate. The existing body of laws therefore has to be adapted on an 

 

 

40/42 

 

 

 

 

 
ongoing  basis  to  cyberspace  developments  within  their  scope  by  means  of  revisions. 
However, it is essential to ensure this work is coherent and consistent.  
 
It  is  also  necessary  to  clarify  to  what  extent  a  legal  basis  already  exists to  oblige  relevant 
players (especially the cantons, CI operators and the private sector) beyond public authority 
units,  or  what  legal  clarifications  are  required  in  order  to  establish  such  powers  to  give 
instructions if need be.  
 
Measures 
Measure 16 
Existing legal foundations are to be examined in terms of their coherence and completeness 
with regard to the measures. To achieve this, priorities are to be set to adapt without delay 
legislation which is not subject to periodic revision. (FDF) 
Implementation 
In cooperation with the departments, the coordination unit for implementing the strategy will 
draw up by the end of 2013 an initial overview of urgent legislative and revision requirements 
in the area of cyberspace on the basis of the measures presented. Care must also be taken 
to ensure that all legislative texts deal with the exchange of information with third parties and 
the  handling  of  data  in  a  manner  that  is  as  uniform  as  possible.  Moreover,  any  more 
extensive  obligations  towards  the  cantons,  CI  operators  and  the  private  sector  are  to  be 
indicated.  The  constitutionality  of  the  proposed  provisions  is  to  be  ensured  in  cooperation 
with the FOJ. For legislative gaps that have been identified as priorities and necessary legal 
adjustments,  a  preliminary  draft  fit  for  consultation  and  an  explanatory  report  are  to  be 
prepared by the competent departments by the end of 2014.  
 
4.3.8  Coordination unit for implementing the strategy  
 
The  responsible  units  concerned  are  responsible,  according  to  their  mission,  for  the  level-
appropriate  preparation  and  implementation  of  measures,  and  this  is  carried  out  in 
cooperation with their respective competent partners in public authorities (at federal, cantonal 
and  commune  level),  the  private  sector  (operators  and  associations)  and  society.  The 
competent units ensure that these players are involved. 
A coordination unit for implementing the strategy in the Federal Department of Finance (FDF) 
supports  ongoing  implementation  and  compliance  with  the  required  measures  in  close 
cooperation with the responsible units. This is to be achieved in a period of four to six years. 
The coordination unit is to cooperate closely with existing coordination units and offices for 
other federal strategies and avoid redundancies.  
Once  implementation  is  complete  and  thus  the  relevant  processes  and  adjustments  have 
been integrated into regular operations, the coordination unit for implementing the strategy 
will be eliminated. The Reporting and Analysis Centre for Information Assurance (MELANI) 
will  take  over  a  coordination  and  leadership  role,  if  necessary,  upon  completion  of 
implementation. 

 

 

41/42 

 

 

 

The tasks of the coordination unit for implementing the strategy are: 
 

 

 

•  Leading  an  interdepartmental  steering  committee  for  coordinating  implementation 
steps at the federal level. It is made up of representatives from the competent federal 
units. The departments designate their own representatives.  

•  Accompanies,  in  cooperation  with  the  consultation  and  coordination  mechanism  of 
the  Swiss  Security  Network  (KKM  SVS),  a  cyber  expert  group  consisting  of 
representatives  of 
the  Confederation,  cantons  and  communes,  as  well  as 
infrastructure  operators,  the  private  sector  and  society.  This  specialist  group 
promotes the consistency of information among partners, as well as the initiation and 
coordination of joint solutions to problems. 

•  Prepares  a  detailed  implementation  plan  with  the  responsible  units  at federal  level. 
The implementation plan includes specifications for the respective areas as well as 
adjustments to resources and the legal basis.  

•  Provides the Federal Council with an annual report on the status of implementation. 
•  Ensures  coordination  among  the  relevant  departments  in  implementation  of  the 
measures,  provided  these  overlap  with  areas  of  legislation,  particularly  for  existing 
and  future  legislative  projects  and  revisions  (FOGIS,  Police  Tasks  Act,  Intelligence 
Service  Act,  National  Economic  Supply  Act,  Surveillance  of  Postal  and 
Telecommunications Traffic Act). 

•  Monitors the implementation of the national strategy for the protection of Switzerland 
against  cyber  risks, taking  into  account  the  Confederation's risk  policy,  the  national 
strategy for the protection of critical infrastructure and the "Switzerland's risks" study 
(DDPS-FOCP), as well as the Federal Council's strategy for an information society in 
Switzerland (DETEC-OFCOM). 

•  Examines with the responsible units the possibility of simplifying and streamlining the 

reporting paths and systems. 

•  Examines  possible  synergies  (e.g.  in  the  technical  and  operational  area)  with  the 

responsible units. 

•  Coordinates the implementation of measures 7, 8 and 15 with the relevant offices and 
players and if necessary also provides support with expert data when measure 1 is 
being implemented. 

•  After  five  years,  examines  the  national  strategy  for  the  protection  of  Switzerland 
against  cyber  risks  and  its  implementation  plan  with  respect  to  the  development  of 
cyberspace  and  the  measures  taken.  Systematic  benchmarking  will  be  established 
for this purpose. 

 

 

 

42/42 

