 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

Government of the Republic of  

Trinidad & Tobago 

 

National Cyber Security Strategy 

 
 
 

Prepared by the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Cyber Security, 

December 2012 

 

 

Table of Contents 
 

1.0   Executive Summary    

2.0   Introduction 

 

 

 

 

2.1   What is Cyber Security? 

3.0   A Case for Action 

 

4.0   Strategic Foundation  

4.1   Vision 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.2   National Policy Considerations 

5.0   Framework 

 

5.1   Governance 

 

 

 

 

5.2   Incident Management 

5.3   Collaboration   

 

 

 

 

 

5.3.1 National Collaboration 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.3.2 International Collaboration  

5.4    Culture  

 

5.5    Legislation      

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.0    Operational Goals and Related Activities 

7.0    Appendix 

8.0    Glossary 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

5 

6 

7 

10 

10 

11 

12 

13 

15 

16 

16 

17 

17 

19 

20 

25 

26 

9.0    References                                                                                      29 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2 

1.0 Executive Summary 
 
Governments,  businesses  and  citizens  are increasingly  becoming 
large 
consumers  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (ICTs)  and 
electronic  services,  relying more  on ICTs  in  the  areas  of  management, 
communication,  education,  commerce,  procurement  and  service  provision. 
The reality of the environment is that for all the opportunities that ICTs bring, 
security risks are also present. These, if not mitigated and managed, can have 
a  deleterious  effect  on  the  reputation  of  the  Government  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, domestically and internationally.  
 
This  Strategy  seeks  to  guide  all  operations  and  initiatives  related  to  cyber 
security  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  It  is  based  on  the  government’s  Medium 
Term  Policy  Framework,  2011-2014,  which  underscores  the  role  of  ICT  in 
advancing national development. Its main objectives are as follows: 
 

i.  To create a secure digital environment that will enable all users to enjoy 

the full benefits of the Internet; 
 

ii.  To  provide  a  governance  framework  for  all  cyber  security  matters  by 
identifying  the  requisite  organizational  and  administrative  structures 
necessary, inclusive of human resources, training and capacity building 
and budgetary requirements; 

 

 

 

iii.  To  protect  the  physical,  virtual  and  intellectual  assets  of  citizens, 
organizations  and  the  State  through  the  development  of  an  effective 
mechanism that addresses and responds to cyber threats regardless of 
their origin;  

iv.  To facilitate the safety of all citizens by  promoting awareness of cyber 
risks and developing effective and appropriate protective measures to 
mitigate risks and attacks; 
 

v.  To help prevent cyber attacks against critical infrastructure and secure 
information  networks  by  building  competency  among  primary 
stakeholders and the general public;  

3 

 

vi.  To  minimize  damage  and  recovery  times  from  cyber  attacks  through 

effective incident management measures; and 

 
vii.  To create a legal and regulatory framework to maintain order, protect 

the privacy of users and criminalize attacks in cyberspace. 

 

In  order  to  achieve  these  objectives,  five  (5)  key  areas  of  focus  have  been 
identified: 
  

1.  Governance:  The  fundamental  goal  is  the  establishment  of  a 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  Cyber  Security  Agency  (TTCSA)  as  the 
main  body  responsible  for  all  cyber  security  matters,  and  the 
coordinating centre for all cyber security operations. 

2.  Incident management: The establishment of Computer Security 
Incident Response Team (TT CSIRT) as a national focal point for 
incident reporting, incident management and incident response. 
3.  Collaboration: The establishment of public-private/civil society 
partnership 
securing  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  cyber 
infrastructure,  as  well  as  the  promotion  of  cooperation  with 
international organizations.  

in 

4.  Culture:  Awareness  raising,  training  and  education  in  cyber 

security throughout the country.  

5.  Legislation: The drafting and enactment of relevant cybercrime 
to  criminalise  appropriate  offences,  prosecute 

legislation 
offenders and protect citizens. 

 
Through this Strategy, the Government envisions the creation of a secure and 
resilient  cyber  environment,  based  on  collaboration  among  all  key 
stakeholders,  which  allows  for  the  exploitation  of  ICT  for  the  benefit  and 
prosperity of all. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4 

through 

its 

infusion 

improved 

inter  alia, 

2.0 Introduction 
 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) provides the basis for the 
development  of  every  modern  and  progressive  society  and  allows  for 
incorporation into the global information economy.   
 
Governments,  businesses  and  citizens  are increasingly  becoming 
large 
consumers  of  ICTs  and  electronic  services.  This  growing  reliance  is 
demonstrated 
in  education,  ongoing 
enhancement  of  communication  networks, 
facilitation  of 
international  trade,  changes  in  management  and  procurement  systems  and 
advances in health care provision. In the last twelve (12) years, ICT usage has 
increased  by  1,310.8%  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean1.  The  World 
Economic Forum, Global Information Technology Report shows that Trinidad 
and  Tobago’s  readiness  to  leverage  ICT  for  increasing  competitiveness  and 
development jumped upwards from 79 out of 133 countries in 20102 to 60 out 
of 142 countries in 20123. 
 
The transformative potential of ICTs and the Internet has been recognised by 
the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  (GoRTT)  which 
identified ICT and the establishment of a  diversified knowledge economy as 
discrete  development  pillars  within 
for  Sustainable 
Development4. The intent is to promote universal and equitable access to and 
use of ICTs and the Internet, so as to address the digital divide and provide 
for the inclusion of underserved and/or un-served communities.  
 
Yet,  a  corollary  to  the  many  opportunities  offered  by  ICT  is  the  presence  of 
various  risks  in  cyberspace.  Thus,  the  country’s  response  to  internal  and 
external  threats  must  include  the  deployment  of  technology  to  monitor  and 
analyze  natural  and  man-made  disasters,  the  physical  protection  of  the 

its  Framework 

                                                 
1 World Internet Usage and Population Statistics, June 2012, 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm  
2 World Economic Forum, “The Global Information Technology Report 2009-2010: ICT for 
sustainability, 2010. p. xvii.  http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GITR_Report_2010.pdf. 
3 World Economic Forum. “Global Information Technology Report: Living in a hyperconnected 
world”: 2012. p. xxiii. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Global_IT_Report_2012.pdf 
4 Government of Trinidad and Tobago, “Innovation for Lasting Prosperity: Medium Term Policy 
Framework, 2011-2014”, October 2011 

 

5 

information  infrastructure  that  supports  the  knowledge-based  economy  and 
the mitigation of threats that can result from the misuse of computer systems. 
In  seeking  to  address  these  threats,  there  is  a  requirement  to  ensure  the 
maintenance of effective communication among relevant stakeholders. This is 
a  key  component  in  realizing  and  maintaining  the  general  ICT  security 
objectives of availability, confidentiality and integrity. 
 
This  Strategy  seeks  to  guide  all  operations  and  initiatives  related  to  cyber 
security  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  It  recognises  the  critical  need  for  an 
overarching  governance  framework,  appropriate  cybercrime  legislation  and 
the  establishment  of  a  national  Cyber  Security  Incident  Response  Team 
(CSIRT).  It also acknowledges the importance of building awareness among 
all  stakeholders  (government,  business,  academia,  civil  society  and  citizens) 
of their roles and responsibilities in establishing a secure ICT environment. 
 
 
2.1 What is Cyber Security? 
 
Although there is a lack of international consensus on the definition of  cyber 
security,  Trinidad 
International 
Telecommunications  Union’s  Telecommunication  Standardization  Sector, 
(ITU-T) Recommendation X.1205(X.cso) which states that: 
 

and  Tobago 

the 

subscribes 

to 

“Cybersecurity  is  the  collection  of  tools,  policies,  security  concepts, 
security  safeguards,  guidelines,  risk  management  approaches,  actions, 
training,  best  practices,  assurance  and  technologies  that  can  be  used  to 
protect  the  cyber  environment  and  organization  and  user’s  assets. 
Organization  and  user’s  assets  include  connected  computing  devices, 
personnel,  infrastructure,  applications,  services,  telecommunications 
systems, and the totality of transmitted and/or stored information in the 
cyber  environment.  Cybersecurity  strives  to  ensure  the  attainment  and 
maintenance  of  the  security  properties  of  the  organization  and  user’s 
assets against relevant security risks in the cyber environment.”5 

 

                                                 
5 International Telecommunication Union Definition of Cybersecurity, 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/Pages/cybersecurity.aspx 

 

6 

Effective  cyber  security  would  ensure  system  availability, 
integrity, 
authenticity,  confidentiality,  and  non-repudiation.  It  would  address  user 
privacy and enhance trust in related systems.  
 
 
 
3.0 A Case for Action 
 
The globally-interdependent network of digital ICT infrastructures referred to 
as  “cyberspace”  is  the  underlying  force  driving  the  growth  of  the  global 
knowledge  economy.  ICT  continues  to  impact  all  sectors  of  society  in 
countries  worldwide,  enabling  new  business  practices,  new  modes  of 
government-citizen  engagement,  and  changes  in  interpersonal  interactions. 
This, as a result, changes the face of, inter alia, economic, social and political 
structures and activities, public infrastructure, public services, education and 
national security. The ICT industry itself is also continually growing. Within 
the  last  decade,  technologies  have  become  even  more  powerful.  Access  to 
cyberspace has now become easier through new mechanisms such as mobile 
devices and mobile broadband, whereby, digital content can be produced and 
shared within minutes on social networks.  
 
Threats to cyberspace are of critical concern to all countries. The ITU reports 
that there is evidence to show that cyber attacks are growing in sophistication, 
frequency  and  gravity;  for  example,  due  to  the  automation  of  business 
processes,  it  is  estimated  that  as  many  as  80  million  hacking  attacks  are 
conducted  daily6.  Security  firm  Symantec  reports  that  global  annual  losses 
resulting from cybercrime are valued at US$388 billion. In a study conducted 
in  twenty-four  (24)  nations  by  the  firm,  69%  of  those  surveyed  claimed  to 
have been the victim of cybercrime. It was found that 431 million adults, more 
than a million a day, fall victim to cybercrime each year7. 
 

 

                                                 
6 International Telecommunication Union,  ‘Understanding Cybercrime: A Guide for Developing   
Countries’, April 2009, p. 72 
7 Symantec, ‘Norton Cybercrime Report 2011’  
http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/home_homeoffice/html/cybercrimereport/  

 

7 

Cyberspace  provides  the  environment  that  facilitates  organized  virtual 
attacks on information assets, as well as physical infrastructure. These attacks 
can be carried out even by using readily available consumer technology. 
 
Sophisticated cybercriminals can conceal their identities, locations, and paths 
of entry. They can leverage cyberspace to disrupt communications, hinder or 
delay  defensive,  offensive  or  emergency  response.  The  virus  Stuxnet8,  for 
example,  which  was  discovered  in  2010,  was  designed  to  target  industrial 
control systems used to monitor and run large-scale industrial facilities such 
as power plants, oil refineries, and gas pipelines.9  
 
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  following  areas  are  among  those  susceptible  to 
compromise by criminal or terrorist elements: 
 

  online banking and financial networks; 
  online government services such as TTBizLink; 
  real-time  information  systems,  such  as  the  Supervisory  Control  and 
Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems that manage the pumping stations 
at  the  Water  and  Sewerage  Authority  (WASA)  and  the  Trinidad  and 
Tobago Electricity Commission (T&TEC);  

  revenue-dependent oil, gas and petrochemical infrastructure; 
  air transport and public ground transportation.  

 
Experiences  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  like  those  globally,  have  underscored 
the  truism  that  increasing  reliance  on  cyberspace  brings  both  opportunities 
and  threats.  The  rapid  integration  of  the  Internet  into  almost  all  aspects  of 
social  and  economic  activity  and  the  ubiquity  of  ICT  has  increased  the 
vulnerability of all facets of society. The country has witnessed an increase in 
a  number  of  cyber  incidents  including  child  online  pornography,  online 
bullying,  attempted  domain  hijacking  and  website  hacking.  The  April  2012 
hacking  into  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Parliament  websites  and  the  July 

                                                 
8  The  ultimate  goal  of  Stuxnet  was  to  manipulate  the  physical  equipment  attached  to  specific 
industrial  control  systems  so  the  equipment  acted  in  a  manner  programmed  by  the  attacker, 
contrary to its intended purpose. 
9  Symantec, ‘Duqu: The Precursor to the Next Stuxnet’  
http://www.symantec.com/outbreak/?id=stuxnet  

 

8 

2012 Automated Teller Machine (ATM) skimming scam whereby well-hidden 
cameras were used by thieves, to capture the personal identification numbers 
for  some  customers’  debit  and  credit  cards,  from  a  few  major  banking 
institutions, are recent local examples of increasing cybercrime incidents10.  
 
Questioned  in  an  online  magazine  “ICT  Pulse”,  an  IT/network  security 
expert expressed the view that the biggest trends in threats and intrusions in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  are  the  increasing  “presence  of  command  and  control 
BOT, attempted domain hijacking and fake antivirus as well as constant port 
scans.”11 
 
The GoRTT has embarked on a number of programmes to increase ICT access 
and affordability and to reduce the digital divide. These include the eConnect 
and Learn (eCAL) Programme through which all students entering secondary 
schools  in  Form  1  are  provided  with  laptops;  and  the  fleet  of  buses  that 
facilitates  ICT  training  and  capacity  building  in  rural  underserved  and  un-
served areas. These programmes are evidence of the importance that has been 
attached  to  ICT  and  the  Internet  as  a  critical  component  in  achieving 
economic growth, global competitiveness and a better life for citizens.  
 
Such  an  approach  allows  for  the  maximum  realisation  of  the  benefits  to  be 
derived  from  the  digital  revolution.  At  the  same  time  however,  it  is 
incumbent that strategies be implemented that address the risks, particularly 
to our children and young people, associated with the use of the Internet. 
 
Thus,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  must  define  and  implement  the  necessary 
policies, strategies and plans to ensure continuing confidence and trust in the 
reliability  of  the  Internet,  the  security  of  the  systems  connected  thereto  and 
the safety, security and resilience of the country’s ICT digital infrastructure.  
 

                                                 
10 Cyber Unit and Fraud Squad probe ATM scam. Trinidad Guardian. July 10, 2012. 
http://www.guardian.co.tt/news/2012-07-09/cyber-unit-and-fraud-squad-probe-atm-scam 
11  Expert  insights  3:  Cyber  threats  and  security  in  the  Caribbean.  ICT  Pulse:  ICT  issues  from  a 
Caribbean  perspective.  April  1,  2012.  Interview  with  Aaron  Manzano,  of  HMP  Consulting  in 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
http://www.ict-pulse.com/2012/03/expert-insights-3-cyber-threats-and-security-in-the-
caribbean/ 

 

9 

4.0 Strategic Foundation 
 
The  GoRTT’s  Medium  Term  Policy  Framework  (MTPF)12,  2011-2014 
underscores the role of ICT in advancing national development. It notes that: 

1.  “The  use  of  ICT  is  an  essential  element  of  the  infrastructure 
underpinning  the  creation  of  a  modern,  competitive  economy  in  an 
information rich, knowledge and technology-driven world.  

2.  Creating a diversified and knowledge intensive economy is at the core 
of  building  international  competitiveness,  stimulating  new  areas  of 
economic growth and moving up the value chain.13” 

 
The MTPF is premised on the Framework for Sustainable Development which 
is  built  upon  seven 
interconnected  development  pillars.  Pillar  Four 
(Information  and  Communication  Technologies  –  Connecting  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
and Building the New Economy ) acknowledges the extent to which the adoption 
and  utilization  of  ICT  is  a  critical  success  factor  in  achieving  sustainable 
development.  Cyber  security  is  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  this  new  ICT 
paradigm, as the establishment of the appropriate legislative framework and 
enforcement  machinery  to  detect,  combat  and  protect  against  cybercrime  is 
considered fundamental.  
 
 
4.1 Vision 
 
The  GoRTT  will  create  a  secure  and  resilient  cyber  environment,  based  on 
collaboration among all key stakeholders, which allows for the exploitation of 
ICT for the benefit and prosperity of all. 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
12Government of Trinidad and Tobago, “Innovation for Lasting Prosperity: Medium Term Policy 
Framework, 2011-2014”, October 2011 
13Ibid  

 

10 

4.2 National Policy Considerations 
 
The  following  are  key  policy  positions  that  have  been  adopted  in  order  to 
define the cyber security strategy for the protection of Trinidad and Tobago’s 
national assets and interests: 
 

responsible 

for 

  The  entity 

the  coordination, 

implementation, 
monitoring, continuous improvement and governance of cyber security 
initiatives  will  be  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Cyber  Security  Agency 
(TTCSA); 
 

  Cyber security is a component of the national security strategy and the 
national  ICT  plan  which  in  turn  are  subsets  of  the  Policy  Framework 
for  Sustainable  Development.  As  such,  all  relevant  policies  and 
strategies are aligned to the overarching policy framework; 

  The  cyber  security  strategy  takes  into  account  data  protection  and 

privacy considerations; 

  Comprehensive  national  cybercrime  legislation  that  is  regionally  and 
internationally  applicable  and  harmonised  will  be  enacted  and 
implemented; 

  The  cyber  security  strategy  as  far  as  possible  will  be  guided  by 

international agreements and standards; 

  A  culture  of  cyber  security  will  be  promoted  in  an  effort  to  raise 

awareness and build confidence in the ICT environment;  

  Coordination  and  collaboration  at 

the  national,  regional  and 

international levels will be promoted and strengthened; and 

  Research  and  development  in  the  area  of  cyber  security  will  be 
encouraged  in  order  to  build  capacity  and  maintain  a  resilient 
knowledge base.  

11 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.0 Framework 
 
Developing  and  implementing  a  national  cyber  security  plan  requires  a 
comprehensive  strategy  that  includes  a  broad  review  of  the  adequacy  of 
current  national  practices  and  consideration  of  the  role  of  all  stakeholders 
(government  authorities,  civil  society,  academia,  businesses,  and  citizens)  in 
the process.  
 
The  following  strategic  objectives  have  been  identified  in  accordance  with 
international guiding frameworks: 
 

i.  To create a secure digital environment that will enable all users to enjoy 

the full benefits of the Internet; 
 

ii.  To  provide  a  governance  framework  for  all  cyber  security  matters  by 
identifying  the  requisite  organizational  and  administrative  structures 
necessary, inclusive of human resources, training and capacity building 
and budgetary requirements; 

 

 

 

 

 

iii.  To  protect  the  physical,  virtual  and  intellectual  assets  of  citizens, 
organizations  and  the  State  through  the  development  of  an  effective 
mechanism that addresses and responds to cyber threats regardless of 
their origin;  

iv.  To facilitate the safety of all citizens by promoting awareness of cyber 
risks and developing effective and appropriate protective measures to 
mitigate risks and attacks; 
 

v.  To help prevent cyber attacks against critical infrastructure and secure 
information  networks  by  building  competency  among  primary 
stakeholders and the general public;  

vi.  To  minimize  damage  and  recovery  times  from  cyber  attacks  through 

effective incident management measures; and 

12 

vii.  To create a legal and regulatory framework to maintain order, protect 

the privacy of users and criminalize attacks in cyberspace. 

 
In  order  to  achieve  these  objectives,  five  key  areas  have  been  identified  and 
are outlined hereunder: 
 

1.  Governance 
2.  Incident Management 
3.  Collaboration  
4.  Culture  
5.  Legislation  

 
 
5.1 Governance 
 
Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  cyber  security  efforts  must  be  able  to  effectively 
address  the  dynamic  and  challenging  nature  of  threats  to  cyberspace.  This 
requires an overarching governance framework to effectively coordinate and 
manage a comprehensive cyber security strategy. 
 
Existing vulnerabilities that could create the most disruption to Trinidad and 
Tobago’s  critical  systems  and 
identified  and 
addressed. The Government will promote development of new systems with 
less  vulnerability  together  with  an  ongoing  assessment  of  emerging 
technologies 
ICT 
infrastructure, services and data repositories will be developed and enforced 
throughout Trinidad and Tobago. Periodic review of standards, policies and 
regulations  will  also  be  undertaken.  Communication  between  and  among 
Government Ministries and Agencies will also be promoted. 
 
In order to manage the country’s response to ever-evolving cyber threats, and 
to  coordinate  the  wide  cross  section  of  entities  with  perceived  overlapping 
authority  for  the  management  of  these  issues,  it  is  imperative  to  establish 
cohesion  between  the  public  sector,  the  private  sector  and  all  key 
stakeholders. In this regard the implementation of a Governance Framework 

for  weaknesses.  Common  standards 

infrastructure  must  be 

for  securing 

 

13 

is required to deliver the infrastructure needed to manage and coordinate all 
activities related to this response. 
 
The  GoRTT  will  establish  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Cyber  Security  Agency 
(TTCSA)  by  way  of  legislation  which  will  provide  the  required  services  for 
the following key functions: 
 

1.  Implementation and advice on the national cyber security strategy; 
2.  Provision  of  situational  awareness  information,  and  collection  and 

analysis of data on cyber security issues; 

3.  Promotion of efficient network and information security management; 
4.  Raising  awareness  and  promotion  of 

local  and 

international 

cooperation. 

 
The  Agency  will  be  responsible  for  coordinating  and  or  managing  the 
following core functional areas of cyber security. 
 

1.  Development  and  implementation  of  management  frameworks 

for all functional areas; 

2.  Incident response and management; 
3.  Cyber  forensics  and 

investigations  (this  function  will  be 
performed by the Cyber Crime Unit of the Trinidad and Tobago 
Police Service);  

4.  Promotion  of  cyber  security  culture,  education,  training  and 

research; 

5.  Communications, international collaboration, public and private 

partnerships;  

6.  Cyber 

security 

legal 

issues, 

(continuous 

review 

and 

recommended amendments to legislation); 

7.  The  interdependence  of  Critical  Information  Infrastructure 

Protection (CIIP) and Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP). 
 

This  governance  framework  will  provide  a  sustainable  structure  which  can 
evolve  to  meet  and  address  the  reality  of  cyber  security  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago.  
 

 

14 

The proposed organisational structure for the TTCSA has been developed and 
is attached as Appendix I.  
 
 
5.2 Incident Management 
 
In  order  to  secure  and  strengthen  the  country’s  critical  information 
infrastructure, coordinated efforts should be made to mitigate, and/or control 
incidents  in  the  quickest  and  most  efficient  manner.  There  is  therefore  a 
requirement  for  an  organization  which  can  serve  as  the  national  focal  point 
for incident reporting, incident management and incident response. 
 
The GoRTT will establish a Trinidad and Tobago Computer Security Incident 
Response Team (TT-CSIRT) which will be responsible for: 
 

  dissemination of cyber security information; 
 

technical guidance and support in the event of a cyber-incident; 

  collaboration  between  and  among  government  entities  at  the  national 
level,  the  private  sector,  academia,  and  the  international  CSIRT 
community. 

 
TT-CSIRT would possess the capabilities to:  
 

  Provide warning of potential threats, incidents, and attacks; 
  Facilitate 

information-sharing  among  the  TT-CSIRT  constituency 
relating  to  best  practices,  investigative  information,  coordination  of 
incident  response,  and 
incident  management  procedures  and 
processes; 

  Analyse cyber vulnerabilities, incidents, and attack methodologies; 
  Provide  technical  assistance  to  the  GoRTT  and  other  stakeholders 

within the national framework; 

  Conduct investigations, and forensics analysis; 
  Defend  against  attacks  with  special  focus  on  critical  information 

infrastructure; and 

  Lead national-level recovery efforts in the event of a cyber-incident. 

 

 

15 

TT-CSIRT  will  be  developed  and  implemented  based  on  industry  standards 
and  international  best  practices,  and  will  ensure  the  national  community  is 
aware of the protocols for reporting cyber incidents. 
 
TT-CSIRT will be housed in the TTCSA. 
 
 
5.3 Collaboration 
 
The  protection  of  cyberspace  is  a  shared  responsibility  with  each  individual 
actor  playing  a  key  role  in  the  security  chain.  If  cyber  security  is  truly  to  be 
realised,  approaches  must  be  pertinent  to  the  local  context  while  also  being 
compatible  and  interoperable  with  those  at  the  international  level.    This 
underscores the critical importance of national and international cooperation 
and collaboration.  
 
5.3.1 National Collaboration 
 
A  public-private/civil  society  partnership  is  essential  in  securing  Trinidad 
and  Tobago’s  cyber  infrastructure.  The  GoRTT  will  partner  with  the  private 
sector and civil society in the implementation of its cyber security strategy. 
 
Cooperation will be facilitated, through information sharing, participation in 
technology  forums  and  research  and  analysis,  to  provide  input  for  the 
development and dissemination of best practices for cyber security. 
 
Private  enterprises,  including  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs),  have  an 
important  role  in  securing  cyberspace  as  they  own  major  networks  and 
computer systems. These entities will be encouraged to evaluate the security 
of  those  networks  that  impact  the  security  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  critical 
infrastructure. Such evaluations would include: 
 

  Conducting risk assessments and audits; 
  Developing continuity plans which consider staff and equipment; and 
  Participating  in  industry-wide  information  sharing  and  best  practice 

dissemination. 

 

16 

foster 

in 

international 

for  national  security  will  also 

The  Ministry  responsible 
the 
development  of  cyber  security  certification  programmes  that  will  be 
nationally recognized and accepted by the public and private sectors. 
 
5.3.2 International Collaboration  
 
Given  the  interconnectivity  of  ICT  infrastructures  and  the  global  nature  of 
cyber  threats,  international  cooperation  and  collaboration  is  required  to 
secure  the  ICT  environment.    Such  collaboration  would  involve  raising 
awareness  of  cyber  security,  improving  the  exchange  of  information  sharing 
of reciprocal data, participating in the formulation of international norms and 
standards,  adopting  and  adapting  such  standards  and  good  practices  in  all 
dimensions  of  cyber  security;  mutual  legal  assistance  and  participating  in 
coordinated investigations and prosecutions of cyber criminals. 
 
A key aspect of this international cooperation is the promotion of discussions 
from the perspective of a Small Island Developing State (SID), especially as it 
relates  to  international  conventions  on  cybercrime  which  may  have  an 
economic  impact  on  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  other  small  states.  This  will 
necessitate 
standard-setting 
organisations at the regional, hemispheric and international level. 
 
To  date,  the  primary  sources  of  international  assistance  for  Trinidad  and 
Tobago in the area of cyber security have been the Organization of American 
States  (OAS),  European  Union  (EU),  Caribbean  Telecommunications  Union 
(CTU)  and  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU).  Nonetheless, 
information  exchange  and  cooperation  will  be  strengthened  with  other 
multilateral organizations including the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), 
the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  and  the  Council  of  Europe.  Avenues  for 
enhanced bilateral cooperation will also be explored. 
 
 
5.4 Culture  
 
It is recognized that awareness at the national level constitutes a pre-requisite 
for  effective  protection  in  cyberspace.  The  GoRTT  will  assume  a  leadership 

greater  participation 

 

17 

role  in  developing  a  culture  of  cyber  security.  This  will  necessitate  the 
adoption of a multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder approach inclusive of 
awareness-  raising,  embedding  cyber  security  in  the  wider  aspects  of  policy 
formulation  and  educating  all  users  of  ICT  and  the  Internet  on  their 
respective roles in cyberspace.   
 
Further,  the  GoRTT,  in  coordination  with  the  private  sector,  will  work  to 
educate the general public and small, medium and large businesses on basic 
cyberspace  safety  and  security  issues.  The  initial  focus  will  be  on  the 
elaboration of guidelines and the creation of programmes in cyber safety for 
primary and secondary school students. 
 
Higher  education  institutions  will  also  be  encouraged  to  adopt  policies  and 
measures necessary to improve system security.  
 
Scientific  research  and  innovation  are  also  critical  to  ensuring  cyber  security 
and development of the national digital economy. Thus, training and ongoing 
research  to  develop  innovative  security  tools  will  be  conducted  in  order  to 
maintain  reliable  systems  while  building  resistance  to  current  and  future 
threats.  The  GoRTT  will  allocate  resources  for  training  and  education  of 
individuals  who  can  develop  such  tools  and  specialise  in  securing  critical 
information infrastructure.  
 
The  Ministries  responsible  for  national  security  and  science  and  technology 
will also promote advanced training for cyber security professionals in public 
and  private  educational  institutions  as  well  as  promote  the  establishment  of 
standards for the certification of qualified ICT security professionals.  
 
The  Ministry  responsible  for  national  security  will  encourage  private 
organizations  and  companies 
to  provide  sufficient  opportunities  for 
continuing  education  and  advanced  training  in  the  workplace  to  maintain 
high  skill  standards  and  the  capacity  to  innovate.  It  will  also  champion  the 
coordination  of  training  programmes  between  the  government  and  the 
private sector.   
 

 

18 

5.5 Legislation 
 
One of the objectives of the national policy framework is the expansion of the 
country’s  internet  connection  capabilities  so  that  every  stakeholder  will  be 
able  to  conduct  business  and  have  access  to  a  wide  range  of  governmental 
services. As a corollary to this, it is recognized that the government must play 
an important role in ensuring that there is clear policy with a regulatory and 
legal  framework  in  relation  to  cybercrime.  The  GoRTT  would  therefore 
develop  a  national  cybercrime  policy  and  enact  national  cybercrime 
legislation.  
 
Recognizing that strong policing of cybercrime is necessary for the enjoyment 
of  the  benefits  of  the  digital  environment,  the  GoRTT  will  develop  a  well-
defined  legal  framework  to  establish  and  maintain  order  and  security  for 
users of the electronic environment and sanction those who deliberately cause 
damage to computers and electronic networks. 
 
The legislative framework will:  
 

  Adopt an omnibus approach to tackle computer and computer-related 

crime to account for rapid ICT developments at the global level; 

  Establish offences which include, illegal access, illegal interception, and 
infringement  of  Intellectual  Property  Rights,  identity-related  crimes, 
unsolicited  electronic  junk  mail  or  SPAM,  cyber-bullying,  as  well  as 
aiding and abetting; 

  Facilitate the collection and admissibility of electronic evidence; 
  Encourage cross–border investigations with regional and international 

governments and their enforcement agencies; and 

  Create  a  pool  of  judicial  experts  from  public  and  private  sectors  to 

share expertise and knowledge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

19 

6.0 Operational Goals and Related Activities 
 
The National Cyber Security Strategy as defined in the five operational goals 
can be represented in a tabular format, as outlined hereunder. 
 
Operational Goals 
1.0 Create an appropriate 
Governance framework for cyber 
security 

Establish  a  Trinidad  and 
Tobago 
Security 
Agency; 
 

Actions 
1.1 

Cyber 

and 

1.2  Develop 
common 
standards 
Government;  

ICT 

implement 
security 
across 

 
1.3 

2.0  Develop  National 
Management Capabilities 

Incident 

2.1 

2.2 

review 

policies 

for 
Provide  a  mechanism 
periodic 
and 
assessment  of  national  cyber 
security 
and 
regulations. 
 
Establish 
computer  security 
response (TT-CSIRT); 
 
Establish  shared  situational 
awareness 
the 
GovNeTT; 
 

centralized 
incident 

across 

a 

2.3  Develop 

a 

coordinated 
national  cyberspace  security 
response  system  to  prevent, 
detect, 
and 
recover from cyber incidents; 
 
 

respond 

to 

 

20 

2.4 

2.5 

cyber 

focal  points 

for 
Establish 
managing 
incidents 
that  bring  together  critical 
elements  from  government 
(including  law  enforcement) 
infrastructure  operators  and 
vendors  to  reduce  both  the 
risk and severity of incidents; 
 
Participate in watch, warning 
response 
and 
information 
sharing 
mechanisms; 

incident 

 
2.6  Develop,  test  and  exercise 
emergency  response  plans, 
procedures,  and  protocols  to 
ensure  that  government  and 
non-government 
collaborators  can  build  trust 
and  coordinate  effectively  in 
a crisis. 

 
3.1 

3.2 

a 

for 
Provide  a  mechanism 
bringing 
of 
variety 
perspectives,  expertise,  and 
knowledge  together  to  reach 
consensus to enhance security 
at a national level; 
 
Include industry perspectives 
in 
the  earliest  stages  of 
development 
and 
implementation  of  security 
policy and related efforts;  
 

industry 

that  work 

3.0  Develop  government,  civil,  and 
collaborative 
private 
relationships 
to 
effectively manage cyber risk and to 
protect cyberspace. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

21 

3.3 

3.4 

 
3.5 

 
3.6 

 
4.1 

4.2 

 
4.3 

57/239 

security 

4.0  Promote  a  national  culture  of 
cyber 
consistent  with 
United  Nations  General  Assembly 
Resolutions 
entitled 
“Creation  of  a  global  culture  of 
cyber security”; and 58/199 entitled 
“Creation  of  a  global  culture  of 
cyber security and the protection of 
critical information infrastructures”.  

common 

industries 

 
Encourage  development  of 
private  sector  groups  from 
different 
critical 
to 
infrastructure 
address 
security 
interests  collaboratively  with 
government; 
 
Bring  together  the  private, 
civil  and  public  sectors  in 
trusted  forums  to  address 
common 
security 
challenges; 

cyber 

cooperation 
Encourage 
among 
from 
interdependent  organisations 
and agencies; 

groups 

Establish 
arrangements 
management 
Government 
groups.  

for 

cooperative 
incident 
between 
and  various 

Implement  a  cyber  security 
plan 
government 
operated systems; 
 
Implement 
security 
awareness  programmes  and 
initiatives 
of 
systems and networks; 

users 

for 

for 

Encourage  the  development 

 

22 

 
4.4 

 
4.5 

of  a  culture  of  cyber  security 
in business enterprises; 

Support  outreach 
to  civil 
society  with  special  attention 
to  the  needs  of  children  and 
individual users; 

so 

Promote  a  comprehensive 
awareness 
national 
programme 
that 
all 
stakeholders  -  business,  the 
general  workforce  and  the 
general  population  -  secure 
their own parts of cyberspace; 

 
4.6  Develop  awareness  of  cyber 
risks and available solutions; 

  
4.7 

 
4.8 

science 
(S&T) 

and 
Enhance 
technology 
and 
research  and  development 
(R&D) initiatives; 

existing 

Review 
privacy 
regime  in  accordance  with 
the digital environment; 

 
4.9  Make IT security a priority in 

higher education; 

 
4.10  Revise 

organizational 
security  policy  and  improve 
the  use  of  existing  security 
tools; 

 

 

23 

5.0 Deter Cybercrime 

4.11 

4.12 

 
5.1 

5.2 

 
5.3 

Integrate  work 
in  higher 
education  with  the  national 
effort  to  strengthen  critical 
infrastructure; 
 
collaboration 
Improve 
between  higher  education, 
industry and Government. 

Enact and enforce legislation 
relating to cyber security and 
cybercrime; 
  
Build  local  capacity  of  law 
enforcement  and  prosecution 
authorities; 

Build local judicial capacity.  
 

 

24 

7.0  Appendix:  Organizational  Structure  for  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
Cyber Security Agency 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

25 

8.0 Glossary 
 

(i) 

(CSIRT) 

Incident  Response  Team 

Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Team:  A  Computer 
Security 
is  a  service 
organization  that  is  responsible  for  receiving,  reviewing,  and 
responding  to  computer  security  incident  reports  and  activity. 
Their  services  are  usually  performed  for  a  defined  constituency 
that  could  be  a  parent  entity  such  as  a  corporation, 
governmental, or educational organization; a region or country; a 
research network; or a paid client. 
 

(ii)  Control  and  command  BOT:  a  group  of  compromised 

computers running software that are under external control. 
 

(iii)  Critical  Infrastructure:  means  computer  systems,  devices, 
networks,  computer  programs,  computer  data,  so  vital  to  the 
country that the incapacity or destruction of or interference with 
such  systems  and  assets  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on 
security,  defence  or  international  relations  of  the  State;  or 
provision  of  services  directly  related  to  national  or  economic 
security,  banking  and 
financial  services,  communications 
infrastructure,  national  public  health  and  safety,  public 
transportation,  public  key  infrastructure  or  any  combination  of 
those matters. 
 

(iv)  Cyber bullying: refers to a person being tormented, threatened, 
harassed,  humiliated,  embarrassed  or  otherwise  targeted  by 
another  person,  using  the  Internet,  interactive  and  digital 
technologies or mobile phones. 

 

(v)  Cyberspace:  Cyberspace  integrates  a  number  of  capabilities, 
such  as  sensors,  signals,  connections,  transmissions,  processors, 
and  controllers,  and  generates  a  virtual  interactive  experience 
accessed  for  the  purpose  of  communication  and  control 
regardless  of  a  geographic  location.  Cyberspace  allows  the 
interdependent 
technology 
infrastructures,  telecommunications  networks,  such  as  the 
Internet,  computer  systems,  integrated  sensors,  system  control 

information 

network 

of 

 

26 

networks  and  embedded  processors  and  controllers  common  to 
global control and communications. 

 

(vi)  Domain  hijacking:  intentionally  accesses  a  computer  without 

authorization or exceeds authorized access. 
 

(vii)  eConnect  and  Learn  (eCAL)  Programme:  This  represents 
Government’s primary programme for increasing accessibility to 
ICTs among students and infusing ICT in education through the 
provision of laptop computers to all students entering secondary 
school  in  Form  1.  It  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  students  develop 
the capacity and requisite skills required for the 21st century. 
 

(viii)  GovNeTT: The Government Wide Area Network (GWAN) is the 
network  backbone  for  communication  and  collaboration  among 
Government  Ministries  and  Agencies  which  provides  an 
enterprise-wide  platform  for  government-related  ICT  services 
including  the  capacity  to  provide  email,  Internet  access, 
messaging, etc. 

 

(ix)  Hacking: A common term usually used to describe unauthorised 

entry on to a computer, network or website. 
 
Information  and  Communication  Technology: 
to 
technologies  people  use  to  share,  distribute,  gather  information 
and 
through  computers  and  computer 
networks. 

to  communicate, 

refer 

(x) 

 

(xi)  Skimming:  A  type  of  fraud  in  which  the  numbers  on  a  credit 
card are recorded and then transferred to a  duplicate card. This 
is done without the knowledge of the original credit card holder. 

(xii)  SPAM: Bulk sending of emails to users 

(xiii)  TTBizLink:  The  name  given  for  the  Single  Electronic  Window 
for Trade and Business Facilitation which is aimed at improving 
the  country’s  global  competitiveness  through  the  application  of 
ICT.   
 

27 

 

 

 

(xiv)  ttconnect:   multi-channel  delivery  suite  of  e-services  through 
which  information  and  services  can  be  accessed.  This  is 
comprised of   the following five (5) delivery channels:   
  ttconnect Online – e-Government Portal   
  ttconnect Service Centres – Brick and mortar service counters 
located  strategically  in  different  parts  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago  ttconnect Self-Serve – Automated, self-serve kiosks 

  ttconnect  Mobile  –  accessing  government  information  and 

service via handheld smart phones 

  ttconnect  Express  –  ICT  customized  buses  as  mobile  service 

centres   

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

9.0 References 
 
1.  Cyber  Unit  and  Fraud  Squad  probe  ATM  scam.  Trinidad  Guardian. 
July  10,  2012.  http://www.guardian.co.tt/news/2012-07-09/cyber-
unit-and-fraud-squad-probe-atm-scam 

 

2.  Expert  insights  3:  Cyber  threats  and  security  in  the  Caribbean.  ICT 
Pulse: ICT issues from a Caribbean perspective. April 1, 2012. Interview 
with  Aaron  Manzano,  of  HMP  Consulting 
in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago.http://www.ict-pulse.com/2012/03/expert-insights-3-cyber-
threats-and-security-in-the-caribbean/ 
 

3.  Government  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  “Innovation  for  Lasting 
Prosperity: Medium Term Policy Framework, 2011-2014”, October 2011 

 
4.  International  Telecommunication  Union,    ‘Understanding  Cybercrime: 

A Guide for Developing   Countries’, April 2009 
 

5.  International  Telecommunication  Union, 

‘National  Cybersecurity 
Strategy Guide’, September 2011   People’s  Partnership, 
‘Prosperity 
for All- 2010 Manifesto of the People’s Partnership for a United People 
to Achieve Sustainable Development for Trinidad and Tobago’ 
 

6.  Symantec, 

‘Duqu:  The 

Precursor 

to 

the  Next 

Stuxnet’ 

http://www.symantec.com/outbreak/?id=stuxnet 

 

7.  Symantec, 

‘Norton 

Cybercrime 

Report 

2011’  

http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/home_homeoffice/html/c
ybercrimereport/ 

8.  World  Economic  Forum,  “The  Global  Information  Technology  Report 
xvii.  

2009-2010: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GITR_Report_2010.pdf. 

sustainability, 

2010. 

ICT 

for 

p. 

 
9.  World  Economic  Forum.  “Global  Information  Technology  Report: 
xxiii. 

Living 
p. 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Global_IT_Report_2012.pdf 

hyperconnected  world”: 

2012. 

in 

a 

 

10. World 

Internet  Usage  and  Population  Statistics, 

June  2012, 

http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm  

 

29 

