The UK Cyber Security Strategy
 
Protecting and promoting the 
UK in a digital world 

November 2011
 

3 

Contents
 

Introduction by the Rt Hon Francis Maude MP, 
Minister for the Cabinet Office
 

Executive summary	 

1. Cyberspace: Driving growth and strengthening society 

2. Changing threats	 

3. Our vision for 2015	 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities 

Annex A: Implementation 

•	  Objective 1: Tackling cyber crime and making 
the UK one of the most secure places in the  

world to do business in cyberspace.
 

•	  Objective 2: Making the UK more resilient 
to cyber attack and better able to protect  

our interests in cyberspace.
 

•	  Objective 3: Helping to shape an open, vibrant 

and stable cyberspace which the UK public can  

use safely and that supports open societies.
 

•	  Objective 4: Building the UK’s cross-cutting 

knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all  

our cyber security objectives.
 

References	 

5
 

7
 

11
 

15
 

21
 

25
 

35
 

36 


39 


40 


42 


43
 

4 

5 

Introduction by the Rt Hon Francis Maude MP, 

Minister for the Cabinet Office 

The growth of the internet has been the biggest 
social and technological change of my lifetime. It is 
a massive force for good in the world in the way 
it drives growth, reduces barriers to trade, and 
allows people across the world to communicate 
and co-operate. As we saw this spring in the Arab 
world, it can help give the unheard a voice and hold 
governments to account. It will have a huge role 
to play in supporting sustainable development in 
poorer countries. 
At the same time our increasing dependence on 
cyberspace has brought new risks, risks that key 
data and systems on which we now rely can be 
compromised or damaged, in ways that are hard to 
detect or defend against. 
The UK Government takes these risks seriously. 
That is why the 2010 National Security Strategy 
rated cyber attacks as a ‘Tier 1’ threat and why, 
despite a tight fiscal situation, we set £650 million 
aside over four years to develop our response. 
We are determined to tackle the threats, but in 
a way which balances security with respect for 
privacy and fundamental rights. At home and 
internationally the UK Government will continue to 
work to ensure that cyberspace remains an open 
space – open to innovation and the free flow of 
ideas, information and expression. 
This strategy sets out the actions we will take to 
reduce the risk and secure the benefits of a trusted 
digital environment for businesses and individuals: 
•	If you are in business this strategy sets out what 

we will do to help ensure protection of your 
company; to promote the UK as a good place to 
do business online; and to foster opportunities 

for UK cyber security firms to leverage strength 
at home to sell their products overseas. 

•	If you are an individual concerned about your 
own personal security from crime, fraud and 
identity theft this strategy outlines what we will 
do to tackle these threats and ensure you have 
the support needed to protect yourself. 

In a domain where technology and change are 
fast-moving, responding effectively will require 
a consistent and extensive effort. By 2015, the 
aspiration is that the measures outlined in this 
strategy will mean the UK is in a position where: 
law enforcement is tackling cyber criminals; 
citizens know what to do to protect themselves; 
effective cyber security is seen as a positive for 
UK business; a thriving cyber security sector has 
been established; public services online are secure 
and resilient; and the threats to our national 
infrastructure and national security have been 
confronted. 
We will report back next year on progress; in the 
meantime I would welcome your feedback on this 
strategy and the plan it sets out. Please send your 
comments care of the Office of Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance in the Cabinet Office 
(ocsia@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk). 

The Rt Hon Francis Maude MP 
Minister for the Cabinet Office and Paymaster 
General 

Executive summary
 

7 

The internet is revolutionising our society by 
driving economic growth and giving people 
new ways to connect and co-operate with one 
another. Falling costs mean accessing the internet 
will become cheaper and easier, allowing more 
people in the UK and around the world to use it, 
‘democratising’ the use of technology and feeding 
the flow of innovation and productivity. This will 
drive the expansion of cyberspace further and as 
it grows, so will the value of using it. Chapter 1 
describes the background to the growth of the 
networked world and the immense social and 
economic benefits it is unlocking. 
As with most change, increasing our reliance on 
cyberspace brings new opportunities but also new 
threats. While cyberspace fosters open markets 
and open societies, this very openness can also 
make us more vulnerable to those – criminals, 
hackers, foreign intelligence services – who want to 
harm us by compromising or damaging our critical 

data and systems. Chapter 2 describes these 
threats. The impacts are already being felt and will 
grow as our reliance on cyberspace grows. 
The networks on which we now rely for our 
daily lives transcend organisational and national 
boundaries. Events in cyberspace can happen at 
immense speed, outstripping traditional responses 
(for example, the exploitation of cyberspace can 
mean crimes such as fraud can be committed 
remotely, and on an industrial scale). Although we 
have ways of managing risks in cyberspace, they do 
not match this complex and dynamic environment. 
So we need a new and transformative programme 
to improve our game domestically, as well as 
continuing to work with other countries on an 
international response. 
Chapter 3 sets out where we want to end up 
– with the Government’s vision for UK cyber 
security in 2015. 

8 

The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

Our vision is for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a 
vibrant, resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core 
values of liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, 
national security and a strong society. 

To achieve this vision by 2015 we want: 

Objective 1: 
The UK to tackle cyber 
crime and be one of the 
most secure places in the 
world to do business in 
cyberspace 

Objective 2: 
The UK to be more 
resilient to cyber attacks 
and better able to 
protect our interests 
in cyberspace 

Objective 3: 
The UK to have helped 
shape an open, stable 
and vibrant cyberspace 
which the UK public 
can use safely and that 
supports open societies 

Objective 4: 
The UK to have the cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability it needs to 

underpin all our cyber security objectives 

That means a UK where: 
•	Individuals know how to protect themselves 

from crime online. 

•	Businesses are aware of the threats they face, 
their own vulnerabilities and are working with 
Government, trade associations, and business 
partners to tackle them. We want to see UK 
companies building on our strengths to create 
a thriving and vibrant market in cyber security 
services around the world. In the current 
economic climate the UK needs more than ever 
to identify and exploit areas of international 
competitive strength to drive growth. We 
believe that being able to show the UK is a safe 
place to do business in cyberspace can be one 
such strength. 

•	Government has: sharpened the law 

enforcement response to cyber crime; helped 
the UK take opportunities to provide the cyber 
security services that will be needed across 
the world; encouraged business to operate 
securely in cyberspace; bolstered defences in 
our critical national infrastructure against cyber 
attack; strengthened our capabilities to detect 
and defeat attacks in cyberspace; enhanced 
education and skills; and established and 
strengthened working relationships with other 
countries, business and organisations around 
the world to help shape an open and vibrant 
cyberspace that supports strong societies here 
and across the globe. 

To achieve this we have set aside £650 million 
of public funding for a four-year, National Cyber 
Security Programme. Chapter 4 sets out what 

Executive Summary 

9 

•	Encourage the courts in the UK to use existing 
powers to impose appropriate online sanctions 
for online offences. 

•	Seek agreement with Internet Service Providers 

(ISPs) on the support they might offer to 
internet users to help them identify, address, and 
protect themselves from malicious activity on 
their systems. 

•	Help consumers respond to the cyber threats 

that will be the ‘new normal’ by using social 
media to warn people about scams or other 
online threats. 

•	Encourage, support, and develop education at all 

levels, crucial key skills and R&D. 

•	Build a single authoritative point of advice for 
the public and small businesses to help them 
stay safe online. 

•	Foster a vibrant and innovative cyber security 

sector in the UK, including exploring new 
partnerships between GCHQ and business to 
capitalise on unique Government expertise. 
Because of its links to intelligence and national 
security, some of the activity the Government has 
set in train is necessarily classified. The full range of 
unclassified actions is set out in Annex A. 

Government will do, in partnership with the 
private sector and other countries, to deliver  
the vision. 
As part of this action plan Government will: 
•	Continue to build up in GCHQ and MOD our 

sovereign UK capability to detect and defeat 
high-end threats. 

•	Pursue the agenda defined at the recent 

London Conference on Cyberspace to establish 
internationally-agreed ‘rules of the road’ on the 
use of cyberspace. 

•	Work with the companies that own and manage 
our critical infrastructure to ensure key data and 
systems continue to be safe and resilient. 

•	Establish a new operational partnership with the 
private sector to share information on threats in 
cyberspace. 

•	Encourage industry-led standards and guidance 
that are readily used and understood, and that 
help companies who are good at security make 
that a selling point. 

•	Help consumers and small firms navigate the 

market by encouraging the development of clear 
indicators of good cyber security products. 
•	Hold a strategic summit with professional 

business services, including insurers, auditors, 
and lawyers to determine the role they might 
play in promoting the better management of 
cyber risks. 

•	Bring together existing specialist law 

enforcement capability on cyber crime into the 
new National Crime Agency (NCA). Encourage 
the use of ‘cyber-specials’ to make more use of 
those with specialist skills to help the police. 
•	Build an effective and easy-to-use single point 

for reporting cyber fraud and improve the 
police response at a local level for those who 
are victims of cyber crime. 

•	Work with other countries to make sure 

that we can co-operate on cross-border law 
enforcement and deny safe havens to cyber 
criminals. 

11 

1. Cyberspace: Driving growth and strengthening 
society in the UK and around the world 

A networked world... 
1.1  The internet and digital technologies are 
transforming our society by driving economic 
growth, connecting people and providing new ways 
to communicate and co-operate with one another. 
The World Wide Web only began in 1991, but 
today 2 billion people are online1 – almost a third 
of the world’s population. Billions more are set to 
join them over the next decade. There are over 
5 billion internet-connected devices.2 $8 trillion 
changed hands last year in online commerce.3 
1.2  The internet is already having a profound 
impact on the way we live our lives. This social 
change will only grow and gather pace as the 
number of users increases. Already it looks like 
it will be on the scale of the very biggest shifts in 
human history, such as the coming of the railways, 
or even learning to smelt metals. 

sources of growth. It enables companies to provide 
better, cheaper and more convenient service to 
customers. And it helps individuals to shop around, 
compare prices and find what they want. 

Cyberspace is an interactive domain made 
up of digital networks that is used to store, 
modify and communicate information. It 
includes the internet, but also the other 
information systems that support our 
businesses, infrastructure and services. 
Digital networks already underpin the supply 
of electricity and water to our homes, help 
organise the delivery of food and other 
goods to shops, and act as an essential  
tool for businesses across the UK. And  
their reach is increasing as we connect  
our TVs, games consoles, and even  
domestic appliances. 

Real GDP per capita has risen by $500 over 
the last 15 years in mature countries enabled 
by the internet. By comparison, it took 50 
years for the industrial revolution to have 
the same effect. 
McKinsey Global Institute, Internet Matters, 2011 

1.4  Developing countries in particular stand 
to benefit as increasing interconnectivity makes 
commerce easier and allows access to information, 
knowledge and education, enabling people to 
innovate, collaborate and compete in global 
marketplaces. 

...which feeds growth.... 
1.3  It is easy to see why the growth of the internet 
has been so dramatic. Cyberspace is transforming 
business, making it more efficient and effective. 
It is opening up markets, allowing commerce to 
take place at lower cost and enabling people to 
do business on the move. It has promoted fresh 
thinking, innovative business models and new 

Some 52% of UK consumers with access 

to broadband use online shopping as an 

opportunity to save money.
 
Ofcom, Communications Market Report, 2010 

1.5  The UK has positively adopted cyberspace as a 
means of doing business. In 2009, 608 million card 
payments were made online, with a total spend 
of £47.2 billion,4 and in 2011 around 74% of UK 

12  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

homes had access to broadband, as shown in the 
graph below (this compares to an EU average of 
60.8% in 20105). 

Take-up of broadband in the UK, 2005–11 

100% 

90% 

80% 

70% 

60% 

50% 

40% 

30% 

20% 

10% 

0% 

s
s
e
c
c
a
 
h
t
i

l

w
 
s
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

 
d
n
a
b
d
a
o
r
b
 
o
t

2005 

2006 

2007 

2009 

2010 

2011

2008 
Year 

Source: Ofcom 

1.6  Recent research suggests that the internet 
contributes an average of 3.4% of GDP in a range 
of developed countries6. In the UK, the internet 
accounts for around 6% of GDP: if it were a sector 
in itself it would be larger than either utilities 
or agriculture. 
1.7  The same research shows that the internet 
has also played a vital role in driving prosperity, 
accounting for 21% of GDP growth in the last five 
years in ‘mature’ countries. Often, small businesses 
and traditional industries draw the biggest benefits. 
This study also shows that overall moving trade 
online has resulted in gains: for every job lost, 
2.6 jobs have been created. 
1.8  As it has developed, cyberspace has 
enabled the automation and optimisation of the 
infrastructure that supports many businesses; for 
example, the SCADA7 systems that automatically 
control and regulate industrial processes such as 
manufacturing, water distribution, refining and 
power generation. 
1.9  Cost savings for governments resulting from 
using online services instead of telephone or face­
to-face services are substantial. 

The creation of a common ICT 

infrastructure for Government will save 

£460 million in 2014/15.
 
Government ICT strategic implementation plan 2011 

Universal Credit will provide support to 
around 19 million citizens across 8.5 million 
households, and will include provision of 
online access to benefit-related services and 
information. Online delivery and greater 
automation of processes will contribute 
towards £500 million savings in costs, per 
year, once Universal Credit is fully operational. 
Department for Work and Pensions 

... supports open, strong societies... 
1.10  Cyberspace also strengthens open societies. 
It acts as a vast repository for many forms of 
knowledge. It allows individuals to connect with 
one another, share ideas and express views, 
and take new approaches to shared problems. 
It provides new and more effective ways to 
participate, allowing larger numbers of people 
to solve problems, support each other and get 
involved in the issues they care about. As more 
people connect to the internet the flow of new 
and innovative ideas increases. With a reach that 
continues to expand, cyberspace is becoming 
‘democratised’ and can now enable social change. 
It is now being used to empower people by making 
governments more transparent, accountable8 and 
efficient in the way they provide public services.9 

93% of children aged 12-15 now use the 

internet at home. This group are more 

likely to say they would miss the internet 

than television.
 
Ofcom, Children and Parents: Media use report 2011 

...and which will continue to grow 
1.11  Since the 1970s, we have witnessed 
remarkable transformational change that has 
helped drive the growth of cyberspace. The 
amount of information created or replicated using 

1. Cyberspace: Driving growth and strengthening society in the UK and around the world 

13 

digital technology continues to grow. In 2010 it 
was estimated to be 1.2 zetabytes and by 2011 
it is predicted to grow to 1.8 zetabytes10 (enough 
information to fill 380 billion DVDs). A zetabyte is 
a staggeringly large number – a billion terabytes – 
where a terabyte is typically the largest hard disk 
available for home computers in 2011. 
1.12  But in many ways the most exciting 
developments in cyberspace are still to come. As 
more people and organisations around the world 
connect, it becomes more and more useful in a 
variety of new and often unexpected ways. The 
introduction of cloud computing and smart-grids, 
the continued growth of mobile working and the 
growth in the number of users of cyberspace each 
demonstrate that the pace of change will not let 
up: cyberspace will become increasingly valuable 
and important to the UK, and to countries across 
the world. 

2. Changing threats
 

15 

2.1  The internet will become increasingly central 
to our economy and our society. But the growing 
role of cyberspace has also opened up new threats 
as well as new opportunities – we have no choice 
but to find ways to confront and overcome these 
threats if the UK is to flourish in an increasingly 
competitive and globalised world. 
2.2  The digital architecture on which we now rely 
was built to be efficient and interoperable. When 
the internet first started to grow, security was 
less of a consideration. However, as we put more 
of our lives online, this matters more and more. 
People want to be confident that the networks 
that support our national security, our economic 
prosperity, and our own private lives as individuals 
are safe and resilient. 
2.3  Unfortunately a growing number of 
adversaries are looking to use cyberspace to steal, 
compromise or destroy critical data. The scale 
of our dependence means that our prosperity, 
our key infrastructure, our places of work and 
our homes can all be affected. For this reason the 
Government’s 2010 National Security Strategy 
identified cyber attacks on the UK as a ‘Tier 1’ 
threat – that is, as one of our highest priorities 
for action. 

What are the threats? 
2.4  Criminals from all corners of the globe 
are already exploiting the internet to target the 
UK in a variety of ways. There are crimes that 
only exist in the digital world, in particular those 
that target the integrity of computer networks 
and online services. But cyberspace is also being 
used as a platform for committing crimes such as 

fraud, and on an industrial scale. Identity theft and 
fraud online now dwarf their offline equivalents. 
The internet has provided new opportunities 
for those who seek to exploit children and the 
vulnerable. Cyberspace allows criminals to target 
the UK from other jurisdictions across the world, 
making it harder to enforce the law. As businesses 
and government services move more of their 
operations online, the scope of potential targets 
will continue to grow. 
2.5  Some of the most sophisticated threats to 
the UK in cyberspace come from other states 
which seek to conduct espionage with the aim 
of spying on or compromising our government, 
military, industrial and economic assets, as well 
as monitoring opponents of their own regimes. 
‘Patriotic’ hackers can act upon states’ behalf, to 
spread disinformation, disrupt critical services or 
seek advantage during times of increased tension. 
In times of conflict, vulnerabilities in cyberspace 
could be exploited by an enemy to reduce our 
military’s technological advantage, or to reach past 
it to attack our critical infrastructure at home. 
2.6  Cyberspace is already used by terrorists to 
spread propaganda, radicalise potential supporters, 
raise funds, communicate and plan. While 
terrorists can be expected to continue to favour 
high-profile physical attacks, the threat that they 
might also use cyberspace to facilitate or to mount 
attacks against the UK is growing. We judge that 
it will continue to do so, especially if terrorists 
believe that our national infrastructure may be 
vulnerable (the recently published CONTEST11 
strategy sets out our approach to terrorism). 

16  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

Total number of malware variants targeting 
smart phones 
1,500 

1,200 

900 

600 

300 

0 

Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2 
2009  2009  2009  2009  2010  2010  2010  2010  2011  2011 

Source: data from McAfee, as cited in The Economist, 
October 2011. 

2.11  The chart below demonstrates the growing 
impact of information security incidents on 
businesses worldwide. Maintaining confidence 
in e-commerce as a viable way of doing business 
is crucial. Investors, businesses, government and 
particularly customers each need to be confident 
that networks are safe to use if the UK is to realise 
its full potential for growth. 

Proportion of companies reporting 

security incidents with ﬁnancial impact 


 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

25 

20 

15 

10 

5 

0 
2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

Source: Pricewaterhouse Coopers. Global state of information 
security survey, 2011 

2.12  But staying secure in cyberspace can seem 
complex, difficult and expensive. Without a clear 
and shared understanding of the nature and scale 
of threats and vulnerabilities, the case for investing 
in protection and prevention can be undermined. 

2.7  The threat to the UK from politically-
motivated activist groups operating in 
cyberspace is real. Attacks on public and private 
sector websites and online services in the UK 
orchestrated by ‘hacktivists’ are becoming more 
common, aimed at causing disruption, reputational 
and financial damage, and gaining publicity. 
2.8  All these different groups – criminals, 
terrorists, foreign intelligence services and 
militaries – are active today against the UK’s 
interests in cyberspace. But with the borderless 
and anonymous nature of the internet, precise 
attribution is often difficult and the distinction 
between adversaries is increasingly blurred. 

Affecting businesses 
2.9  Organisations are not always aware of the new 
vulnerabilities that dependence on cyberspace can 
bring. Intellectual property and other commercially 
sensitive information (for example, business 
strategies) can be attractive targets. This risks 
undermining the strengths of the UK’s research 
base and intellectual property as important drivers 
of growth. Services relying on, or delivered via, 
cyberspace can be taken offline by criminals or 
others, damaging revenue and reputations. 

In the spring of 2011, Sony announced 
that criminals had successfully targeted 
the PlayStation network, compromising 
the personal details of up to 100 million 
customers and resulting in the network 
shutting down for several weeks. The costs 
to Sony are expected to total $171 million. 

2.10  As the digital connections between 
organisations and individuals proliferate (for 
example through shared or sub-contracted 
services), incidents can affect larger numbers of 
individuals and organisations. Recent research 
suggests that the costs to the UK of cyber crime 
could be in the order of £27 billion per year12. 
A truly robust estimate will probably never be 
established, but it is clear the costs are high and 
rising. Cyber criminals have demonstrated their 
ability to adjust quickly to new developments like 
smart-phones (see graph above). The collective 
impact of this threat now has the potential to 
cause significant damage to online economies. 

2. Changing threats 

17 

Affecting our security 
2.13  Cyberspace has now grown to become a 
domain where strategic advantage – industrial 
or military – can be won or lost. It underpins the 
complex systems used by commerce (for example, 
banking, the delivery of food and the provision of 
utilities such as power and water) and the military. 
The growing use of cyberspace means that its 
disruption can affect nations’ ability to function 
effectively in a crisis. 

Nearly two-thirds of critical infrastructure 

companies report regularly finding malware 

designed to sabotage their systems.
 
McAfee, Critical infrastructure protection report,  

March 2011
 

2.14  Some states regard cyberspace as providing 
a way to commit hostile acts ‘deniably’. Alongside 
our existing defence and security capabilities, the 
UK must be capable of protecting our national 
interests in cyberspace. 

“There are over 20,000 malicious emails on 
government networks each month, 1,000 of 
which are deliberately targeting them.” 
Iain Lobban, Director of Government Communications 

Headquarters, 2010
 

These kinds of attack are increasing; the 

number of emails with malicious content 

detected by government networks in the 

whole of 2010 was double the number  

seen in 2009.
 
Cabinet Office, 2011 

Affecting individuals and societies 
2.15  In order to get the most from the internet, it 
is important that people feel confident that it can 
be used safely. As all of us make more use of the 
internet in our work and private lives it makes for a 
more attractive target for criminals or others. Any 
reduction in trust towards online communications 
can now cause serious economic and social harm 
to the UK. 

2.16  Beyond the impact on individuals, the scale 
of the use of cyberspace means that it can now 
also affect society more broadly. We have a strong 
tradition in the UK of protecting our citizens in 
ways that are guided by core values of liberty, 
fairness, transparency and the rule of law. These 
values help define who we are, what we do and 
what it means to be British. The interconnected 
nature of cyberspace and its expansion mean that 
it has developed to promote many of these values. 
2.17  The conventions and norms covering 
conduct within the cyber domain are still 
developing. While this helps make it the vibrant 
domain that it is today, it can also cause instability 
and uncertainty about accountability. The blurring 
of boundaries in cyberspace increases the risk of 
actions affecting larger numbers of people and 
organisations unintentionally. At its most serious, 
this leads to the potential for unpredictable and 
large-scale shocks. 
2.18  Actions to strengthen our national security 
must also be consistent with our obligations, such 
as those concerning freedom of expression; the 
right to seek, receive and impart ideas; and the 
right to privacy. Defending security should be 
consistent with our commitment to uphold civil 
liberties. Of course, these are well-established and 
ongoing debates, but cyberspace can bring them 
into focus in new ways, and more quickly than in 
other areas. 
2.19  These changes do not affect the UK 
alone. We believe that the global reach of the 
internet and digital technologies can provide 
an important means for the spread of ideas, 
with profound implications for societies. But 
like any communications medium, cyberspace 
can also potentially be used to restrict liberty 
and undermine freedoms. Some states and 
organisations are already seeking to control and 
restrict the future development of the cyber 
domain. These attempts are ultimately doomed 
to fail. But for as long as they last they are holding 
back progress and reducing social benefit. The 
UK will continue to work with like-minded states 
around the world to maximise the extent to which 
the world can fully realise and enjoy the benefits 
that cyberspace will offer. 

18  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

A complex problem 
2.20  The growing adoption of the internet and 
new uses of digitally connected technologies make 
for a fast moving and complex environment, which 
brings its own challenges: 
•	Cyberspace is largely commercially owned and 

driven, and global in nature. 

•	The systems that form cyberspace contain 
a vast array of components, sourced from a 
global and diverse range of suppliers. Multiple 
sub-contractors produce, test, package and 
assemble these components. 

•	Predicting and understanding how cyberspace 

will be used in future is difficult given the rate of 
innovation and change. 

•	New vulnerabilities and risks will emerge 

suddenly. 

•	The pace of events can make existing defences 
and responses look slow and inadequate. Along 
with the complexity of cyberspace, this makes 
attributing hostile actions difficult. 

•	The covert nature of the threat means that 
the public and businesses can underestimate 
the risks. 

Existing capacity to meet the challenge 
2.21  In tackling these problems we are not 
starting from scratch. The UK is well placed to 
respond to many of the challenges that cyberspace 
presents. Our private sector, key government 
agencies, and academia all have world-leading 
strengths in cyberspace; we must bring these 
together to capitalise on the opportunities and get 
the most for the UK: 
•	The UK has strong international alliances based 

on shared values and common interests. 
•	Our sound domestic legal framework and 

regulatory environment mean that the UK has 
the basis to respond to cyber crime and similar 
threats to the UK. We need to promote a 
similar environment internationally. 

•	The UK already has ways to exchange information 

with the private sector on the risks emerging 
from cyberspace, and to tackle cyber crime. 

•	Some of the specific technical and specialist 

expertise needed to help us achieve our cyber 
security objectives already exists in the UK. 

•	In particular GCHQ, the Government’s signals 
intelligence agency, has some world-class skills at 
its disposal. 

•	We already have some businesses with strengths 

in cyber security. 

•	Information assurance already plays an 

important role in reducing our vulnerabilities 
in cyberspace. 

2.22  But government capacity, though it includes 
these real strengths, is not sufficient or sufficiently 
scaled to meet the growing security challenges 
of the digital age. Although government already 
provides advice to organisations that run our 
infrastructure on how to manage the risks in 
cyberspace, the adoption of this approach needs 
to be broader. Our current capacity to enforce the 
law is too distributed, meaning that criminals still 
regard exploiting cyberspace as a profitable and 
low-risk option. 
2.23  As for business, some firms recognise the 
growing scale and impact of the risks. However, 
some sectors of the economy, particularly small 
and medium sized businesses, do not have access 
to the skills and knowledge to protect themselves 
online. We need to improve our understanding of 
the threat across the board and manage it more 
effectively. This can mean relying upon skills and 
knowledge, not often found in the same place. 
2.24  We also recognise that there are challenges 
in ensuring that the public has access to the 
information and skills they require in order 
to understand the threat and take actions to 
operate safely online. More needs to be done to 
ensure that the current provision of information 
is coordinated across Government, and with the 
private sector. 
2.25  We do have a body of internationally agreed 
principles, behaviour and law which applies to 
cyberspace. The International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights sets out some of the key 
obligations. But there remains more to be done 

2. Changing threats 

19 

with other countries to establish the practical 
implications of applying existing principles to 
cyberspace. At a practical level, not all countries 
have appropriate legislation to allow them to 
work together to tackle threats from crime in 
cyberspace. 
2.26  The technical capabilities that enable a 
wide range of actions to protect the UK need 
strengthening. But it is clear that our approach 
to the risks in cyberspace must not rely on 
technical measures alone. Changes in attitudes and 
behaviours will also be crucial to operating safely 
in cyberspace. 
2.27  It is clear that cyberspace is changing the 
world. The huge benefit that this brings also means 
new vulnerabilities. This dynamic and changing 
profile of risk demands a new approach. 

3. A vision for UK cyber security in 2015
 

21 

3.1  In order to secure the vast economic and 
social benefits that cyberspace will offer the UK 
we will transform our approach to cyber security. 
This section sets out our vision for the UK in 2015 

and identifies the principles that will shape our 
work. The next chapter shows how we will use 
our existing strengths and the new National Cyber 
Security Programme to achieve our goals. 

Our vision 

Our vision is for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a 
vibrant, resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core values 
of liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, national 
security and a strong society. 

Our objectives 

Our objectives are for: 

Objective 1: 
The UK to tackle cyber 
crime and be one of the 
most secure places in the 
world to do business in 
cyberspace 

Objective 2: 
The UK to be more 
resilient to cyber attacks 
and better able to 
protect our interests 
in cyberspace 

Objective 3: 
The UK to have helped 
shape an open, stable 
and vibrant cyberspace 
which the UK public 
can use safely and that 
supports open societies 

Objective 4: 
The UK to have the cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability it needs to 
underpin all our cyber security objectives 

22  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

Our principles: 

A risk-based approach.... 
3.2  In a globalised world where all networked 
systems are potentially vulnerable and where cyber 
attacks are difficult to detect, there can be no such 
thing as absolute security. We will therefore apply a 
risk-based approach to prioritising our response. 

....working in partnership... 
3.3  Though the scale of the challenge requires 
strong national leadership, Government 
cannot act alone. It must recognise the limits 
of its competence in cyberspace. Much of the 
infrastructure we need to protect is owned and 
operated by the private sector. The expertise and 
innovation required to keep pace with the threat 
will be business-driven. 
3.4  Similarly, though we can improve our defences 
domestically, the internet is fundamentally 
transnational. Threats are cross-border. Not all the 
infrastructure on which we rely is UK-based. So 
the UK cannot make all the progress it needs to 
on its own. We will seek partnership with other 
countries that share our views, and reach out 
where we can to those who do not. 

... balancing security with freedom and privacy 
3.5  At home we will pursue cyber security policies 
that enhance individual and collective security 
while preserving UK citizens’ right to privacy and 
other fundamental values and freedoms. 
3.6  Internationally the UK will continue to 
pursue the development of norms of acceptable 
behaviour in cyberspace. We start from the 
belief that behaviour which is unacceptable offline 
should also be unacceptable online. Our position 
will be guided by the principles proposed by the 
Foreign Secretary in February 2011 and reiterated 
at the London Conference on Cyberspace this 
November: 
•	The need for governments to act 

proportionately in cyberspace and in accordance 
with national and international law. 

•	The need for everyone to have the ability – in 

terms of skills, technology, confidence and 
opportunity – to access cyberspace. 

•	The need for users of cyberspace to show 

tolerance and respect for diversity of language, 
culture and ideas. 

•	The need to ensure that cyberspace remains 
open to innovation and the free flow of ideas, 
information and expression. 

•	The need to respect individual rights of privacy 
and to provide proper protection to intellectual 
property. 

•	The need for us all to work collectively to tackle 

the threat from criminals acting online. 

•	The promotion of a competitive environment 
which ensures a fair return on investment in 
network, services and content. 

Roles and responsibilities 
3.7  Achieving this vision will require everybody, 
the private sector, individuals and government to 
work together. Just as we all benefit from the use 
of cyberspace, so we all have a responsibility to 
help protect it. 

Individuals 
3.8  Ordinary people have an important role to 
play in keeping cyberspace as a safe place to do 
business and live our lives. By 2015 we want a 
UK where: 
•	People know how to get themselves a basic level 

of protection against threats online. They have 
access to accurate and up to date information 
on the online threats that they face, and the 
techniques and practices they can employ to 
guard against them. 

•	Individuals are careful about putting personal or 
sensitive information on the internet; are wary 
of email attachments or links from unrecognised 
senders; and are cautious about downloading 
files from websites they know little about. 
•	Everyone, at home and at work, can help 

identify threats in cyberspace and report them – 
for example, identifying fraudulent websites. 
•	Individuals play their part in transacting safely 
with businesses and Government, protecting 
passwords, understanding the importance 

3. A vision for UK cyber security in 2015 

23 

•	Helped shape an international consensus on 

‘norms of behaviour’ in cyberspace. 

•	Reduced vulnerabilities in government systems 

and our critical national infrastructure. 

•	Grown the cadre of cyber security professionals. 
•	Strengthened law enforcement and tackled 

cyber crime. 

•	Improved prevention and public awareness. 
•	Raised business awareness. 
•	Seized the business opportunities – working 

with industry and academia to boost our share 
of the cyber security market and cemented the 
UK’s status as a safe place to do business online. 
3.11  The next section sets out how we will work 
with partners to achieve this vision. 

of updating software and operating systems 
regularly and running anti-malware programs 
to help prevent their computers being used by 
others to increase the threat. 

•	People are clear that, as in the offline world, 
we are each responsible for our behaviour in 
cyberspace (including those who harass others, 
commit crime or ‘hack’ into systems for publicity 
or to cause disruption). 

The private sector 
3.9  The private sector has a crucial role to play 
in the UK’s cyber security. Much of cyberspace 
is owned and used by private companies. It is 
businesses that will drive the innovation required 
to keep pace with security challenges. By 2015 we 
want a UK where: 
•	Companies are aware of the threat and use 

cyberspace in a way that protects commercially 
sensitive information, intellectual property and 
customer data. 

•	Private organisations work in partnerships with 
each other, Government and law enforcement 
agencies, sharing information and resources, 
to transform the response to a common 
challenge, and actively deter the threats we face 
in cyberspace (the work of the UK Council for 
Child Internet Safety offers a good example of 
what can be achieved). 

•	Companies capitalise on the growth in demand 
in the UK and globally for vibrant and innovative 
cyber security services. 

•	The private sector has built upon the strengths 
of the UK’s skills base in cyber security to invest 
and create centres of excellence to provide the 
cyber security skills we will need in future. 

Government 
3.10  Government will play its part in achieving 
these aims. By 2015 we want a UK where we have: 
•	Built up our capacity to detect and defeat 

high-end threats. 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities
 

25 

4.1  As one of the outcomes of its Strategic 
Defence and Security Review13 in 2010 the 
Government put in place a £650 million, four-year 
National Cyber Security Programme (NCSP). This 
funding is intended to transform the Government’s 
response to cyber threats, and has been allocated 
to those departments and agencies that have key 
roles to play. 
4.2  The intelligence agencies and Ministry 
of Defence have a strong role in improving 
our understanding of – and reducing – the 
vulnerabilities and threats that the UK faces in 
cyberspace. GCHQ in particular is central to this 
effort. But the Home Office, the Cabinet Office 
and BIS are also receiving funding to bolster 
their specific individual capabilities. As set out in 
Chapter 3, outreach to business and the public is 

crucial. With the rise of cyber crime what was a 
concern primarily for the defence and intelligence 
elements of government is now something that 
concerns us all. 
4.3  The NCSP is managed and co-ordinated on 
behalf of Government by the Office of Cyber 
Security and Information Assurance in the Cabinet 
Office, under the oversight of the Minister for the 
Cabinet Office. Allocations to departments for 
later years are provisional and can be adjusted if 
experience suggests that a different mix of inputs 
will produce better results. 
4.4  Working through departments and their 
partners in business, civil society and internationally 
the NCSP will deliver on the following priorities. 
We will report on progress in a year’s time. 

National Cyber Security Programme investment (2011-2015) 

Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, 

working with the private sector 

and improving resilience 

2% 

Home Office, tackling cyber crime 

10% 

Single Intelligence Account, building cross cutting
 

capabilities, including Information Assurance
 

59%
 

Cabinet Office, co­ordinating and 

maintaining a view of operational threat 

5% 

Ministry of Defence, 

mainstreaming cyber in defence 

14% 

Government ICT, building
 

secure online services
 

10%
 

26  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

Priorities for action 
4.5  We will build on the UK’s existing strengths as 
follows: 
•	We will continue to improve our detection and 

analysis of sophisticated cyber threats, with a 
focus on the UK’s critical national infrastructure, 
and other systems of national interest. 

•	As part of this we will pool knowledge and 
situational awareness as appropriate with 
partners across business to build a genuinely 
national response. 

•	We will enhance our capability to defend against 
and deter high-end, state-sponsored threats, and 
to prevent these techniques becoming available 
to non-state actors. 

•	We will work internationally to develop 

international principles or ‘rules of the road’ for 
behaviour in cyberspace.  We will work with 
other countries on practical confidence-building 
measures to reduce the risk of escalation and 
avoid misunderstandings. 

•	The UK has ratified the Budapest Convention 

on cyber crime and will work to persuade other 
countries to develop compatible laws, so that 
cyber crimes can be prosecuted across borders 
and cyber criminals are denied safe havens. 
•	At home we will maintain an effective legal 
framework and enforcement capabilities to 
disrupt and prosecute cyber crime. We will 
make it easier to report cyber crime and ensure 
that the intelligence from reporting is fed back 
into effective action and advice to the public. 
Where appropriate we will use cyber-relevant 
sanctions to tackle cyber crimes like online 
bullying or internet scams. 

•	We will model best practice on cyber security 

in the Government’s own systems, setting strong 
standards for suppliers to government to ensure 
we raise the bar. 

•	We will promote the development of a cadre 
of skilled cyber security professionals so that 
the UK continues to retain an edge in this area, 
together with the underlying research and 
development to keep producing innovative 
solutions. 

•	Because prevention is key, we will work to raise 
awareness and to educate and empower people 
and firms to protect themselves online. 80% 
or more of currently successful attacks exploit 
weakness that can be avoided by following 
simple best practice, such as updating anti­
malware software regularly. 

•	We will create a thriving market in cyber 

security products and services that can win the 
UK business abroad and contribute to growth. It 
will also enable us to promote the UK as a good 
place to do business in cyberspace. 

Building capacity to deter and defend against  
high-end threats 
4.6  The 2010 NATO Lisbon Summit highlighted 
the cyber domain as an area of significant new 
risk and opportunity for the Alliance. The new 
Strategic Concept committed the Alliance to: 

“develop further our ability to prevent, detect, 
defend against and recover from cyber-attacks, 
including by using the NATO planning process 
to enhance and coordinate national cyber-
defence capabilities, bringing all NATO bodies 
under centralized cyber protection, and better 
integrating NATO cyber awareness, warning and 
response with member nations”. 

4.7  In keeping with the NATO Strategic Concept, 
and with the agreement of the National Security 
Council, the NCSP is investing to ensure we take a 
more proactive approach to tackling cyber threats 
and exploiting the cyber environment for our own 
national security needs. 
4.8  In the Ministry of Defence, investment in 
ensuring military networks and equipment are 
protected against cyber attack is already underway. 
The new Joint Forces Command will take the lead 
in the development and integration of defence 
cyber capabilities from April 2012. 
4.9  As part of this we are creating a new Defence 
Cyber Operations Group to bring together cyber 
capabilities from across defence. The group will 
include a Joint Cyber Unit hosted by GCHQ at 
Cheltenham whose role will be to develop new 
tactics, techniques and plans to deliver military 
effects, including enhanced security, through 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities 

27 

operations in cyberspace. We will also consider 
the future contribution of reservists in bringing in 
specialist cyber knowledge and skills. 
4.10  The Ministry of Defence has recently opened 
a new Global Operations and Security Control 
Centre, located at Corsham, to act as a focus for 
cyber defence for the armed forces. A second 
Joint Cyber Unit embedded within the centre at 
Corsham will develop and use a range of new 
techniques, including proactive measures, to 
disrupt threats to our information security. 
4.11  The Ministry of Defence is also strengthening 
relations with key allies and with industry to 
improve our collective awareness of and response 
to cyber threats, vulnerabilities and incidents. 
4.12  Around half of the £650 million funding will 
go towards enhancing the UK’s core capability, 
based mainly at GCHQ at Cheltenham, to detect 
and counter cyber attacks. The details of this work 
are necessarily classified, but it will strengthen and 
upgrade the sovereign capability the UK needs to 
confront the high-end threat. 

Working to build international consensus on 
proportionality in cyberspace 
4.13  At the same time we will work internationally 
to develop international principles or ‘rules of the 
road’ for behaviour in cyberspace. 
4.14  As a start, the UK believes that all 
governments must act proportionately in 
cyberspace and in accordance with national 
and international law. This includes respect for 
intellectual property and for fundamental human 
rights to freedom of expression and association. 
4.15  The UK has already set a lead in this area 
with the London Conference on Cyberspace in 
November 2011. It will continue to work in the 
UN and other international fora on the agenda set 
out in London, to develop norms of acceptable 
behaviour. We are clear that the debate must 
involve all those with a stake in an open, trusted 
and stable cyberspace, including industry, business 
and representatives of civil society. 
4.16  Meanwhile the UK will work actively in 
the UN and with organisations such as the 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe (OSCE) to develop practical confidence­

building measures to reduce the risk of escalation 
and avoid misunderstandings between states 
arising from unexpected incidents in cyberspace. 

In February 2011 the Foreign Secretary 

called for ‘rules of the road’ for behaviour 

in cyberspace, and for a more focussed and 

inclusive dialogue between all those with 

a stake in the internet – civil society and 

industry as well as governments – on how 

we might implement them.
 
On 1-2 November that more focussed 

debate was begun at the London Conference 

on Cyberspace. This brought together 

Ministers, senior government officials, 

industry leaders, and representatives of 

the internet technical community and civil 

society. In all, more than 700 participants 

from 60 countries took part. There was 

also a lively online debate around the 

Conference, with citizens from across 

the world following the debate in real 

time through livestreaming, and feeding 

in questions and issues through the Web. 

The agenda set out in London will now 

go forward over the next 24 months with 

conferences in 2012 and 2013, hosted by 

Hungary and South Korea respectively, to 

take stock.
 

Reducing vulnerabilities in government systems 
and our critical infrastructure 
4.17  The Government ICT Strategy sets out how 
Government is working to make its own critical 
data and systems secure and resilient. We will 
work with industry to develop rigorous cyber 
security and IA standards for ICT products and 
services supplied to Government and its Public 
Services Network. In particular we will raise 
the standard of cyber security we expect from 
suppliers for sensitive defence equipment. Just 
as we already place certain requirements on 
contractors’ physical security, it now also makes 
sense to look again at our requirements on cyber 
security, as the means through which attempts 
to steal data are now most likely to come. The 
Ministry of Defence is leading on the approach 
to managing risks to Government information 
through the ICT Strategy, strengthening risk 

28  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

management governance and building on the 
progress Government has already made in the 
oversight of Information Assurance. 
4.18  The UK is about to see a big expansion of 
public services online as the Government rolls 
out its ‘digital by default’ agenda. Many of these 
services will migrate to cloud computing in due 
course, and Government recently published a 
Cloud Computing Strategy14 setting out how 
this shift will be effected without compromising 
security. This is the right thing to do to improve 
efficiency and service delivery to customers. 
But we need to make sure that these services 
are safe and resilient against fraud and cyber 
attack. Government is rationalising the numerous 
technology platforms used to deliver Government 
services. This will also enable increased protection 
and improve protective monitoring. We will set 
targets for the speed with which systems apply 
security patches to all of their supported software 
and machines. To ensure that service users can 
be identified and fraud prevented, the NCSP is 
funding work on a trusted and resilient approach 
to identity assurance and other supporting 
measures. 
4.19  Of course much of the UK’s critical 
infrastructure is not in Government hands but is 
owned and managed by the private sector. CPNI 
(see box) is already working with a network of 
critical national infrastructure companies to ensure 
that they take the necessary steps to protect key 
systems and data. 

The Centre for the Protection of National 
Infrastructure delivers advice that aims to 
reduce the vulnerability of organisations 
in the national infrastructure to terrorism 
and other threats such as espionage, 
including those from cyberspace. It 
has built up strong partnerships with 
private sector organisations across the 
national infrastructure, creating a trusted 
environment where information can 
be shared for mutual benefit. Direct 
relationships are augmented by an extended 
network, which includes other Government 
departments and professional service 
organisations. 

4.20  Government will now work to scale up this 
approach to reach a wider group of companies 
not currently deemed part of the critical 
infrastructure, but where the threat to revenues 
and intellectual property is capable of causing 
significant economic damage to the UK. CPNI will 
be critical to this effort through the NCSP-funded 
Cyber Protection Priorities outreach work. 
4.21  A cyber security ‘hub’ (see below) is being 
established to make sure this wider group can 
draw on actionable information on threats and 
what can be done to counter them. 

Responding in partnership: the cyber 
security ‘hub’ 
In February 2011 the Prime Minister met the 
heads of some of the largest companies from 
all sectors of the UK economy to discuss 
the cyber threat and our shared interest in 
getting the response right. 
In the months since, the private sector 
and Government have come together to 
design and build an innovative new approach 
focused on: 
•  exchanging actionable information on cyber 
threats and strengthening our response to 
incidents 

•  analysing new trends and identifying new 
and emerging threats and opportunities 

•  working to strengthen and link up our 

collective cyber security capabilities. 

A joint public/private sector ‘hub’ will pool 
government and private threat information 
and pass that out to ‘nodes’ in key business 
sectors, helping them identify what needs 
to be done and providing a framework for 
sharing best practice. A pilot will commence 
in December involving five business sectors: 
defence, finance, telecommunication, 
pharmaceuticals, and energy. Lessons from 
this will be used to  inform roll-out of the 
initiative to other sectors from March 2012. 
We will also establish the best way to make 
sure that SMEs are also aware of the threats 
and benefit from the cyber security ‘hub’. 

Encouraging a cadre of cyber security professionals 
4.22  The pace of technological change is 
relentless. Keeping pace will require people who 
have a deep understanding of cyberspace and how 
it is developing. But these people are currently 
a scarce resource across Government and in 
business. There are clear and authoritative voices 
warning that cyber security skills and expertise 
in the private sector will be increasingly sought 
after, and that business and providers of education 
and training need to respond. To help boost 
and maintain the pool of experts in the UK and 
encourage the development of a community of 
‘ethical’ hackers in the UK who can help ensure our 
networks are well protected, the National Cyber 
Security Programme will: 
•	Drive up the skill levels of information assurance 
and cyber security professionals by establishing 
programmes of certified specialist training by 
March 2012. 

•	Continue to support the Cyber Security 

Challenge (see below) as a way of bringing new 
talent into the profession. 

•	Strengthen postgraduate education to expand 
the pool of experts with in-depth knowledge of 
cyber. 

•	Strengthen the UK’s academic base by 

developing a coherent cross-sector research 
agenda on cyber, building on work done by the 
Government Office for Science. 

•	Establish, with GCHQ’s help, a research institute 

in cyber security, with an indicative budget of  
£2 million over 3.5 years. 

•	Commissioning research clarifying the extent, 
pattern and nature of the demand for cyber 
security skills across the private sector. 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities 

29 

From postman to cyber expert 
The UK will need cyber security experts 
with technical skills and an aptitude for 
problem solving and investigation. Cyber 
Security Challenge runs challenging 
competitions with a diverse range of 
entrants to help identify talented individuals. 
A recent winner was working as a postman, 
but now works as an information security 
professional for the Royal Mail. 

Cyber crime and law enforcement 
4.23  What is illegal offline is illegal online. We 
will ensure the UK has a robust legal framework 
that enables law enforcement agencies to tackle 
cyber crime. 
4.24  Because cyberspace allows criminals to 
operate from around the world, we are working 
to encourage wider adoption of the Budapest 
Convention on cyber crime, putting in place 
compatible frameworks of law that enable 
effective cross-border law enforcement and 
deny safe havens to cyber criminals. We will 
make  progress on this a key element of the UK’s 
chairmanship of the Council of Europe over the 
next 12 months. 
4.25  While having the right legislation in place 
is essential, this must also be supported by a 
willingness to act when called upon. We need 
practical collaboration and capacity development 
on cross-border law enforcement, to take place 
at a rapid pace that reflects the reality of the 
networked world. The UK is a strong supporter 
of the network of law enforcement contact points 
known as the ‘24/7 Network’ as the best means to 
make sure that when urgent assistance is required, 
partner countries are able to obtain it. The UK 
will work with other countries to encourage 
them to join the 24/7 Network and to put in the 
commitment to make it a success. The Serious 
Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) already has 
liaison officers around the world. 
4.26  We also need to make sure that we are able 
to respond robustly here in the UK. At home we 
are reviewing the UK’s own Computer Misuse 
Act to ensure it is fit for purpose in an area of 

30  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

fast-moving technological change. If amendments 
are needed, proposals for these will be brought 
forward as soon as possible. 
4.27  The Government will also work to ensure 
that law enforcement agencies and the judiciary are 
aware of the additional powers the courts already 
have to protect the public when there is strong 
reason to believe someone is likely to commit 
further serious cyber crime offences. Computer 
use may be monitored or restricted under licence 
conditions when an offender is released, or through 
a Serious Crime Prevention Order (under the 
Serious Crime Act 2007). For example an internet 
fraudster can be prevented from offering goods 
for sale online. Other orders which may include 
restrictions on internet use are used to protect 
the public or victims in cases of sexual offences, 
harassment and anti-social behaviour. Through 
guidance we will encourage the judicial system to 
consider these cyber-relevant sanctions for cyber 
offences wherever appropriate. 
4.28  In addition, the Ministry of Justice and 
the Home Office will consider and scope the 
development of a new way of enforcing these 
orders, using ‘cyber-tags’ which are triggered by 
the offender breaching the conditions that have 
been put on their internet use, and which will 
automatically inform the police or probation 
service. If the approach shows promise we will 
look at expanding cyber-sanctions to a wider 
group of offenders. 
4.29  As well as broadening the powers at their 
disposal, we are also helping law enforcement 
agencies tighten up its operational response. 
As part of the creation of the National Crime 
Agency (NCA), we will create a new national 
cyber crime capability, drawing together the 
work currently carried out by the e-crime unit 
in SOCA and the Metropolitan Police’s Central 
E-Crime Unit. The new unit will underpin the 
work of all four operational commands of the 
NCA (borders, organised crime, economic crime 
and Child Exploitation and Online Protection – 
CEOP) by providing specialist support, intelligence 
and guidance. 
4.30  The unit will act as the national capability to 
deal with the most serious national-level cyber 

crime, and to be part of the response to major 
national incidents. The NCA will continue the 
good work of SOCA and the Metropolitan Police 
in finding ways to disrupt criminal activity even 
where – because of cross-border jurisdictional 
issues – convictions are unlikely. We will also 
use cyber techniques to disrupt other types of 
organised crime. 
4.31  The NCA will also support police forces 
across England and Wales to drive up wider 
national capability on cyber crime, including 
through shaping the training for mainstream law 
enforcement on cyber issues, and making sure 
the links to related issues such as bullying or child 
exploitation are made. A key area will be ensuring 
the best possible flow of information between 
police forces and the NCA. The Government will 
look closely at the way intelligence (for example, 
on threats to children provided by CEOP) is used 
by forces and how the outcome of action by forces 
and the courts is fed back to develop the best 
possible picture on threats. As part of our work 
to build strong relationships between the police, 
business and communities, we will encourage 
the transfer of skills between these sectors. The 
Metropolitan Police’s Police Central E-crime Unit 
has made groundbreaking use of Police Specials 
with relevant specialist skills to help tackle cyber 
crime: we will encourage all police forces to make 
use of such ‘cyber-specials’. We will involve people 
from outside law enforcement to help tackle cyber 
crime as part of the NCA cyber crime unit. 
4.32  The increase in e-commerce, and use of 
networked technologies to underpin all elements 
of business make it an increasingly attractive 
target for criminals. Businesses have a key role in 
combating this kind of crime. We will learn from 
the success we have had in tackling online threats 
to children by bringing industry, law enforcement 
and government in the UK Council for Child 
Internet Safety (UKCCIS). We will introduce a 
similar forum, led by Ministers, to bring together 
a wide range of groups to develop cross-sector 
working on cyber crime. This forum will help 
drive forward work on designing out crime online, 
developing best practice for security, and effective 
crime prevention advice for all levels of business. 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities 

31 

4.33  In parallel we are taking action to make sure 
that it is simple and straightforward for members 
of the public to report cyber crimes. Of course 
this should include being able to do so online. 
4.34  Over half of all police forces already provide 
a facility for the public to report crime online, 
though these range from basic systems for certain 
crime types to fully integrated crime reporting 
tools. We will support forces to move to full 
online crime reporting by helping them identify 
good practice. 
4.35  People are already encouraged to report 
fraud, including cyber fraud, through the internet, 
using the Action Fraud tool. We will make it easier 
for people to do this by improving its accessibility 
and functionality. Crime reports can currently take 
up to 30 minutes to complete online. We will aim 
to reduce that time by a half. 
4.36  As well as allowing the police to follow up 
directly on individual crimes, better reporting will 
help build our intelligence picture through the 
National Fraud Intelligence Bureau, improving the 
targeting of enforcement resources and feeding 
into crime prevention advice. 

Prevention and public awareness 
4.37  Prevention is key. Most common cyber 
incidents could be prevented by quite simple 
‘cyber hygiene’. GCHQ estimates that 80% or 
more of currently successful attacks are defeatable 
by simple best practice, such as updating anti-virus 
software regularly. 
4.38  In order to help people protect themselves 
we will: 
•	Help consumers respond to the cyber threats 

that will be the ‘new normal’ by using social 
media to provide warnings about scams or 
other online threats. 

•	Look at the best ways to improve cyber security 
education at all levels so that people are better 
equipped to use cyberspace safely. 

•	Work with internet companies to explore 
the potential for online sanctions for online 
offences. 

•	Work with Internet Service Providers (ISPs) 

to help individuals identify whether their 
computers have been compromised and what 
they can do to resolve the compromise and 
protect themselves from future attacks. 

•	Provide clear cyber security advice for use 
by anyone using the internet so that people 
can decide how they want to use cyberspace, 
informed of the risks. 

•	Improve the information available to people 
buying security products by encouraging the 
development of security ‘kitemarks’. BIS will 
work with domestic, European and global and 
commercial standards organisations to stimulate 
the development of industry-led standards 
and guidance that help customers to navigate 
the market and differentiate companies with 
appropriate levels of protection and good cyber 
security products. 

4.39  Get Safe Online (see below) already exists 
as a platform around which this effort will be 
built. We are talking to funding partners, internet 
companies, retailers and ISPs about how we 
improve it and make it more interactive; develop 
more sustained awareness activity; signpost the 
public to further sources of support; and through 
‘kitemarks’ help consumers distinguish between 
genuinely helpful products and advice and the 
purveyors of ‘scareware’. A joint action plan will be 
launched in the New Year. 

Get Safe Online is a joint public/private 

sector campaign to raise awareness of 

online security, aimed at the general public 

and small businesses. It is sponsored by 

Government, Microsoft, HSBC, Cable and 

Wireless, Ofcom, Trend Micro, Gumtree, 

Verisign, Symantec and Paypal. It works 

with a range of community groups and 

aims to give people the confidence and 

know-how to use the internet securely. It 

combines marketing and PR activities with a 

comprehensive website (www.getsafeonline.
 
org) giving up-to-date advice, tools and 

guidance on cyber good practice. It includes 

advice on topics such as online shopping, 

social networking sites, data theft and 

identity fraud.
 

32  The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world 

Raising business awareness 
4.40  As well as working with consumers, we need 
to raise awareness in business of the potential 
threat to reputation, revenues and intellectual 
property from cyber attack. 
4.41  Business is the largest victim of crime 
and economic espionage perpetrated through 
cyberspace. Responsibility for the issue must be 
shared by Government and the private sector. 
Ultimately it is the private sector that owns the 
assets and makes the business decisions about 
investing in improved cyber security. We have 
already begun to do more to raise awareness of 
the threat and what businesses can do to protect 
their assets. However, raising awareness will only 
take us so far and we need to do more to bring 
about behavioural change. 
4.42  The joint public/private sector cyber security 
‘hub’ (see page 28) has a key role to play in 
helping to identify and manage threats by sharing 
information. 
4.43  Get Safe Online increases awareness and 
provides advice for consumers and small and 
medium sized companies. But we need other 
measures to reach these businesses that are not 
already acting – and have lots of other competing 
demands on their time. We will use digital channels 
and online media to raise awareness of threats to 
information assets and reputation, and encourage 
more cyber-aware behaviour by SMEs, including 
using online tutorials. 
4.44  In order to improve the protection of 
business critical information and assets the 
Government believes it is important to find 
ways to improve the profile and transparency 
of information about breaches of cyber security. 
BIS will publish in 2013 comprehensive research 
into cyber security breaches including research 
into security breach disclosure in UK business. 
In the meantime BIS will work through existing 
and ongoing research in this area (the 2012 
Information Security Breaches Survey produced by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers and Reed Exhibitions) to 
improve understanding of the risks. 
4.45  The market for security products can be 
hard to navigate for small businesses, just as it is for 
individual consumers. So BIS will work to stimulate 

the development of industry-led standards and 
guidance that help customers to differentiate good 
cyber security products and services. BIS is also 
exploring ways in which industry-led standards 
for firms’ performance on cyber security might 
be used as a market differentiator more generally. 
BIS will work with users, industry and appropriate 
standards organisations (domestic, and European 
and international) to stimulate the development of 
appropriate standards. 
4.46  The suppliers of business services have an 
important role to play in raising awareness. As 
well as mainstreaming cyber security messages in 
its own outreach to business, BIS will work with 
professional business services and the insurance 
market on how we can together ensure that cyber 
security is effectively managed as a business risk. 
BIS will hold a strategic summit with professional 
business services providers (including insurers, 
lawyers and auditors) to discuss how they can 
develop the services they offer to businesses to 
help them manage and reduce the risks. 
4.47  Government will work specifically with the 
retail industry to address challenges there. The UK 
has one of the largest online retail economies in 
the world, with transactions estimated to be worth 
more than £100 billion in 2009; UK shoppers 
spend more on average online than in any other 
major economy. In order to protect this thriving 
online retail sector, the Government is establishing 
a Retail Cyber Security Forum to address the 
specific key issues for this sector, including effective 
reporting and information sharing. Government 
will work with the British Retail Consortium and its 
members to help consumers stay safe online. 
4.48  Through their relationship with their 
customers, ISPs can make an important 
contribution to identifying and preventing cyber 
attacks on UK networks. Building on the existing 
relationships between Government and ISPs, we 
will work together to co-design a set of guiding 
principles that could be adopted on a voluntary 
basis. These principles might include agreement for 
ISPs to offer support to internet users to deal with 
malicious activity on their systems, agreement to 
establish a collaborative means of identifying and 
sharing threat information between Government 
and ISPs, or for ISPs to offer customers the means 

4. Action: Meeting threats, taking opportunities 

33 

Prime Minster’s commitments on transparency in 
procurement and contracting. 
4.52  We are also raising the standard of cyber 
security we expect from suppliers of sensitive 
defence equipment. We are doing this on national 
security grounds: for example to prevent key data 
on equipment performance being compromised 
by a foreign intelligence service before the kit 
even enters service. But the Government hopes 
these rising standards for public procurement will 
also help drive forward the wider market in cyber 
security in the UK. 
4.53  Better data on the extent of the problem, 
a developing insurance market and clearer 
signposts on what good cyber security looks 
like should between them help remove factors 
dampening demand within the UK. UK Trade and 
Investment (UKTI) will work with the security 
sector’s trade associations to make sure that this 
increasing domestic strength is leveraged to help 
UK firms sell abroad. We will turn the threat into 
opportunity and make strong cyber security a 
positive for all UK businesses and part of the UK’s 
competitive advantage. 
4.54  Further information on the National Cyber 
Security Programme and the Government’s 
approach can be found in Annex A. 

to address compromises to their computers or to 
protect themselves from cyber attacks in future. 

Fostering business opportunity 
4.49  In order to support the private sector in 
taking the opportunities that cyberspace offers we 
will aim to foster a vibrant and innovative cyber 
security sector in the UK, with global reach. 
4.50  GCHQ is home to world-class expertise 
in cyber security. Government will explore 
ways in which that expertise can more directly 
benefit economic growth and support the 
development of the UK cyber security sector 
without compromising the agency’s core security 
and intelligence mission. For example, options 
examined might include: 
•	Working with private sector partners to explore 

the potential commercial applications for 
GCHQ’s unique expertise. 

•	GCHQ working with BIS, the Technology 

Strategy Board and the Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council to explore strategic 
vehicles for bringing together industry, academia 
and Government to develop and exploit 
innovations in cyber security. 

•	A government-sponsored venture capital model 
to unlock innovation on cyber security in SMEs. 

4.51  As we have said, we plan to require higher 
cyber security standards for ICT products supplied 
into the Public Services Network. To ensure 
smaller companies can play their part as drivers 
of new ideas and innovation we will bring forward 
proposals as part of the Growth Review to help 
small and medium sized enterprises fully access 
the value of public procurement. For cyber 
security, Government is setting an expectation 
that at least 25% of the value of Government 
cyber security contracts go to SMEs, either 
by breaking contracts into lots or by including 
SME sub-contracting arrangements in contracts 
awarded to larger suppliers (providing these 
arrangements are proportionate to the market 
conditions for the particular requirements of 
the contract). The Cabinet Office will work with 
departments to ensure the transparency of SME 
arrangements in all new contracts, in line with the 

34 

35 

Annex A: Implementation
 

Below is more detail on the Government’s 
approach and the specific actions we will take to 
deliver against our cyber security objectives. 

Objective 1: Tackling cyber crime and making the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business
 

Cyberspace is an important and expanding part of our economy. Our objective is to tackle cyber crime and make the UK one of the most 
secure places in the world to do business. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

Tackling cyber crime 
and making the UK 
one of the most secure 
places in the world to 
do business 

Tackling cyber crime 
•	Reducing online vulnerability 
•	Restricting criminal activity online 
•	Promoting more effective 

partnerships 

Government lead: Home Office 

Making it safer to do business in 
cyberspace 
•	Increasing awareness and visibility 

of threats 

•	Improving incident response 
•	Protecting information and services 
•	Fostering a culture that manages 

the risks 

•	Promoting confidence in cyberspace 
Government lead: BIS 

1. Encourage the courts in the UK to use existing powers to impose appropriate 
online sanctions for online offences. 
2. Create a new national cyber crime capability as part of the new National Crime 
Agency by 2013. 
3. Encourage the use of ‘cyber-specials’ to bring in those with specialist skills to help 
the police. 
4. Significantly increase the law enforcement agency capability on cyber crime 
by March 2012, and develop new training, giving more capability to understand, 
investigate and disrupt cyber crime. 
5. More resources will go into working with the private sector and our international 
partners in 2012, and from now SOCA will increase the focus of cyber crime in its 
international network. 
6. Promote greater levels of international cooperation and shared understanding 
on cyber crime as part of the process begun by the London Conference on 
Cyberspace, in addition to promoting the Council of Europe’s Convention on Cyber 
crime (the Budapest Convention) and building on the new EU Directive on attacks 
on information systems. Contribute to the review of security provisions of the EU 
Data Protection Directive and the proposed EU Strategy on Information Security. 
7. Review existing legislation, for example the Computer Misuse Act 1990, to ensure 
that it remains relevant and effective. 
8. By the end of 2011, build a single reporting system for citizens and small 
businesses to report cyber crime so that action can be taken and law enforcement 
agencies can establish the extent of cyber crime (including how it affects individuals 
and the economy). 

Continued on next page 

3
6

 

 

T
h
e
 
U
K
C
y
b
e
r
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
 
S
t
r
a
t
e
g
y
:
 

 

P
r
o
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
 
a
n
d
p
r
o
m
o
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
U
K

 
i
n
 
a
 
d
g
i
t
a
l
 

i

w
o
r
l
d

Objective 1: Tackling cyber crime and making the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business (continued)
 

Cyberspace is an important and expanding part of our economy. Our objective is to tackle cyber crime and make the UK one of the most 
secure places in the world to do business. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

9. Commencing this year, the police will mainstream cyber awareness, capacity and 
capabilities throughout their service. 
10. Take action to tackle hate crime on the internet with a plan to be published in 
Spring 2012. 
11. Exploring the ways in which GCHQ’s expertise could more directly benefit 
economic growth and support the development of the UK cyber security sector 
without compromising the agency’s core security and intelligence mission. 
12. Starting in January 2012, harnessing the wider private sector joint working 
initiative on cyber security to ensure that law enforcement fully engages with 
business in information sharing and minimising the risks from cyber crime. 
13. Working with domestic, European, global and commercial standards organisations 
to stimulate the development of industry-led standards and guidance that help 
customers to navigate the market and differentiate good cyber security products. 
14. Work with business services providers (including insurers, lawyers and auditors) 
to discuss how they can develop the services they offer to businesses to help them 
manage and reduce the risks. 
15. Work with other countries to make sure that we can co-operate on cross-
border law enforcement and deny safe havens to cyber criminals. 
16. Ensure that new national procedures (adopted in May 2011) for responding 
to cyber incidents, and the developing partnership between government and 
the private sector, facilitate agile information sharing on threats to business, with 
mitigating advice aimed at reducing impacts. 
17. Bolstering (and, where necessary, building at pace) new operational partnerships 
between the public and private sectors to share information on threats, manage 
cyber incidents, develop trend analysis and build cyber security capability and 
capacity. Led by the Prime Minister and representatives of industry, an initial 
operating capability will be in place by March 2012. 

A
n
n
e
x
 
A

:
 
I

l

m
p
e
m
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n
 

3
7

 

Objective 1: Tackling cyber crime and making the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business (continued)
 

Cyberspace is an important and expanding part of our economy. Our objective is to tackle cyber crime and make the UK one of the most 
secure places in the world to do business. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

18. Support GetSafeOnline.org to become the single authoritative point of advice  
on responding to cyber threats (for example, the recent publication of an internet 
safety guide). 
19. Promote robust levels of cyber security in online public services, allowing people 
to transact online with government with confidence. 
20. Enable the UK cyber security industry to thrive and expand, supporting it in 
accessing overseas markets. 
21. Develop a better understanding of the cyber security industry’s strengths, growth 
potential and barriers to success. 
22. Develop a marketing strategy to promote internationally the capabilities of the 
UK cyber security industry, by March 2012. 
23. Raise awareness amongst businesses of the threat and actions that they can take 
to protect themselves including working through strategically important sectors to 
raise cyber security issues throughout their supply chains. 
24. Encourage industry-led standards and guidance that are readily used and 
understood, and that help companies who are good at security make that a  
selling point. 

3
8

 

 

T
h
e
 
U
K
C
y
b
e
r
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
 
S
t
r
a
t
e
g
y
:
 

 

P
r
o
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
 
a
n
d
p
r
o
m
o
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
U
K

 
i
n
 
a
 
d
g
i
t
a
l
 

i

w
o
r
l
d

Objective 2: Making the UK more resilient to cyber attack and better able to protect our interests in cyberspace
 

Making the UK more resilient and better able to protect our interests in cyberspace will mean reorganising and refocusing our existing 
resources to find new ways to strengthen our national security. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

Making the UK more 
resilient to cyber 
attack and better 
able to protect our 
interests in cyberspace 

Defending our national 
infrastructure from cyber attacks 
•	Strengthening defences in 

cyberspace 

•	Improving resilience and diminishing 

the impact of cyber attacks 

•	Countering terrorist use of the 

internet 

Government lead: Cabinet Office 

Ensuring that the UK has the 
capability to protect our interests 
in cyberspace 
•	Improving our ability to detect 

threats in cyberspace 

•	Expanding our capability to deter 

and disrupt attacks on the UK 

Government lead: MOD 

1. Work with the companies that own and manage our Critical National 
Infrastructure (CNI) to ensure key data and systems continue to be safe and resilient 
2. Expand the government advice to include a wider range of organisations whose 
resilience is a priority for the UK economy. 
3. Ensure that new national procedures for responding to cyber incidents (ensuring 
that key services can be maintained or restored quickly) are fully tested, both within 
the UK and in exercises with international partners. This will include a programme 
of exercises and plans for an EU-wide event in 2012. This builds on a minister-led 
incident management/response exercise (July 2011) and government’s ongoing 
exercise programme. 
4. Work with allies to ensure implementation of NATO’s cyber defence policy 
(agreed in June 2011). 
5. Through the Government ICT strategy, ensure that we build and maintain 
appropriately secure government ICT networks. 
6. Supporting Olympic cyber security by joining up the relevant government 
departments and conducting exercises to ensure preparations for cyber incidents 
are robust. 
7. Through the CONTEST strategy, increase our disruption of online radicalisation 
and recruitment, and safeguarding against cyber attack. 
8. Sharpen our ability to identify the nature and attribution of cyber attacks. 
9. Create and build a dedicated and integrated civilian and military capability within 
the MoD. Mainstreaming cyber within the organisation and setting up a Defence 
Cyber Operations Group (DCOG). An interim DCOG will be in place by April 
2012 and will achieve full operational capability by April 2014. 
10. Maintain and strengthen our ability to anticipate, prepare for and disrupt hostile 
acts in cyberspace (including improving information sharing across government 
and industry partners, enhancing defence against hostile acts and increasing law 
enforcement capability to investigate and prosecute those carrying out hostile acts). 
11. Maintain capabilities that enable the UK’s freedom of action and cyber advantage 
and preserve our sovereign capabilities in niche areas. 

A
n
n
e
x
 
A

:
 
I

l

m
p
e
m
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n
 

3
9

 

Objective 3: Helping to shape an open, vibrant and stable cyberspace which the UK public can use safely and that supports 
open societies 

We will work in partnership with other nations and organisations to help shape the development of cyberspace to support its role as 
a driver of open societies, whilst promoting stability and reliability. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

Helping to shape an 
open, vibrant and 
stable cyberspace 
which the UK 
public can use 
safely and that 
supports open 
societies 

Helping to shape the development 
of cyberspace 
•	Promoting an open and 
interoperable cyberspace 

•	Promoting the fundamental 

freedoms and rights that we enjoy 
Government lead: Department for Culture, 
Media and Sport (DCMS) 

Protecting our way of life 
•	Ensuring our security without 

compromising our values 

Government lead: FCO 

1. Continue the process started by the London Conference on Cyberspace to establish 
international norms of acceptable behaviour in cyberspace. 
2. Undertake a review of policy and regulation of the UK communication sector, with a 
view to publishing a Green Paper early in 2012 followed by a White Paper and a draft Bill 
by 2013. 
3. Support the open internet, working with the Broadband Stakeholder Group to 
develop industry-wide principles on traffic management and non-discrimination and 
reviewing its transparency code of practice in early 2012. 
4. Implement bilateral commitments set out in high-level communiqués (agreed in 2010 
and 2011) with the US, Australia and France.
5. Develop new bilateral relationships on cyber with those emerging powers that are 
active in cyberspace. 
6. Encourage international and regional organisations to support capacity building, for 
example working with the Commonwealth to promote model legislation on cyber crime, 
with the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) to support training on technical 
standards, with the Council of Europe (during our chairmanship starting in November 
2011) and with the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to 
promote freedom of expression online. 
7. Use multilateral and bilateral channels to discuss how to apply the framework of 
international human rights law in cyberspace and new challenges in guaranteeing 
such rights. 
8. Strengthen international systems to build confidence among states in cyberspace, 
including through engagement within the OSCE on confidence-building measures. 

15 

4
0

 

 

T
h
e
 
U
K
C
y
b
e
r
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
 
S
t
r
a
t
e
g
y
:
 

 

P
r
o
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
 
a
n
d
p
r
o
m
o
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
U
K

 
i
n
 
a
 
d
g
i
t
a
l
 

i

w
o
r
l
d

Objective 3: Helping to shape an open, vibrant and stable cyberspace which the UK public can use safely and that supports 
open societies (continued) 

We will work in partnership with other nations and organisations to help shape the development of cyberspace to support its role as 
a driver of open societies, whilst promoting stability and reliability. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

9. Actively engage in the UN Group of Governmental Experts, which will reconvene in 
2012, to ensure that a constructive report is made to the Secretary-General in 2014 
in line with UN General Assembly Resolution 65/141. 
10. Work closely with the European Commission and the External Action Service to 
encourage greater coherence within the EU on cyber issues. 
11. Seek agreement with ISPs on the support they might offer to internet users to 
help them identify, address, and protect themselves from with malicious activity on 
their systems. 

A
n
n
e
x
 
A

:
 
I

l

m
p
e
m
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n
 

4
1

 

Objective 4: Building the UK’s cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all cyber security objectives
 

We will build a foundation of flexible knowledge, skills and capability in the UK, supporting all of our objectives. 

Objective 

Approach 

Actions to include 

Building the UK’s 
cross-cutting 
knowledge, skills and 
capability to underpin 
all cyber security 
objectives 

Extending knowledge 
•	Building a coherent cross-sector 

research agenda 

•	Deepening understanding of the 
threats, vulnerabilities and risks 

Government lead: BIS 

Enhancing skills 
•	Building a culture that understands 
the risks and enables people to use 
cyberspace and improving cyber 
security skills at all levels 

Government lead: BIS 

Expanding capability 
•	Building technical capabilities 
•	Increasing ability to respond to 

incidents 

Government lead: Cabinet Office 

1. Improve our ability to anticipate the technological, procedural and societal 
behaviour developments that affect our use of cyberspace. 
2. Expand our understanding of the threats and vulnerabilities in cyberspace that 
affect the UK. 
3. By March 2012, conduct research on how to improve educational involvement 
with cyber security significantly at all levels – including higher education and 
postgraduate level. 
4. During 2012, establish a programme of exercises to improve our capability to 
respond to incidents in cyberspace, building on the experience gained exercising 
response mechanisms for the Olympics. 
5. Improve levels of professionalism in information assurance and cyber defence 
across the public and private sector. Establishing a scheme for certifying the 
competence of information assurance and cyber security professionals by March 
2012, and a scheme for certifying specialist training in 2012. Continuing to support 
the Cyber Security Challenge as a way of bringing new talent into the profession. 
6. Put in place clear leadership of cyber across Government, with a dedicated 
minister and oversight at the highest levels of Government. 
7. Support the application of research, working with the Government Office for 
Science and others to build innovative cyber security solutions, building on our 
world-leading technical capabilities in support of our national security interests and 
wider economic prosperity. 
8. Manage crucial skills and helping to develop a community of ‘ethical hackers’ in the 
UK to ensure that our networks are robustly protected. 
9. Enhance the world-class technical skills of GCHQ. 
10. Identify Centres of Excellence in cyber research to locate existing strengths and 
providing focused investment to address gaps. First focused investment by March 2012. 
11. Raise awareness amongst the public and businesses of the threat and the actions 
they can take to protect themselves. 

4
2

 

 

T
h
e
 
U
K
C
y
b
e
r
 
S
e
c
u
r
i
t
y
 
S
t
r
a
t
e
g
y
:
 

 

P
r
o
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
 
a
n
d
p
r
o
m
o
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
U
K

 
i
n
 
a
 
d
g
i
t
a
l
 

i

w
o
r
l
d

43 

References
 

1.	  www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm 

2.	  http://imsresearch.com/news-events/press-template. 

php?pr_id=1532 

3.	  www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/internet_matters/ 

pdfs/MGI_internet_matters_full_report.pdf 

4.	  www.theukcardsassociation.org.uk/view_point_and_ 

publications/facts_and_figures/internet_card_use_(2009)/ 

5.	  European Commission 

6.	  www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/internet_matters/ 

pdfs/MGI_internet_matters_full_report.pdf 

7.	  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 

8.	  www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/transparency-overview 

9.	  www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/uk­

government-government-ict-strategy_0.pdf 

10. www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/idc-extracting­

value-from-chaos-ar.pdf 

11. http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/publications/counter­

terrorism/counter-terrorism-strategy/ 

12. www.detica.com/uploads/press_releases/ 

THE_COST_OF_CYBER_CRIME_SUMMARY_FINAL_ 
14_February_2011.pdf 

13. www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/ 

strategic-defence-security-review.pdf 

14. http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/ 

resources/government-cloud-strategy_0.pdf 

15. http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/uk-us-co-operation­

on-cyberspace/, http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/ 
uk%e2%80%93france-summit-2010-declaration-on­
defence-and-security-co-operation/ 

Cabinet Office
 
22 Whitehall
 
London SW1A 2WH
 
Publication date: November 2011
 
© Crown copyright 2011
 
You may re-use this information (not including 

logos) free of charge in any format or medium, 

under the terms of the Open Government Licence.
 
To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/
 
doc/open-government-licence/
 
or write to the Information Policy Team, 

The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, 

or e-mail: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
 

This publication is available for download at: 
www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk 
The material used in this publication is 
constituted from 75% post consumer waste 
and 25% virgin fibre. 
Ref: 407494/1111 

