 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  

CYBER STRATEGY 

 

 

April 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 

I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................1 

II. STRATEGIC CONTEXT ......................................................................................................................9 

III. STRATEGIC GOALS ......................................................................................................................13 

I. 

Build and maintain ready forces and capabilities to conduct cyberspace operations. ......................... 13 

II.  Defend the DoD information network, secure DoD data, and mitigate risks to DoD missions ......... 13 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

Be prepared to defend the U.S. homeland and U.S. vital interests from disruptive or destructive 
cyberattacks of significant consequence. .................................................................................................... 14 

Build and maintain viable cyber options and plan to use those options to control conflict 
escalation and to shape the conflict environment at all stages. ............................................................... 14 

Build and maintain robust international alliances and partnerships to deter shared threats and 
increase international security and stability. ............................................................................................. 15 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................................17 

STRATEGIC GOAL I. ....................................................................................................................................... 17 

STRATEGIC GOAL II ....................................................................................................................................... 19 

STRATEGIC GOAL III ...................................................................................................................................... 24 

STRATEGIC GOAL IV. .................................................................................................................................... 26 

STRATEGIC GOAL V ....................................................................................................................................... 26 

V. MANAGING THE STRATEGY..........................................................................................................29 

CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................................................32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We  live  in  a  wired  world.  Companies  and  countries  rely  on  cyberspace  for  everything  from 
financial transactions to the movement of military forces. Computer code blurs the line between 
the  cyber  and  physical  world  and  connects  millions  of  objects  to  the  Internet  or  private 
networks.  Electric  firms  rely  on  industrial  control  systems  to  provide  power  to  the  grid. 
Shipping managers use satellites and the Internet to track freighters as they pass through global 
sea lanes, and the U.S. military relies on secure networks and data to carry out its missions.  
 
The  United  States  is  committed  to  an  open,  secure,  interoperable,  and  reliable  Internet  that 
enables  prosperity,  public  safety,  and  the  free flow  of  commerce and  ideas.  These qualities  of 
the  Internet  reflect  core  American  values  –  of  freedom  of  expression  and  privacy,  creativity, 
opportunity,  and  innovation.  And  these  qualities  have  allowed  the  Internet  to  provide  social 
and economic value to billions of people. Within the U.S. economy alone, anywhere from three 
to 13 percent of business sector value-added is derived from Internet-related businesses. Over 
the last ten years Internet access increased by over two billion people across the globe.. Yet these 
same  qualities  of  openness  and  dynamism  that  led  to  the  Internet’s  rapid  expansion  now 
provide dangerous state and non-state actors with a means to undermine U.S. interests.  
 
We  are  vulnerable in  this  wired world.  Today  our  reliance  on  the  confidentiality,  availability, 
and  integrity  of  data  stands  in  stark  contrast  to  the  inadequacy  of  our  cybersecurity.  The 
Internet  was  not  originally  designed  with  security  in  mind,  but  as  an  open  system  to  allow 
scientists  and  researchers  to  send  data  to  one  another  quickly.  Without  strong  investments  in 
cybersecurity  and  cyber  defenses,  data  systems  remain  open  and  susceptible  to  rudimentary 
and  dangerous forms  of  exploitation  and attack.  Malicious  actors  use cyberspace  to  steal  data 
and intellectual property for their own economic or political goals. And an actor in one region 
of the globe can use cyber capabilities to strike directly at a network thousands of miles away, 
destroying data, disrupting businesses, or shutting off critical systems. 
 
State and non-state actors conduct cyber operations to achieve a variety of political, economic, 
or  military  objectives.  In  conducting  their  operations,  they  may  strike  at  a  nation’s  values  as 
well as its interests or purposes. As one example, in November, 2014, likely in retaliation for the 

 

1 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

intimidation,  and 

the 

The  Red  Flag  14-1  Cyber  Protection  Team  works  on  cyber  defense 
procedures inside the Combined Air and Space Operations Center-Nellis, 
Nellis, NV. The CPT's primary goal is to find and thwart potential space, 
cyberspace  and  missile  threats  against  U.S.  and  allied  forces.  (U.S.  Air 
Force photo by Senior Airman Brett Clashman)  

planned release of a satirical film, North Korea conducted a cyberattack against Sony Pictures 
Entertainment,  rendering  thousands  of  Sony  computers  inoperable  and  breaching  Sony’s 
confidential  business  information.  In  addition  to  the  destructive  nature  of  the  attacks,  North 
Korea stole digital copies of a number of unreleased movies, as well as thousands of documents 
containing  sensitive  data  regarding  celebrities, 
Sony employees, and Sony’s business operations. 
North Korea accompanied their cyberattacks with 
coercion, 
threat  of 
terrorism. The North Korean attack on Sony was 
one of the most destructive cyberattacks on a U.S. 
entity  to  date.  The  attack  further  spurred  an 
already  ongoing  national  discussion  about  the 
nature  of  the  cyber  threat  and  the  need  for 
improved cybersecurity.  
 
The  increased  use  of  cyberattacks  as  a  political 
instrument 
in 
international  relations.  Vulnerable  data  systems 
present  state  and  non-state  actors  with  an 
enticing  opportunity  to  strike  the  United  States 
and  its  interests.  During  a  conflict,  the  Defense 
Department  assumes  that  a  potential  adversary 
will seek to target U.S. or allied critical infrastructure and military networks to gain a strategic 
advantage. Beyond the attacks described above, a sophisticated actor could target an industrial 
control system (ICS) on a public utility to affect public safety, or enter a network to manipulate 
health  records  to  affect  an  individual’s  well-being.  A  disruptive,  manipulative,  or  destructive 
cyberattack  could  present  a  significant  risk  to  U.S.  economic  and  national  security  if  lives  are 
lost, property destroyed, policy objectives harmed, or economic interests affected.  

reflects  a  dangerous 

trend 

Leaders  must  take  steps  to  mitigate  cyber  risks.  Governments,  companies,  and  organizations 
must  carefully  prioritize  the  systems  and  data  that  they  need  to  protect,  assess  risks  and 
hazards,  and  make  prudent  investments  in  cybersecurity  and  cyber  defense  capabilities  to 
achieve their security goals and objectives. Behind these defense investments, organizations of 
every kind must build business continuity plans and be ready to operate in a degraded cyber 
environment  where  access  to  networks  and  data  is  uncertain.  To  mitigate  risks  in  cyberspace 
requires  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  counter  and  if  necessary  withstand  disruptive  and 
destructive attacks. 

Defending the United States in Cyberspace 

In concert with other agencies, the United States’ Department of Defense (DoD) is responsible 
for  defending  the  U.S.  homeland  and  U.S.  interests  from  attack,  including  attacks  that  may 
occur in cyberspace. In a manner consistent with U.S. and international law, the Department of 
Defense seeks to deter attacks and defend the United States against any adversary that seeks to 
harm  U.S.  national  interests  during  times  of  peace,  crisis,  or  conflict.  To  this  end  the  Defense 
Department has developed capabilities for cyber operations and is integrating those capabilities 
into  the  full  array  of  tools  that  the  United  States  government  uses  to  defend  U.S.  national 
interests, 
law 
enforcement tools.  

informational,  military,  economic,  financial,  and 

including  diplomatic, 

 

2 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

The  May  2011  Department  of  Defense  Strategy  for  Operating  in  Cyberspace  guided  the  Defense 
Department’s cyber activities and operations in support of U.S. national interests over the last 
four  years.  This  new  strategy  sets  prioritized  strategic  goals  and  objectives  for  DoD’s  cyber 
activities and missions to achieve over the next five years. It focuses on building capabilities for 
effective  cybersecurity  and  cyber  operations  to  defend  DoD  networks,  systems,  and 
information; defend the nation against cyberattacks of significant consequence; and support 
operational and contingency plans. This strategy builds on previous decisions regarding DoD’s 
Cyber  Mission  Force  and  cyber  workforce  development  and  provides  new  and  specific 
guidance  to  mitigate  anticipated  risks  and  capture  opportunities  to  strengthen  U.S.  national 
security.  

As a matter of first principle, cybersecurity is a team effort within the U.S. Federal government. 
To  succeed  in  its  missions  the  Defense  Department  must  operate  in  partnership  with  other 
Departments and Agencies, international allies and partners, state and local governments, and, 
most importantly, the private sector.  

Cybersecurity Activities 

To  support  its  missions  in  cyberspace,  the  Defense  Department  conducts  a  range  of  activities 
outside  of  cyberspace  to  improve  collective  cybersecurity  and  protect  U.S.  interests.  For 
example,  the  Defense  Department  cooperates  with  agencies  of  the  U.S  government,  with  the 
private  sector,  and  with  our  international  partners  to  share  information,  build  alliances  and 
partnerships, and foster norms of responsible behavior to improve global strategic stability.  

 

Information sharing and interagency coordination. To secure and advance U.S. interests in 
cyberspace, DoD seeks to share information and coordinate with U.S. government agencies 
in  an  integrated  fashion  on  a  range  of  cyber  activities.  For  example,  if  DoD  learns  of 
malicious cyber activities that will affect important U.S. networks and systems that are vital 
for  U.S.  national  and  economic  security  or  public  safety,  DoD  supports  agencies  like  the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)  as 
they reach out to U.S. entities, and often other countries, to share threat information such as 
technical indicators of a potential attack. Such 
information sharing can significantly improve 
an  organization’s  ability  to  defend  itself 
against  a  broad  range  of  cyberattacks.  In 
addition 
information,  DoD 
partners  with  other  agencies  of  the  U.S. 
government to synchronize operations and to 
share lessons-learned and cybersecurity best-
practices. This includes incident management 
and network defense response.  

sharing 

to 

 

  Build  bridges  to  the  private  sector.  From 
application  developers  to  Internet  Services 
Providers,  private  companies  provide  the 
goods and services that make up cyberspace. 
The Defense Department relies on the private 
sector 
its  networks,  provide 
cybersecurity  services,  and  research  and 

to  build 

Mr.  Joe  Sciabica  and  Maj.  Gen.  J.  Kevin  McLaughlin  sign  an  Air  Force 
Civil  Engineer  Center-Air  Forces  Cyber  collaboration  agreement.  The 
initiative is designed to enhance the security of industrial control systems 
that support critical Air Force infrastructures around the world. (U.S. Air 
Force photo by Shannon Carabajal)  

 

3 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

develop  advanced  capabilities.  The  Defense  Department  has  benefited  from  private  sector 
innovation  throughout its  history.  Going forward,  DoD  will  work closely  with  the  private 
sector to validate and commercialize new ideas for cybersecurity for the Department. 

 

  Building alliances, coalitions, and partnerships abroad. The Defense Department engages 
in a broad array of activities to improve cybersecurity and cyber operations capacity abroad. 
DoD helps U.S. allies and partners to understand the cyber threats they face and to build the 
cyber  capabilities  necessary  to  defend  their  networks  and  data.  Allies  and  partners  also 
often have complementary capabilities that can augment those of the United States, and the 
United States seeks to build strong alliances and coalitions to counter potential adversaries’ 
cyber activities. Strategically, a unified coalition sends a message that the United States and 
its  allies  and  partners  are  aligned  in  collective  defense.  In  addition to  the  Five  Eyes  treaty 
partners,  DoD  works  closely  with  key  partners  in  the  Middle  East,  the  Asia-Pacific,  and 
Europe to understand the cybersecurity environment and build cyber defense capacity.  

Three Primary Missions in Cyberspace 

The  President  has  established  principles  and  processes  for  governing  cyber  operations.  The 
purpose  of  these  principles  and  processes  is  to  plan,  develop,  and  use  U.S.  capabilities 
effectively,  and  to  ensure  that  cyber  operations  occur  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  values 
that the United States promotes domestically and internationally.  

The  Defense  Department  has  three  primary  cyber  missions.  First,  DoD  must  defend  its  own 
networks,  systems,  and  information.  The  U.S.  military’s  dependence  on  cyberspace  for  its 
operations led the Secretary of Defense in 2011 to declare cyberspace as an operational domain 
for  purposes  of  organizing,  training,  and  equipping  U.S.  military  forces.  The  Defense 
Department  must  be  able  to  secure  its  own  networks  against  attack  and  recover  quickly  if 
security  measures  fail.  To  this  end,  DoD  conducts  network  defense  operations  on  an  ongoing 
basis  to  securely  operate  the  Department  of  Defense  Information  Network  (DoDIN).  If  and 
when DoD detects indications of hostile activity within its networks, DoD has quick-response 
capabilities  to  close  or  mitigate  vulnerabilities  and  secure  its  networks  and  systems.  Network 
defense  operations  on  DoD  networks  constitute  the  vast  majority  of  DoD’s  operations  in 
cyberspace.  

In  addition  to  defense  investments,  DoD  must  prepare  and  be  ready  to  operate  in  an 
environment where access to cyberspace is contested. During the Cold War, forces prepared to 
operate  in  an  environment  where  access  to  communications  could  be  interrupted  by  the 
adversary’s advanced capabilities, to include the potential use of an electromagnetic pulse that 
could  disrupt  satellite  and  other  global  communications  capabilities.  Commanders  conducted 
periodic  exercises  that  required  their  teams  to  operate  without  access  to  communications 
systems. Through years of practice and exercise, a culture of resilience took root in the military 
and units were ready and prepared to operate in contested environments.   

Since  the  end  of  the  Cold  War,  however,  a  younger  generation  has  grown  increasingly  more 
accustomed to an environment of connectivity. The generation of military men and women that 
grew  up  since  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  have  had  near  constant  access  to  information  and 
communications, and the information revolution has led to a more agile and globally adaptive 
force.  In the face of an escalating cyber threat, the lessons of the previous generations must now 
be passed down. The Defense Department must be able to carry out its missions to defend the 

 

4 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

country. Organizations must exercise and learn to operate without the tools that have become 
such a vital part of their daily lives and operations.   

For  its  second  mission,  DoD  must  be  prepared  to 
defend  the  United  States  and  its  interests  against 
cyberattacks  of  significant  consequence.  While 
cyberattacks are assessed on a case-by-case and fact-
specific basis by the President and the U.S. national 
security team, significant consequences may include 
loss  of  life,  significant  damage  to  property,  serious 
adverse U.S. foreign policy consequences, or serious 
economic impact on the United States.  

If  directed  by  the  President  or  the  Secretary  of 
Defense,  the  U.S.  military  may  conduct  cyber 
operations  to  counter  an  imminent  or  on-going 
attack against the U.S. homeland or U.S. interests in 
cyberspace.  The  purpose  of  such  a  defensive 
measure  is  to  blunt  an  attack  and  prevent  the 
destruction of property or the loss of life. DoD seeks 
to 
capabilities  with  other 
government agencies to develop a range of options 
and  methods 
for  disrupting  cyberattacks  of 
significant  consequence  before  they  can  have  an  impact,  to  include  law  enforcement, 
intelligence,  and  diplomatic  tools.  As  a  matter  of  principle,  the  United  States  will  seek  to 
exhaust all network defense and law enforcement options to mitigate any potential cyber risk to 
the U.S. homeland or U.S. interests before conducting a cyberspace operation.    

Navy Petty Officer 1st Class Joel Melendez, Naval Network Warfare 
Command information systems analysis, Air Force Staff Sgt. Rogerick 
Montgomery,  U.S.  Cyber  Command  network  analysis,  and  Army 
Staff  Sgt.  Jacob  Harding,  780th  Military  Intelligence  Brigade  cyber 
systems  analysis,  at an  exercise  during Cyber  Flag 13-1  at Nellis  Air 
Force  Base,  NV.  (U.S.  Air  Force  photo  by  Senior  Airman  Matthew 
Lancaster) 

synchronize 

its 

The  United  States  government  has  a  limited  and  specific  role  to  play  in  defending  the  nation 
against  cyberattacks  of  significant  consequence.  The  private  sector  owns  and  operates  over 
ninety percent of all of the networks and infrastructure of cyberspace and is thus the first line of 
defense. One of the most important steps for improving the United States’ overall cybersecurity 
posture is for companies to prioritize the networks and data that they must protect and to invest 
in improving their  own cybersecurity. While the U.S. government must prepare to defend the 
country against the most dangerous attacks, the majority of intrusions can be stopped through 
relatively basic cybersecurity investments that companies can and must make themselves.  

Third, if directed by the President or the Secretary of Defense, DoD must be able to provide 
integrated  cyber  capabilities  to  support  military  operations  and  contingency  plans.  There 
may be times when the President or the Secretary of Defense may determine that it would be 
appropriate for the U.S. military to conduct cyber operations to disrupt an adversary’s military-
related networks or infrastructure so that the U.S. military can protect U.S. interests in an area 
of operations. For example, the United States military might use cyber operations to terminate 
an ongoing conflict on U.S. terms, or to disrupt an adversary’s military systems to prevent the 
use of force against U.S. interests. United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM) may also be 
directed  to  conduct  cyber  operations,  in  coordination  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  as 
appropriate, to deter or defeat strategic threats in other domains.  

 

5 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

To ensure that the Internet remains open, secure, and prosperous, the United States will always 
conduct cyber operations under a doctrine of restraint, as required to protect human lives and 
to  prevent  the  destruction  of  property.  As  in  other  domains  of  operations,  in  cyberspace  the 
Defense  Department  will  always  act  in  a  way  that  reflects  enduring  U.S.  values,  including 
support for the rule of law, as well as respect and protection of the freedom of expression and 
privacy,  the  free  flow  of  information,  commerce,  and  ideas.  Any  decision  to  conduct  cyber 
operations outside of DoD networks is made with the utmost care and deliberation and under 
strict policy and operational oversight, and in accordance with the law of armed conflict.  As it 
makes  its  investments  and  builds  cyber  capabilities  to  defend  U.S.  national  interests,  the 
Defense Department will always be attentive to the potential impact of defense policies on state 
and non-state actors’ behavior. 

A New Cyber Mission Force 

The  Defense  Department  requires  the  commitment  and  coordination  of  multiple  leaders  and 
communities across DoD and the broader U.S. government to carry out its missions and execute 
this strategy. Defense Department law enforcement, intelligence, counterintelligence, and policy 
organizations all have an active role, as do the men and women that build and operate DoD’s 
networks  and  information  technology  systems.  Every  organization  needs  to  play  its  part.  For 
example,  network  service  providers  across  DoD  must  be  adaptive  and  active  to  follow 
cybersecurity best-practices and cyber defense orders. U.S. Cyber Command must synchronize 
its  activities  with  other  DoD  organizations,  particularly  combatant  commands,  to  respond  to 
emerging  challenges  and  opportunities.  Installation  owners  and  operators  must  partner  with 
the  Military  Departments’  Computer  Emergency  Response  Teams  (CERTs),  DHS,  and 
USCYBERCOM to build adaptive defenses and continuity plans for mission-critical systems and 
the  civil  systems  that  support  them.  Success  requires  creative  and  strong  intra-Departmental 
and interagency partnerships. 

Among  DoD’s  cyber  personnel  and  forces,  the  Cyber  Mission  Force  (CMF)  has  a  unique  role 
within the Department. In 2012, DoD began to build a CMF to carry out DoD’s cyber missions. 
Once  fully  operational,  the  CMF  will  include  nearly  6,200  military,  civilian,  and  contractor 
support  personnel  from  across  the  military  departments  and  defense  components.  The  Cyber 
Mission  Force  represents  a  major  investment  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  United 
States as whole, and a central aim of this strategy is to set specific goals and objectives to guide 
the development of the Cyber Mission Force and DoD’s wider cyber workforce to protect and 
defend U.S. national interests.  

The  Cyber  Mission  Force  will  be  comprised  of  cyber  operators  organized  into  133  teams, 
primarily  aligned  as  follows:  Cyber  Protection  Forces  will  augment  traditional  defensive 
measures  and  defend  priority  DoD  networks  and  systems  against  priority  threats;  National 
Mission  Forces  and  their  associated  support  teams  will  defend  the  United  States  and  its 
interests against cyberattacks of significant consequence; and Combat Mission Forces and their 
associated  support  teams  will  support  combatant  commands  by  generating  integrated 
cyberspace  effects  in  support  of  operational  plans  and  contingency  operations.  Combatant 
commands  integrate  Combat  Mission  Forces  and  Cyber  Protection  Teams  into  plans  and 
operations  and  employ  them  in  cyberspace,  while  the  National  Mission  Force  operates  under 
the  Commander  of  USCYBERCOM.    Outside  of  this  construct,  teams  can  also  be  used  to 
support other missions as required by the Department.  

 

6 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

the  course  of 

In 2013 the Department began to integrate the CMF into the larger multi-mission U.S. military 
force  to  achieve  synergy  across  domains,  assure  the  CMF’s  readiness  within  the  force,  and 
restructure  the  military  and  civilian  workforce  and  infrastructure  to  execute  DoD’s  missions. 
During 
this 
strategy,  DoD  will  continue  to  build  the  CMF, 
and  will  continue  to  mature  the  necessary 
command,  control,  and  enabling  organizations 
required for effective operations. DoD will focus 
on ensuring that its forces are trained and ready 
to 
and 
architectures 
to  conduct  cyber 
operations,  continue  to  build  policy  and  legal 
frameworks  to  govern  CMF  employment,  and 
integrate  the  CMF  into  DoD’s  overall  planning 
and force development. 

the 
they  need 

operate  using 

implementing 

capabilities 

that 

strategy 

recognizes 

This 
effective 
cybersecurity  will  require  close  collaboration 
within DoD and across the federal government, 
with  industry,  with  international  allies  and 
partners, and with state and local governments. 
The pursuit of security in cyberspace requires a 
whole-of-government  and  international  approach  due  to  the  number  and  variety  of 
stakeholders  in  the  domain,  the  flow  of  information  across  international  borders,  and  the 
distribution of responsibilities, authorities, and capabilities across governments and the private 
sector.  For  each  of  DoD’s  missions,  DoD  must  continue  to  develop  routine  relationships  and 
processes for coordinating its cyber operations.  

U.S.  Strategic  Command  serves  as  the  Defense  Department’s  global 
synchronizer for capabilities that affect every combatant command. Here the 
sun  sets  over  some  of  the  assets  that  provide  capabilities  at  Forward 
Operating  Base  Sharana  in  Afghanistan’s  Paktika  province.  (U.S.  Army 
photo by Spc. Raymond Schaeffer) 

Specific risks and opportunities inform this new strategy. For example, DoD’s own network is a 
patchwork  of  thousands  of  networks  across  the  globe,  and  DoD  lacks  the  visibility  and 
organizational  structure  required  to  defend  its  diffuse  networks  effectively.  The  Defense 
Department  must  further  develop  adequate  warning  intelligence  of  adversary  intentions  and 
capabilities for conducting destructive and disruptive cyberattacks against DoD and the United 
States.  Beyond  its  own  networks,  DoD  relies  on  civil  critical  infrastructure  across  the  United 
States  and  overseas  for  its  operations,  yet  the  cybersecurity  of  such  critical  infrastructure  is 
uncertain.  

To mitigate these and other risks and improve U.S. national security, this strategy sets strategic 
goals  for  the  Department  to  achieve,  and  prescribes  objectives  and  metrics  for  meeting  each 
goal.  All  of  the  goals  and  objectives  within  this  strategy  reflect  the  goals  of  the  2015  United 
States National Security Strategy and the 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review. 

DoD sets five strategic goals for its cyberspace missions: 

1.  Build and maintain ready forces and capabilities to conduct cyberspace operations; 

 

2.  Defend  the  DoD  information  network,  secure  DoD  data,  and  mitigate  risks  to  DoD 

missions;  

 

 

7 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

3.  Be  prepared  to  defend  the  U.S.  homeland  and  U.S.  vital  interests  from  disruptive  or 

destructive cyberattacks of significant consequence; 

 

4.  Build and maintain viable cyber options and plan to use those options to control conflict 

escalation and to shape the conflict environment at all stages; 

 

5.  Build and maintain robust international alliances and partnerships to deter shared threats 

and increase international security and stability. 

 

 

 

8 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Cyber Threats  
 
From 2013-2015, the Director of National Intelligence named the cyber threat as the number one 
strategic  threat  to  the  United  States,  placing  it  ahead  of  terrorism  for  the  first  time  since  the 
attacks of September 11, 2001. Potential state and non-state adversaries conduct malicious cyber 
activities against U.S. interests globally and in a manner intended to test the limits of what the 
United  States  and  the  international  community  will  tolerate.  Actors  may  penetrate  U.S. 
networks and systems for a variety of reasons, such as to steal intellectual property, disrupt an 
organization’s operations for activist purposes, or to conduct disruptive and destructive attacks 
to achieve military objectives. 
 
Potential  adversaries  have  invested  significantly  in  cyber  as  it  provides  them  with  a  viable, 
plausibly deniable capability to target the U.S. homeland and damage U.S. interests. Russia and 
China have developed advanced cyber capabilities and strategies. Russian actors are stealthy in 
their  cyber  tradecraft  and  their  intentions  are  sometimes  difficult  to  discern.  China  steals 
intellectual  property  (IP)  from  global  businesses  to  benefit  Chinese  companies  and  undercut 
U.S. competitiveness. While Iran and North Korea have less developed cyber capabilities, they 
have  displayed  an  overt  level  of  hostile intent  towards  the  United  States  and  U.S.  interests in 
cyberspace.   
 
In addition to state-based threats, non-state actors like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL)  use  cyberspace  to  recruit  fighters  and  disseminate  propaganda  and  have  declared  their 
intent  to  acquire  disruptive  and  destructive  cyber  capabilities.  Criminal  actors  pose  a 
considerable  threat  in  cyberspace,  particularly  to  financial institutions,  and ideological  groups 
often  use  hackers  to  further  their  political  objectives.    State  and  non-state  threats  often  also 
blend  together;  patriotic  entities  often  act  as cyber  surrogates  for  states, and non-state  entities 
can provide cover for state-based operators. This behavior can make attribution more difficult 
and increases the chance of miscalculation.  

 

Malware Proliferation  

The  global  proliferation  of  malicious  code  or  software  (“malware”)  increases  the  risk  to  U.S. 
networks  and  data.  To  conduct  a  disruptive  or  destructive  cyber  operation  against  a  military 
system or industrial control system requires expertise, but a potential adversary need not spend 

 

9 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

billions  of  dollars  to  develop  an  offensive  capability.  A  nation-state,  non-state  group,  or 
individual actor can purchase destructive malware and other capabilities on the black market. 
State  and  non-state  actors  also  pay  experts  to  search  for  vulnerabilities  and  develop  exploits. 
This  practice  has  created  a  dangerous  and  uncontrolled  market  that  serves  multiple  actors 
within  the  international  system,  often  for  competing  purposes.    As  cyber  capabilities  become 
more  readily available  over  time,  the  Department  of  Defense assesses  that  state  and  non-state 
actors will continue to seek and develop cyber capabilities to use against U.S. interests.  
 
Risk to DoD Networks and Infrastructure  

The Defense Department’s own networks and systems are vulnerable to intrusions and attacks. 
In  addition  to  DoD’s  own  networks,  a  cyberattack  on  the  critical  infrastructure  and  key 
resources  on  which  DoD  relies  for  its  operations  could  impact  the  U.S.  military’s  ability  to 
operate  in  a  contingency.  DoD  has  made  gains  in  identifying  cyber  vulnerabilities  of  its  own 
critical assets through its Mission Assurance Program – for many key assets, DoD has identified 
its  physical  network  infrastructure  on  which  key  physical  assets  depend  –  but  more  must  be 
done to secure DoD’s cyber infrastructure. 
 
In addition to destructive and disruptive attacks, cyber actors steal operational information and 
intellectual property from a range of U.S. government and commercial entities that impact the 
Defense  Department.  Victims  include  weapons  developers  as  well  as  commercial  firms  that 
support  force  movements  through  U.S.  Transportation  Command  (USTRANSCOM).  State 
actors  have  stolen  DoD’s  intellectual  property  to  undercut  the  United  States’  strategic  and 
technological advantage and to benefit their own military and economic development. 

Finally, the Defense Department faces a risk from the  U.S. government’s continued budgetary 
uncertainty.  Although DoD has prioritized the allocation of resources in its budget to develop 
cyber  capabilities,  continued  fiscal  uncertainty  requires  that  DoD  plan  to  build  its  cyber 
capabilities under a declining overall defense budget. DoD must continue to prioritize its cyber 
investments  and  develop  the  capabilities  required  to  defend  U.S.  interests  at  home  and 
overseas.  

Deterrence in the Future Security Environment  

In  the  face  of  an  escalating  threat,  the  Department  of  Defense  must  contribute  to  the 
development  and  implementation  of  a  comprehensive  cyber  deterrence  strategy  to  deter  key 
state  and  non-state  actors  from  conducting  cyberattacks  against  U.S.  interests.  Because  of  the 
variety  and  number  of  state  and  non-state  cyber  actors  in  cyberspace  and  the  relative 
availability  of  destructive  cyber  tools,  an  effective  deterrence  strategy  requires  a  range  of 
policies and capabilities to affect a state or non-state actors’ behavior. 

As  DoD  builds  its  Cyber  Mission  Force  and  overall  capabilities,  DoD  assumes  that  the 
deterrence  of  cyberattacks  on  U.S.  interests  will  not  be  achieved  through  the  articulation  of 
cyber  policies  alone,  but  through  the  totality  of  U.S.  actions,  including  declaratory  policy, 
substantial  indications  and  warning  capabilities,  defensive  posture,  effective  response 
procedures, and the overall resiliency of U.S. networks and systems. The deterrence of state and 
non-state  groups  in  cyberspace  will  thus  require  the  focused  attention  of  multiple  U.S. 
government  departments  and  agencies.  The  Department  of  Defense  has  a  number  of  specific 
roles to play in this equation.  

 

10 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

Deterrence  is  partially  a  function  of  perception.  It  works  by  convincing  a  potential  adversary 
that  it  will  suffer  unacceptable  costs  if  it  conducts  an  attack  on  the  United  States,  and  by 
decreasing  the  likelihood  that  a  potential  adversary’s  attack  will  succeed.  The  United  States 
must  be  able  to  declare  or  display  effective  response  capabilities  to  deter  an  adversary  from 
initiating  an  attack;  develop  effective  defensive  capabilities  to  deny  a  potential  attack  from 
succeeding; and strengthen the overall resilience of U.S. systems to withstand a potential attack 
if  it  penetrates  the  United  States’  defenses.  In  addition,  the  United  States  requires  strong 
intelligence,  forensics,  and  indications  and  warning  capabilities  to  reduce  anonymity  in 
cyberspace and increase confidence in attribution. 

  Response: The United States has been clear that it will respond to a cyberattack on U.S. 
interests  through  its  defense  capabilities.  The  United  States  has  articulated  this 
declaratory  policy  in  the  2011  United  States International  Strategy  for  Cyberspace,  in  the 
Department  of  Defense  Cyberspace  Policy  Report  to  Congress  of  2011,  and  through 
public statements by the President and the Secretary of Defense.  The United States will 
continue to respond to cyberattacks against U.S. interests at a time, in a manner, and in a 
place  of  our  choosing,  using  appropriate  instruments  of U.S.  power  and  in  accordance 
with applicable law.   

 
  Denial: While DoD has made progress in 
building  the  Cyber  Mission  Force,  DoD 
must increase its defensive capabilities to 
defend  DoD  networks  and  defend  the 
nation  from  sophisticated  cyberattacks, 
and  must  work  with  other  departments, 
agencies, 
and 
partners,  and 
to 
strengthen  deterrence  by  denial  through 
improved cybersecurity.  

the  private  sector 

international 

allies 

 
  Resilience: 

Because 

that 

guarantee 

capabilities 

the  Defense 
cannot 
Department’s 
necessarily 
every 
cyberattack  will  be  denied  successfully, 
the  Defense  Department  must  invest  in 
resilient and redundant systems so that it 
may continue its operations in the face of 
disruptive  or  destructive  cyberattacks  on  DoD  networks.  The  Defense  Department 
cannot,  however,  foster  resilience  in  organizations  that  fall  outside  of  its  authority.  In 
order  for  resilience  to  succeed  as  a  factor  in  effective  deterrence,  other  agencies  of  the 
government must work with critical infrastructure owners and operators and the private 
sector  more  broadly  to  develop  resilient  and  redundant  systems  that  can  withstand  a 
potential attack. Effective resilience measures can help convince potential adversaries of 
the futility of commencing cyberattacks on U.S. networks and systems.   

Airman  1st  Class  Nate  Hammond  adjusts  the  frequency  of  a  Roll-On 
Beyond  Line  of  Sight  Enhancement,  or  ROBE,  data  link  system  at  the 
Transit Center  at  Manas,  Kyrgyzstan. A  ROBE connects  manpower  assets 
on  the  ground  to  other  ground  or  airborne  units.  (U.S.  Air  Force 
photo/Senior Airman Brett Clashman) 

Attribution is a fundamental part of an effective cyber deterrence strategy as anonymity enables 
malicious  cyber  activity by  state  and non-state  groups.  On  matters  of intelligence, attribution, 
and  warning,  DoD  and  the  intelligence  community  have  invested  significantly  in  all  source 

 

11 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

collection, analysis, and dissemination capabilities, all of which reduce the anonymity of state 
and  non-state  actor  activity  in  cyberspace.  Intelligence  and  attribution  capabilities  help  to 
unmask  an  actor’s  cyber  persona,  identify  the  attack’s  point  of  origin,  and  determine  tactics, 
techniques, and procedures.  Attribution enables the Defense Department or other agencies to 
conduct response and denial operations against an incoming cyberattack.  

Public  and  private  attribution  can  play  a  significant  role  in  dissuading  cyber  actors  from 
conducting  attacks  in  the  first  place.  The  Defense  Department  will  continue  to  collaborate 
closely  with  the  private  sector  and  other  agencies  of  the  U.S.  government  to  strengthen 
attribution.  This  work  will  be  especially  important  for  deterrence  as  activist  groups,  criminal 
organizations, and other actors acquire advanced cyber capabilities over time.  

Finally,  cyber  capabilities  present  state  and  non-state  actors  with  the  ability  to  strike  at  U.S. 
interests in a manner that may or may not necessarily warrant a purely military response by the 
United States, but which  may nonetheless  present a significant threat to U.S. national  security 
and  may  warrant  a  non-military  response  of  some  kind.  In  response  to  certain  attacks  and 
intrusions, the United States  may undertake diplomatic actions, take law enforcement actions, 
and consider economic sanctions.  

For example, the United States used verifiable and attributable data to engage China about the 
risks posed by its economic espionage. The attribution of this data allowed the United States to 
express concerns regarding the impact of Chinese intellectual property theft on U.S.  economic 
competitiveness, and the potential risks posed to strategic stability by Chinese activity. Because 
they  broke  the  law  and  to  deter  China  from  conducting  future  cyber  espionage,  the  Justice 
Department indicted five members of the People’s Liberation Army for stealing U.S. intellectual 
property  to  directly  benefit  Chinese  companies.  The  Defense  Department  will  support  the 
Justice Department and other agencies in exploring new tools and capabilities to help deter such 
activity in cyberspace. 

 

 

 

12 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

III. STRATEGIC GOALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To mitigate risks and defend U.S. interests in the current and future security environment, the 
Defense  Department  outlines  five  strategic  goals  and  specific  objectives  for  its  activities  and 
missions.  
 
STRATEGIC  GOAL I:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  READY  FORCES  AND  CAPABILITIES 
TO CONDUCT CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS. 
 
To operate effectively in cyberspace, DoD requires forces and personnel that are trained to the 
highest  standard,  ready,  and  equipped  with  best-in-class  technical  capabilities.  In  2013  DoD 
initiated a major investment in its cyber personnel and technologies by initiating the CMF; now 
DoD must make good on that investment by training its people, building effective organizations 
and command and control systems, and fully developing the capabilities that DoD requires to 
operate in cyberspace. This strategy sets specific objectives for DoD to meet as it mans, trains, 
and equips its forces and personnel over the next five years and beyond. 
 
STRATEGIC  GOAL  II:  DEFEND  THE  DOD  INFORMATION  NETWORK,  SECURE 
DOD DATA, AND MITIGATE RISKS TO DOD MISSIONS.  
 
While DoD cannot defend every network and system against every kind of intrusion – DoD’s 
total  network  attack  surface  is  too  large  to  defend  against  all  threats  and  too  vast  to  close  all 
vulnerabilities  –  DoD  must  take  steps  to  identify,  prioritize,  and  defend  its  most  important 
networks  and  data  so  that  it  can  carry  out  its  missions  effectively.  DoD  must  also  plan  and 
exercise  to  operate  within  a  degraded  and  disrupted  cyber  environment  in  the  event  that  an 
attack on DoD’s networks and data succeeds, or if aspects of the critical infrastructure on which 
DoD relies for its operational and contingency plans are disrupted.   
 
Finally,  DoD  must  raise  the  bar  on  technology  and  innovation  to  stay  ahead  of  the  threat  by 
enhancing  its  cyber  defense  capabilities,  including  by  building  and  employing  a  more 
defendable  network  architecture  in  the  Joint  Information  Environment  (JIE).  Outside  of  DoD 
networks, DoD must work with the private sector to help  secure defense industrial base trade 

 

13 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

data,  and  be  prepared  to  assist  other  agencies  in  hardening  U.S.  networks  and  data  against 
cyberattacks and cyber espionage.  
 
STRATEGIC GOAL III: BE PREPARED TO DEFEND THE U.S. HOMELAND AND U.S. 
VITAL  INTERESTS  FROM  DISRUPTIVE  OR  DESTRUCTIVE  CYBERATTACKS  OF 
SIGNIFICANT CONSEQUENCE. 
 

and  U.S. 

The  Department  of  Defense  must  work  with  its 
interagency  partners,  the  private  sector,  and  allied 
and partner nations to deter and if necessary defeat a 
cyberattack  of  significant  consequence  on  the  U.S. 
homeland 
interests.  The  Defense 
Department  must  develop  its  intelligence,  warning, 
and operational capabilities to mitigate sophisticated, 
malicious  cyberattacks  before  they  can  impact  U.S. 
interests.  Consistent  with  all  applicable  laws  and 
policies, DoD requires granular, detailed, predictive, 
and  actionable  intelligence  about  global  networks 
and  systems,  adversary  capabilities,  and  malware 
brokers  and  markets.  To  defend  the  nation,  DoD 
must  build  partnerships  with  other  agencies  of  the 
government  to  prepare  to  conduct  combined  cyber 
operations to deter and if necessary defeat aggression 
in cyberspace. The Defense Department is focused on 
building 
the  capabilities,  processes,  and  plans 
necessary to succeed in this mission.  

Cyber Flag 14-1 participants analyze an exercise scenario in the Red 
Flag  building  at  Nellis  Air  Force  Base,  NV.  Cyber  Flag  focuses  on 
exercising  USCYBERCOM’s  mission  of  operating  and  defending 
DoD  networks  across  the  full  spectrum  of  operations  against  a 
realistic  adversary  in  a  virtual  environment.  (U.S.  Air  Force  photo 
by Airman 1st Class Christopher Tam) 

 
STRATEGIC  GOAL  IV:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  VIABLE  CYBER  OPTIONS  AND 
PLAN  TO  USE  THOSE  OPTIONS  TO  CONTROL  CONFLICT  ESCALATION  AND  TO 
SHAPE THE CONFLICT ENVIRONMENT AT ALL STAGES.  
 
During heightened tensions or outright hostilities,  DoD must be able to provide the President 
with a wide range of options for managing conflict escalation. If directed, DoD should be able to 
use cyber operations to disrupt an adversary’s command and control networks, military-related 
critical infrastructure, and weapons capabilities. As a part of the full range of tools available to 
the  United  States,  DoD  must  develop  viable  cyber  options  and  integrate  those  options  into 
Departmental plans. DoD will develop cyber capabilities to achieve key security objectives with 
precision,  and  to  minimize  loss  of  life  and  destruction  of  property.  To  ensure  unity  of  effort, 
DoD  will  enable  combatant  commands  to  plan  and  synchronize  cyber  operations with  kinetic 
operations across all domains of military operations. 
 
 
 

 

14 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

STRATEGIC  GOAL  V:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  ROBUST  INTERNATIONAL 
ALLIANCES  AND  PARTNERSHIPS  TO  DETER  SHARED  THREATS  AND  INCREASE 
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND STABILITY. 
 
All three of DoD’s cyber missions require close collaboration with foreign allies and partners. In 
its  international  cyber  engagement  DoD  seeks  to  build  partnership  capacity  in  cybersecurity 
and cyber defense, and to deepen operational partnerships where appropriate.  
 
Given  the  high  demand  and  relative  scarcity  of  cyber  resources,  the  Department  of  Defense 
must make hard choices and focus its partnership capacity initiatives on areas where vital U.S. 
national  interests  are  stake.  Over  the  next  five  years,  in  addition  to  ongoing  partner  capacity 
building  efforts  in  other  regions,  DoD  will  focus  its  international  engagement  on:  the  Middle 
East,  the  Asia-Pacific,  and  key  NATO  allies.  Through  the  course  of  this  strategy  DoD  will 
constantly  assess  the  international  environment  and  develop  innovative  partnerships  to 
respond to emerging challenges and opportunities.  
 

 

 

15 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

16 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION OBJECTIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each  of  DoD’s  strategic  goals  requires  specific,  measurable  objectives  for  the  Department  to 
achieve. The Office of the Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of Defense, the Office of the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, and the Joint Staff will 
work with DoD components to prioritize and oversee the implementation of this strategy and 
its  objectives  and  to  assign  offices  of  primary  and  support  responsibility  for  managing  each 
objective. The office of primary responsibility will develop a project plan for each objective; the 
Principal  Cyber  Advisor  will  track  progress  in  achieving  each  objective  and  ultimately  the 
success of each strategic goal.  
 
STRATEGIC  GOAL I:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  READY  FORCES  AND  CAPABILITIES 
TO CONDUCT CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS. 
 

  Build  the  cyber  workforce.  To  make  good  on  DoD’s  significant  investment  in  cyber 
personnel, and to help achieve many of the objectives in this strategy, DoD’s first priority is 
to  develop  a  ready  Cyber  Mission  Force  and  associated  cyber  workforce.  This  workforce 
will be built on three foundational pillars: enhanced training; improved military and civilian 
recruitment and retention; and stronger private sector support.  

 

o  Maintain a persistent training environment. DoD requires an individual and collective 
training  capability  to  achieve  the  goals  outlined  in  this  strategy  and  to  meet  future 
operational  requirements.  U.S.  Cyber  Command  will  work  with  other  components, 
agencies, and military departments to define the requirements for and create a training 
environment  that  will  enable  the  total  cyber  force  to  conduct  joint  training  (including 
exercises  and  mission  rehearsals),  experimentation,  certification,  as  well  as  the 
assessment  and  development  of  cyber  capabilities  and  tactics,  techniques,  and 
procedures for missions that cross boundaries and networks.  

 

 

17 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

o  Build  viable  career  paths.  Throughout  the  course  of  this  strategy,  and  following  the 
CMF  decisions  of  2013,  DoD  will  continue  to  foster  viable  career  paths  for  all  military 
personnel performing and supporting cyber operations.  

 

 

o  Draw on the National Guard and Reserve. Throughout the course of this strategy, DoD 
will  draw  on  the  National  Guard  and  Reserve  Components  as  a  resource  for  expertise 
and  to  foster  creative  solutions  to  cybersecurity  problems.  The  Reserve  Component 
offers a unique capability for supporting each of DoD’s missions, including for engaging 
the defense industrial base and the commercial sector. It represents DoD’s critical surge 
capacity for cyber responders.  

 
o  Improve  civilian  recruitment  and  retention.  In  addition  to  developing  highly-skilled 
military  personnel,  DoD  must  recruit  and  retain  highly-skilled  civilian  personnel, 
including technical personnel for its total cyber workforce. Civilians must follow a well-
developed  career  development  and  advancement  track  and  be  provided  with  best-in-
class opportunities to develop and succeed within the workforce.    
 

o  Develop  and  implement  exchange  programs  with  the  private  sector.  To  supplement 
DoD’s  civilian  cyber  workforce,  DoD  must  be  able  to  employ  technical  subject  matter 
experts  from  the  best  cybersecurity  and  information  technology  companies  in  the 
country  to  perform  unique  engineering  and  analytic  roles  within  DoD.  The  Defense 
Department  will  implement  successful  private  sector  exchange  programs  to  bring 
measurable benefits to the Department of Defense through the design and development 
of new operational concepts for DoD’s cyberspace missions.  
 

o  Support the National Initiative for Cyberspace Education. DoD will develop policies to 
support the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education. Working with interagency 
partners,  one  or  more  educational  institutions,  as  well  as  state  and  private  sector 
partners, DoD will continue to support innovative workforce development partnerships 
focused on both the technical and policy dimensions of cybersecurity and cyber defense.  

 

  Build  technical  capabilities  for  cyber  operations.  In  2013,  DoD  developed  a  model  for 
achieving CMF readiness and for developing viable cyber military options to present to the 
President and Secretary of Defense. DoD must have the technical tools available to conduct 
operations  in  support  of  combatant  command  missions.  Key  initiatives  include  the 
following: 

 

o  Develop  the  Unified  Platform.    On  the  basis  of  planning  requirements,  DoD  will 
develop  the  detailed  requirements  for  integrating  disparate  cyber  platforms  and 
building  an  interoperable  and  extendable  network  of  cyber  capabilities.  This  Unified 
Platform will enable the CMF to conduct full-spectrum cyberspace operations in support 
of national requirements.  

 
o  Accelerate  research  and  development.  The  Defense  Department  will  continue  to 
accelerate  innovative  cyber  research  and  development  to  build  cyber  capabilities.  The 

 

18 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

DoD research and development community as well as established and emerging private 
sector  partners  can  provide  DoD  and  the  nation  with  a  significant  advantage  in 
developing leap-ahead technologies to defend U.S. interests in cyberspace. In addition to 
supporting  current  and  planned  investments,  DoD  will  focus  its  basic  and  applied 
research agenda on developing cyber capabilities to expand the capacity of the CMF and 
the broader DoD cyber workforce.  

 

 

  Validate and continually refine  an adaptive command and control mechanism for  cyber 
operations. DoD has made significant progress in recent years in developing command and 
control for all three of its missions, but its command and control model must be finalized, 
resourced,  and  tested  to  ensure  effectiveness.  The  command  and  control  model  must 
support  USCYBERCOM  and  the  combatant commands.    It  must be  efficient  and  practical, 
and must promote unity of effort of effort across all three cyber missions.  
 

  Establish an enterprise-wide cyber modeling and simulation capability. DoD will work in 
collaboration  with  the  intelligence  community  to  develop  the  data  schema,  databases, 
algorithms,  and  modeling  and  simulation  (M&S)  capabilities  necessary  to  assess  the 
effectiveness of cyber operations.  
 

  Assess  Cyber  Mission  Force  capacity. 
Assess  the  capacity  of  the  projected  Cyber 
Mission  Force 
its  mission 
objectives  when  confronted  with  multiple 
contingencies.  
 
o  The 

Joint  Staff,  with  support 

to  achieve 

the 

to 

and 

from 
other  DoD 
USCYBERCOM 
collect, 
components,  will  propose, 
analyze,  and  report  a  set  of  appropriate 
metrics to the Principal Cyber Advisor to 
measure  the  operational  capacity  of  the 
CMF. These metrics will include updates 
of  USCYBERCOM 
on 
contingency 
include 
capability  development  and  proficiency  as  well  as  accesses  and  tools  that  may  be 
required  in  a  contingency.  In  response  to  this  analysis,  DoD  will  develop  a  plan  for 
ensuring that the CMF has the appropriate capacity and flexibility available to respond 
to changes in the strategic environment.  

Air  Force  Tech  Sgt.  Kevin  Garner  and  Air  Force  Senior  Airman  David 
Solnok,  cyber  transport  technicians  assigned  to  the  354th  Communications 
Squadron,  hook  cables  in  to  the  new  Air  Force  Network  router  system  at 
Eielson Air Force Base, AK. (U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Christopher 
Boitz)   

capabilities, 

status 

 

STRATEGIC  GOAL  II:  DEFEND  THE  DOD  INFORMATION  NETWORK,  SECURE 
DOD DATA, AND MITIGATE RISKS TO DOD MISSIONS.  

 

  Build  the  Joint  Information  Environment  (JIE)  single  security  architecture.  The  Defense 
Department  will  build  DoD  information  networks  to  meet  the  JIE’s  single  security 

 

19 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

architecture. The single security architecture will adapt and evolve to mitigate cyber threats; 
it  will  help  DoD  to  develop  and  follow  best-in-class  cybersecurity  practices,  and  its  small 
network footprint will allow USCYBERCOM, combatant commands, and DoD components 
to maintain comprehensive situational awareness of network threats and mitigations.  

 

o  The JIE’s single security architecture will enable a robust network defense and shift the 
focus  from  protecting  service-specific  networks  and  systems  to  securing  the  DoD 
enterprise in a unified manner. The JIE’s single security architecture must be developed 
with  enhanced  cyber  situational  awareness,  deployed  in  response  to  validated 
requirements, and able to accommodate future defensive measures.  
 

o  As a part of JIE planning DoD will develop a framework for developing and integrating 
new  defensive  techniques  into  DoD’s  cybersecurity  architecture,  to  include  anomaly-
based  detection  capabilities,  data  analytics  to  identify  vulnerabilities  and  threats,  and 
advanced encryption methods.  

 

(DoDIN)  operations.  Operating  under  USCYBERCOM, 

  Assess and ensure the effectiveness of the Joint Force Headquarters for DoD information 
Joint  Force 
network 
Headquarters-DoDIN  will  coordinate  network  defense  and  mitigate  cyber  risks  to  DoD 
operations and missions across the defense enterprise.  DoD will assess, validate, and fully 
implement the Joint Force Headquarters-DoDIN concept to operate DoD networks securely, 
defend DoD networks, and mitigate cyber risks to DoD missions.  

the 

 

  Mitigate  known  vulnerabilities.  The  Defense  Department  will  implement  a  capability  to 
mitigate  all  known  vulnerabilities  that  present  a  high  risk  to  DoD  networks  and  data.  In 
addition  to  zero-day  vulnerabilities,  one  of  the  greatest  threats  to  DoD  networks  and 
systems lies in known, high-risk vulnerabilities that potential adversaries can exploit. DoD 
often finds itself rushing to close vulnerabilities once an adversary has penetrated a system. 
The  DoD  Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO)  will  lead  an  effort  to  implement  an  automated 
patch management capability to distribute software and configuration patches, updates, and 
fixes to mitigate known, major vulnerabilities on DoD networks and systems against threats.  
 

  Assess DoD’s cyber defense forces.  The Defense Department will assess its cyber defense 
forces’  ability  to  conduct  integrated,  adaptive,  and  dynamic  defensive  operations. 
Enterprise-level  and  Cyber  Protection  Team  (CPT)  network  defenders  must  be  able  to 
discover,  detect,  analyze,  and  mitigate  threats  and  vulnerabilities  to  defend  the  DoD 
information network.  
 

 

Improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  current  DoD  Computer  Network  Defense  Service 
Provider  (CNDSP)  construct  in  defending  and  protecting  DoD  networks.  Computer 
network  defense  service  providers  deliver  cybersecurity  solutions  for  DoD  networks,  to 
include  monitoring,  detection,  and  protection  capabilities.  The  Defense  Department  will 
determine  whether  current  CNDSP  processes  are  sufficient  to  defend  networks  against 
known  and  projected  threats  in  cyberspace  and  whether  current  CNDSP  forces  are 
adequately  trained  and  equipped  to  defend  against  advanced  threats.  Finally,  DoD  will 

 

20 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

determine  whether  its  CNDSP  forces  can  integrate  into  the  broader  cyberspace  command 
and  control  construct  and  how  that  integrated  construct  will  perform  in  the  face  of  cyber 
threats that span CNDSP and CPT protected networks and data.  

 

 

  Plan for network defense and resilience. The Defense Department must identify and plan 
to  defend  the  networks  that  support  key  DoD  missions.  The  Department  must  make  a 
careful  assessment  of  the  priority  assets  that  it  must  defend  in  cyberspace  to  assure  DoD 
missions and exercise to defend those assets effectively. 
 
o  Integrate  cyber  into  mission  assurance  assessments.  The  Defense  Department  will 
integrate cybersecurity requirements and assessments into the DoD Mission Assurance 
program  and  update  DoD  policy  appropriately.  Currently  DoD  components  take 
varying  approaches  to  measuring  and 
assessing 
for  mission 
assurance.  DoD  will  develop  a  Joint 
Mission  Assurance  Assessment  Program 
that 
of 
cybersecurity  assessments,  cybersecurity 
requirements,  and  cyber  operations’ 
requirements.  
 

integration 

includes 

cyber 

risks 

the 

o  Assess  Cyber  Protection  Team  (CPT) 
capabilities.  DoD  will  complete  an 
assessment  of  CPT  capacity,  capability, 
and  employment  model  in  regard  to 
mission  assurance  priorities  as  set  by 
combatant command requirements. 

Soldiers monitor networks in the Cyber Mission Unit Operations Center at 
the  Army's  Cyber  Center  of  Excellence,  Fort  Gordon,  GA.  (Photo  by 
Michael L. Lewis) 

 
o  Improve weapons systems cybersecurity. DoD will assess and initiate improvements to 
the  cybersecurity  of  current  and  future  weapons  systems,  doing  so  on  the  basis  of 
operational  requirements.  For  all  future  weapons  systems  that  DoD  will  acquire  or 
procure,  DoD  will  mandate  specific  cybersecurity  standards  for  weapons  systems  to 
meet.  Acquisition  and  procurement  policy  and  practice  will  be  updated  to  promote 
effective cybersecurity throughout a system’s life cycle.  
 

o  Build  and  exercise  continuity  plans.  All  DoD  components  will  identify  and  build 
resiliency  plans  to  maintain  continuity  of  their  most  critical  operations  in  the  event  of 
network  disruption  and  degradation.  Military  campaign  plans  must  fully  incorporate 
the ability to operate in a degraded cyber environment; military forces must exercise and 
be able to conduct military campaigns in a degraded cyber environment where access to 
networks  and  data  is  uncertain.  Components  must  balance  cyber  risks  effectively  to 
ensure that they can continue to carry out their missions in the physical world.  

 

  Red  team  DoD’s  network  defenses.  The  Defense  Department  has  developed  mature  red 
team capabilities to test vital networks and mission systems for vulnerabilities and to better 

 

21 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

prepare its cyber defense forces. Going forward, DoD must focus its red team capabilities on 
priority networks and mission systems to assure DoD’s ability to carry out its most critical 
missions. As a part of this work, every major DoD exercise should include a cyber red team 
to  test  DoD's  cyber  defenses  in  a  realistic  scenario  where  the  Department  could  have  its 
operations  disrupted  by  an  adversary.  Components  will  be  audited  regularly  to  ensure 
progress in incorporating red team findings and improving their cybersecurity posture. 

 

  Mitigate the risk of insider threats. The nation's defense depends upon the fidelity of those 
entrusted  with  the  nation's  secrets.  The  Defense  Department  has  invested  in  the 
technological  and  personnel  solutions  necessary  to  identify  threats  before  they  can  impact 
U.S.  national  security.  The  Defense  Department  continues  to  deploy  and  implement  these 
solutions through continuous network monitoring, improved cybersecurity training for the 
workforce,  and  improved  methods  for  identifying‎,  reporting,  and  tracking  suspicious 
behavior. 

 

o  This  work  extends  beyond  information  technology  and  includes  matters  of  personnel 
and reliability. Mitigating the insider threat requires good leadership and accountability 
throughout  the  workforce.  Beyond  implementing  policies  and  protocols,  leaders  will 
strive  to  create  a  culture  of  awareness  to  anticipate,  detect,  and  respond  to  insider 
threats before they have an impact. 
 

  Exercise to provide Defense Support of Civil Authorities. Under its existing and planned 
force  structure,  DoD  will  develop  a  framework  and  exercise  its  Defense  Support  of  Civil 
Authorities  (DSCA)  capabilities  in  support  of  DHS  and  other  agencies  and  with  state  and 
local  authorities  to  help  defend  the  federal  government  and  the  private  sector  in  an 
emergency if directed.  

 

o  DoD‘s  annual  exercise  program,  to  include  Cyber  Guard,  will  include  exercising  with 
DHS  and  the  FBI  for  contingencies  that  may  require  emergency  allocation  of  forces  to 
help  protect  critical 
infrastructure,  under 
partner  agencies’  lead.  This  framework  will 
describe how combatant commands and combat 
support agencies can partner with DHS and FBI 
and  other  agencies  to  improve  integration, 
training and support.  
 

Members  of  the  Ohio  National  Guard  Computer  Network  Defense  Team 
conduct  cyber  defense  operations  during  exercise  Cyber  Shield  2015  at 
Camp  Atterbury,  IN.  (Ohio  National  Guard  photo  by  Staff  Sgt.  George 
Davis) 

supporting 

law 

 
Define and refine the National Guard’s 
role 
in 
enforcement, 
Homeland  Defense,  and  Defense  Support  of 
Civil  Authorities  missions.  DoD  will  work 
with 
the 
coordinate,  train,  advise,  and  assist  (C/TAA) 
roles  of  the  National  Guard  force  and  refine 
implementation  through  Cyber  Guard  16-1. 
Under  its  existing  and  planned  force  structure, 

the  National  Guard 

to  define 

 

22 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

National  Guard  forces  will  exercise  to  coordinate,  train,  advise,  and  assist  state  and  local 
agencies  and  domestic  critical  infrastructure  and  to  provide  support  to  law  enforcement, 
Homeland  Defense,  and  Defense  Support  of  Civil  Authorities  activities  in  support  of 
national objectives. 
 

Improve accountability and responsibility for the protection of data across DoD and the 
DIB. The Defense Department will ensure that policies and any associated federal rules or 
contract language requirements have been implemented to require DIB companies to report 
data theft and loss to the Defense Cyber Crime Center.  

 

o  DoD  will  continue  to  assess  Defense  Federal  Acquisition  Regulation  Supplement 
(DFARS)  rules  and  associated  guidance  to  ensure  they  mature  over  time  in  a  manner 
consistent with known standards for protecting data from cyber adversaries, to include 
standards promulgated by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).  

 
o  DoD  will  continue  to  expand  companies'  participation  in  threat  information  sharing 

programs, such as the Cyber Security/Information Assurance program.  

o  As  the  certification  authority  for  DIB  cleared  defense  contractor  sites,  the  Defense 
Security  Service  will  expand  education  and  training  programs  to  include  material  for 
DoD personnel and DIB contractors to enhance their cyber threat awareness.   
 
In addition, the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence will review the 
sufficiency  of  current  classification  guidance  for  critical  acquisition  and  technology 
programs to protect information on contractor networks.  

o 

 

 

 

 

  Strengthen DoD’s  procurement  and  acquisition  cybersecurity  standards. To defend DoD 
networks,  DoD  must  strengthen  the  cybersecurity  requirements  of  DoD’s  network 
acquisition  and  procurement  items  by  integrating  cybersecurity  standards  into  contract 
vehicles  for  research,  development,  and  procurement.  DoD  will  specify  additional 
cybersecurity standards for industry to meet for components of any DoD procurement item. 
  

  Build  collaboration  between  the  acquisition,  intelligence,  counterintelligence,  law 
enforcement, and operations communities to prevent, mitigate, and respond to data loss. 
DoD  will  establish  a  Joint  Acquisition  Protection  and  Exploitation  Cell  (JAPEC)  to  link 
intelligence,  counterintelligence,  and  law  enforcement  agents  with  acquisition  program 
managers to prevent and mitigate data loss and theft. DoD will conduct comprehensive risk 
and damage assessments of cyber espionage and theft to inform requirements, acquisition, 
programmatic, and counterintelligence courses of action.  
 
o  The  DoD  CIO,  in  collaboration  with  the  Office  of  the  Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for 
Acquisition,  Technology,  and  Logistics,  will  assess  and  update  specific  information 
system  security  controls  that  underpin  the  DFARs  for  defense  contractors  within  the 
NIST and DFARS standards.  

 

23 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

 

o  To  safeguard  critical  programs  and  technologies  DoD  will  work  with  companies  to 

develop alert capabilities and build layered cyber defenses.  
 

o  Finally, the Defense Cyber Crime Center, the Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of 
Defense, and the Office of the Under  Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, 
and  Logistics  will  collaborate  with  the  Services'  Damage  Assessment  Management 
Offices to streamline risk and damage assessment processes to better inform decisions to 
maintain, modify, or cancel penetrated programs.  
 

  Use  DoD  counterintelligence  capabilities  to  defend  against  intrusions.  The  Military 
Departments and  the Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Intelligence,  in  consultation with the 
Principal Cyber Advisor, will develop a strategy for the Secretary of Defense’s approval that 
maximizes the capabilities and authorities of the military departments’ counterintelligence 
agencies to identify, attribute, and defend against cyber intruders.  

 

o  Counterintelligence authorities are uniquely positioned to improve our insight into and 
frustrate  and  defeat  cyber  espionage.  The  strategy  will  specify  how  DoD’s 
counterintelligence  agencies  will  collaborate  more  effectively  with  the  broader  U.S. 
intelligence  and  law  enforcement  communities  on  investigations  and  human  and 
technical  operations  to  thwart  cyber-enabled  intellectual  property  theft  against  the 
United States and its allies and partners.  

 

  Support  whole-of-government  policies  and  capabilities  to  counter  intellectual  property 
theft.  The  Defense  Department  will  continue  to  work  with  other  agencies  of  the  U.S. 
government to counter the threat posed by intellectual property theft through cyberspace. 

 
STRATEGIC GOAL III: BE PREPARED TO DEFEND THE U.S. HOMELAND AND U.S. 
VITAL  INTERESTS  FROM  DISRUPTIVE  OR  DESTRUCTIVE  CYBERATTACKS  OF 
SIGNIFICANT CONSEQUENCE.  
 

  Continue to develop intelligence and warning capabilities to anticipate threats. To defend 
the nation against cyberattacks of significant consequence, DoD will work with the broader 
intelligence  community  to  develop  intelligence  capabilities  about  adversary  activities  and 
prepare to disrupt cyberattacks before they can impact the U.S. homeland and U.S. interests. 
To meet combatant command contingency requirements, DoD will expand its intelligence of 
key  adversary  human  and  technical  networks.  To  operate  effectively  in  cyberspace  DoD 
requires  cyber  intelligence  and  warning  and  shared  situational  awareness  through  all 
phases of a potential operation. All intelligence collection will follow the law and guidance 
outlined in executive orders. 

 

  Develop  and  exercise  capabilities  to  defend  the  nation.  The  National  Mission  Force  and 
other relevant DoD components will  train and partner with key interagency organizations 

 

24 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

to prepare to conduct cyber operations to defend the nation from cyberattacks of significant 
consequence.  In  addition,  DoD  will  practice  emergency  procedures  through  regular 
exercises  at  all  levels  of  the  Department  and  support  interagency  exercises  to  practice 
emergency and deliberate cyber action procedures.  

 

other 

o  Build  partnerships  to  defend  the  nation. 
DoD  will  have  a  framework  in  place  to 
cooperate  with 
government 
agencies  to  conduct  defend  the  nation 
operations. DoD will work with FBI, CIA, 
DHS  and  other  agencies 
to  build 
relationships and integrate capabilities to 
provide  the  President  with  the  widest 
range of options available to respond to a 
cyberattack of significant consequence to 
the United States.  

 

o  Conduct  an  annual 

comprehensive 
review  of  DoD’s  defend  the  nation 
capabilities.  The  Defense  Department’s 
requirements  and  capabilities  for 
its 
mission  to  defend  the  nation  against 
cyberattacks  of  significant  consequence 
will evolve over time. On an annual basis, DoD will conduct an in-depth review of the 
capabilities  available  and  required  for  the  mission.  As  a  part  of  this  review,  DoD  will 
validate new requirements and identify gaps and initiatives to pursue.  

The  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (DARPA)  Plan  X 
program  is  a  foundational  cyber  warfare  program  that  is  developing 
platforms for the Defense Department. DARPA uses advanced touch-table 
displays to use finger gestures and motions to advance the state of the art 
in cyber operations. (Photo courtesy of DARPA) 

 

  Develop  innovative  approaches  to  defending  U.S.  critical  infrastructure.  DoD  will work 
with  DHS  to  improve  the  Enhanced  Cybersecurity  Services  program  and  encourage 
additional  critical  infrastructure  entities  to  participate,  with  a  particular  emphasis  on 
increasing the number of defense critical infrastructure participants.  

  

  Develop  automated  information  sharing  tools.  To  improve  shared  situational  awareness 
DoD  will  partner  with  DHS  and  other  agencies  to  develop  continuous,  automated, 
standardized  mechanisms  for  sharing  information  with  each  of  its  critical  partners  in  the 
U.S.  government,  key  allied  and  partner  militaries,  state  and  local  governments,  and  the 
private  sector.  In  addition,  DoD  will  work  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  and 
Congress  to  support  legislation  that  enables  information  sharing  between  the  U.S. 
government and the private sector.  

 

  Assess DoD’s  cyber  deterrence  posture  and  strategy.  Building off of the Defense Science 
Board’s  Task  Force  on  Cyber  Deterrence,  U.S.  Strategic  Command  (USSTRATCOM),  in 
coordination with the Joint Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, will assess the 
Department of Defense’s ability to deter specific state and non-state actors from conducting 
cyberattacks of significant consequence on the U.S. homeland and against U.S. interests, to 

 

25 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

include loss of life, significant destruction of property, or significant impact on U.S. foreign 
and economic policy interests.   

 

o 

In conducting its analysis, USSTRATCOM must determine whether DoD is building the 
capabilities  required  for  attributing  and  deterring  key  threats  from  conducting  such 
attacks  and  recommend  specific  actions  that  DoD  can  take  to  improve  its  cyber 
deterrence  posture.   Careful  attention  should  be  devoted  also  to  deterring  non-state 
actors that may fall outside of traditional deterrence frameworks but which could pose a 
considerable threat to U.S. interests. 

 
STRATEGIC  GOAL  IV:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  VIABLE  CYBER  OPTIONS  AND 
PLAN  TO  USE  THOSE  OPTIONS  TO  CONTROL  CONFLICT  ESCALATION  AND  TO 
SHAPE THE CONFLICT ENVIRONMENT AT ALL STAGES.  

 

 

Integrate cyber options into plans. To meet strategic end-states as defined by the Guidance 
for the Employment of the Force, combatant command plans, and other strategic guidance 
documents, DoD will work with agencies of the U.S. government as well as U.S. allies and 
partners to integrate cyber options into combatant command planning.  

 

o  Accelerate  the  integration  of  cyber  requirements  into  plans.  The  Defense  Department 
will  accelerate  the  integration  of  cyber  requirements  into  combatant  command  plans. 
Plans must outline and define specific cyberspace effects against targets. To facilitate this 
work,  the  Joint  Staff  will  work  with  USSTRATCOM  to  synchronize  and  integrate 
requirements into planning and provide recommendations to the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs  of  Staff  on  the  alignment,  allocation,  assignment,  and  apportionment  of  Cyber 
Mission Forces.  

 

STRATEGIC  GOAL  V:  BUILD  AND  MAINTAIN  ROBUST  INTERNATIONAL 
ALLIANCES  AND  PARTNERSHIPS  TO  DETER  SHARED  THREATS  AND  INCREASE 
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND STABILITY. 
 

  Build partner capacity in key regions. Under its existing and planned force structure, DoD 
will work with key allies and partners to build partner capacity and help secure the critical 
infrastructure  and  key  resources  on  which  DoD  missions  and  U.S.  interests  depend.    The 
Defense  Department  will  work  regularly  with  other  agencies  of  the  U.S.  government,  to 
include  the  Department  of  State,  in  building  partner  capacity.  Priority  regions  include  the 
Middle East, Asia-Pacific, and Europe. 

 

o  Support  the  hardening  and  resiliency  of  Middle Eastern  allies’  and  partners’  networks 
and systems. As a part of its cyber dialogue and partnerships, DoD will work with key 
Middle  Eastern  allies  and  partners  to  improve  their  ability  to  secure  their  military 
networks  as  well  as  the  critical  infrastructure  and  key  resources  upon  which  U.S. 
interests  depend.  Key  initiatives  include  improved  information  sharing  to  establish  a 

 

26 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

unified  understanding  of  the  cyber  threat,  an  assessment  of  our  mutual  cyber  defense 
posture, and collaborative approaches to building cyber expertise.  

  

o  Support  the  hardening  and  resiliency  of 
Northeast  Asian  allies’  networks  and 
systems.  As  a  part  of  its  broader  cyber 
dialogue with Asian allies, DoD will work 
with  key  allies  and  partners  to  improve 
their  ability  to  secure  their  military 
networks  and  critical  infrastructure  and 
key resources upon which U.S. and allied 
interests depend.  

 

region. 

o  Build  new  strategic  partnerships  in  the 
Asia-Pacific 
The  Defense 
Department  will  work  with  key  states 
across  the  Asia-Pacific  to  build  cyber 
capacity  and  minimize  risk  to  U.S.  and 
allied  interests,  in  a  manner  consistent 
with  DoD’s 
International  Cyberspace 
Security Cooperation Guidance. 

 

U.S.  Navy  Seaman  Katelynn  L.  Ehrs  discusses  network  and 
communication 
training  with  Royal  Thai  Navy  sailors  during  a 
Cooperation  Afloat  Readiness  and  Training  military  operations 
symposium  in  Sattahip,  Thailand,  in  2010.  (Photo  by  Petty  Officer  2nd 
Class David A. Brandenburg, U.S. Navy.) 

o  Work with key NATO allies to mitigate cyber risks to DoD and U.S. national interests. 
The  Defense  Department  will  develop  these  partnerships  through  the  defense 
consultations that DoD holds with its key NATO allies. 

 

o  DoD will remain flexible and agile as it builds alliances and partnerships to best respond 

to shifts in the strategic environment. 

 

  Develop solutions to counter the proliferation of destructive malware. State and non-state 
actors seek to acquire destructive malware. The uncontrolled spread of destructive malware 
to  hostile  actors  presents  a  significant  risk  to  the  international  system.  Working  with  the 
Department  of  State  and  other  agencies  of  the  U.S.  government  as  well  as  U.S.  allies  and 
partners, the Defense Department will draw on best-practices to counter the proliferation of 
destructive  malware  within  the  international  system.    In  addition  to  international  regimes 
and best-practices, the U.S. government has a range of domestic export control regimes for 
governing dual-use technologies that can be used to prevent proliferation.  

 

  Work  with  capable  international  partners  to  plan  and  train  for  cyber  operations. 
Throughout  the course of  this  strategy, DoD will  strengthen  its  international  alliances  and 
partnerships  to  develop  combined  capabilities  to  achieve  cyber  effects  in  support  of 
combatant command plans.  

 

 

27 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

  Strengthen  the  United  States  cyber  dialogue  with  China  to  enhance  strategic  stability. 
Through  the  course  of  this  strategy,  as  part  of  the  U.S.-China  Defense  Consultative  Talks 
and  related  dialogues,  such  as  the  Cyber  Working  Group,  DoD  will  continue  to  hold 
discussions  with  China  to  bring  greater  understanding  and  transparency  of  each  nation’s 
military doctrine, policy, roles and missions in cyberspace. The goal of this work is to reduce 
the  risks  of  misperception  and  miscalculation  that  could  contribute  to  escalation  and 
instability.  DoD  will  support  U.S.  government  efforts  to  strengthen  confidence-building 
measures  to  bring  a  greater  level  of  trust  to  the  U.S.-China  relationship.  In  addition,  DoD 
will  continue  to  raise  concerns  about  China’s  cyber  enabled  theft  of  U.S.  intellectual 
property, trade secrets, and confidential business information.1  

 

 

 

 

                                                           
1 If and when U.S.-Russia military relations resume, as a part of broader interagency efforts DoD will seek 
to develop a military-to-military cyber dialogue with Russia to foster strategic stability in cyberspace.  

 

28 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

V. MANAGING THE STRATEGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To achieve the goals and objectives outlined in this strategy will require hard choices regarding 
cyber  forces  and  personnel,  organizations,  and  capabilities.  The  financial  choices  that  DoD 
makes in the course of implementing this strategy will have national and global implications for 
years to come, and DoD must operate in an effective and cost-efficient manner to guarantee the 
best  return  on  its  investments.  To  that  end,  DoD  will  pursue  the  following  management 
objectives to govern its cyber activities and missions.  

 

  Establish  the  Office  of  the  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.  In  the 
National  Defense  Authorization  Act  (NDAA)  of  2014,  Congress  required  the  Defense 
Department  to  designate  a  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  to  review 
military  cyberspace  activities,  cyber  mission  forces,  and  offensive  and  defensive  cyber 
operations  and  missions.  In  addition,  the  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  will  govern  the 
development of DoD cyberspace policy and strategy for the DoD enterprise.  
 
o  The  2014  NDAA  also  stipulated  that  this  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  integrate  the  cyber 
expertise  and  perspectives  of  key  organizations  to  build  an  intradepartmental  team  of 
key  players  to  ensure  effective  governance  of  cyber  issues  within  DoD.    The  Principal 
Cyber Advisor responsibilities assigned by the FY14 NDAA shall not be interpreted to 
affect the existing responsibilities and authorities of the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Acquisition,  Technology,  and  Logistics;  the  Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Policy;  the 
Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Intelligence;  the  Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for 
Personnel and Readiness; or any other Principal Staff Assistant (PSA) in the office of the 
Secretary of Defense in cyber-related responsibilities and authorities. 
 

o  An  intradepartmental  team.  The  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  will  work  with  DoD 
components  through  the  Cyber  Investment  and  Management  Board  (CIMB)  to  review 
DoD’s cyber management. The CIMB will be a forum for synchronization, coordination, 
and  project  management.  It  will  not  replicate  existing  programmatic  and  budgetary 
mechanisms  or  interfere  with  previously  defined  Principal  Staff  Assistant  roles  and 
authorities, nor will it interfere in any way with the military chain of command; rather, it 
will provide a single forum to integrate cyber initiatives, it will manage projects through 

 

29 

 

 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

completion,  and  streamline  DoD’s  cyber  governance  structures.    The  PCA  will  work 
with  the  Office  of  the  Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Acquisition,  Technology,  and 
Logistics and the Joint Staff to build an intradepartmental team of DoD representatives 
to support the CIMB in this work. 

 

o  A  senior  executive  forum.  Subordinate  and  reporting  to  the  CIMB,  a  senior  executive 
forum  will  provide  initial  senior-level  coordination  on  key  cyber  issues.    The  senior 
executive forum will recommend courses of action to the CIMB and will coordinate with 
other  OSD  and  Joint  Staff  governance  bodies  to  facilitate  unity  of  effort  and  resolve 
management issues at appropriate levels. 
 
If  and  when  a  budgetary  or  financial  matter  comes  into  play  during  the  Program  and 
Budget Review process, the Principal Cyber Advisor will use the senior executive forum 
and  the  CIMB  to  coordinate  recommendations  for  the  Deputy’s  Management  Action 
Group or other financial and budgetary organizations, vetting options and alternatives 
through the issue teams as appropriate.  
 

o 

Improve cyber budgetary management. DoD will develop an agreed-upon method to more 
transparently  and  effectively  manage  the  DoD  cyber  operations  budget.  Today  cyber 
funding  is  spread  across  the  DoD  budget,  to  include  the  Military  Intelligence  Program 
(MIP), in multiple appropriations, budget lines, program elements, and projects. In addition, 
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, on behalf of DoD, ensures that all National 
Intelligence  Program  (NIP)  investments  are  aligned  to  support  DoD  missions.  The  diffuse 
nature  of  the  DoD  cyber  budget  presents  DoD  with  a  challenge  for  effective  budgetary 
management; DoD must develop a new method for 
managing  cross-program 
improve 
mission  effectiveness  and  achieve  management 
efficiencies.  

funding 

to 

  Develop  DoD’s  cyber  operations  and 
cybersecurity  policy  framework.  Consistent  with 
Presidential  guidance,  DoD  will  align  and  simplify 
its  cyber  operations  and  cybersecurity  policy 
management  and  identified  gaps,  overlaps,  seams, 
conflicts,  and  areas  in  need  of  revision  in  current 
documentation.  This  effort  will  help  translate 
national and departmental guidance and policy into 
tactical  operations.  It  is  essential  to  clarifying 
conflicts  in  existing  documentation  that  currently 
complicate  cyber  operations  and  cybersecurity 
governance. 
 

Sailors conduct an exercise at Fleet Cyber Command's headquarters in 
the  Frank  B.  Rowlett  Building,  Fort  George  G.  Meade,  MD.  This 
exercise  features  members  of  Fleet  Cyber  Command's  Joint  Force 
Headquarters-Cyber (JFHQ-C). 

  Conduct an end-to-end assessment of DoD’s cyber capabilities. U.S. Cyber Command 
will  lead  a  comprehensive  operational  assessment  of  its  posture.  In  coordination  with 
the  Principal  Cyber  Advisor  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  Office  of  the  Under 
Secretary  of  Defense  for  Acquisition,  Technology,  and  Logistics,  and  the  Office  of  the 
Director  of  Coast  Assessment  and  Program  Evaluation,  USCYBERCOM  will  provide 
short- and long-term recommendations through the CIMB to provide to the Secretary of 

 

30 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

Defense regarding organizational structure, command and control mechanism, rules of 
engagement,  personnel,  capabilities,  tools,  and  potential  operational  gaps.  The  goal  of 
this  posture  assessment  will  be  to  provide  a  clear  understanding  of  the  future 
operational environment; key stakeholder views; as well as strategic priorities, choices, 
and resources for planning and operations.  

 

 

 

 

31 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 

 

 

32 

T h e   D e p a r t m e n t   o f   D e f e n s e   C y b e r   S t r a t e g y  

 

CONCLUSION  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We live in a time of growing cyber threats to U.S. interests. State and non-state actors threaten 
disruptive and destructive attacks against the United States and conduct cyber-enabled theft of 
intellectual  property  to  undercut  the  United  States’  technological  and  military  advantage.  We 
are vulnerable in cyberspace, and the scale of the cyber threat requires urgent action by leaders 
and organizations across the government and the private sector.  

Since developing its first cyber strategy in 2011, the Defense Department has made significant 
progress in building its cyber capabilities, developing its organizations and plans, and fostering 
the  partnerships  necessary  to  defend  the  country  and  its  interests.  More  must  be  done. 
Stemming from the goals and objectives outlined in this strategy, appropriate resources must be 
aligned and managed to ensure progress.  

This strategy presents an aggressive, specific plan for achieving change. For DoD to succeed in 
its  mission  of  defending  the  United  States  and  its  interests  in  cyberspace,  leaders  from  across 
the Department must take action to achieve the objectives outlined in this document. They must 
also  hold  their  organizations  accountable.  Because  of  the  nature  of  networks  and  computer 
code,  no  single  organization  can  be  relied  upon  to  do  this  work.  Success  requires  close 
collaboration across DoD, between agencies of the U.S. government, with the private sector, and 
with U.S. allies and partners.  

The strategic environment can change quickly. That is especially true in cyberspace. We must be 
dynamic,  flexible,  and  agile  in  this  work.  We  must  anticipate  emerging  threats,  identify  new 
capabilities to build, and determine how to enhance our partnerships and planning.  As always, 
our women and men – both uniformed and civilian personnel – will be our greatest and most 
enduring  strength  and  a  constant  source  of  inspiration.  By  working  together  we  will  help 
protect and defend the United States and its interests in the digital age. 

 

33 

