Cy beR spACe


polICy R ev Iew
 

Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information 

and Communications Infrastructure
 

Preface
 

 
Cyberspace touches practically everything and everyone.  It provides a platform for innovation and 
prosperity and the means to improve general welfare around the globe.  But with the broad reach of 
 
a loose and lightly regulated digital infrastructure, great risks threaten nations, private enterprises, 
 
 
and individual rights. The government has a responsibility to address these strategic vulnerabilities 
to ensure that the United States and its citizens, together with the larger community of nations, can 
 
realize the full potential of the information technology revolution. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The architecture of the Nation’s digital infrastructure, based largely upon the Internet, is not secure or 
resilient. Without major advances in the security of these systems or significant change in how they 
 
are constructed or operated, it is doubtful that the United States can protect itself from the growing 
 
threat of cybercrime and state-sponsored intrusions and operations.  Our digital infrastructure has 
 
already suffered intrusions that have allowed criminals to steal hundreds of millions of dollars and 
nation-states and other entities to steal intellectual property and sensitive military information. 
  
Other intrusions threaten to damage portions of our critical infrastructure.  These and other risks 
have the potential to undermine the Nation’s confidence in the information systems that underlie 
 
our economic and national security interests. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The Federal government is not organized to address this growing problem effectively now or in the 
 
future. Responsibilities for cybersecurity are distributed across a wide array of federal departments 
and agencies, many with overlapping authorities, and none with sufficient decision authority to 
 
direct actions that deal with often conflicting issues in a consistent way.  The government needs 
 
to integrate competing interests to derive a holistic vision and plan to address the cybersecurity­
related issues confronting the United States. The Nation needs to develop the policies, processes, 
 
people, and technology required to mitigate cybersecurity-related risks. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Information and communications networks are largely owned and operated by the private sector, 
 
both nationally and internationally.  Thus, addressing network security issues requires a public-
private partnership as well as international cooperation and norms.  The United States needs a 
comprehensive framework to ensure coordinated response and recovery by the government, the 
 
private sector, and our allies to a significant incident or threat. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The United States needs to conduct a national dialogue on cybersecurity to develop more public 
awareness of the threat and risks and to ensure an integrated approach toward the Nation’s need 
 
for security and the national commitment to privacy rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the 
 
 
Constitution and law. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Research on new approaches to achieving security and resiliency in information and communica­
tions infrastructures is insufficient.  The government needs to increase investment in research that 
 
will help address cybersecurity vulnerabilities while also meeting our economic needs and national 
 
security requirements. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i 

Executive Summary
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The President directed a 60-day, comprehensive, “clean-slate” review to assess U.S. policies and 
structures for cybersecurity. Cybersecurity policy includes strategy, policy, and standards regarding 
the security of and operations in cyberspace, and encompasses the full range of threat reduction, 
 
 
vulnerability reduction, deterrence, international engagement, incident response, resiliency, and 
recovery policies and activities, including computer network operations, information assurance, 
 
law enforcement, diplomacy, military, and intelligence missions as they relate to the security 
 
 
and stability of the global information and communications infrastructure.  The scope does not 
include other information and communications policy unrelated to national security or securing 
the infrastructure.  The review team of government cybersecurity experts engaged and received 
 
input from a broad cross-section of industry, academia, the civil liberties and privacy communities, 
 
State governments, international partners, and the Legislative and Executive Branches. This paper 
summarizes the review team’s conclusions and outlines the beginning of the way forward towards 
a reliable, resilient, trustworthy digital infrastructure for the future. 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The Nation is at a crossroads. The globally-interconnected digital information and communications 
 
infrastructure known as “cyberspace”underpins almost every facet of modern society and provides 
 
critical support for the U.S. economy, civil infrastructure, public safety, and national security.  This 
 
technology has transformed the global economy and connected people in ways never imagined. 
  
Yet, cybersecurity risks pose some of the most serious economic and national security challenges 
 
of the 21st Century.  The digital infrastructure’s architecture was driven more by considerations of 
 
interoperability and efficiency than of security. Consequently, a growing array of state and non-state 
 
actors are compromising, stealing, changing, or destroying information and could cause critical dis­
ruptions to U.S. systems.  At the same time, traditional telecommunications and Internet networks 
continue to converge, and other infrastructure sectors are adopting the Internet as a primary means 
 
of interconnectivity. The United States faces the dual challenge of maintaining an environment that 
 
promotes efficiency, innovation, economic prosperity, and free trade while also promoting safety, 
 
 
security, civil liberties, and privacy rights.1  It is the fundamental responsibility of our government 
 
to address strategic vulnerabilities in cyberspace and ensure that the United States and the world 
realize the full potential of the information technology revolution. 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The status quo is no longer acceptable.  The United States must signal to the world that it is serious 
 
about addressing this challenge with strong leadership and vision.  Leadership should be elevated 
 
and strongly anchored within the White House to provide direction, coordinate action, and achieve 
  
results.  In addition, federal leadership and accountability for cybersecurity should be strengthened. 
This approach requires clarifying the cybersecurity-related roles and responsibilities of federal 
departments and agencies while providing the policy, legal structures, and necessary coordina­
 
tion to empower them to perform their missions.  While efforts over the past two years started key 
 
programs and made great strides by bridging previously disparate agency missions, they provide 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Internet Security Alliance, The Cyber Security Social Contract: Policy Recommendations for the Obama Administration and 111th Congress, 
at 5. 

 

iii 

cybErSPacE   Policy   rEviEw 

 

 

an incomplete solution.  Moreover, this issue transcends the jurisdictional purview of individual 
departments and agencies because, although each agency has a unique contribution to make, no 
 
single agency has a broad enough perspective or authority to match the sweep of the problem. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The national dialogue on cybersecurity must begin today. The government, working with industry, 
 
should explain this challenge and discuss what the Nation can do to solve problems in a way that 
 
 
the American people can appreciate the need for action.  People cannot value security without first 
understanding how much is at risk.  Therefore, the Federal government should initiate a national 
public awareness and education campaign informed by previous successful campaigns.  Further, 
 
similar to the period after the launch of the Sputnik satellite in October, 1957, the United States 
 
is in a global race that depends on mathematics and science skills.  While we continue to boast 
the most positive environment for information technology firms in the world, the Nation should 
 
develop a workforce of U.S. citizens necessary to compete on a global level and sustain that posi­
tion of leadership. 

 
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The United States cannot succeed in securing cyberspace if it works in isolation. The Federal govern­
ment should enhance its partnership with the private sector. The public and private sectors’interests 
 
are intertwined with a shared responsibility for ensuring a secure, reliable infrastructure. There are 
 
many ways in which the Federal government can work with the private sector, and these alternatives 
 
should be explored. The public-private partnership for cybersecurity must evolve to define clearly 
 
 
the nature of the relationship, including the roles and responsibilities of each of the partners.2,3,4  The 
 
Federal government should examine existing public-private partnerships to optimize their capacity 
  
to identify priorities and enable efficient execution of concrete actions.5,6,7 

  

 

 

 

 

 

The Nation also needs a strategy for cybersecurity designed to shape the international environ­
 
ment and bring like-minded nations together on a host of issues, such as technical standards and 
  
acceptable legal norms regarding territorial jurisdiction, sovereign responsibility, and use of force. 
International norms are critical to establishing a secure and thriving digital infrastructure.  In addi­
tion, differing national and regional laws and practices—such as laws concerning the investigation 
and prosecution of cybercrime; data preservation, protection, and privacy; and approaches for net­
 
work defense and response to cyber attacks—present serious challenges to achieving a safe, secure, 
 
and resilient digital environment. Only by working with international partners can the United States 
  
best address these challenges, enhance cybersecurity, and reap the full benefits of the digital age. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Federal government cannot entirely delegate or abrogate its role in securing the Nation from 
a cyber incident or accident.  The Federal government has the responsibility to protect and defend 
the country, and all levels of government have the responsibility to ensure the safety and well­
 
being of citizens.  The private sector, however, designs, builds, owns, and operates most of the 
digital infrastructures that support government and private users alike. The United States needs a 

 
  

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2 Written testimony of Scott Charney (Microsoft) to the House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, 

Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, March 10, 2009, at 4.
 
3 Cross-Sector Cyber Security Working Group (CSCSWG) Response to 60-day Cyber Review Questions, March 16, 2009, at 2.
 
4 Information Technology & Communications Sector Coordinating Councils, March 20, 2009, at 2.
 
5 Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 

44th Presidency, December 2008, at 43.
 
 
6 TechAmerica, Response to 60-Day Cyber Security Review, at 6.
 
7 Business Software Alliance, National Security & Homeland Security Councils Review of National Cyber Security Policy,  March 19, 2009, at Q3.
 

iv 

ExEcutivE   Summary 

 

 
comprehensive framework to ensure a coordinated response by the Federal, State, local, and tribal 
governments, the private sector, and international allies to significant incidents.  Implementation 
 
 
of this framework will require developing reporting thresholds, adaptable response and recovery 
 
plans, and the necessary coordination, information sharing, and incident reporting mechanisms 
needed for those plans to succeed. The government, working with key stakeholders, should design 
 
an effective mechanism to achieve a true common operating picture that integrates information 
 
from the government and the private sector and serves as the basis for informed and prioritized 
vulnerability mitigation efforts and incident response decisions. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Working with the private sector, performance and security objectives must be defined for the 
 
next-generation infrastructure. The United States should harness the full benefits of technology 
 
to address national economic needs and national security requirements.  Federal policy should 
 
address requirements for national security, protection of intellectual property, and the availability 
 
and continuity of infrastructure, even when it is under attack by sophisticated adversaries.  The 
 
Federal government through partnerships with the private sector and academia needs to articulate 
 
coordinated national information and communications infrastructure objectives. The government, 
 
working with State and local partners, should identify procurement strategies that will incentivize 
 
the market to make more secure products and services available to the public.  Additional incentive 
 
mechanisms that the government should explore include adjustments to liability considerations 
 
(reduced liability in exchange for improved security or increased liability for the consequences of 
 
poor security), indemnification, tax incentives, and new regulatory requirements and compliance 
 
  
mechanisms.8,9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The White House must lead the way forward.  The Nation’s approach to cybersecurity over the past 
 
 
15 years has failed to keep pace with the threat. We need to demonstrate abroad and at home that 
the United States takes cybersecurity-related issues, policies, and activities seriously.  This requires 
  
White House leadership that draws upon the strength, advice, and ideas of the entire Nation. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review recommends the near-term actions listed in Table 1. 

8 Jim Harper, Government-Run Cyber Security? No, Thanks., Cato Institute, March 13, 2009. 

9 Internet Security Alliance, Issue Area 3: Norms of Behavior—Hathaway Questions, March 24, 2009, at 2, 4-7.
 

v 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Table 1:  Near-Term acTioN PlaN 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.  Appoint a cybersecurity policy official responsible for coordinating the Nation’s cybersecurity 

 
policies and activities; establish a strong NSC directorate, under the direction of the cybersecurity 
policy official dual-hatted to the NSC and the NEC, to coordinate interagency development of 
 
cybersecurity-related strategy and policy. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  Prepare for the President’s approval an updated national strategy to secure the information 

 
and communications infrastructure. This strategy should include continued evaluation of CNCI 
activities and, where appropriate, build on its successes. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.  Designate cybersecurity as one of the President’s key management priorities and establish 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
performance metrics. 

4.  Designate a privacy and civil liberties official to the NSC cybersecurity directorate. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct interagency-cleared legal analyses 
 
of priority cybersecurity-related issues identified during the policy-development process and 
formulate coherent unified policy guidance that clarifies roles, responsibilities, and the application 
of agency authorities for cybersecurity-related activities across the Federal government. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. 
 

Initiate a national public awareness and education campaign to promote cybersecurity. 

 

7.  Develop U.S. Government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework and 
 
 
strengthen our international partnerships to create initiatives that address the full range of 
 
activities, policies, and opportunities associated with cybersecurity. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.  Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan; initiate a dialog to enhance public-private 

 
partnerships with an eye toward streamlining, aligning, and providing resources to optimize their 
contribution and engagement 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In collaboration with other EOP entities, develop a framework for research and development 
 
strategies that focus on game-changing technologies that have the potential to enhance the 
security, reliability, resilience, and trustworthiness of digital infrastructure; provide the research 
 
community access to event data to facilitate developing tools, testing theories, and identifying 
 
workable solutions. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.  Build a cybersecurity-based identity management vision and strategy that addresses privacy and 

 
civil liberties interests, leveraging privacy-enhancing technologies for the Nation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

vi 

table of contents
 

Preface.................................................................................................................................... i
 

 

Executive Summary......................................................................................................... iii
 

 

Table of Contents ............................................................................................................vii
 

 

Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1
 

 

 I. 

Leading from the Top ............................................................................................... 7
 

 

 II. 

Building Capacity for a Digital Nation..............................................................13
 

 

III. 
 

Sharing Responsibility for Cybersecurity ........................................................17
 

 

IV. 
 

Creating Effective Information Sharing and Incident Response ............23
 

 

 V. 

Encouraging Innovation .......................................................................................31
 

 

 VI. 

Action Plans ...............................................................................................................37
 

 

Appendix A:  Bibliography ........................................................................................A–1
 

 

Appendix B:  Methodology....................................................................................... B–1
 

 

Appendix C:  Growth of Modern Communications Technology in the 

United States and Development of Supporting Legal and Regulatory 

Frameworks ....................................................................................................................C–1
 

 

vii 

introduction
 

What is cyberspace? 
National  Security  Presidential 
Directive  54/Homeland 
Security  Presidential 
Directive 23 (NSPD-54/HSPD­
23)  defines  cyberspace  as 
the  interdependent  network 
of  information  technology 
infrastructures,  and  includes 
the Internet, telecommuni-
cations  networks,  computer 
systems,  and  embedded 
processors  and  controllers  in 
critical  industries.   Common 
usage  of  the  term  also  refers 
to  the  virtual  environment  of 
information  and  interactions 
between  people.  

The globally-interconnected digital information and communi-
cations infrastructure known as “cyberspace”  underpins almost  
every facet of modern society and provides critical support for  
the  U.S.  economy,  civil  infrastructure,  public  safety,  and  national 
security.   Information  technology  has  transformed  the  global 
economy  and  connected  people  and  markets  in  ways  never 
imagined.  To realize the full  benefits of the digital revolution,  
users must have confidence that sensitive information is secure,  
commerce is not compromised, and the infrastructure is not  
infiltrated.   Nation-states  also  need  confidence  that  the  networks 
that support their national security and economic prosperity are  
safe and resilient.  Achieving a trusted communications and infor
mation infrastructure will ensure that the United States achieves  
the full potential of the information technology revolution.  The  
December  2008 report  by  the Commission  on  Cybersecurity  
for the 44th Presidency states the challenge plainly:  “America’s  
failure  to  protect  cyberspace  is  one  of  the  most  urgent  national 
security problems facing the new administration.”10 

Protecting cyberspace requires strong vision and leadership and will require changes in policies,  
technologies, education, and perhaps laws.  Demonstrating commitment to cybersecurity-related  
issues at the highest levels of government, industry, and civil society will allow the United States to  
continue to lead innovation and adoption of cutting-edge technology, while enhancing national  
security and the global economy. 

Case for Action 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Threats to cyberspace pose one of the most serious economic and national security challenges of 
the 21st Century for the United States and our allies.  A growing array of state and non-state actors 
 
such as terrorists and international criminal groups are targeting U.S. citizens, commerce, critical 
 
infrastructure, and government.  These actors have the ability to compromise, steal, change, or 
completely destroy information.11  The continued exploitation of information networks and the 
 
compromise of sensitive data, especially by nations, leave the United States vulnerable to the loss of 
economic competitiveness and the loss of the military’s technological advantages.  As the Director 
 
of National Intelligence (DNI) recently testified before Congress, “the growing connectivity between 
 
information systems, the Internet, and other infrastructures creates opportunities for attackers to 
 
disrupt telecommunications, electrical power, energy pipelines, refineries, financial networks, and 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December 2008, at 11. 
11 Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the Intelligence Community for the Senate Armed Services Committee, State­
ment for the Record, March 10, 2009, at 39. 

1
 

­
cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

other critical infrastructures.” The Intelligence Community assesses that a number of nations already 
 
have the technical capability to conduct such attacks.12 

  

 

 

 

The growing sophistication and breadth of criminal activity, along with the harm already caused 
by cyber incidents, highlight the potential for malicious activity in cyberspace to affect U.S. com­
petitiveness, degrade privacy and civil liberties protections, undermine national security, or cause 
 
a general erosion of trust, or even cripple society.  For example: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

• 	  Failure of critical infrastructures.   CIA reports malicious activities against information tech
nology systems have caused the disruption of electric power capabilities in multiple regions  
overseas, including a case that resulted in a multi-city power outage.13   

• 	  Exploiting global financial services.   In November 2008, the compromised payment pro
cessors of an international bank permitted fraudulent transactions at more than 130 auto
mated teller machines in 49 cities within a 30-minute period, according to press reports.14   
In another case reported by the media, a U.S. retailer in 2007 experienced data breaches  
and loss of personally identifiable information that compromised 45 million credit and  
debit cards.15 

• 	  Systemic loss of U.S. economic value.  Industry estimates of losses from intellectual property  

to data theft in 2008 range as high as $1 trillion.16 

Clean-Slate Review 

 

Recognizing the challenges and opportunities, the President identified cybersecurity as one of the 
 
top priorities of his administration and directed an early 60-day, comprehensive review to assess U.S. 
 
policies and structures for cybersecurity. The review addressed all missions and activities associated 
with the information and communications infrastructure, including computer network defense, law 
 
enforcement investigations, military and intelligence activities, and the intersection thereof with 
 
information assurance, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, telecommunications policies, and 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cybersecurity policy as used in this document includes strategy, policy, and standards regarding the 
 
security of and operations in cyberspace, and encompasses the full range of threat reduction, vulner­
ability reduction, deterrence, international engagement, incident response, resiliency, and recovery 
policies and activities, including computer network operations, information assurance, law enforce­
ment, diplomacy, military, and intelligence missions as they relate to the security and stability of the 
global information and communications infrastructure.  The scope does not include other information 
and communications policy unrelated to national security or securing the infrastructure. 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
12  Id., at 39-40.
 
13 www.sans.org/newsletters/newsbites/newsbites.php?vol=10&issue=5, CIA presentation, SANS SCADA Security Summit, January 16, 

2008.
 
14 www.bankinfosecurity.com/article.php?art_id=1197, February 5, 2009. 

15 www.infoworld.com/d/security-central/retailer-tjx/reports-massive-data-breach-952, January 17, 2007.
 
16 www.mcafee.com/us/about/press/corporate/2009/20090129_063500_j.html.  See also http://resources.mcafee.com/content/NAUn­
securedEconomiesReport, McAfee, “Unsecured Economies:  Protecting Vital Information”, January 2009.  Projection based on survey by 

Purdue’s Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and Security.
 

2
 

­
­
­
introduction 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

general critical infrastructure protection.  The review team of government cybersecurity experts 
 
inventoried relevant presidential policy directives, executive orders, national strategies, and stud­
ies from government advisory boards and private-sector entities.  The review team solicited input 
 
from departments and agencies on their specific cybersecurity-related activities, authorities, and 
capabilities across these requirements and requested departments and agencies to identify any 
 
new or existing requirements that may not have been identified as part of the initial inventory. 
  
 
Scores of legal issues emerged, such as considerations related to the aggregation of authorities, 
what authorities are available for the government to protect privately owned critical infrastructure, 
 
the placement of Internet monitoring software, the use of automated attack detection and warning 
 
sensors, data sharing with third parties within the Federal government, and liability protections for 
the private sector. 
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review team reached out to a wide array of stakeholders inside and outside the Federal govern­
ment.  The review team sought to be transparent by engaging a broad cross-section of industry, 
 
academia, the civil liberties and privacy communities, State governments, international partners, and 
 
the Legislative and Executive Branches to identify and assess other relevant programs and issues. 
  
Recognizing that there are opportunities for everyone—academia, industry, and government—to 
 
work together to build a trusted and resilient communications and information infrastructure, the 
 
review team engaged these stakeholders about the scope of the reviews and asked for input on 
pertinent areas of interest. The engagement process included more than 40 meetings and yielded 
more than 100 papers that provided specific recommendations and goals.  Stakeholders’responses 
 
and public statements (e.g., Congressional testimony) helped to identify key requirements, illumi­
nate policy gaps, suggest areas of improvement or collaboration, and frame the decision space for 
cybersecurity-related policies. 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review team found that throughout the evolution of the information and communications 
 
infrastructure, missions and authorities were vested with various departments and agencies by laws 
 
and policies enacted to govern aspects of what were then very diverse and discrete technologies 
 
and industries. The programs that evolved from those missions were focused on the particular issue 
 
or technology of the day and were not necessarily considered with the broad perspective needed 
to match today’s sweeping digital dependence. 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The impact of technology on national and economic security needs has led the Federal government 
 
to adapt by creating new laws and organizations.  For example: 

 

•	 
 

In a 1918 Joint Resolution, Congress authorized the President to assume control of any 
 
telegraph system in the United States and operate it as needed for the duration of World 
 
War I. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The Communications Act of 1934 formed the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
 
from the Federal Radio Commission and established a broad regulatory framework for all 
communications, by wire and radio, that has influenced the development of these tech­
nologies ever since. 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

•	  The Brooks Act of 1965 gave the National Bureau of Standards (NBS)—now the Department 
 
 
of Commerce’s National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)—responsibilities 
 
for developing automatic data processing standards and guidelines pertaining to federal 
computer systems. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	 
 

•	 
 

In 1984, Executive Order 12472 re-chartered the National Communication System (NCS) as 
 
those telecommunication assets owned or leased by the Federal government that can meet 
 
U.S. national security and emergency preparedness needs. The Department of Homeland 
 
Security inherited the NCS in 2003. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In 1994, through the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, the Department of State was 
 
delegated authority over foreign policy related to international communication and infor­
mation policy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Answering the question of“who is in charge”must address the distribution of statutory authorities 
and missions across departments and agencies. This is particularly the case as telecommunications 
 
and Internet-type networks converge and other infrastructure sectors adopt the Internet as a primary 
 
means of interconnectivity.  Unifying mission responsibilities that evolved over more than a century 
 
will require the Federal government to clarify policies for cybersecurity and the cybersecurity-related 
 
roles and responsibilities of various departments and agencies. The review team analyzed responses 
 
from more than 20 federal departments and agencies and identified cybersecurity-related policy 
 
gaps, overlaps in mission areas, and opportunities to improve collaboration. 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

As the threats have grown in sophistication, efforts to address the risks of cyberspace and harmonize 
 
department and agency efforts have evolved over time as well.  Presidential Decision Directive 63 
 
(PDD-63), signed in May 1998, established a structure under White House leadership to coordinate 
 
the activities of designated lead departments and agencies, in partnership with their counterparts 
 
from the private sector, to “eliminate any significant vulnerability to both physical and cyber attacks 
 
on our critical infrastructures, including especially our cyber systems.”17  This policy was updated in 
 
2003 with The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace.  It was further augmented later that year in 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 (HSPD-7), which assigned the Secretary of Homeland 
 
Security the responsibility for coordinating the nation’s overall critical infrastructure protection 
 
efforts, including for cyber infrastructure, across all sectors working in cooperation with designated 
 
sector-specific agencies within the Executive Branch.18  Both of these policies focused purely on 
 
defensive strategies, and HSPD-7 did not encompass protection of Federal government informa­
tion systems.  In 2007, the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) took a different 
 
approach.  Core to this strategy is the “bridging” of historically separate cyber defensive missions 
 
with law enforcement, intelligence, counterintelligence, and military capabilities to address the full 
 
spectrum of cyber threats from remote network intrusions and insider operations to supply chain 
vulnerabilities. The CNCI strategy was codified in NSPD-54/HSPD-23 and initiated programs focused 

 
 

 
 

  

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17  Presidential Decision Directive 63, Critical Infrastructure Protection, May 22, 1998, at section II.
 
18  Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization, and Protection (December 17, 2003).  

HSPD-7 also designated DHS as a the lead agency for the nation’s Information Technology and Communications sectors, to share threat 

information, help assess vulnerabilities, and encourage appropriate protective action and the development of contingency plans.
 

4
 

introduction 

 

 
primarily on the security of Executive Branch networks, which represent only a fraction of the global 
information and communications infrastructure on which the United States depends. 
  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This paper summarizes the review team’s findings and outlines initial areas of action to help the 
 
United States achieve a more reliable, resilient, and trustworthy digital infrastructure for the future. 
  
It does not provide an in-depth analysis of options or an extensive audit of programs.  Instead, it 
 
presents the need for greater coordination and integrated development of policy. The paper struc­
tures the specific findings and options for action under five key topics:  (1) leading from the top, (2) 
 
building capacity for a digital nation, (3) sharing responsibility for cybersecurity, (4) improving infor­
mation sharing and incident response, and (5) building the architecture of the future.  In addition, 
 
 
the paper is accompanied by appendices, including (A) a bibliography, (B) the study methodology, 
and (C) a brief history of modern communications technology. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5
 

i.  leading from the top
 
  

 

 
Ensuring that cyberspace is sufficiently resilient and trustworthy to support U.S. goals of economic 
growth, civil liberties and privacy protections, national security, and the continued advancement of 
democratic institutions requires making cybersecurity a national priority. Accomplishing this critical 
 
and complex task will only be possible with leadership at the highest levels of government. 
  

 
   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Anchor Leadership at the White House 

 

 

 

 

Anchoring and elevating leadership for cybersecurity-related policies at the White House signals 
 
to the United States and the international community that we are serious about cybersecurity. 
 
Many departments and agencies as well as components of the Executive Office of the President 
(EOP) will need to harmonize disparate responsibilities and authorities to contribute effectively to 
 
cybersecurity.  Currently, no single individual or entity has the responsibility to coordinate Federal 
 
government cybersecurity-related activities.  Independent efforts will not be sufficient to address 
 
this challenge without a central coordination mechanism, an updated national strategy, an action 
 
plan developed and coordinated across the Executive Branch, and the support of Congress. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Administration already has established an Information and Communications Infrastructure 
 
Interagency Policy Committee (ICI-IPC), chaired by the National Security Council (NSC) and Homeland 
Security Council (HSC),19 as the primary policy coordination body for issues related to achieving an 
 
assured, reliable, secure, and survivable global information and communications infrastructure and 
 
related capabilities. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The President should consider appointing a cybersecurity policy official at the White House, report­
ing to the NSC and dual-hatted with the NEC, to coordinate the Nation’s cybersecurity-related 
policies and activities. This individual would chair the ICI-IPC and lead a strong process in consulta­
tion with other elements of the EOP to resolve competing priorities and coordinate interagency 
 
development of policies and strategies for cybersecurity.20  The cybersecurity policy official should 
participate in all appropriate economic, counterterrorism, and science and technology policy dis­
cussions to inform them of cybersecurity perspectives.21,22 

    

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To be successful, the President’s cybersecurity policy official must have clear presidential support, 
 
authority, and sufficient resources to operate effectively in policy formulation and the coordination 
 
of interagency cybersecurity-related activities. The cybersecurity policy official should be supported 
by at least two Senior Directors and appropriate staff from the NSC and at least one Senior Director 
 
and appropriate staff from the NEC.  These directorates would report through the cybersecurity 
 
policy official and work together in pursuit of the goals set forth in this paper and established as 
 
national policy. In addition, to achieve additional scale and integration across the NSC, each NSC 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19 A separate 60-day study by the White House is examining the organizational structure of the two councils.  The rest of the paper will 

refer just to the NSC for simplicity.
 
20 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December 2008, at 36-7.
 
 
21 Written testimony of Scott Charney (Microsoft) to the House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, 

Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, March 10, 2009, at 2.
 
22 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December 2008, at 28.
 

7
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 
regional and functional directorate should designate an individual to be responsible for following 
cybersecurity-related issues in the directorate’s portfolio and coordinating with the directorate for 
cybersecurity. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The cybersecurity policy official should not have operational responsibility or authority, nor the 
 
authority to make policy unilaterally.  Using interagency coordination processes, the cybersecurity 
 
policy official should harmonize cybersecurity-related policy and technology efforts across the 
 
Federal government, ensure that the President’s budget reflects federal priorities for cyberse­
curity, and develop a legislative agenda, all in consultation with the Federal government’s Chief 
 
Technology Officer and Chief Information Officer—along with the appropriate entities within the 
 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and 
 
 
the NEC. 23 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This appointment also would make crisis management more effective by establishing the cyberse­
curity policy official as the White House action officer for cyber incident response (a similar role to 
 
the action officers who help the White House monitor terrorist attacks or natural disasters); depart­
ments and agencies would continue to perform their operational roles. 
  

 

To facilitate coordination, all federal departments and agencies should establish a point-of-contact 
 
in their respective executive suites authorized to interface with the White House on cybersecurity­
related issues. 
 

 

 

 

The cybersecurity policy official—through the interagency policy development process—should 
 
prepare for the President’s consideration an updated national strategy to secure the information 
 
and communications infrastructure.  The strategy should include continued evaluation of CNCI 
 
activities and build, where appropriate, on its successes.24  The national strategy should focus 
 
senior leadership attention and time toward resolving issues that hamper U.S. efforts to achieve an 
 
assured, reliable, secure, and resilient global information and communications infrastructure and 
 
related capabilities.25 The strategy would assist government efforts to raise public awareness, renew 
 
and build international alliances and public-private partnerships, establish a more comprehensive 
 
national cyber response and recovery plan, and promote an aggressive research and development 
 
agenda that has the potential to result in new technologies that will enhance cybersecurity. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should continue the principle of “mission bridging” started under the 
 
CNCI.  Departments and agencies should expand the sharing of expertise, knowledge, and per­
spectives about threats, tradecraft, technology, and vulnerabilities between network defenders 
 
and the intelligence, military, and law enforcement organizations that develop U.S. operational 
capabilities in cyberspace.  In addition, the cybersecurity policy official should help coordinate 
intelligence and military policies and strategies for cyberspace—including for countering terrorist 
use of the Internet—to ensure integration of all mission equities.The cybersecurity policy official 
should engage external advisory bodies.  Many advisory bodies touch on cybersecurity-related 
issues, including the National Security and Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC), the 
 

 
  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23 Intelligence and National Security Association, Critical Issues for Cyber Assurance Policy Reform, at 3.
 
24 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December 2008, at 59.
 
25 Cross-Sector Cyber Security Working Group (CSCSWG) Response to 60-day Cyber Review Questions, March 16, 2009, at 11.
 

8
 

   
i.  lEading  from  thE  toP 

 

 

 

National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC), the Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory 
 
Council (CIPAC), and the Information Security and Privacy Advisory Board (ISPAB). The cybersecurity 
 
policy official should review the responsibilities of these bodies and propose changes as necessary 
 
to optimize advice and eliminate unnecessary duplication. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Other structures will be needed to help ensure that civil liberties and privacy rights are protected. 
  
Such structures would signal transparency and build trust between the civil liberties and privacy 
 
community, the public, and the program for cybersecurity, especially if implemented from the 
 
outset.26  It is important to reconstitute the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB), 
 
accelerate the selection process for its board members, and consider whether to seek legislative 
 
  
amendments to broaden its scope to include cybersecurity-related issues.27  Other options include: 
 
facilitating regular engagement of government civil liberties and privacy advisors on policy matters 
 
for cybersecurity or designating a dedicated privacy and civil liberties officer within the NSC (or, 
 
more broadly, the EOP) to engage with the private-sector civil liberties and privacy community, an 
oversight board, and government civil liberties and privacy officers.28, 29 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

Equally important to developing cybersecurity policy, is assuring the effective execution and imple­
mentation of that policy to meet the goals of the larger strategy.  Accordingly, the cybersecurity 
 
policy official, in consultation with OMB and other EOP entities, will need to ensure effective imple­
mentation of cybersecurity-related policy and activities.  During the course of the 60-day review, 
 
stakeholders suggested a variety of options to coordinate and oversee cybersecurity activities. 
   
Several commentators identified strong executive leadership as well as focused, multi-year atten­
tion across the participating departments and agencies as critical elements to ensure that the U.S. 
 
Government has the mechanisms needed for an effective cybersecurity program.  Currently, some 
 
of these oversight functions for existing cybersecurity efforts are being performed outside of the 
 
EOP.  For example, the Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force (JIACTF), under the Director of National 
Intelligence, currently is responsible for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the 
 
CNCI.  The cybersecurity policy official, in consultation with OMB and other EOP entities, should 
 
develop structural options to perform appropriate oversight, implementation, and other functions. 
  
These could include among others, developing a JIACTF-like function30 in OMB or elsewhere in the 
 
EOP, creating an entity similar to President Eisenhower’s Operations Coordinating Board,31 or estab­
lishing some other entity that, among other things, assists in assessing department and agency 
 
performance and oversees federal compliance with cybersecurity standards. Unless and until such 
an office is established, the work of the JIACTF should continue.32 

   

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

26 Electronic Frontier Foundation, Submission to White House Cyber Revew, at 1.
 
27 Center for National Security Studies, Letter to National Security Council, April 8, 2009, at 2.
 
 
28 TechAmerica, Response to 60-Day Cyber Security Review, at 6.
 
29 Ari Schwartz and Gregory Nojeim (Center for Democracy and Technology), letter to National Security Council, March 20, 2009, at 4-5.
 
30 JIACTF activities include reviewing target achievements, recent accomplishments, planned activities and schedules, risks and mitiga­
tion strategies, budget, staffing, performance measures, and critical issues as presented in department and agency quarterly report 

submissions.
 
 
31 The board was established by Executive Order 10483 to provide for the integrated implementation for national security policies by 

several agencies.  Some of its main functions included:  assuring coordination and implementation of National Security policies, devel­
oping agreed upon plans of operations, and reporting to the NSC on actions taken.  See Alfred Dick Sander, Eisenhower’s Executive Office, 

Greenwood Press, Westport, 1999, at 128.  See also Executive Order 10483, Establishing the Operations Coordinating Board, September 2, 

1953.
 
32 Congressional Research Service, Report for Congress, The Executive Office of the President: An Historical Overview, November 26, 2008, at 

21. 

9
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Review Laws and Policies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The President’s cybersecurity policy official should work with departments and agencies to recom­
mend coherent unified policy guidance where necessary in order to clarify authorities, roles, and 
responsibilities for cybersecurity-related activities across the Federal government.  Law applicable 
 
to information and communications networks is a complex patchwork of Constitutional, domestic, 
 
foreign, and international laws that shapes viable policy options. In the United States, this patchwork 
 
exists because, throughout the evolution of the information and communications infrastructure, 
the Federal government enacted laws and policies to govern aspects of what were very diverse 
 
industries and technologies. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As traditional telecommunications and Internet-type networks continue to converge and other 
 
infrastructure sectors adopt the Internet as a primary means of interconnectivity, law and policy 
 
should continue to seek an integrated approach that combines the benefits of flexibility and diver­
sity of applications and services with the protection of civil liberties, privacy rights, public safety, 
 
and national and economic security interests.  A paucity of judicial opinions in several areas poses 
 
both opportunities and risks that policy makers should appreciate—courts can intervene to shape 
 
the application of law, particularly in areas involving Constitutional rights.  Policy decisions will 
necessarily be shaped and bounded by the legal framework in which they are made, and policy 
 
consideration may help identify gaps and challenges in current laws and inform necessary develop­
ments in the law. That process may prompt proposals for a new legislative framework to rationalize 
 
the patchwork of overlapping laws that apply to information, telecommunications, networks, and 
technologies, or the application of new interpretations of existing laws in ways to meet technological 
evolution and policy goals, consistent with U.S. Constitutional principles.  However, pursuing either 
 
course risks outcomes that may make certain activities conducted by the Federal government to 
 
protect information and communications infrastructure more difficult. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Administration should partner appropriately with Congress to ensure adequate law, poli­
cies, and resources are available to support the U.S. cybersecurity-related missions.  Congress has 
demonstrated interest and bipartisan leadership regarding the cybersecurity-related needs of the 
 
Nation, and the Administration would benefit from Congressional knowledge and experience. The 
 
cybersecurity policy official, working with departments and agencies, should consult with industry 
 
to understand the impact of laws and policies on business operations. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Strengthen Federal Leadership and Accountability for Cybersecurity 

Effective leadership anchored at the White House alone will not be sufficient to achieve the broad 
 
range of objectives necessary to lead the United States in the digital age.  Leadership and account­
ability must extend throughout the Federal government.  Including cybersecurity among the 
 
President’s management priorities and assessing the progress of departments and agencies against 
 
stated goals would provide additional means to ensure accountability and progress.  The cyberse­
curity policy official—in consultation with NSC, OMB, NEC, and OSTP—would define the milestones 
 
and success criteria and raise the visibility of cybersecurity within all agency budgets. 
  

 

 

 

10
 

   
i.  lEading  from  thE  toP 

 

 

 

To bring transparency and effective management to the overall portfolio for cybersecurity, OMB 
 
should use its program assessment framework to ensure departments and agencies use perfor­
mance-based budgeting in pursuing cybersecurity-related goals.  A formal program assessment 
 
 
framework for cybersecurity would have departments and agencies define each program’s purpose 
and goal as well as identify metrics to evaluate whether goals are achieved.33  The CNCI has used a 
 
variation on this approach successfully. 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Department and agency leaders must be held accountable, as required by the Federal Information 
 
Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002. The Administration should work with Congress to update 
 
and strengthen this legislation. Performance plans of the department and agency leadership should 
 
include reporting on progress made to secure systems by each department and agency. The Federal 
 
government should develop options to hold department and agency leadership accountable for 
compliance with cybersecurity policies and to enforce implementation of appropriate cybersecurity 
 
procedures. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elevate State, Local, and Tribal Leadership 

State, local, and tribal governments should consider the need to elevate cybersecurity as an issue 
 
by designating a single leader to ensure effective coordination between Chief Information Officers 
 
(CIOs), Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs), and State Homeland Security Advisors (HSAs). The 
 
review team heard from representatives of the National Governors Association that cybersecurity 
 
  
is the weakest link in their efforts to protect critical infrastructure assets in their individual states.34,35 
HSAs can spend funds under a number of Department of Homeland Security (DHS) grant programs 
 
for cybersecurity efforts, but historically grant funds to a large extent have not been prioritized for 
 
cybersecurity.  State, local, and tribal governments should consider whether to elevate cybersecurity 
 
as an issue and should ensure that CIOs, CISOs, and HSAs coordinate to achieve a robust defensive 
 
posture. 

  

 

 

 

 
33  See Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection, National Cyber Security Research and Development Challenges Related to Econom­
ics, Physical Infrastructure, and Human Behavior: An Industry, Academic, and Government Perspective, 2009, at 5, 29.
 
34 Meeting with representatives of Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center, March 6, 2009.
 
35 Meeting with representatives of National Governors Association, March 25, 2009.
 

11
 

ii.  building capacity for a digital nation
 

  

 

 

 

 
The Nation is at a crossroads.  Computers have transformed nearly every aspect of daily life, both 
at home and in the workplace.  Online banking, shopping, and tax-filing are commonplace.  The 
 
Nation’s infrastructure is undergoing a revolution as digital and network technologies are being 
 
 
integrated across large systems with programs such as Smart Grid and the Next Generation Air Traffic 
System.  Components of the recently enacted American Recovery and Reinvestment Act encourage 
 
the deployment of modern information and communications infrastructure to improve America’s 
 
 
competitiveness and use technology to solve some of the Nation’s most pressing problems. The 
United States faces the dual challenge of maintaining an environment that promotes innovation, 
 
open interconnectivity, economic prosperity, free trade, and freedom while also ensuring public 
 
safety, security, civil liberties, and privacy. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The general public needs to be well informed to use the technology safely.  In addition, the United 
 
States needs a technologically advanced workforce to remain competitive in the 21st Century 
 
economy.  In schools, math and science must be a priority. The United States should initiate a K-12 
 
cybersecurity education program for digital safety, ethics, and security; expand university curricula; 
 
and set the conditions to create a competent workforce for the digital age.  As the President has 
noted, “America faces few more urgent challenges than preparing our children to compete in a 
 
global economy.”36  To help achieve these goals, the Nation should: 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Promote cybersecurity risk awareness for all citizens; 
 

  
37,38

•	  Build an education system that will enhance understanding of cybersecurity and allow the 
 
 
United States to retain and expand upon its scientific, engineering, and market leadership 
 
in information technology; 

•	  Expand and train the workforce to protect the Nation’s competitive advantage; and 
 

•	  Help organizations and individuals make smart choices as they manage risk. 
 
 

Increase Public Awareness 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
  

Broad public awareness of the risks of online activities and how to manage them will require an 
effective communications strategy.  The Federal government, in partnership with educators and 
 
industry, should conduct a national cybersecurity public awareness and education.39  The President’s 
 
cybersecurity policy official should lead the development and direct the implementation of this 
public awareness strategy and should seek endorsement by Congress; State, local, and tribal gov­
ernments; the private sector; and the civil liberties and privacy communities.  The strategy should 

 
 
  

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

36 www.whitehouse.gov/agenda/education, “Education,” April 2, 2009, at 1.
 
37 Cross-Sector Cyber Security Working Group (CSCSWG) Response to 60-day Cyber Review Questions, March 16, 2009, at 4.
 
38 Business Executives for National Security, Cyber Strategic Inquiry 2008, December 2008, at 8.
 
39 A 2008 study conducted by the organization Educational Technology Policy, Research, and Outreach, College of Education, University 

of Maryland concluded that education on cyber-ethics, cyber-safety, and cybersecurity is inadequate.  Davina Pruitt-Mentle, Ph.D., 2008 

National Cyberethics, Cybersafety, Cybersecurity Baseline Study, October 2008, Section 4, at 45, http://staysafeonline.mediaroom.com/
 
index.php?s=67&item=44.
 

13
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

involve public education about the threat and how to enhance digital safety, ethics, and security. 
  
Malicious actors often take advantage of people’s willingness to accept information from or pro­
vide personal information over the Internet.  This campaign should focus on public messages to 
 
 
promote responsible use of the Internet and awareness of fraud, identity theft, cyber predators, 
and cyber ethics.  Past successful public safety campaigns such as Smokey Bear on fire safety and 
the Click It or Ticket campaign for seat belt safety could be used as a model to inform and persuade 
 
 
the public about the importance of cybersecurity. These public service campaigns should focus on 
making cybersecurity popular for children and for older students choosing careers.  Celebrities, the 
 
generation that has grown up with the technology, and new types of media can play critical roles 
 
in delivering the message effectively. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Increase Cybersecurity Education 

 

 

Similar to the period after the launch of the Sputnik satellite in October, 1957, the United States is in 
 
a global race that depends on mathematics and science skills.  According to a report published by 
 
The Economist, talented information technology (IT) employees “are already in short supply every­
where, but the situation will get tougher, as the nature of skills needed is changing.  In addition to 
 
technical knowledge, tomorrow’s IT employee will require expertise in project management, change 
 
management and business analysis.” The study notes that the United States continues to boast the 
 
most positive environment for IT firms in the world, combining scale and quality in the key areas 
 
that promote competitiveness:  education, infrastructure, encouragement of innovation, and legal 
 
protection.40  The 2007-2008 Taulbee Survey on Computing Degree and Enrollment Trends, however, 
 
showed a continued decline in U.S. computer science and engineering bachelor’s degree production 
 
to about half of its 2004 peak.41  The Nation cannot afford to see this decline continue.42 

  

  

  

 

 

 
The Federal government, with the participation of all departments and agencies, should expand 
support for key education programs and research and development to ensure the Nation’s contin­
 
ued ability to compete in the information age economy.  Existing programs should be evaluated 
and possibly expanded, and other activities could serve as models for additional programs.  For 
example: 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

• 	  The National Science Foundation (NSF) in 2006 began to solicit grant proposals under its  
“Pathways to Revitalized Undergraduate Computing Education.”   This program seeks to  
develop a “U.S. workforce with the computing competencies and skills imperative to the  
Nation’s health, security and prosperity in the 21st Century.”43 

• 	  Scholarships have provided direct incentives for students to pursue not only cybersecurity  
education, but also careers in the Federal government.  NSF and DHS sponsor the Scholarship  
for Service program in 34 institutions.44   More than a thousand students received support  

 
40 The Economist Intelligence Unit, The means to compete, Benchmarking IT industry competitiveness, July 2007, at 3.
 
41 Stuart Zweben, Computing Degree and Enrollment Trends, from the 2007-2008 CRA Taulbee Survey, 2008, at 4, www.cra.org/taulbee/
 
CRATaulbeeReport-StudentEnrollment-07-08.pdf.
 
 
42  See also Committee on Prospering in the Global Economy of the 21st Century, Rising Above the Gathering Storm:  Energizing and Employ­
ing America for a Brighter Economic Future, National Academies Press, 2007.
 
43 www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=109691. 

44 www.sfs.opm.gov, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Federal Cyber Service:  Scholarship for Service. 


14
 

ii.  building  caPacity  for  a  digital  nation 

   

 

 

 

 

 

during the first eight years of the program, with more than 80 percent receiving jobs in the  
Federal government.  The NSF stresses that the proven synergy between research and educa
tion cannot be over-emphasized in light of the pressing need to expand the workforce.45 

• 	  The  National  Centers  of  Academic  Excellence  in  Information  Assurance  Education  and 
Research, founded in 1988 by the National Security Agency and co-sponsored by DHS since  
2004,  promotes  higher  education  in  information  assurance  in  94  institutions  in  38  States 
and the District of Columbia.46   These  centers  have  built  partnerships  beyond  the  most 
well-known institutions to include community, Hispanic, and historically Black colleges.   
The Defense Department also sponsors the Information Assurance Scholarship Program  
in those institutions. 

• 	  The National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition, the Mathematical Association of  
America’s Math Olympiad, the Department of Energy’s Science Bowl, and the Siemens  
Foundation’s Math, Science, and Technology Competition offer competition-oriented mod
els.  A group of academics organized by NSF cited DARPA’s grand challenges, the Malcolm  
 
Baldrige National Quality Award, and the competition to create the Advanced Encryption 
Standard as other models.47 

Expand Federal Information Technology Workforce 

 

 
The President’s cybersecurity policy official, in coordination with the ICI-IPC, should consider how 
 
to better attract cybersecurity expertise and to increase retention of employees with such expertise 
 
within the federal service.  Departments and agencies have had success attracting new employees 
 
from industry, but the time required to obtain, transfer, or renew security clearances leads to lost 
 
opportunities.  Federal employees need to be able to build portfolios and advance careers in ways 
 
they might not be able to do within a single agency.  Shared training and rotational assignments 
across agencies and potentially with the private sector would not only be efficient, but would pro­
  
mote beneficial cross-fertilization and the building of professional networks. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Promote Cybersecurity as an Enterprise Leadership Responsibility 

The Federal government should continue to facilitate programs and information sharing on threats, 
 
vulnerabilities, and effective practices across all levels of government and industry.  It is not enough 
 
for the information technology workforce to understand the importance of cybersecurity; leaders 
 
at all levels of government and industry need to be able to make business and investment deci­
sions based on knowledge of risks and potential impacts.  State, local, and tribal governments face 
 
similar issues.  State governments often serve as incubators for innovation and thus may be able to 
 
provide lessons learned in managing information and communications infrastructure. The Federal 
government should continue to work with industry to identify and disseminate effective practices 
in secure design and operation of information technology products. 
  

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

45 NSF, “Responses to Questions Posed by Ms. Melissa Hathaway during her Presentation at the National Science Foundation on March 18, 

2009,” March 31, 2009, at 1.
 
46 www.nsa.gov/ia/academic_outreach/nat_cae/institutions.shtml. 

 
47  See NSF, supra note 45.
 

15
 

­
­
iii.  Sharing responsibility for 


cybersecurity
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government cannot succeed in the many facets of securing cyberspace if it works in 
 
isolation.  The public and private sectors’ interests are intertwined with a shared responsibility for 
ensuring a secure, reliable infrastructure upon which businesses and government services depend. 
  
Government and industry leaders—both nationally and internationally—need to delineate roles and 
 
responsibilities, integrate capabilities, and take ownership of the problem to develop holistic solu­
tions.  Only through such partnerships will the United States be able to enhance cybersecurity and 
 
reap the full benefits of the digital revolution. The global challenge of securing cyberspace requires 
 
an increased effort in multilateral forums. This effort should seek—in continued collaboration with 
 
the private sector—to improve the security of interoperable networks through the development of 
global standards, expand the legal system’s capacity to combat cyber crime, continue to develop 
 
and promote best practices, and maintain stable and effective Internet governance. 
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Improve Partnership Between Private Sector and Government 

 
The Federal government has the responsibility to protect and defend the country, and all levels of 
government have the responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of their citizens.  The pri­
 
vate sector, however, designs, builds, owns, and operates most of the network infrastructures that 
 
support government and private users alike.  Industry and governments share the responsibility 
 
for the security and reliability of the infrastructure and the transactions that take place on it and 
 
should work closely together to address these interdependencies. There are various approaches the 
Federal government could take to address these challenges, some of which may require changes 
in law and policy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Private-sector engagement is required to help address the limitations of law enforcement and 
 
national security.  Current law permits the use of some tools to protect government but not private 
networks, and vice versa.  Industry leaders can help by engaging in enterprise information shar­
 
ing and account for the corporate risk and the bottom line impacts of data breaches, corporate 
 
espionage, and loss or degradation of services.  Industry leaders can demand higher assurance 
 
from vendors and service providers while taking responsibility to create more secure software 
and equipment.  Businesses need effective means to share detection methods, information about 
 
breaches and attack methods, remediation techniques, and forensic capabilities with each other 
and the Federal government. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
If the risks and consequences can be assigned monetary value, organizations will have greater ability 
 
and incentive to address cybersecurity. In particular, the private sector often seeks a business case to 
 
justify the resource expenditures needed for integrating information and communications system 
  
security into corporate risk management and for engaging partnerships to mitigate collective risk. 
 
Government can assist by considering incentive-based legislative or regulatory tools to enhance 

 

17
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

the value proposition and fostering an environment that facilitates and encourages partnership 
 
and information sharing.48, 49, 50 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The President’s cybersecurity policy official should work with relevant departments and agencies 
and the private sector to examine existing public-private partnership and information sharing 
mechanisms to identify or build upon the most effective models.  Public-private partnerships have 
 
fostered information sharing and served as a foundation for U.S. critical infrastructure protection and 
cybersecurity policy for over a decade.  During that time, the Federal government and the private 
 
sector have engaged in a number of forums on cybersecurity and information and communications 
 
  
infrastructure issues.51 

   

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

These groups perform valuable work, but the diffusion of effort has left some participants frustrated 
with unclear delineation of roles and responsibilities, uneven capabilities across various groups, and 
a proliferation of plans and recommendations.  As a result, government and private-sector person­
nel, time, and resources are spread across a host of bodies engaged in sometimes duplicative or 
inconsistent efforts.  Partnerships must evolve to clearly define the nature of the relationship, the 
 
roles and responsibilities of various groups and their participants, the expectations of each party’s 
contribution, and accountability mechanisms. The Federal government should streamline, align, and 
 
provide resources to existing organizations to optimize their capacity to identify priorities, enable 
 
more efficient execution, and develop response and recovery plans. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The 60-day review considered a number of models of effective public-private partnerships.52  While 
 
these models perform very different functions, they share important attributes.  Each has a clearly 
 
defined institutional mission, well-defined roles and responsibilities for participants, and a clear 
value proposition that creates incentives for members to participate.  Each model also mitigates 
 
concerns that would otherwise discourage participation by establishing and maintaining an envi­
ronment of trust among the members.  Existing cybersecurity partnership bodies might apply the 
 
most effective characteristics of these models. 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Evaluate Potential Barriers Impeding Evolution of Public-Private 
 
Partnership 

 

 

 

 

 

Some members of the private sector continue to express concern that certain federal laws might 
 
impede full collaborative partnerships and operational information sharing between the private 
 
sector and government.  For example, some in industry are concerned that the information sharing 
 
 
and collective planning that occurs among members of the same sector under existing partnership 

 

 
48 Written testimony of Scott Charney (Microsoft) to the House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, 
Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, March 10, 2009, at 4-5. 
49 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December 2008, at 49ff. 
50 Internet Security Alliance, Issue Area 3: Norms of Behavior—Hathaway Questions, March 24, 2009, at 2, 4-7 
 
51 These include organizations such as the Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council (CIPAC) and its constituent bodies such as 
the Enduring Security Framework, the Sector Coordinating Councils (SCCs) and Government Coordinating Councils (GCCs); the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation’s InfraGard; the U.S. Secret Service’s Electronic Crimes Task Forces; the National Security Telecommunications 
Advisory Committee (NSTAC); the National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC); the Homeland Security Advisory Council; and the 
associated subcommittees and working groups. 
 
52 These include the National Cyber-Forensics & Training Alliance, the Cross-Sector Cybersecurity Working Group (CSCSWG), and a con­
sultancy model from the United Kingdom. 

18
 

iii.  Sharing  rESPonSibility  for  cybErSEcurity 

   

 

 

 

 

  

 
models might be viewed as “collusive”or contrary to laws forbidding restraints on trade.53  Industry 
has also expressed reservations about disclosing to the Federal government sensitive or proprietary 
 
business information, such as vulnerabilities and data or network breaches.  This concern has per­
sisted notwithstanding the protections afforded by statutes such as the Trade Secrets Act and the 
 
Critical Infrastructure Information Act, which was enacted specifically to address industry concerns 
 
with respect to the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).  Beyond these issues, industry may still have 
 
  
concerns about reputational harm, liability, or regulatory consequences of sharing information. 
Conversely, the Federal government sometimes limits the information it will share with the private 
 
sector because of the legitimate need to protect sensitive intelligence sources and methods or the 
 
privacy rights of individuals. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

These concerns do not exist in isolation.  Antitrust laws provide important safeguards against unfair 
 
competition, and FOIA helps ensure transparency in government that is essential to maintain public 
 
confidence. The civil liberties and privacy community has expressed concern that extending protec­
tions would only serve as a legal shield against liability.  In addition, the challenges of information 
 
sharing can be further complicated by the global nature of the information and communications 
 
marketplace.  When members of industry operating in the United States are foreign-owned, man­
datory information sharing, or exclusion of such companies from information sharing regimes, can 
 
present trade implications. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

As part of the partnership, government should work creatively and collaboratively with the private 
 
sector to identify tailored solutions that take into account both the need to exchange information 
 
and protect public and private interests and take an integrated approach to national and economic 
 
security.  These solutions should identify clear, actionable objectives for the sharing of data and 
define standards for incident reporting.  The private sector would be more comfortable with shar­
ing solutions that do not require data ownership changing hands, such as occurs with the British 
 
model of using vetted information security providers as a nexus for combining data rather than 
the government. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Finally, the Federal government should engage academia, civil liberties and privacy groups, advo­
cates of open government, and consumers to ensure that government policy adequately considers 
 
the broad set of interests that they represent.  Few problems can be reduced to a discrete question 
of process, policy, or technology. Changes in technology often precipitate policy considerations and 
may require changes in existing processes.  Changes in policy (for example, adoption of regulation 
 
or tax incentives) can affect decisions regarding procurement or technological research and devel­
opment. The Federal government could also consider ways in which it could focus more resources 
on research into possible “game-changing” areas, such as behavioral, policy, and incentive-based 
 
cybersecurity solutions. The interwoven nature of these issues underscores the need to ensure that 
all stakeholders’interests are represented. 
  

 
 

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

53 For example, the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1-7 (2004). 

19
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Partner Effectively With the International Community 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

International norms are critical to establishing a secure and thriving digital infrastructure.  The 
 
United States needs to develop a strategy designed to shape the international environment and 
bring like-minded nations together on a host of issues, including acceptable norms regarding ter­
ritorial jurisdiction, sovereign responsibility, and use of force.  In addition, differing national and 
 
regional laws and practices—such as those laws concerning the investigation and prosecution of 
 
cybercrime;54 data preservation, protection and privacy; and approaches for network defense and 
response to cyber attacks—present serious challenges to achieving a safe, secure, and resilient 
digital environment.  Addressing these issues requires the United States to work with all countries— 
 
including those in the developing world who face these issues as they build their digital economies 
and infrastructures—plus international bodies, military allies, and intelligence partners. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the past decade, federal communications, infrastructure, and cybersecurity-related policies devel­
oped along multiple paths.  A more integrated approach to policy formulation would ensure mutu­
 
ally reinforcing objectives and allow the United States to leverage its international opportunities 
 
with consistent, more effective positions.  The United States should adopt an integrated approach 
to national interests across a range of substantive areas—including cybersecurity and the protec­
tion of free speech and other civil liberties—to develop consistent policies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
The President’s cybersecurity policy official should, working with departments and agencies, 
strengthen and integrate interagency processes to formulate and coordinate international cyber­
security-related positions.  In addition, the Federal government—continuing the long-term his­
tory of collaboration with the private sector—should develop a proactive engagement plan for 
 
use with international standards bodies.  This would include taking stock of current policies and 
coordinating the development, refinement, or reaffirmation of positions to ensure that the full 
 
range of cybersecurity-related economic, national security, public safety, and privacy interests 
 
are taken into account.55  More than a dozen international organizations—including the United 
 
Nations, the Group of Eight, NATO, the Council of Europe, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
 
forum, the Organization of American States, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, the InternationalTelecommunication Union (ITU), and the International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO)—address issues concerning the information and communications infra­
 
structure.56  New organizations are beginning to consider cybersecurity-related policies and activities, 
 
while others are expanding the scope of their existing work.  These venues consider policies and 
 
conduct activities that sometimes conflict and often overlap.  Agreements, standards, or practices 
 
promulgated in these organizations have global effects and cannot be ignored. The sheer number, 
variety, and differing focuses of these venues strain the capacity of many governments, including 
 
the United States, to engage adequately. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

54 For example, the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime is an important international effort to achieve consistency in cyber-

crime laws and law enforcement efforts.  Although the United States and many developed countries are parties to this agreement, most 

countries are not signatories or have not ratified the treaty.  

55 CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency, December, 2008, at 11-13.
 
 
56  Id.
 

20
 

iii.  Sharing  rESPonSibility  for  cybErSEcurity 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

 
The President’s cybersecurity policy official should work with departments and agencies to enhance 
the identification, tracking, and prioritization of international venues, negotiations, and discussions 
where cybersecurity-related agreements, standards, activities, and policies are being developed. 
  
Past experience indicates the United States will need to remain engaged in a range of international 
activities. The Federal government should then increase its work with the private sector and other 
countries to ensure full engagement in appropriate forums with respect to the issues that are most 
 
  
important to U.S. interests in the future of the global information and communications infrastructure. 
The United States and its international allies should leverage each other’s participation in regional 
 
or other forums to drive common policy objectives, focus the work of existing international orga­
nizations, and limit duplication of effort among them.  For example, standards for cybersecurity 
 
forensics are being developed in both the ITU and the ISO.  The United States also should identify 
 
opportunities to promote the security and growth of the information and communications infra­
structure in projects undertaken in forums devoted to broader topics. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Working with the private sector, the Federal government should coordinate and expand international 
 
partnerships to address the full range of cybersecurity-related activities, policies, and opportunities 
 
associated with the information and communications infrastructure upon which U.S. businesses, 
 
government services, the U.S. military, and nations depend.  New agreements between govern­
ments and industry may need to be documented to enable international information sharing as 
 
well as strategic and operational collaboration. The Federal government should increase resources 
 
and attention dedicated to conducting outreach and building foreign capacity.  For example, the 
 
United States should accelerate efforts to help other countries build legal frameworks and capac­
ity to fight cybercrime and continue efforts to promote cybersecurity practices and standards. The 
 
United States also should work with allies to ensure the stability and global interoperability of the 
 
Internet, while increasing security and reliability for all users.57 

 

 

 

 

57 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Letter to National Security Council, March 27, 2009, at 3. 

21
 

iv.  creating Effective information Sharing 


  

and incident response
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The United States needs a comprehensive framework to facilitate coordinated responses by gov­
ernment, the private sector, and allies to a significant cyber incident. Federal, State, local, and tribal 
governments should work with industry to improve the plans and resources they have in place 
 
in advance to detect, prevent, and respond to significant cybersecurity incidents.  Because such 
 
incidents are likely to affect interconnected networks across government and industry sectors, 
coordination of such plans and activities is important before, during, and after significant incidents. 
  
For example, despite advance warning and instructions on how networks could be protected, had 
 
the “Conficker”worm activated on April 1, 2009 with a malicious payload, some federal departments 
 
and agencies were not prepared to respond. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Build a Framework for Incident Response 

 

 

 

 

 

During a significant cyber incident, as with other major national incidents, only the White House 
 
has the authority to coordinate the wide array of capabilities and authorities involved in incident 
 
 
response.  Departments and agencies conduct their relevant mission responsibilities in line with 
 
overall White House strategic direction.  The President’s cybersecurity policy official should be the 
White House action officer for cyber incident response (a similar role to the action officers who help 
 
the White House monitor terrorist attacks or natural disasters). 
  

 

 

 

  

The Federal government should have a clear and authoritative cyber incident response frame­
work that needs to be documented in a revised Cyber Incident Annex for the National Response 
 
Framework.  To date, federal responses to cyber incidents have not been unified.  For situations 
involving National Security/Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) communications, Executive Order 
12472 delineates established authorities and processes; however, under current law and policy, 
 
each department and agency is responsible for deciding on and implementing measures to isolate, 
 
secure, and restore its own cyber networks and data. 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Responsibility for a federal cyber incident response is dispersed across many federal departments 
and agencies because of the existing legal, but artificial, distinctions between national security and 
 
other federal networks.  Depending on the character of an incident—for example, a major vulner­
ability, a criminal attack, or a military incident—different departments or agencies may have or 
share the lead role for response, while others may never learn of the event.  Moreover, the lead for 
the overall incident may not be clear. Although each player has defined areas of expertise and legal 
authorities, they are difficult to pull together into a single coordinated structure.  Any consolidation 
 
of authorities in a unified structure may require legislation. The ICI-IPC process should define roles, 
 
responsibilities, and resources for different departments and agencies with respect to incident 
response—harmonized or enhanced as necessary—recognizing the different aspects of incident 
 
response and the different strengths various communities—network security, law enforcement, 
 
intelligence, and military—bring to the table. 
 

 
  

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

 
 

 
 

 
 

Numerous  commentators  have  stressed  the 
importance of developing thresholds for incident 
reporting and response.  Network operators and 
service providers deal daily with large numbers of 
incidents that do not rise beyond the “nuisance” 
 
level.  Hidden among these low-level incidents 
are a relatively few sophisticated, potentially high-
impact intrusions or attacks that are difficult to 
 
detect. Knowledge of the technical details of such 
incidents would be of great interest to operators 
of other government and private-sector networks 
to help them defend their own networks against 
 
similar threats, as well as to law enforcement and 
 
intelligence entities tracking and seeking to stop 
 
criminal and foreign cybersecurity-related threat 
activities. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Network operators and Service Providers 
The Internet is operated by a combination of 
 
businesses that manage operations and pro­
vide services for their customers.  Network 
operators build and maintain information 
and communications infrastructure in order 
to provide connectivity and bandwidth for 
customers.  Service providers may provide 
an access gateway to the Internet, security 
services, storage or processing services, or 
access to information (for example, Internet 
addresses or news) and applications (for 
 
example, search engines).  Individual 
companies may provide a unique mixture 
 
 
of access, information, and services (for 
example, social networks). 

 
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government—in collaboration with State, local, and tribal governments and industry— 
should develop a set of threat scenarios and metrics that all can use for risk management decisions, 
 
recovery planning, and prioritization of R&D.  Modeling and simulation capabilities should be devel­
oped to help exercise these plans and determine potential levels of damage. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The ICI-IPC should develop clear, enforceable rules for timely reporting of incidents by departments 
 
and agencies to enable an effective and efficient interagency response. Departments and agencies 
are uneven in their incident reporting outside their own boundaries.  The overall federal response 
 
would benefit from immediate reporting of significant events across a wider range of departments 
and agencies having incident response roles. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The President’s cybersecurity policy official, working with the ICI-IPC, should determine the most 
 
efficient and effective method of developing and maintaining situational awareness and incident 
 
response capabilities. The CNCI effort should continue to improve federal network defenses but con­
sider the need for adjustments or additions to implementation plans.  In particular, the President’s 
 
cybersecurity policy official should: 

 

 

•	  Work with the private sector to explore how best to apply technical capabilities to the 
 
 
defense of the national infrastructure and what legal framework would be required to 
 
ensure the protection of privacy rights and civil liberties. 

•	  Review the operational concept and the implementation of the National Cybersecurity 
 
 
Center (NCSC) to determine whether its proposed responsibilities, resource strategy, and 
governance are adequate to enable it to provide the shared situational awareness necessary 
 
to support cyber incident response efforts. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Continue to pursue the goal of the Trusted Internet Connection program to reduce the 
 
 
number of government network connections to the Internet but reconsider goals and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24
 

iv.	 crEating EffEctivE information Sharing and incidEnt rESPonSE 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

timelines based on a realistic assessment of the challenges.  Some departments and agen­
cies during the past two years made progress reducing the number of connections and 
 
beginning the deployment of systems that will help the Federal government prevent as 
 
well as detect malicious behavior. The government, however, still has considerable work to 
do before full capability is achieved and may need to consider additional policies to enable 
 
full implementation of the strategy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Evaluate and continue, as appropriate—in ongoing consultation with the civil liberties and 
 
 
privacy community—pilot deployments of intrusion detection and prevention systems for 
 
the benefit of federal networks, evaluate the performance of these systems, and continue 
 
studies of the issues that would arise if such capabilities were used with State government 
 
systems.  These sensors will be vital to gaining situational awareness for federal networks, 
 
and the government will benefit from any policy, legal, or technology lessons learned as 
 
these deployments move forward. 

 

•	  Explore—in collaboration with industry and the civil liberties and privacy community— 
 

additional, long-term architectures for intrusion detection and prevention systems. 

 

The Federal government should improve its ability to provide strategic warning of cyber intrusions 
 
and attacks to the President.  The Federal government should continue to leverage the Nation’s 
 
long-term investments in the fundamental development of cryptologic and information assurance 
 
technologies and the necessary supporting infrastructure.  These investments, along with other 
 
intelligence capabilities, are critical to national strategic warning for attacks through cyberspace.  In 
 
 
addition, the Federal government should identify any gaps in law enforcement capacity or investi­
gative authority needed to defend the Nation’s infrastructure.  Any new authorities would need to 
 
be consistent with the protection of civil liberties and privacy rights. 

 

 

The U.S. Government should invest in processes, technologies, and infrastructure that will help 
 
prevent cyber incidents.  Options include increased security testing, investment in systems that 
 
automate or centralize network management, and more restricted connectivity to the Internet for 
some unclassified systems. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The government needs a reliable, consistent mechanism for bringing all appropriate information 
 
together to form a common operating picture.  Federal cybersecurity centers often share their infor­
mation, but no single entity combines all information available from these centers and other sources 
 
to provide a continuously updated, comprehensive picture of cyber threats and network status, 
 
to provide indications and warning of imminent incidents, and to support a coordinated incident 
response.  The Defense Department is responsible for aggregating information on network health 
 
and status, attempted intrusions, and cyber attacks for its networks, the Intelligence Community for 
its networks, and US-CERT for civilian federal agencies and to some extent the private sector.  Law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies collect information on criminal and foreign cyber-related 
threat activities but require additional capacity to deal with the scale of criminal activities. 
  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should consider whether available alternative or reserve communica­
tions would be adequate in the event of a major disruption of information and communications 
 

 

 

 

 

 

25
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 
infrastructure, particularly as information and communications networks converge.  Replacement 
or repair of infrastructure may also require additional planning and resources, particularly in the 
 
event of physical damage to networks or hard-to-replace components of the power grid. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should develop processes between all levels of government and the private 
 
sector to assist in preventing, detecting, and responding to cyber incidents by leveraging existing 
 
resources.  To help build situational awareness related to the information and communications 
 
infrastructure, the Federal government should leverage existing resources such as the Multi-State 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center and the 58 State and local Fusion Centers that have been 
 
set up around the country. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Enhance Information Sharing To Improve Incident Response Capabilities 

Information is key to preventing, detecting, and responding to cyber incidents.  Network hardware 
 
and software providers, network operators, data owners, security service providers, and in some 
 
cases, law enforcement or intelligence organizations may each have information that can contribute 
 
to the detection and understanding of sophisticated intrusions or attacks.  A full understanding 
 
and effective response may only be possible by bringing information from those various sources 
 
together for the benefit of all. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should work with State, local, and tribal governments and the private 
 
sector—including data owners, network operators, and experts on privacy and civil liberties—to 
 
develop options for cybersecurity-related information sharing that address concerns with privacy 
 
and proprietary information and make information sharing mutually beneficial in the national 
interest.  Private companies are concerned about the potential uses of their information.  The gov­
ernment must protect privacy rights, law enforcement equities, intelligence sources and methods, 
 
and government information that would provide unfair competitive advantages.  Clarity and 
 
accountability for both government and the private sector are needed to address these concerns. 
  
Possible options include: 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Creation of a not-for-profit non-governmental organization to serve as a trusted third-party 
 
 
host where government and private sector information may be shared to enhance the 
 
security of critical government and private-sector networks.  Such an organization could 
 
leverage commercial services without disrupting the growing security service market. 

 

•	  Continued engagement between the Federal government (e.g., law enforcement agencies) 
 
 
and individual firms or groups of firms—possibly with the participation of State, local, and 
 
tribal governments—that could achieve a level of voluntary information sharing within a 
particular sector or region beyond what could be achieved in a broader setting. 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Administration should consider, in consultation with affected parties and Congress, develop­
ing tailored incentives for information sharing.  These measures might include, as a last resort, 
 
regulatory measures as part of an integrated approach to satisfying society’s interests in robust 
 
and resilient critical infrastructures, civil liberties and privacy protections, and maintaining the 
 
fair and open economic markets that underlie the U.S. economic system.  Privacy enhancing 
  

 

 

26
 

iv.  crEating EffEctivE information Sharing and incidEnt rESPonSE 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

technologies such as encryption or controlled access authentication could ameliorate some risks 
 
in sharing information. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should undertake a comprehensive review of policies (such as security 
 
classification and clearance requirements) that inhibit interagency sharing of cybersecurity infor­
mation, seek improvements in information sharing, and ensure that they preserve civil liberties and 
 
privacy rights and appropriate protection for sensitive information.  Current policies governing the 
 
collection, use, retention, and dissemination of information by federal departments and agencies 
vary greatly based on statutory authorities, privacy and civil liberties concerns, sources and methods 
concerns, and historical practice. These policies present significant barriers to sharing cybersecurity 
 
 
information across the Federal government.  This review should take into account the progress 
that the Federal government has made through the Security and Suitability Reform Initiative and 
the Information Sharing Environment effort in examining all facets of the security and suitability 
 
processing components. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The Federal government should work with the private sector to develop standards for incident 
 
reporting by private-sector network operators to the Federal government.  Industry has expressed 
concerns about reporting cyber incidents to which they have fallen victim, including the potential 
 
  
for negative impacts from resulting shareholder concerns, market reactions, or regulatory action.58 
One industry group has proposed a government-industry working group to define sector-specific 
 
 
cyber incident thresholds that warrant reporting to security officials.59  Use of such information by 
the government would require rules and oversight, particularly for the protection of privacy rights 
and civil liberties.  Another way to increase reporting is through consideration of appropriate data 
breach notification laws that require notification to the public and to the government, including 
law enforcement entities that could pursue investigations.  The Federal government also should 
  
examine the effectiveness and scope of existing reporting requirements for regulated markets. 

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

At the same time, the Federal government needs to define processes and rules for sharing its incident 
reporting with the private sector.  Formulation of these rules should consider classification and pri­
 
vacy issues.  In addition, the Federal government should help the research community gain access, 
 
with appropriate controls, to cybersecurity-related event data that could be used to develop tools, 
test theories, and develop workable solutions.  Such sharing would need to address the protection 
of sensitive or proprietary data and personal identity information. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Federal government should explore expanded sharing of information about network incidents 
 
and vulnerabilities with major allies, seeking bilateral or multilateral arrangements that improve 
 
cybersecurity consistent with the protection of other U.S. economic and security interests and the 
protection of civil liberties and privacy rights.  International collaboration makes effective govern­
ment-private sector collaboration in the United States more challenging. Legitimate private-sector 
 
concerns over sharing information will increase if the government plans to share that information 
 
with other countries.  Once again, clarity and accountability are needed for control, dissemination, 
and use of information shared by the private sector with the Federal government, including under­

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
58 TechAmerica, Response to 60-Day Cyber Security Review, March 21, 2009.
 
59 Cross-Sector Cybersecurity Working Group (CSCSWG), Response to 60-Day Cyber Review Questions, March 16, 2009, at 11-12.
 

27
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

standings governing the use of information shared between the United States and the international 
 
community. 

Improve Cybersecurity Across All Infrastructures 

 

The Federal government should work with the private sector to define public-private partnership 
 
roles and responsibilities for the defense of privately owned critical infrastructure and key resources. 
  
The common defense of privately-owned critical infrastructures from armed attack or from physi­
cal intrusion or sabotage by foreign military forces or international terrorists is a core responsibility 
 
of the Federal government.  Similarly, government plays an important role in protecting these 
 
infrastructures from criminals or domestic terrorists.  The question remains unresolved as to what 
 
extent protection of these same infrastructures from the same harms by the same actors should be 
 
a government responsibility if the attacks were carried out remotely via computer networks rather 
 
than by direct physical action.  Most private network operators and service providers consider it to 
 
be their responsibility to maintain and defend their own networks, but key elements of the private 
 
sector have indicated a willingness to work toward a framework under which the government would 
 
pursue malicious actors and assist with information and technical support to enable private-sector 
operators to defend their own networks.60 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Federal government should consider options for incentivizing collective action and enhance 
 
competition in the development of cybersecurity solutions.  For example, the legal concepts for 
“standard of care” to date do not exist for cyberspace.  Possible incentives include adjustments to 
 
liability considerations (reduced liability in exchange for improved security or increased liability for 
the consequences of poor security), indemnification, tax incentives, and new regulatory require­
ments and compliance mechanisms. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The President’s cybersecurity policy official should work with all levels of government, the private 
 
sector, and our international partners to develop strategies and plans to encourage the develop­
ment of innovative cybersecurity solutions and ensure the security and resilience of infrastructure 
 
systems.  Infrastructure examples include: 

 

•	  The Administration should assist international financial institutions, such as the World Bank 
 
 
and the International Monetary Fund, with the necessary information, tools, and expertise 
 
and encourage their use of best practices to protect their information systems, which suf­
fered a series of serious intrusions in 2008.61 

60 CSCSWG, Response to 60-Day Cyber Review Questions, March 16, 2009; TechAmerica input to 60-Day Cyber Review, March 21, 2009, 

at 1-2; NSTAC Response to 60-Day Cyber Group, March 12, 2009, at 3-4; Information Technology and Communications SCCs, Response to 

White House Cyber Review Questions, March 20, 2009.
 
61 www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,435681,00.html, World Bank Under Cyber Siege in ‘Unprecedented Crisis’, October 10, 2008; www.foxnews.
 
com/story/0,2933,452348,00.html, Cyber-Hackers Break into IMF Computer System, November 14, 2008.
 

28
 

iv.	 crEating EffEctivE information Sharing and incidEnt rESPonSE 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act reserves funding to advance the use of 
 
 
health information technology. Protection of patient information will be critical to gaining 
public acceptance as electronic record keeping becomes more pervasive and accessible 
 
through the Internet. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The Department of Energy should work with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
 
 
to determine whether additional security mandates and procedures should be developed 
 
for energy-related industrial control systems.  In addition, as the United States deploys 
 
new Smart Grid technology, the Federal government must ensure that security standards 
are developed and adopted to avoid creating unexpected opportunities for adversaries to 
 
penetrate these systems or conduct large-scale attacks. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  The Department of Transportation’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has developed 
 
 
a long-term plan for transitioning to the Next-Generation Air Traffic Control System while 
 
still maintaining the current system.  The Department’s Inspector General on March 18, 
 
2009 advised the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee 
 
on Aviation of the need to assess potential security vulnerabilities and develop a robust 
 
cybersecurity strategy and design.62 

 

 

 

 

62 www.oig.dot.gov/item.jsp?id=2442, Department of Transportation, Statement of the Inspector General before the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee on Aviation, House of Representatives, “Federal Aviation Administration:  Actions 
Needed to Achieve Mid-Term NextGen Goals,” March 18, 2009, at 7. 

29
 

v.  Encouraging innovation
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

resiliency requirements 
The infrastructure must be resilient 
 
against physical damage, unauthorized 
manipulation, and electronic assault.  In 
addition to protection of the information 
itself, a risk mitigation strategy for cyber­
space must focus on the devices used 
 
to access the infrastructure, the services 
 
provided by the infrastructure, support­
ing elements of the networks, and all 
 
means of moving, storing, and process­
ing information.  The strategy also must 
 
include prevention, mitigation, and 
 
response against threats to or subversion 
of the people who operate and benefit 
 
from the infrastructure, the processes 
that run or take advantage of the infra­
structure, and the supply chains used to 
 
build and maintain the infrastructure. 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
The information and communications sector is 
moving toward a converged platform where data, 
voice and video applications share a common infra­
structure.  The decentralized nature of the current 
Internet model allows individuals and entrepreneurs 
to develop and deploy innovative applications at the 
 
edges of the network without obtaining permission. 
Innovation has sparked new multi-billion dollar busi­
nesses that have revolutionized the way users inter­
act with the network and each other.  As technology 
becomes more critical to the United States, maintain­
 
ing confidence and trust in this constantly evolving 
infrastructure is essential. The President has called for 
 
the federal government to work with industry on the 
development of“next-generation secure computers 
 
and networking for national security applications,” 
“tough new standards for cybersecurity and physi­
cal resilience,” and “standards for securing personal 
  
data.”63 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
The United States should harness the full benefits of innovation to address cybersecurity concerns. 
 
Many technical and network management solutions that would greatly enhance security already 
exist in the market place but are not always used because of cost or complexity.  In addition, exist­
 
ing solutions can only do so much given the underlying design of the Internet architecture.  In the 
long run, openness and innovation will help create a stronger infrastructure with transparency and 
accountability.  Federal policy must address national security requirements, protection of intellec­
 
tual property, and the availability and continuity of infrastructure, even when it is under attack by 
 
sophisticated adversaries.  The Federal government also must be careful not to create policy and 
  
regulation that inhibits innovation or results in inefficiencies or less security. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Future 

According to a 2006 National Academies Report, Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research, 
“Telecommunications networks are large, complex systems whose reliability, security, and evolv­
  
ability are dependent on the development of a coherent and well-conceived architectural concept.”64 
The report goes on to note that: 

 

 

 

63 www.whitehouse.gov/agenda/homeland_security/#protect-our-information-networks, The Agenda, Homeland Security, “Protect Our 
Information Networks.” 
 
64 http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cstb/CompletedProjects/CSTB_042246, Robert Lucky and Jon Eisenberg, editors, Committee on 
Telecommunications Research and Development, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Division on Engineering and 
Physical Sciences, National Research Council of the National Academies, “Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research,” 2006, at 36-37. 

31
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

“[M]ultiple vendors’products are used to configure U.S. telecommunications infra­
structure and deliver services … that cross provider boundaries.  As a result of the 
 
industry’s shift to a horizontal structure and its fragmentation into a large number 
 
of firms, neither vendors nor service providers are prepared to take responsibility 
for end-to-end systems design.” 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As a result, no single, integrated vision exists to guide decision-making by the private sector, 
 
academia, and government about policies, standards, research, market development, or procure­
ment.  The Federal government, the private sector, and other stakeholders together should define 
 
technology-neutral performance and security objectives for future infrastructure, both to meet its 
 
own requirements as a consumer as well as in its capacity as a steward of the public interest.  The 
 
Federal government and its partners should create a family of coordinated national information and 
 
communications infrastructure objectives, customized by sectors and organizations. These objec­
tives could consider different models of computing platforms or network control concepts, and the 
 
emergence of technology solutions from government, academic, or industry research programs. 

 

 

The movement of data and services to third-party network-based servers, referred to as the “cloud,” 
 
introduces new policy challenges for the private sector and governments around the globe.  The 
 
movement of data across jurisdictional boundaries presents challenges for law enforcement, the 
 
protection of privacy and civil liberties as defined by different countries, and liability decisions in 
 
the event of data or network breaches.  Some customers will seek to limit where service providers 
move and store data, whereas others with multinational operations will seek to take advantage of 
 
geographic and time-zone diversity. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

infrastructure Security Visions 
A number of efforts exist to define visions for some technology or infrastructure sectors.  For example, 
 
the U.S. Department of Energy, in collaboration with industry, in 2005 published a 10-year roadmap 
 
for securing control systems used in the power grid (see www.controlsystemsroadmap.net).  The 
vision for this effort is that by 2015“control systems for critical applications will be designed, installed, 
operated, and maintained to survive an intentional cyber attack with no loss of critical function.” An 
 
advisory group for the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) describes defense of cur­
rent Internet Protocol-based networks as a losing proposition and calls for an “independent examina­
tion of alternate architectures,”leading to experimentation and evaluation of the best candidates. 
 
According to a March 2009 briefing, DARPA is proceeding with a six-month analysis of alternatives. 

 
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Link R&D Frameworks to Infrastructure Development 

Under the leadership of the President’s cybersecurity policy official, in collaboration with other 
 
EOP entities and the ICI-IPC, the Federal government should provide a framework for research and 
 
development strategies that focus on game-changing technologies that will help meet infrastruc­
ture objectives, building on the existing Networking and Information Technology Research and 
 
Development (NITRD) strategies and other R&D-related work.  The Federal government should 

 

32
 

v.  Encouraging  innovation 

   

 

 
greatly expand coordination of these strategies with industry and academic research efforts to avoid 
duplication, leverage and synchronize complementary capabilities and agendas, and ensure that 
 
technology transitions and enters into the marketplace. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  To enhance U.S. competitiveness, the Federal government should work with industry to 
 
 
develop migration paths and incentives for the rapid adoption of research and technology 
 
development, including encouragement of collaboration between academic and industrial 
 
laboratories. 

•	  The Federal government, in collaboration with the private sector and other stakeholders, 
 
 
also should use the infrastructure objectives and the R&D framework to help define goals 
for national and international standardsbodies. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Establish Identity Management as an Option 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We cannot improve cybersecurity without improving authentication, and identity management is 
not just about authenticating people.  Authentication mechanisms also can help ensure that online 
 
 
transactions only involve trustworthy data, hardware, and software for networks and devices. With 
 
the systems available today for most Internet transactions, the electronic equivalent of cues people 
use to establish trust might be absent, incomplete, or difficult to understand and act upon.65  Identity 
 
management has the potential to help individuals and organizations form trusted communities 
 
based on varying degrees of identity exposure and mutually agreed accountability, while helping 
 
exclude unwanted intruders or inappropriate membership.  Identity management also has the 
potential to enhance privacy through additional protection against the inappropriate release of 
 
personal identifiable information. 

  

 

The Federal government—in collaboration with industry and the civil liberties and privacy commu­
nities—should build a cybersecurity-based identity management vision and strategy for the Nation 
 
that considers an array of approaches, including privacy-enhancing technologies. The Federal gov­
ernment must interact with citizens through myriad information, services, and benefit programs 
 
and thus has an interest in the protection of the public’s private information as well.  Increased use 
 
of on-line transactions involving financial, health, and commerce require a basis for building trust 
 
between the parties to a transaction. 
  

 

 

• 	  The Nation should implement, for high-value activities (e.g., the Smart Grid), an opt-in array  
of interoperable identity management systems to build trust for online transactions and  
to enhance privacy. 

• 	  The National Science and Technology Council’s (NSTC’s) Subcommittee on Biometrics and  
Identity Management in 2008 published a report that provides a vision for future federal  
identity management and a series of research and development recommendations.66  The  
Federal  government  should  use  this  report  as  a  starting  point  for  identity  management 
strategies. 

65 See www.microsoft.com/mscorp/twc/endtoendtrust/vision.aspx, Scott Charney, “Establishing End to End Trust,” Microsoft, 2008, at 5. 
66 www.ostp.gov/galleries/NSTC%20Reports/IdMReport%20Final.pdf, Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology 
Council, Identity Management Task Force Report, July 2008. 

33
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

•	  The Federal government should work with international partners to develop policies that 
 
 
encourage the development of a global, trusted eco-system that protects privacy rights and 
civil liberties and governs appropriate use of law enforcement activities to protect citizens 
 
and infrastructures. 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Federal government, following the guidance of Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 
 
(HSPD-12), is seeking to leverage the federal interoperable identity credentialing mechanism across 
the federal enterprise. The Federal government should ensure resources are available for full federal 
implementation of HSPD-12.  The Federal government also should consider extending the avail­
ability of federal identity management systems to operators of critical infrastructure and to private-
sector emergency response and repair service providers for use during national emergencies. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Integrate Globalization Policy with Supply Chain Security 

 

 

 

One of the results of the information technology revolution and free trade policies is a global envi­
 
ronment for research, design, manufacturing, and servicing of information and communications 
products by corporations with facilities spread across the globe. This global marketplace has created 
tremendous benefits for U.S. industry by opening markets worldwide for high-tech U.S. goods and 
 
services. However, the emergence of new centers for manufacturing, design, and research across the 
 
globe raises concerns about the potential for easier subversion of computers and networks through 
 
subtle hardware or software manipulations.  Counterfeit products have created the most visible 
  
supply problems, but few documented examples exist of unambiguous, deliberate subversions. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

A broad, holistic approach to risk management is required rather than a wholesale condemnation 
of foreign products and services.  The challenge with supply chain attacks is that a sophisticated 
 
adversary might narrowly focus on particular systems and make manipulation virtually impossible 
 
to discover.  Foreign manufacturing does present easier opportunities for nation-state adversaries 
 
to subvert products; however, the same goals could be achieved through the recruitment of key 
 
insiders or other espionage activities. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The best defense may be to ensure U.S. market leadership through continued innovation that 
enhances U.S. market leadership and the application of best practices in maintaining diverse, resil­
 
ient supply chains and infrastructures.  The President’s cybersecurity policy official, working with 
departments and agencies, should: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Define procurement strategies through the General Services Administration, building on 
 
 
work by the National Security Agency for the Department of Defense, for commercial prod­
 
ucts and services in order to create market incentives for security to be part of hardware and 
software product designs, new security technologies, and secure managed services; 

•	  Expand partnerships with State, local, and tribal governments and international partners 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

to maximize the market influence of these procurements; 

•	  Work with Congress to identify mechanisms that would enable departments and agencies— 
 
 
under appropriate, limited situations—to incorporate threat information into acquisition 
decisions; and 

34
 

v.  Encouraging  innovation 

   

 

 

•	  Work with industry to provide threat information and identify best practices for managing 
 

 
supply chain and insider risks, both from economic and threat perspectives. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maintain National Security/Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) Capabilities 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Federal government’s obligation to protect the American people and to provide for the com­
mon defense includes a responsibility to ensure that the Nation can communicate and respond in 
 
times of crisis. The communications system itself might bear the brunt of such events and must have 
 
resilience or the capability to recover to manage a response and preserve governmental functions. 
  
The Communications Act of 1934 authorized the President, if he deems it necessary in the national 
security or defense and the requisite threshold condition exists, to use, control, or close commu­
nications services, systems, and networks under the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications 
Commission in conditions ranging from “state of public peril”to “war.” Executive Order 12472 estab­
lished a joint government-industry National Coordinating Center to assist in the initiation, coordina­
tion, restoration and reconstitution of communications services or facilities under all conditions of 
 
crisis or emergency.  NSPD-51/HSPD-20 on“National Continuity Policy”(May 4, 2007) assigns roles 
in the Federal government regarding continuity communications. 
  

 
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is working toward the goal of providing national 
 
security and emergency users with access to the converged information services of next-generation 
networks in a manner that provides a high likelihood of service success during disasters and other 
events that cause public users to experience severe degradation or loss of communications ser­
vices.  The national security enhancements to next-generation networks will include services for 
 
data, voice, and video.  The DHS effort is complicated by the variations in architectures envisioned 
by the major carriers and service providers.  As such, DHS is examining and comparing different 
 
approaches and will seek industry consensus on approaches to be brought forward for consideration 
 
by standards organizations.  The Federal government should: 

 
 
 

  
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

• 	  Develop a coordinated plan for national security and emergency preparedness commu
nications  capabilities  over  next-generation  networks,  including  milestones  and  funding 
requirements; 

• 	  Develop options for additional services the Federal government could acquire or direct  
investments the government could make in the information and communications infra
structure to enhance the survivability of communications during a time of natural disaster,  
crisis, or conflict; 

• 	  Coordinate with international partners and standards bodies to support next-generation  
NS/EP communications capabilities in a globally distributed next-generation environment;67  
and 

• 	  Ensure that efforts associated with the development of Executive Branch continuity com
munications  architectures  and  next-generation  services  programs  are  adequately  staffed 
and resourced. 

67 Also recommended by “NSTAC Response to the Sixty Day Cyber Study Group,” March 12, 2009, at 18, 21. 

35
 

­
­
­
vi. action Plans 

 

The review team recommends the near-term and mid-term actions listed in Tables 2 and 3. 

Table 2:  Near-Term acTioN PlaN 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.  Appoint a cybersecurity policy official responsible for coordinating the Nation’s cybersecurity 

 
policies and activities; establish a strong NSC directorate, under the direction of the cybersecurity 
policy official dual-hatted to the NSC and the NEC, to coordinate interagency development of 
 
cybersecurity-related strategy and policy. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  Prepare for the President’s approval an updated national strategy to secure the information 

 
and communications infrastructure. This strategy should include continued evaluation of CNCI 
activities and, where appropriate, build on its successes. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.  Designate cybersecurity as one of the President’s key management priorities and establish 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
performance metrics. 

4.  Designate a privacy and civil liberties official to the NSC cybersecurity directorate. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
5.  Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct interagency-cleared legal analyses 
of priority cybersecurity-related issues identified during the policy-development process and 
formulate coherent unified policy guidance that clarifies roles, responsibilities, and the application 
of agency authorities for cybersecurity-related activities across the Federal government. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6. 

Initiate a national public awareness and education campaign to promote cybersecurity. 

 

7.  Develop U.S. Government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework and 
 
 
strengthen our international partnerships to create initiatives that address the full range of 
 
activities, policies, and opportunities associated with cybersecurity. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.  Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan; initiate a dialog to enhance public-private 

 
partnerships with an eye toward streamlining, aligning, and providing resources to optimize their 
contribution and engagement 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
9. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
In collaboration with other EOP entities, develop a framework for research and development 
strategies that focus on game-changing technologies that have the potential to enhance the 
security, reliability, resilience, and trustworthiness of digital infrastructure; provide the research 
 
community access to event data to facilitate developing tools, testing theories, and identifying 
 
workable solutions. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.  Build a cybersecurity-based identity management vision and strategy that addresses privacy and 

 
civil liberties interests, leveraging privacy-enhancing technologies for the Nation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Table 3:  miD-Term acTioN PlaN 

  

 

 

 

 
1. 

 

 
Improve the process for resolution of interagency disagreements regarding interpretations of law 
and application of policy and authorities for cyber operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  Use the OMB program assessment framework to ensure departments and agencies use 
 

 
performance-based budgeting in pursuing cybersecurity goals. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.  Expand support for key education programs and research and development to ensure the Nation’s 

 
 
continued ability to compete in the information age economy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.  Develop a strategy to expand and train the workforce, including attracting and retaining 

 
cybersecurity expertise in the Federal government. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  Determine the most efficient and effective mechanism to obtain strategic warning, maintain 
 

 
situational awareness, and inform incident response capabilities. 

6.  Develop a set of threat scenarios and metrics that can be used for risk management decisions, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
recovery planning, and prioritization of R&D. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.  Develop a process between the government and the private sector to assist in preventing, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
detecting, and responding to cyber incidents. 

 

 

 

 

 

8.  Develop mechanisms for cybersecurity-related information sharing that address concerns about 

 
privacy and proprietary information and make information sharing mutually beneficial. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9.  Develop solutions for emergency communications capabilities during a time of natural disaster, 
 

 

 
crisis, or conflict while ensuring network neutrality. 

 

10.  Expand sharing of information about network incidents and vulnerabilities with key allies and seek 
 

 
bilateral and multilateral arrangements that will improve economic and security interests while 
protecting civil liberties and privacy rights. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.  Encourage collaboration between academic and industrial laboratories to develop migration 

 
paths and incentives for the rapid adoption of research and technology development innovations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12.  Use the infrastructure objectives and the research and development framework to define goals for 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
national and international standards bodies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13.  Implement, for high-value activities (e.g., the Smart Grid), an opt-in array of interoperable identity 
 

 
management systems to build trust for online transactions and to enhance privacy. 

 

14.  Refine government procurement strategies and improve the market incentives for secure and 

 
resilient hardware and software products, new security innovation, and secure managed services. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38
 

appendix a:  bibliography

Accenture, “Secure Enterprise Network Consortium: Helping Provide Comprehensive Cyber Security 
Approaches for High Performance” (undated)

Aliant, “Developing a Telecommunications Roadmap: Preparing for the promise of convergence” 
(undated)

American Chemistry Council, ChemITC, “Making Strides to Improve Cyber Security in the Chemical 
Sector,” 2009 Update, March 2009

American Chemistry Council, Christine Adams, untitled memorandum of the Chemical Sector 
Cyber Security Program’s responses to four questions from the White House 60-day Cyber Policy 
Review (undated) 

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and 
Securities and Exchange Commission, “Interagency Paper on Sound Practices To Strengthen the 
Resilience of the U.S. Financial System,” Federal Register, Volume 68, Number 70, April 18, 2003

Booz Allen Hamilton, “Commercial/Civil Cyber Community Snapshot” (undated) 

Booz Allen Hamilton, “National Cybersecurity Center Policy Capture” (undated) 

Brecht, Lyle A., Capital Markets Research, “National Cyber Systems Infrastructure Security Review 
Concept Paper,” February 15, 2009  

Business Executives for National Security, “Cyber Strategic Inquiry: Enabling Change Through a 
Strategic Simulation and Megacommunity Concept”, December 2008

Business Executives for National Security, “Cybersecurity Roundtable, March 19, 2009, City Club, 
Washington DC,” March 26, 2009

Business Software Alliance, “National Security & Homeland Security Councils Review of National 
Cyber Security Policy,” March 19, 2009

Carnegie Mellon CyLab, Pradeep Khosla, “Information Security for the Next Century: Why we need 
an information-centric approach to data protection” (undated)

Carnegie Mellon University, Lynn Robert Carter, “Computing Infrastructure Risk: Issue, Analysis, and 
Recommendation,” December 23, 2008

Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research, Indiana University, Fred H. Cate, “Comments to the 
White House 60-Day Cybersecurity Review,” March 27,  2009

Center for Democracy and Technology, “Comprehensive Privacy and Security: Critical for Health 
Information Technology,” Version 1.0, May 2008

A–1

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Center for Democracy and Technology, letter from Ari Schwartz and Gregory T. Nojeim, 
 
March 20, 2009 

 

 

Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and Security, Purdue University, 
 
presentation by Eugene Spafford entitled “NITRD Strategic Plan Forum,” February 2009 

 

Center for Infrastructure Protection, George Mason University, “The CIP Report,” Volume 7, Number 
 
8, February 2009 

 

Center for National Security Studies, letter from Kate Martin, April 4, 2009 

Center for Progressive Regulation, Rena Steinzor, “Democracies Die Behind Closed Doors: The 
 
Homeland Security Act and Corporate Accountability,” March 12, 2003 
 

 

Center for Strategic and International Studies Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th 
 
Presidency, “Securing Cyberspace for the 44th Presidency,” December 2008 

Center for the Development of Technological Leadership, University of Minnesota, presentation 
 
by S. Massoud Amin entitled “Smart Grid: Opportunities and Challenges Toward a Stronger and 
 
Smarter Grid” at the 2009 MIT Energy Conference – Accelerating Change in Global Energy, 
 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 6, 2009 

 

Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
 
presentation by John C. Mallery entitled “Mobilizing for Cyber Defense: Transforming Computation 
& Networking,”March 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Computing Research Association, paper by Stuart Zweben entitled “Computing Degree and 
Enrollment Trends: From the 2007-2008 CRA Taulbee Survey” (undated) 

 

 

 

Congressional Research Service, report by Harold C. Relyea entitled “The Executive Office of the 
 
President: An Historical Overview,” updated November 26, 2008 

 

Congressional Research Service, report by John Rollins and Anna C. Henning entitled 
 
  
“Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative: Legal Authorities and Policy Considerations,” 
March 10, 2009 

Davidson, Mary Ann, Oracle Corporation, “The Monroe Doctrine in Cyberspace”, March 2009 

 

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, “The National Cyber Range: A National Testbed for 
Critical Security Research” (undated) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of Defense, “Defense Security Information Exchange (DSIE) A partnership for the 
 
Defense Industrial Base” (undated) 
 

 

Department of Defense, Lt. Col. Michael Barry and Steven D. Shirley, “DoD Cyber Crime Center 
(DC3) Prioritization,” March 12, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of Health & Human Services, Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
 
Information technology, “The ONC-Coordinated Federal Health IT Strategic Plan: 2008-2012,” 
  
June 3, 2008 
 

A–2
 

aPPEndix  a:  bibliograPhy 

   

 

Department of the Treasury, “2008 Update to Banking and Finance Sector-Specific Plan: Sector 

Profile and Goals” (undated)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of the Treasury, “2008 Update to Banking and Finance Sector-Specific Plan: Appendix B: 

Statutory Authorities” (undated)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of the Treasury, FSSCC/FBIIC Cyber Security Intelligence and Information 
Sharing Work Groups, “Roadmap for Improved Information Sharing: Situational Analysis and 
Recommendations for Action” (undated) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of the Treasury, memorandum regarding 60-day cyber review questions (undated) 

Economist Intelligence Unit, The, “The means to compete: Benchmarking IT Industry 
 
Competitiveness”, July 2007 

 

Educational Technology, Policy, Research, and Outreach, “2008 National Cyberethics, Cybersafety, 
Cybersecurity Baseline Study”, study conducted on behalf of the National Cyber Security Alliance, 
 
October 2008 

 

 

 

 

Electronic Frontier Foundation, letter from Lee Tien and Peter Eckersley (undated) 

Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center, letter from William B. Nelson, 
 
March 23, 2009 

 

Forrester, “IT Security Remains An Integral Part Of The Enterprise: The State Of Enterprise IT Security: 
2008 To 2009”, January 29, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gourley, Bob, Crucial Point LLC, “Cloud Computing and Cyber Defense,” March 21, 2009 

 

Gourley, Bob, Crucial Point LLC, “Open Source Software and Cyber Defense,” March 30, 2009 

 

Harper, Jim, Cato Institute, “Government-Run Cyber Security? No, Thanks,” TechKnowledge 
 
Newsletter, Issue #123, March 13, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Harris Interactive, “Online Security and Privacy Study”, conducted on behalf of Microsoft and the 
 
National Cyber Security Alliance, March 2009 

 

Information Sciences Institute, University of California, “Report on National Cyber Defense Initiative 
 
Industry Workshop: Report and Recommendations,” March 27, 2009 
 

 

Information Systems Audit and Control Association, “IS Standards, Guidelines and Procedures for 
Auditing and Control Professionals,” January 15, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Information Technology Information Sharing and Analysis Center, letter from Brian Willis, 
 
February 27, 2009 

Information Technology Sector Coordinating Council and Communications Sector Coordinating 
Council, “Response to White House Cyber Review Questions,” March 20, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Intelligence and National Security Alliance, “60 Day Cyber Study INSA Response,” March 26, 2009 

 

 

 

A–3
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Intelligence and National Security Alliance, “Critical Issues for Cyber Assurance Policy Reform: 
 
An Industry Assessment,” March 26, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Intelligence and National Security Alliance, “The Missing Link in U.S. Cybersecurity,” March 21, 2009 

 

 

Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, “Factsheet: Root server attack on 
6 February 2007,” March 1, 2007 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Internet Security Alliance, “ISA Comments to Hathaway on creating an International Cyber Security 
 
Anchor Program” (undated) 

Internet Security Alliance, “ISA Initial Comments on Hathaway 60-Day review – a top 10 list of Cyber 
Principles” (undated) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Internet Security Alliance, “The Cyber Security Social Contract Policy Recommendations for the 
 
Obama Administration and 111th Congress: A Twenty-First Century Model for Protecting and 
 
Defending Critical Technology Systems and Information” (undated) 
 

 

Internet Security Alliance, “The Economic and Security Costs of Obsolescent Computer Laws” 
 
March 24, 2009 
 

 

 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Jeff Brown, Raytheon Company, entitled “A National Model for 
Cyber Protection Through Disrupting Attacker Command and Control Channels,” March 2009 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Larry Clinton entitled “Cross cutting Issue #2 How Can we create 
 
public private partnerships that extend to action plans that work?” (undated) 

 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Larry Clinton entitled “Cyber-Insurance Metrics and Impact on 
Cyber-Security” (undated) 

 

 

 

 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Larry Clinton entitled “Issue Area 3: Norms of Behavior— 
Hathaway Questions” (undated) 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Scott Borg entitled “Securing the Supply Chain for Electronic 
 
Equipment: A Strategy and Framework” (undated) 

 

Internet Security Alliance, paper by Sentar, Inc., “Position paper for Obama 60 Day review on Cyber 
  
Security: Utilization of Small Business (SBs) for Innovative Cyber Security Research and Development”, 
March 26, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Jackson, William, “Agency Award’Federal Aviation Administration: Protect and serve,” Government 
 
Computer News, October 7, 2007 

 

Kellermann, Tom, Core Security Technologies, “Proactive Public Policy per Cybersecurity,” March 
 
18, 2009 

 

Kellermann, Tom, Core Security Technologies, “Red teaming idea in detail,” March 11, 2009 

 

 

Khater, Rami and Rachel Schaffer, Georgetown University, untitled memorandum, April 13, 2009 

 

 

Markle Foundation, “Nation at Risk: Policy Makers Need Better Information to Protect the Country,” 
 
March 10, 2009 

A–4
 

aPPEndix  a:  bibliograPhy 

   

 

 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The Microphotonics Center, executive overview of 
the 2005 communications technology roadmap entitled “Microphotonics: Hardware for the 
 
Information Age,” 2005 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Association of State Chief Information Officers, NASCIO State CIO-CISO Cybersecurity 
 
Priorities Survey Summary, March 3, 2009 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Coordination Office for Networking and Information Technology Research and 
Development, Sally E. Howe, presentation entitled “Workshop Deliverables: Roadmap, Hard 
 
Problems, and Report” at the HCSS-Sponsored National Workshop on Beyond SCADA: Networked 
 
Embedded Control for Cyber Physical Systems, November 8, 2008 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Cyber Forensics & Training Alliance and Cyber Initiative & Resource Fusion Unit, “Cyber 
Fusion Center, Pittsburgh, PA:  Executive Briefing” (undated) 

 

National Cyber Security Alliance and Symantec, “NCSA-Symantec National Cyber Security 
 
Awareness Study: Newsworthy Analysis,” October 2008 

 

National Cyber Security Alliance, “National Cyber Security Alliance in Brief” (undated) 

 

National Research Council, report edited by Robert W. Lucky and Jon Eisenberg entitled 
 
“Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research,” 2006 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Science and Technology Council, Subcommittee on Biometrics and Identity 
 
Management, “Identity Management Task Force Report 2008,” 2008 
 

National Science Foundation / Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity / National 
 
Security Agency, workshop report by David Evans, (University of Virginia) Principal Investigator, 
 
for the NSF/IARPA/NSA Workshop on the Science of Security, Berkeley, California, November 
17-18, 2008 (unpublished) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Science Foundation, “Notes for White House 60-day Cyber-Policy Review,” March 25, 2009 

 

 

National Science Foundation, “NSF Security Program Overview,” March 26, 2009 

National Science Foundation, “Responses to Questions Posed by Ms. Melissa Hathaway During Her 
Presentation at the National Science Foundation on March 18, 2009,” March 31, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee, “NSTAC Response to the Sixty-Day 
 
Cyber Study Group,” March 12, 2009 

Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program, High Confidence 
 
Software and Systems Coordinating Group, “High-Confidence Medical Devices: Cyber-Physical 
 
Systems for 21st Century Health Care,” February 2009 

 

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force, Steven 
 
R.Chabinsky, presentation entitled “Intrusion Detection and Prevention (What, Where, How and 
 
Who)” (undated) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pederson, Perry, Wurldtech Labs, “Project Aurora and the Smart Grid” (undated) 

 

A–5
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

Pinkney, Kevin R., “Putting Blame Where Blame is Due: Software Manufacturer and Customer Liability  
for Security-related Software Failure,”  Albany Law Journal of Science & Technology, Volume 13,  
2002 

Raduege, Harry D., Jr., “Evolving Cybersecurity Faces a New Dawn,” SIGNAL Magazine, 
 
December 2008 

 

Raduege, Harry D., Jr., “Future Defense Department Cybersecurity Builds on the Past,” SIGNAL 
 
Magazine, February 08 

SANS Institute, “The United States Cyber Challenge,” May 8, 2009 
 

SAS Institute, “INSA Cyber Task Force Submission” (undated) 

 

Schneider, Fred B., and Birman, Kenneth P., Cornell University, “The Monoculture Risk put into 
 
Context,” IEEE Security & Privacy, January/February 2009 

Spafford, Eugene H. and Annie I Antón, “The Balance of Privacy and Security,” Controversies in 
Science and Technology, Vol II, ed. by Daniel Lee Kleinman, Karen A. Cloud-Hansen, Christina 
 
Matta, and Jo Handelsman, pub. MaryAnn Liebert, Inc, NYC, NY, 2008 

 

 

Spoonamore, Stephen and Ronald L. Krutz, “Smart Grid and Cyber Challenges: National Security 
 
Risks and Concerns of Smart Grid”, March 2009 

 

SRI International, Computer Science Laboratory, technical report addendum by Phillip Porras,
 
 
Hassen Saidi, and Vinod Yegneswaran entitled “Conficker C Analysis,” March 19, 2009
 

 

TechAmerica, “TechAmerica Response to 60-Day Cyber Security Review,” March 2009
 

Trevithick, Paul, William Coleman, John Clippinger, and Kim Taipale, “Identity and Resilience”
 
 
(undated)
 

U.S. Chamber of Commerce, letter from Ann Beauchesne, March 27, 2009 

United States Congress, American Recovery and Reinvesment Act of 2009, Public Law 111-5 

United States Congress, Year 2000 Information and Readiness Disclosure Act, Public Law 105-271 

United States Government Accountability Office, David A. Powner, “Information Technology: 
Federal Laws, Regulations, and Mandatory Standards for Securing Private Sector Information 
Technology Systems and Data in Critical Infrastructure Sectors,” September 16, 2008 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, 111th Congress, “A bill to authorize the Secretary of 
 
 
Homeland Security to establish a program to award grants to institutions of higher education for 
 
the establishment or expansion of cybersecurity professional development programs, and for other 
purposes.” (H.R.266), as introduced in the House, January 7, 2009 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Armed Services Committee, 
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, “Status of US Strategic Programs,” March 17, 2009 

 

A–6
 

aPPEndix  a:  bibliograPhy 

   

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Armed Services Committee, 
 
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, “Statement of General Kevin P. Chilton, Commander, United 
States Strategic Command,” March 17, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Statement of 
Chairman Bennie G. Thompson, ‘Reviewing the Federal Cybersecurity Mission,’” March 10, 2009 
 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Testimony of 
Amit Yoran, Netwitness Corporation, ‘Reviewing the Federal Cybersecurity Mission,’” March 10, 2009 
 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Federal 
 
Cybersecurity Mission,” March 10, 2009 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Statement for 
the Record of Seán P. McGurk,  Director, Control Systems Security Program, National Cyber Security 
 
Division, National Protection and Programs Directorate, Department of Homeland Security,” 
  
March 24, 2009 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, Science and Technology, “Statement of 
Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke,” March 10, 2009 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Statement of 
 
David Powner, Director, Information Technology Management Issues, United States Government 
Accountability Office, ‘National Cybersecurity Strategy: Key Improvements are Needed to Strengthen 
the Nation’s Posture,’” March 10, 2009 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Statement of 
 
James A. Lewis, Center for Strategic and International Studies, ‘Reviewing the Federal Cybersecurity 
 
Mission,’” March 10, 2009 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology, “Testimony of 
Mary Ann Davidson, Chief Security Officer, Oracle Corporation,” March 10, 2009 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Homeland Security, 
 
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, Science and Technology, “Written Testimony 
 
of Scott Charney, Corporate Vice President, Microsoft Corporation’s Trustworthy Computing, ‘Securing 
America’s Cyber Future: Simplify, Organize and Act,’” March 10, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A–7
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Science and 
Technology, “Statement of Dr. Christopher L. Greer, Director, National Coordination Office for 
 
 
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development,” April 1, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Aviation, “Statement of James C. May, President and CEO, Air 
Transport Association of America, Inc., ‘Air Traffic Control Modernization and NextGen: Near-Term 
 
Achievable Goals,’” March 18, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Committee on Transportation 
 
and Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Aviation, “Statement of The Honorable Calvin L. Scovel III, 
 
Inspector General, U.S. Department of Transportation, ‘Federal Aviation Administration: Actions 
 
Needed to Achieve Mid-term NextGen Goals,’” March 18, 2009 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

United States House of Representatives, hearing before the Permanent Select Committee on 
 
Intelligence, “Annual Threat Assessment” by Dennis C. Blair, Director of National Intelligence, 
 
February 25, 2009 

 

United States House of Representatives, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, “HPSCI 
 
White Paper on Cyber security,” December 10, 2008 

United States Secret Service, memorandum entitled “Electronic Crime task Forces (ECTF)” (undated) 

United States Senate, 111th Congress, Senate Bill S.773, “Cybersecurity Act of 2009”, as introduced 
in the Senate, April 1, 2009 

 

 

United States Senate, 111th Congress, Senate Bill S.778, “A bill to establish, within the Executive 
 
Office of the President, the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor”, as introduced in the Senate, 
 
April 1, 2009 

United States Senate, hearing before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, “Questions 
for Patrick Gallagher, National Institute of Standards and Technology,” March 3, 2009 

 

 

 

United States Senate, hearing before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, 
 
“Statement of Patricia Hoffman, Acting Assistant Secretary for Electricity Delivery and Energy 
 
Reliability, U.S. Department of Energy,” March 3, 2009 

 

United States Senate, hearing before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources “Testimony 
 
of Patrick D. Gallagher, Ph.D., Deputy Director, National Institute of Standards and Technology, United 
States Department of Commerce,” March 3, 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vijayan, Jaikumar, “PCI security standard gets flayed at House hearing,” Computerworld, 
 
April 1, 2009 

 

 

 

A–8
 

appendix b:  methodology
 

  

 

 
The globally interconnected information and communications infrastructure often known as 
“cyberspace”underpins every facet of American society and provides critical support for the national 
 
economy, civil infrastructure, security, and military power.  Recognizing its importance to the nation, 
 
the President directed the National and Homeland Security Councils to conduct a 60-day compre­
hensive, “clean-slate”review to assess U.S. cyberspace policies and structures. The review begins to 
 
carry out the President’s pledge to “lead an effort, working with private industry, the research com­
munity and our citizens, to build a trustworthy and accountable cyber infrastructure that is resilient, 
 
protects America’s competitive advantage, and advances our national and homeland security.” 

 

 

 

Defining the scope of the review and establishing a clear end-state goal 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Pursuant to the President’s direction, the White House staff established the review’s scope and 
defined the end-state goal, which was vetted through the Interagency Policy Committee (IPC) pro­
cess and approved by the NSC-HSC Deputies Committee. When achieved, that end goal of trusted 
 
and resilient communications and information infrastructures built through a national public-private 
partnership and action plan will: 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Enhance economic prosperity and facilitate U.S. market leadership in the information and 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

communications industry; 

•	  Enable the United States to deter, prevent, detect, defend against, respond to, and remedi­
 

ate interruptions and damage to U.S. information and communications infrastructure; 

•	  Ensure U.S. capabilities to operate in cyberspace in support of national goals; while at the 
 
 

same time 

•	  Protect privacy rights and preserving civil liberties. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This review addresses all missions and activities associated with the information and communica­
tions infrastructure, including computer network defense, military, and intelligence missions and 
the intersection thereof with information assurance, counter intelligence, counter terrorism and 
 
telecommunications policies.  It seeks to identify the policy gaps, organizational redundancies, 
 
overlapping missions, legal questions, civil liberties and privacy concerns, and other unresolved 
issues across the above mission spaces. The review does not provide an in-depth analysis of options 
 
or an extensive audit of programs; rather, it presents the need for a more balanced and integrated 
 
policy-making approach to address the convergence of the Nation’s economic and security interests 
 
in the digitally-dependent global environment of the 21st Century. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-1
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

Inventorying requirements of cyber, communications, and homeland 
security and counter-terrorism mission areas as well as recommendations 
 
from government advisory boards and private-sector studies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

During the first ten days, the review team inventoried more than 250 requirements (some overlap­
ping) from the relevant Presidential policy directives, executive orders, national strategies, and 
 
studies from government advisory boards and private sector entities.  The review team solicited 
input from departments and agencies on their specific cyber activities, authorities, and capabilities 
 
across these requirements and requested departments and agencies to identify any new or existing 
 
requirements that may not have been identified as part of the initial inventory.  During this phase, 
governmental legal experts identified more than 80 issues associated with the scope of the 60-day 
 
cyber review.  Those lawyers are addressing the highest priority legal issues in papers that identify 
 
common facts, applicable law, differences in legal interpretation, and options for resolution.  In 
 
 
addition, the review team consulted governmental civil liberties and privacy officials to identify 
and assess relevant issues. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Capturing the viewpoints of key cyber stakeholders on requirements to 
meet the end-state goal 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review team reached out to a wide array of stakeholders inside and outside the Federal gov­
ernment.  Recognizing that there are opportunities for everyone—academia, industry, and gov­
ernment—to work together to build a trusted and resilient communications and information 
 
infrastructure, the review team ensured that these stakeholders were aware of the review’s scope 
 
and asked for input on pertinent areas of interest. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The engagement process included over 40 meetings and yielded over 100 papers that named 
specific recommendations and desired goals.  Stakeholders’responses and public statements (e.g., 
 
Congressional testimony) helped to identify key requirements, illuminate policy gaps, suggest areas 
of improvement or collaboration, and frame the decision space for cyberspace policy.  The review 
 
team synthesized the results into overarching themes and issues for further consideration. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In some cases, the individuals who submitted materials did so in their personal capacity as experts, 
 
rather than as representatives or affiliates of particular entities (such as universities).  In all cases, the 
 
participants’submission of information does not imply that they endorse the results of the review 
in part or in full. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Private Sector 
The U.S. depends upon a privately owned, globally operated digital infrastructure. The review team 
 
engaged with industry to continue building the foundation of a trusted partnership. This engage­
ment underscored the importance of developing value propositions that are understood by both 
 
government and industry partners.  It also made clear that increasing information sharing is not 
 
enough; the government must foster an environment for collaboration.  The following industry 
 
groups and venues participated: the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association 
 

 

 

 

 

B-2
 

aPPEndix  b:  mEthodology 

   

 

 

 

 

 
(AFCEA), Business Executives for National Security (BENS), the Business Software Alliance (BSA), 
the Center for Strategic and International Studies’(CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th 
 
 
Presidency, the Communications Sector Coordinating Council (C-SCC), the Cross-Sector Cyber 
Security Working Group (CSCSWG), the Defense Industrial Base Executive Committee, the Financial 
and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC), the Financial Services Sector Coordinating 
 
Council (FS-SCC), the Intelligence and National Security Alliance (INSA), the Internet Security Alliance 
 
 
(ISA), the Information Technology Sector Coordinating Council (IT-SCC), the National Infrastructure 
Advisory Council (NIAC), the National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC), 
 
TechAmerica, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Civil Liberties and Privacy Community 
Robust protections for civil liberties and privacy needed to be considered at the outset. The 60-day 
 
review team began a dialogue with key members of the civil liberties and privacy community, includ­
ing both advocates and independent experts, to discuss measures for protecting the information 
 
and communications infrastructure and how those measures may impact individual users.  The 
 
review team’s civil liberties and privacy community engagement included affiliates of the American 
 
Civil Liberties Union, the American Library Association, the Cato Institute, the Center for Democracy 
 
and Technology, Carnegie Mellon University, Consumer Action, the Center on National Security 
 
Studies, Cornell University, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Electronic Privacy Information 
 
Center, George Washington University, Harvard University, Indiana University, Johns Hopkins 
 
University, OMB Watch, Ohio State University, the National Security Archive, and the University of 
 
California-San Diego. 

 

 

 

 

B-3
 

 

Academic and Research Community 
The academic and open cybersecurity research community has contributed many important tech­
nological innovations and continues to be a valuable resource for the future of the nation’s efforts 
 
to design, build and deploy trustworthy systems. The National Science Foundation assembled more 
 
than sixty academics from universities across the country to contribute to the 60-day cyber policy 
 
review.  Their areas of interest included privacy; computer networking and security; cryptography 
 
and web security; trust and risk; Internet commerce, usability, and feasibility; usable privacy and 
 
security; network security and architecture; theory of network security; biologically-inspired security; 
 
systems security; systems and software engineering; systems and wireless security and botnets; 
 
host security and usability; e-vote security; the power grid; clean-slate security; and theoretical 
computer science and nanotechnology, among other disciplines. These academics were affiliated 
 
with the following institutions:  Brown University, Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia University, 
 
Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Georgia Tech, Indiana University, Johns Hopkins University, 
 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, New York University, North Carolina State University, 
 
Purdue University, Princeton University, SRI International, Stanford University, the University of 
 
California-Berkeley, the University of California-Santa Barbara, the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, the University of New Mexico, the University of Southern California, the University of 
 
Washington, and Yale University. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 

  

State and Local Constituents 
State governments are experiencing many of the same network intrusions and infections as the 
 
 
Federal government.  Recognizing that the Nation must identify ways to leverage State resources, 
provide assistance, and continue cooperation, the 60-day cyber policy review team engaged with 
state Chief Information Security Officers (CISO) and Chief Information Officers (CIO) through the 
 
Office of Management and Budget’s E-Government and Information Technology Office and the 
 
Department of Homeland Security’s US-CERT.  The Multi-State Information Sharing Advisory Council 
(MS-ISAC) and National Governors Association were also engaged to gain a better understanding 
 
of State and local needs. 

 
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Independent U.S. Government Agencies 
 
While it is often preferable to allow markets to create appropriate incentives for desired behaviors, 
 
there are occasions when government intervention is necessary.  Ensuring the health, security, and 
growth potential of the U.S. information and communications infrastructure will require a success­
 
ful partnership between government and the private sector. The 60-day cyber policy review team 
reached out to regulatory agencies for their views on sound regulation for an effective market­
 
place.  The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, 
 
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Federal 
 
Trade Commission, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (a component of the Department 
of the Treasury rather than an independent agency), and the Securities and Exchange Commission 
all provided information or met with the review team. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The 60-day cyber review team also met with independent agencies such as the Social Security 
Administration which uses on-line services to interact daily with the American public.  Additional 
information was considered regarding the Federal Aviation Administration and the informational 
 
services it provides to the Nation. 

 
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The United States Congress 
 
The 60-day cyber policy review team recognizes that Congress must be engaged at every stage of 
the review and will have important roles to play going forward.  Creating and maintaining a trans­
 
parent and connected democracy is a key tenet of the Administration.  Accordingly, the review 
 
team engaged Members and staff of the Congress across 10 committees in both chambers and 
also provided a briefing to the House Cyber Caucus. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Foreign Partners 
 
The United States cannot succeed by acting in isolation, because cyberspace crosses geographic 
 
and jurisdictional boundaries.  The United States must work actively with countries around the 
world to make the digital infrastructure a trusted, safe, and secure place that enables prosperity for 
 
all nations. The 60-day cyber policy review team engaged with key U.S. allies to learn how they are 
 
organizing for this challenge and to understand their mission requirements and priorities.  One area 
needing further study is whether and in what ways elements of the information and communica­
 
tions infrastructure ought to be treated as a global commons. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-4
 

aPPEndix  b:  mEthodology 

   

 

Conducting gap analyses, reviewing program effectiveness, and identifying 

policy gaps, overlaps, and opportunities for collaboration 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review team queried and analyzed responses from 21 Federal departments and agencies to 
 
identify areas where cyberspace policy gaps exist, where mission areas overlap, and where there 
 
are opportunities for collaboration between agencies.  This analysis suggested that any complete 
 
national cyber policy must consider, at a minimum, the following elements: 

 

 

•	  Governance:  Encompasses U.S. Government (USG) structures for policy development and 
 
coordination of operational activities related to the cyber mission across the Executive 
 
Branch. This element includes reviewing overlapping missions and responsibilities that are 
 
the result of authority being vested with various departments and agencies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Architecture:  Addresses the performance, cost, and security characteristics of existing infor­
 
mation and communications systems and infrastructures as well as strategic planning for 
 
the optimal system characteristics that will be needed in the future. This element includes 
standards, identity management, authentication and attribution, software assurance, 
 
research and development, procurement, and supply chain risk management. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Norms of Behavior:  Addresses those elements of law, regulation, and international treaties 
 
 
and undertakings, as well as consensus-based measures, such as best practices, that col­
lectively circumscribe and define standards of conduct in cyberspace. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	  Capacity Building:  Encompasses the overall scale of resources, activities, and capabilities 
 
 
 
required to become a more cyber-competent nation. These include resource requirements, 
 
research and development, public education and awareness, and international partnerships, 
 
and all other activities that allow the USG to interface with its citizenry and workforce to 
build the digital information and communications infrastructure of the future. 

  

The review team also identified areas that cut across all of the foundational elements and included 
 
these in the analysis framework:  Information Sharing and Access; Public-Private Partnerships; Legal, 
 
Policy, and Authorities; Protecting Civil Liberties and Privacy Rights; International Partnerships and 
 
Forums; Incident Response, and Research and Development. 

 

Developing a roadmap to identify short-, mid-, and long-term issues, an 
 
organizational structure to address these issues, and an accountability 
mechanism to ensure compliance 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The review team synthesized the input from the requirements compilation and the extensive 
 
engagement functions to begin developing a roadmap that outlines a way forward. 

 

 

 

Within the roadmap, the team prioritized issues for further consideration. The roadmap includes an 
organizational structure and proposals for accountability mechanisms that will ensure coordinated 
 
policies. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-5
 

cybErSPacE  Policy  rEviEw 

 

 

 
This review produced recommendations on an optimal White House organizational construct to 
coordinate all issues related to U.S. and global information and communications infrastructures and 
capabilities.  It also led to the broad outlines of a proposed interagency cyber policy action plan. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-6
 

Appendix C:  Growth of Modern 


Communications Technology in the United 


States and Development of Supporting 


Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This paper highlights some of the significant historical milestones in the growth and convergence 
 
of modern communications media and information technology in the United States over the last 
century, along with the increasing importance of these media to support commercial, societal, 
and governmental purposes.  It also attempts to trace at a high level some of the corresponding 
 
 
milestones in law, regulation, and policy that were intended to accommodate needs associated 
with these changing uses.  Rooted in the Nation’s experience with wire and radio media and com­
munications in the 20th Century, present U.S. laws and policies governing cyberspace reflect serial 
 
attempts to keep pace with newly emerging challenges presented by the rapid technological and 
 
marketplace changes in communications, computing, networking, and security technologies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

This review is not meant to be exhaustive; nor does it seek to present legal analysis of the laws and 
instruments discussed.1  Rather, it attempts only to capture noteworthy highlights of the histori­
cal progression to survey the landscape of Federal authorities that now apply to information and 
communications technology and systems. The picture that emerges shows this landscape to be an 
elaborate patchwork of domestic and international laws and structures that shape policy options. 

 
  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Early Development and Use of the Media for Civil and 
 
Commercial Purposes 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The development of the electric telegraph in the 1840s and the telephone in the late 1870s made 
 
rapid long-distance communications possible.  Both media began in local areas and then rapidly 
 
spread to connect large parts of the Nation and the world.  Fewer than five years after its introduc­
tion, over 47,000 telephones were being used in the United States.  The growth of these commu­
nications media accelerated the pace of social interaction, migration, commerce, and government 
 
activities. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The telegraph and, to a greater degree, the telephone continued to be the principal media for 
 
telecommunications for most of the 20th Century.  The introduction of undersea cables in the late 
1850s enabled worldwide communications structures and the expansion of the leading telecom­
munications companies to a dominant position in the industry. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1  The contents of this appendix do NOT constitute legal analysis, guidance or advice and may not be relied upon by any Federal officer, 
agency or department.  The legal analysis in this appendix has not undergone an interagency clearance process and does not represent 
an official position of the United States government or any department or agency thereof.  A working group of governmental legal 
experts supporting the 60-day cyber review is examining the function of, and relationship among, some of the various legal authorities 
noted herein.  From among more than 80 issues submitted to the cyber review group, the lawyers group is reviewing the highest prior­
ity legal issues in papers that identify common facts, applicable law, and differences in legal interpretation. 

C-1
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The invention of “wireless telegraphy”(now known as“radio”) at the turn of the 20th Century greatly 
increased the mobility of official and personal communications and made greater volumes of com­
munications possible.  Radio quickly emerged as both a medium for point-to-point (e.g., ship-to­
shore) and point-to-multipoint telecommunications (e.g., police dispatch) and a mass medium for 
information, entertainment, and commerce.  Fueled by technological advances like the amplifying 
vacuum tube in 1913, both coast-to-coast telephony and transatlantic radio transmission became 
 
 
possible, weaving the world even closer together. The utility and consequent worldwide adoption 
and rapid evolution of these new communications media prompted the creation of new legal and 
 
regulatory regimes both internationally and domestically to set rates, standardize terms of service, 
 
and allocate frequency bands to radio services by country. 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The advent of international communications via telegraph led to the International Telegraph Union 
Convention and the formation of the International Telegraph Union in 1865, and the United States 
 
became a member in 1908.  The Department of State has led U.S. delegations to this organization 
 
(and its successor) since the United States first joined it.  Communication via radiotelegraph led to 
 
the International Radiotelegraph Convention in 1906. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

On the domestic front, the Radio Act of 1912 established a radio licensing regime within the 
 
Department of Commerce and required certain ships to carry radios for communications.  Due to 
 
conflict between amateur radio operators and the U.S. Navy and corporations, the Radio Act further 
 
regulated private radio communications, thus setting the precedent for federal regulation of wire­
less communications. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the Radio Act of 1927, Congress directed the transfer of this radio frequency licensing regime 
 
from the Department of Commerce (with the notable exception of federal agencies’ authorization 
 
to use radio frequencies) to a newly created five-member independent agency, the Federal Radio 
 
Commission.  The Radio Act of 1927 also outlawed the interception of private radio messages and 
divulging their contents.  Regulation of wireline communications remained separate from wire­
less, however, with responsibility shared between the Commerce Department and the Interstate 
 
Commerce Commission.  Following on the popularity of radio, television debuted in the 1920s and 
 
by the 1950s was firmly entrenched. 

 
 

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The next noteworthy developments came less than a decade later, in 1934.  First, the International 
 
Telegraph Convention and the International Radiotelegraph Convention combined, and the 
 
International Telegraph Union was renamed the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 
  
In 1949, the ITU became a specialized agency of the United Nations.  The ITU Constitution and 
 
Convention are updated every four years and will next be negotiated again in 2010 at the ITU 
 
Plenipotentiary Conference in Veracruz, Mexico. 

  

 

 

Second, coinciding with the establishment of the ITU, Congress enacted the Communications Act of 
 
1934, which replaced the Federal Radio Commission with a new agency, the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) and consolidated in it authorities for both wireless and wireline communications. 
  
In particular, the Communications Act gave the FCC broad authority to regulate: 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C-2
 

AppenDix  C:  GRowTh  oF  MoDeRn  CoMMUniCATionS
 
   
 

TeChnoLoGy  in  The  UniTeD  STATeS  AnD  DeveLopMenT  oF
 
   

SUppoRTinG  LeGAL  AnD  ReGULAToRy  FRAMewoRkS
 

   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
interstate and foreign commerce in communication by wire and radio so as to make 
available, without discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, 
 
or sex, a rapid efficient, Nation-wide, and world-wide wire and radio communica­
 
tion service with adequate facilities at reasonable charges, for the purpose of the 
national defense, for the purpose of promoting safety of life and property through 
 
the use of wire and radio communication . . . .2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Since its inception, the FCC has remained the primary institution responsible for formulating and 
implementing U.S. policies and regulations governing private, commercial electronic communica­
tions within the United States and between the United States and other countries.  Its jurisdiction 
 
over “communication by wire and radio” has been reinforced by multiple amendments to the 
Communications Act over the years. This has enabled the FCC to affect the economic and technical 
 
development of virtually all types of electronic communications, including telegraph, telephone 
service, cable television, radio, television, wireless telecommunications and, more recently, emerg­
 
ing advanced telecommunications technologies and services.  Separate from the FCC, however, 
the White House with support from the Department of Commerce retained a role in management 
 
of the Federal government’s use of radio spectrum, and in the development of executive branch 
policies related to communications, for another 44 years.3 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Innovation in electronic communications continued to progress during the 1940s.  The need to 
deliver television signals to communities in remote mountain areas led to the early development 
of community antenna television (CATV) systems, which, with the adoption of coaxial cable, and 
 
more recently fiber optic cable, would later evolve into the modern cable television systems that 
 
now compete with telephone companies to deliver video, voice, and data services to customers.  It 
was also during this decade that radio and telephony intersected with the invention of the transistor 
 
and the advent of mobile radiotelephone technology. Broader commercial and public use of mobile 
 
telephone service began in the 1970s, and the first commercial cellular networks were developed in 
1982 and 1983.  By 2004, wireless subscribership in the United States had exceeded 180 million. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The first experimental communications satellite was launched in 1962.  It was the first satellite to 
 
receive, amplify, and simultaneously re-transmit signals from earth.  The development of satellite 
 
communications available not only to governments but also the commercial sector and individuals 
led to even greater volumes of communications worldwide. 

 

 

 
As noted above, for most of the 20th Century, the White House directly managed executive branch 
 
communications policy and the Federal government’s use of the radio spectrum, supported by 
the Department of Commerce.  In 1978, however, the Carter Administration disaggregated and 
 
reorganized telecommunications functions within the Executive Branch.  In Executive Order 12046,4 
President Carter dissolved the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy (OTP) and trans­

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 47 U.S.C. § 151. 
3 Over the course of time, telecommunications policy in the White House was managed variously by a Telecommunications Advisor to 
the President, 1951-53; the Office of Defense Mobilization (later the Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization), 1953-61; the Office of 
Emergency Planning (later the Office of Emergency Preparedness), 1961-70; and, finally, the Office of Telecommunications Policy, 1970­
78.  See National Archives & Records Administration, Records of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, § 417.1 
Administrative History, available at http://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/417.html?template=print. 
4 E.O. 12046, Relating to the transfer of telecommunications functions (March 27, 1978), 43 FR 13349, 3 C.F.R., 1978 Comp., p. 158. 

C-3
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

ferred its responsibilities, respectively, either to the Commerce Department or back to the President 
 
for re-delegation to other components within his Executive Office. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Responsibility for Federal radio spectrum management and development and presentation of 
telecommunications and information policies on behalf of the Executive Branch were transferred to 
 
the Commerce Department, and a new agency, the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA), was established to perform them.5  These responsibilities were codified by 
 
the NTIA Organization Act in 1992.6  By contrast, OTP’s responsibility to advise the President, and 
develop and establish policies, regarding procurement and management of Federal telecommuni­
cations systems, were reassigned to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).7  Similarly, OTP’s 
 
responsibilities relating to emergency and national security communications were reassigned to 
 
the National Security Council (NSC) and the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP).8 

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Use of Communications Technologies in Support of Critical 
 
Government Functions 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

As public adoption of each new generation of communications and information technology grew, 
 
use by government correspondingly increased.  State, local, and tribal authorities have adopted 
these technologies for a variety of applications ranging from more efficient execution of routine 
 
administrative functions and improving government services and access to government informa­
 
tion, to support for law enforcement efforts.  The Federal government has employed evolving 
 
communications and information technologies for all of these purposes as well, but it has also 
 
applied them for critical national functions including foreign affairs, military command and control, 
and intelligence efforts. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For example, following the deployment of the first successful transatlantic cable in 1866, the tele­
graph became an important tool for U.S. diplomacy and remained so through most of the 20th 
Century.  Spurred by the development of Morse Code, the telegraph was widely employed for mili­
tary purposes as well during the U.S. Civil War, and as early as 1904, the U.S. Navy was using wireless 
 
telegraphy for communications with its bases in the Caribbean Sea. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Recognizing the pivotal importance of communications to support the execution of government 
 
functions during a crisis, Congress, by joint resolution in 1918, authorized the President to assume 
 
control of any telegraph, telephone, marine cable or radio system or systems in the U.S. and to 
operate them as needed for the duration of World War I.9  Relying on this Congressional authoriza­
tion, President Wilson issued a proclamation asserting possession, control and supervision over 
 

  

 
5  While NTIA is the principal adviser to the President on matters related to telecommunications, other Federal agencies routinely repre­
sent executive branch views on matters related to the public safety and national security before the FCC.  For example, in the context of 

the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA), the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation 

have submitted comments regarding published industry standards that do not satisfy CALEA’s requirements or adequately address law 

enforcement and national security equities.
 
6 47 U.S.C. § 901 et seq.
 
7 E.O. 12046, supra note 4, § 3-1.
 
8 Id. § 4.  These responsibilities included the President’s war power functions under Section 706 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 

606,  policy direction of the development and operation of the National Communications System (NCS), and coordinating the develop­
ment of policy, plans, programs and standards for the mobilization and use of the Nation’s telecommunications resources during a crisis. 

 
Id. §§ 4-101, 4-201, 4-301.
 
9 Pub. Res. No. 38, 40 Stat. 904.
 

C-4
 

AppenDix  C:  GRowTh  oF  MoDeRn  CoMMUniCATionS
 
   
 

TeChnoLoGy  in  The  UniTeD  STATeS  AnD  DeveLopMenT  oF
 
   

SUppoRTinG  LeGAL  AnD  ReGULAToRy  FRAMewoRkS
 

   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

every telegraph and telephone system within the United States.10  To preserve support for critical 
government communications needs during times of crisis, Congress later included in Section 706 
 
of the Communications Act of 1934 authority for the President to control private communications 
 
systems within the United States during wartime.11 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

As governments around the world increased their use of electronic communications for diplomatic, 
 
military, and other functions, vulnerabilities of long-range radio communications made it possible to 
 
intercept foreign communications from faraway locations without the knowledge of the communi­
cators. The potential for “signals intelligence”(SIGINT) greatly increased. Conversely, the potential for 
 
interception of electronic communications led to the need for improved communications security 
 
(COMSEC) technologies and efforts:  Nations including the United States sought more sophisticated 
 
means to protect their communications from interception, generally relying on electromechanical 
machines to encipher and decipher messages.  COMSEC and Computer Security (COMPUSEC) prac­
tices were merged in the late 1980s to create Information Systems Security and, later, Information 
 
Assurance.  Pursuant to Executive Order 12333, as amended, the Secretary of Defense serves as 
 
the Executive Agent for SIGINT and the Director of the National Security Agency (NSA) serves as 
 
Functional Manager for SIGINT and National Manager for National Security Systems.12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

Use of electronic surveillance for legitimate purposes such as intelligence and law enforcement 
 
investigation, as well as for illegitimate purposes, spurred enactment of a number of laws intended 
to comprehensively address such activities.  Congress enacted the first federal wiretap statute as 
a temporary measure to prevent disclosure of domestic telephone or telegraph communications 
 
during the First World War.13  The Communications Act of 1934 extended the ban on intercepting and 
divulging of messages to telephone and telegraph communications.  In 1968, Congress passed Title 
 
III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act (the Federal Wiretap Act),14  and 18 years later 
enacted the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA),15  which substantially revised 
 
Title III to provide coverage for the technological advances developed in the area of electronic com­
munications since the passage of the original act. In 1978, Congress enacted the Foreign Intelligence 
 
Surveillance Act (FISA),16  which established the framework for conducting electronic surveillance 
 
for foreign intelligence purposes.17 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

World events and changes in the communications marketplace also prompted changes in govern­
ment organizational structures and policies.  In response to communications problems experienced 
 
during the Cuban Missile Crisis, President Kennedy in 1963 established the National Communications 
 

 

 

 

 

 

10 40 Stat. 1807-1808.
 
11 47 U.S.C. § 606; see also 47 U.S.C. § 305 (Presidential authority over all U.S. government stations).
 
12 E.O. 12333, United States Intelligence Activities (December 4, 1981), as amended by E.O. 13284 (2003), E.O. 13355 (2004), and E.O. 13470 

(2008).  E.O. 12333 encompasses much more than the discrete issues noted here; as amended, it provides the governance framework for 

all United States intelligence activities.
 
13 Pub. L. No. 230, 65th Cong., 2d Sess., 40 Stat. 1017-18 (1918), 56 Cong. Rec. 10761-765.
 
14 18 U.S.C. § 2510 et seq.
 
15 Pub. L. No. 99-508.
 
16 50 U.S.C. § 1801 et seq.
 
 
17  While Title III governs domestic surveillance and FISA relates to surveillance conducted for foreign intelligence purposes, the two laws 

share several common characteristics.  Both prescribe authorization procedures that must be followed before electronic surveillance 

can be conducted, including judicial approval of surveillance applications; minimization of interceptions by surveilling officials; and 

limitations on the use of intercepted information.  Both statutes also impose criminal and civil penalties on unauthorized surveillance 

activities.  See U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Resource Manual, 1073 The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, available at http://
 
www.usdoj.gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/title9/crm01073.htm.
 

C-5
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

System (NCS).18  Two decades later, responding in part to the break-up of AT&T, President Reagan re­
chartered and strengthened the NCS, increasing its membership and establishing an administrative 
 
structure to ensure that national telecommunications infrastructure is responsive to national security 
 
and emergency preparedness (NS/EP) needs.19  By its terms, the executive order was intended to 
 
support “improved execution of national security and emergency preparedness telecommunica­
tions functions,” but it did not address information systems, or converged information and com­
munications networks which now provide the foundation for most critical NS/EP communications 
requirements. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Executive Order 12472 continued the disaggregation and realignment of telecommunications 
responsibilities started in E.O. 12046, especially with respect to NS/EP functions.  First, it established 
 
two new roles, Executive Agent and Manager of the NCS, who were responsible for oversight and 
 
day-to-day administration of the NCS organization.20  It also bifurcated responsibilities for certain 
NS/EP functions among elements within the Executive Office of the President (EOP). For example, it 
 
charged the NSC to provide policy direction for the exercise of the President’s war power functions 
 
under the Communications Act but gave the OSTP responsibility to direct the exercise of those 
functions.21  The E.O. created a similar split of responsibilities with respect to the exercise of the 
 
President’s non-wartime emergency telecommunications functions; the identification, allocation, 
 
and use of the Nation’s telecommunications resources during a crisis or emergency; and planning 
and oversight activities.22 

  
 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Emergence of Computing, the Internet, and the Convergence of 
 
Information and Communications Technology 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

Computers. The development of electronic computing systems following World War II fostered the 
 
transition from analog to digital technology.  Increasing miniaturization led to high adaptability of 
 
computers for many different modes of communications.  The first e-mail program was created in 
 
1971, and the first PC modem was invented in 1977, enabling digital computers to communicate 
with one another over analog telephone lines. The first popular computers for the mass consumer 
 
market first emerged in the early 1980s, coincident in time with the emergence of the Internet as a 
 
global network-of-networks. This new, retail computing capability was quickly adopted by govern­
ment, private commercial entities, and the general public. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As the data speeds of modems progressively increased, computer users were encouraged to con­
nect to the telephone network to access newly-emerging online services (e.g., CompuServe and 
 
America Online), which, in turn, fueled the market for new online applications and services of value 
 
to consumers. The World Wide Web, first conceptualized in 1984, came into widespread public use 
 
a decade later as a ubiquitous environment accessible through the telephone network. The corre­

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 Presidential Memorandum of August 21, 1963.
 
 
19  E.O. 12472, Assignment of national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications functions (April 3, 1984), 49 FR 13471.  In partic­
ular, it established an interagency committee comprised of those 24 federal departments and agencies that own or lease telecommuni­
cations assets identified as part of the NCS or which bear policy, regulatory, or enforcement responsibilities of importance to NS/EP.
 
 
20  The Executive Agent function was originally assigned to the Secretary of Defense, but was later reassigned to the Secretary of Home­
land Security upon the creation of that Department following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.  See 6 U.S.C. § 121(g)(2); see 

also E.O. 13286, Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, In Connection With the Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of 

Homeland Security (February 28, 2003) § 46.
 
21 E.O. 12472, supra note 19, § 2(a)
 
 
22  Id. §§ 2(b), (c).
 

 

 

C-6
 

AppenDix  C:  GRowTh  oF  MoDeRn  CoMMUniCATionS
 
   
 

TeChnoLoGy  in  The  UniTeD  STATeS  AnD  DeveLopMenT  oF
 
   

SUppoRTinG  LeGAL  AnD  ReGULAToRy  FRAMewoRkS
 

   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

sponding progressive migration from the traditional copper telephone infrastructure and co-axial 
 
cable to fiber optic infrastructure has delivered increased bandwidth and speed to users. 

 

 

As information technology and systems evolved, Congress enacted a separate body of law governing 
 
 
computers and information systems.  The Brooks Act,23  enacted in 1965, gave the National Bureau 
 
of Standards—now the Department of Commerce’s National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST)—responsibilities for developing automatic data processing standards and guidelines pertain­
 
ing to Federal computer systems.  The responsibilities assigned to NBS, however, did not apply to 
 
the procurement of automatic data processing equipment or services by the Central Intelligence 
 
Agency or to what are now called “national security systems” by the Department of Defense.  The 
Computer Security Act of 1987,24  which further amended the Brooks Act, gave NIST the authority for 
 
developing standards and guidelines for the security of non-national security systems and required 
NIST to collaborate with NSA. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA)25  amended the Computer 
Security Act, leaving intact the roles of NIST and NSA, but it gave OMB expanded information secu­
rity oversight responsibilities over all Executive Branch departments and agencies; it authorized 
 
the Director of OMB to require agencies to follow the standards and guidelines developed by NIST, 
review agency security programs annually and approve or disapprove them, and take authorized 
 
actions to ensure compliance.  FISMA did not change, however, the dichotomy that exists in the 
treatment of civilian and national security systems. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

While national security systems continued to be excluded from NIST oversight,26  other regimes 
 
were established to deal with them, most notably National Security Directive 42.  NSD-42, issued 
 
in July 1990, expanded the scope of a previously chartered national security telecommunications 
 
policy coordinating body to encompass information systems as well.  In addition, it established a 
 
new body, the National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Committee 
 
(NSTISSC). The NSTISSC was charged, among other things, to provide systems security guidance for 
national security systems for Executive Branch departments and agencies and to develop appropri­
 
ate “operating policies, procedures, guidelines, instructions, standards, objectives, and priorities as 
may be required . . . .”27  The NSTISSC shared many of the structural characteristics of the NCS, includ­
ing an interagency membership structure (which included the Manager of the NCS) administered 
by an Executive Agent, which function was assigned to the Secretary of Defense, and a National 
Manager (the Director of NSA) that assists the Secretary in executing assigned information assur­
ance responsibilities.28 

 
 

 
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23 Public Law 89-306, as amended by the Paperwork Reduction Reauthorization Act of 1986, Public Laws 99-500 and 99-591. 
24 Public Law 100-235. 
25 Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. 107-296; see also Title III, e-Gov Act of 2002, Pub. L. 107-347. 
26 15 U.S.C. § 278g-3, which incorporates the definition of NSS contained in 44 U.S.C. § 3542(b)(2).  NSS are defined as “any information 
system (including any telecommunications system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor of an agency, or other organi­
zation on behalf of an agency, the function, operation, or use of which — (A) involves intelligence activities; (B) involves cryptologic 
activities related to national security; (C) involves command and control of military forces; (D) involves equipment that is an integral part 
of a weapon or weapons system; or (E) is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions provided that this definition 
does not apply to a system that is used for routine administrative and business applications (including payroll, finance, logistics, and 
personnel management applications).” 
27 National Security Directive 42, National Policy for the Security of National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems (July 
5, 1990), § 5(b).  The NSTISSC has since been renamed the Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS).  E.O. 13231, Critical Infrastruc­
ture Protection in the Information Age (October 16, 2001). 
 
28  Id. §§ 5, 6, 7.  In particular, NSA may provide technical assistance to owners of national security systems as well as conduct vulnerability 
assessments to those systems and disseminate information on threats to and vulnerabilities of national security systems. 

C-7
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Development of the Internet.  Consistent with the need to ensure the continuity of communications 
 
for these critical national security needs, the Federal government, in 1962, commissioned a study 
 
on how the government could maintain command and control over its missiles and bombers after 
 
a nuclear attack.  This effort yielded a concept for a network that would break up the information 
into “packets”sent through various computers and could be reassembled at the destination location. 
  
Unlike the conventional hub and spoke telephone system available at the time, an attack on any one 
 
 
part of the proposed system would allow the undamaged portions to continue operating.  During 
the 1960s, what is now the Department of Defense (DOD) Advanced Research Projects Agency 
 
(DARPA) sought to develop this network idea, eventually establishing ARPANET, a computer link 
 
between the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Stanford Research Institute, in 1969.29 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARPANET expanded significantly during the 1980s, interconnecting with numerous educational 
institutions and a growing number of companies that were participating in government research 
 
projects or providing services to entities participating in such projects.  Moreover, during this 
 
time, other packet-switched networks were emerging in the United States and elsewhere around 
the world (e.g., Europe, Australia, Japan, Singapore, and Thailand) and seeking to connect to this 
 
“Internet.”30  This network-of-networks continued to grow over the course of the next decade until, 
 
in 1997, the United States government undertook to privatize the Internet’s domain name and 
addressing system (DNS) in a manner intended to increase competition and facilitate international 
participation in its management. 

  
 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Shift in the Law, and the Emergence of “Cybersecurity” 

 

As the Internet grew, the government, like the private sector, rapidly adopted this new medium 
 
for a wide variety of applications including interconnecting the civilian department and agency, 
 
defense, and intelligence community networks across the government to facilitate more rapid com­
munications and common processing tasks. While this evolution was progressing, policy makers in 
 
Congress and the Executive Branch were separately considering dramatic changes to the legal and 
 
regulatory framework that had governed communications technologies and markets for decades. 
  
Invigorated by the emergence of competition in the long distance telephone market following the 
 
breakup of AT&T, policy makers reexamined regulatory frameworks that had historically perpetu­
ated monopolistic market structures (e.g., local exchange telephone and cable television services) 
 
and sought to replace them with new regimes that would stimulate the emergence of competition, 
 
lowering costs for consumers and accelerating the development and deployment of advanced 
telecommunications infrastructures. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

29 Following on this research, international packet switching network standards were developed in collaboration with entities in other 
countries under the auspices of the ITU.  During the 1970s, DARPA pursued further work on a network protocol that would permit 
multiple computer networks to interconnect and communicate with each other, which led to the development of the transfer control 
protocol/internet protocol (TCP/IP) in the late 1970s.  At this time, the term “internetworking” was coined, eventually leading to the term 
“Internet” as a shorthand term for this network of networks. 
30 In the mid-1980s, NASA, the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Department of Energy (DOE) worked on development of a 
successor to ARPANET and created the first multi-protocol wide area network, called the NASA Science Internet or NSI.  As a high-speed, 
multi-protocol, international network, NSI provided connectivity to over 20,000 scientists across all seven continents.  Also in the 1980s, 
CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, installed and operated TCP/IP, first, to interconnect its internal computer systems 
and, then, to provide external connections to other computer systems worldwide. 

C-8
 

AppenDix  C:  GRowTh  oF  MoDeRn  CoMMUniCATionS
 
   
 

TeChnoLoGy  in  The  UniTeD  STATeS  AnD  DeveLopMenT  oF
 
   

SUppoRTinG  LeGAL  AnD  ReGULAToRy  FRAMewoRkS
 

   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Telecommunications Act of 199631  represented the first major overhaul of telecommunications 
law since the enactment of the Communications Act.  Its stated purpose was to “promote competi­
 
tion and reduce regulation in order to secure lower prices and higher quality services for American 
telecommunications consumers and encourage the rapid deployment of new telecommunica­
tions technologies.”32  The 1996 Act significantly deregulated U.S. telecommunications markets, 
 
eliminating regulatory barriers that had previously prevented various types of service providers 
 
from competing with one another: it opened the door for local telephone companies to provide 
 
long distance services and for long distance carriers and cable television operators to provide local 
phone service.  Cognizant of the potential of then-emerging digital communications networks, the 
 
1996 Act articulated that: 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the policy of the United States [is] . . . to promote the continued development of 
 
the Internet and other interactive computer services and other interactive media 
 
. . . [and] preserve the vibrant and competitive free market that presently exists 
   
 
for the Internet and other interactive computer services, unfettered by Federal or 
 
State regulation . . . .33 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The thirteen years since the Telecommunications Act was passed have witnessed significant growth 
and transformation in the telecommunications marketplace.  Advanced wireline and, increasingly, 
 
wireless broadband network infrastructures have been (and continue to be) deployed that provide 
 
an increasingly diverse array of applications and services to both commercial and individual users, 
 
accessible over a growing variety of fixed and mobile devices.  They support the clearing of bil­
lions of dollars in transactions among financial institutions, trading on exchanges, online banking, 
 
e-commerce, as well as billing and account management for many retailers and service providers; 
 
they facilitate rapid, global communications and the storage and transfer of enormous volumes of 
 
information, including proprietary business information, intellectual property, customer account and 
transaction information, and other personally identifiable private user information such as health 
 
records; they make an array of heretofore inaccessible information available at the user’s fingertips 
 
with a few keystrokes.  They have also become essential elements in the operation and manage­
ment of a range of critical infrastructure functions, including transportation systems, shipping, the 
 
electric power grid, oil and gas pipelines, nuclear plants, water systems, critical manufacturing, and 
many others. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The capabilities of these systems have also changed the way governments at all levels do business: 
 
they enable advanced communications for law enforcement, public safety, and emergency response 
 
officials; make government more accessible (e.g., e-FOIA); and have led to innovative new means 
 
of delivering a wide variety of services and benefits to citizens (including motor vehicle licensing 
and registration, social security benefits, tax administration, and grants management).  As noted 
 
above, they also support continuity of the most critical functions of national government, including 
 
command and control of the armed forces, foreign affairs, intelligence, crisis response, and national 
criminal investigation and law enforcement. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

31 Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56.
 
 
32  Id.
 
33 47 U.S.C. § 230(b).  In connection with this policy, the 1996 Act also included a “good Samaritan” provision to protect Internet Service 

Providers (ISPs) from liability when they act in good faith to block or screen offensive content hosted on their systems.  Id. § 230(c).
 

C-9
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

 
As dependence on these converged systems grew, users and network managers became aware 
of new types of vulnerabilities in the infrastructure.  Moreover, the rapid emergence of the online 
 
 
commercial environment, the growing monetary value of transactions, and the increasing volume 
of sensitive information accessible online have also increased the online threat landscape by fuel­
ing the growth of organized criminal elements and other adversaries.  Not only was it necessary to 
 
protect the information content, it became necessary to ensure the confidentiality of information 
 
as well as the authenticity of its sender and recipient. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Although these trends increased following the 1996 Telecommunications Act, they had already 
 
been under way for some time. Thus, by 1998, as the scope of the risk associated with these depen­
dences expanded to encompass not only converged government communications and information 
systems, but also the systems supporting national critical infrastructures, policy makers began to 
 
recognize the need for an integrated effort that coupled the capabilities of government and the 
 
private sector to mitigate these risks. “Cybersecurity”emerged as a distinct policy area.  Presidential 
 
Decision Directive 63 (PDD-63), signed in May 1998, established a structure under White House 
 
leadership to coordinate the activities of designated lead departments and agencies, in partnership 
 
with their counterparts from the private sector, to “eliminate any significant vulnerability to both 
  
physical and cyber attacks on our critical infrastructures, including especially our cyber systems.”34 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
  

As these efforts matured, the White House in late 2001 augmented the structure by formally char­
tering the President’s Critical Infrastructure Protection Board, an interagency body with cabinet-level 
representation from the departments and agencies and chaired by the Special Advisor to the 
 
President for Cyberspace Security in the NSC who was“assisted by an appropriately sized staff within 
the White House Office.”35  The board was charged to“recommend policies and coordinate programs 
 
for protecting information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness 
 
communications, and the physical assets that support such systems.” This mandate also included 
specific responsibilities to coordinate, in consultation with relevant offices, a range of functions 
including: outreach to and consultation with the private sector and State and local government, 
 
information sharing, cyber incident response programs and policies, federal government research 
and development for information system security and emergency preparedness communications, 
 
law enforcement programs against cyber crime, international information infrastructure protection, 
 
and legislative recommendations relating to protection of information systems.36 

  
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

This coordinating function continued until March 2003, when the White House dissolved the 
 
board and its supporting staff function incident to the creation of the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS).  The Homeland Security Act of 2002 (HSA) made the Department of Homeland 
Security responsible for coordinating national efforts to protect critical infrastructure across all 
sectors, including information technology and telecommunications systems.  It also gave the 
 
Secretary of Homeland Security wide access to information relating to threats of terrorism against 
 
the United States and to all information concerning infrastructure or other vulnerabilities of the 
 
U.S. to terrorism. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

34 Presidential Decision Directive 63, Critical Infrastructure Protection, May 22, 1998, at section II.
 
35 Executive Order No. 13231, Critical Infrastructure Protection in the Information Age, October 16, 2001 §§ 3, 7.
 
 
36  Id. § 5.
 

C-10
 

AppenDix  C:  GRowTh  oF  MoDeRn  CoMMUniCATionS
 
   
 

TeChnoLoGy  in  The  UniTeD  STATeS  AnD  DeveLopMenT  oF
 
   

SUppoRTinG  LeGAL  AnD  ReGULAToRy  FRAMewoRkS
 

   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

From an operational standpoint, the HSA transferred to DHS responsibility for managing the National 
Communications System (NCS) as well as the Federal Computer Incident Response Center (FedCIRC), 
 
 
which had previously been operated by the General Services Administration.  Within months after 
 
coming into existence, DHS established the National Cyber Security Division within its Office of 
Infrastructure Protection as a differentiated component to manage the Department’s cyber security 
 
 
policy and operational responsibilities.37  Shortly after creating the NSCD, DHS established the United 
 
States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) as the successor to FedCIRC, to serve as the 
 
principal cyber watch, warning, and analysis center for Federal civilian departments and agencies 
and an operational point of coordination with the private sector for cyber incident response. 

  

 

 

 

 

 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, issued in December 2003, superseded PDD-63.  It 
 
reiterated U.S. policy to enhance the protection of the nation’s critical infrastructure, including its 
 
cyber infrastructure.  It further assigned the Secretary of Homeland Security the responsibility for 
coordinating the nation’s overall critical infrastructure protection efforts across all sectors, working 
 
in cooperation with designated sector-specific agencies within the Executive Branch.  It designated 
 
DHS as a the lead agency for the nation’s Information Technology and Communications sectors, to 
 
share threat information, help assess vulnerabilities, and encourage appropriate protective action 
and the development of contingency plans. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Important Developments 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Complementing these statutes affecting the structure and economic regulation of the communica­
 
tions marketplace, Congress has also over time enacted various laws intended to protect the public 
from abuses of these communications platforms and to facilitate their use in support of criminal 
 
investigations and other law enforcement purposes.  The Communications Assistance for Law 
 
Enforcement Act (CALEA), enacted in 1994, amended both the Wiretap Act and ECPA.  It further 
defined the existing statutory obligation of telecommunications carriers to assist law enforce­
 
ment in executing electronic surveillance, including over wireless and digital communications 
 
systems, pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization.  CALEA was intended to preserve 
 
law enforcement’s ability to conduct lawful electronic surveillance over emerging digital networks 
 
while preserving public safety, the public’s right to privacy, and the telecommunications industry’s 
competitiveness. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To address the lack of criminal laws available to fight emerging computer crimes following the 
 
advent of computers as consumer electronics items in the early 1980s, Congress enacted the 
 
Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, which included provisions to address the unauthorized 
 
access and use of computers and computer networks.38  Two years later, that was followed by the 
 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 (CFAA).  The CFAA clarified provisions in the 1984 law and 
also criminalized additional computer-related acts, including theft of property via computer and 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37 In the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act, Pub. L. 109-295 (Oct. 4, 2006), 120 Stat. 1355, Congress amended the HSA to 
reorganize DHS, establishing an Office for Cybersecurity and Communications under a new Assistant Secretary.  Id., 120 Stat. 1409.  This 
office incorporated NCSD, the Office of the Manager of NCS, and a new Office of Emergency Communications, which was also estab­
lished by the statute. 
38 18 U.S.C. § 1030. 

C-11
 

CybeRSpACe  poLiCy  Review 

 

 

 

 

 
the intentional alteration, damage, or destruction of data belonging to others.39  The USA PATRIOT 
Act of 2001, passed in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and reauthorized 
in 2005, provided a range of tools to support law enforcement capabilities to combat terrorism, 
 
including enhancing law enforcement’s surveillance capabilities. 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Conclusion 

 
The history of electronic communications in the United States reflects steady, robust technological 
innovation punctuated by government efforts to regulate, manage, or otherwise respond to issues 
 
 
presented by these new media, including security concerns.  The iterative nature of the statutory 
and policy developments over time has led to a mosaic of government laws and structures gov­
erning various parts of the landscape for information and communications security and resiliency. 
  
Effectively addressing the fragmentary and diverse nature of the technical, economic, legal, and 
 
 
policy challenges will require a leadership and coordination framework that can stitch this patchwork 
together into an integrated whole. 

 

 
39  See http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/ccmanual/01ccma.pdf. 

C-12
 

History Informs our Future

The Radio Era
1900 - 1970

Late 1940s: 

transition from 
analog to digitals; 

increasing 

miniaturization

1971: e-mail 

program 
created 

Y
G
O
L
O
N
H
C
E
T

1920: Int’l Orgs

managed 

radio frequency

1908 :
U.S.

joins ITU

1900 :
Radio

1962:

communications
satellite launched  

1940:

Transistor and 

cellular 
telephone

1960s: DARPA 

develops ARPANET

The Computer Era

1945 – present

The Satellite and Networks Era
1960s - present

Significant Laws and Governance

1960s - present

1994:

1970s: widespread 

use of cellular

phones ;

TCP/IP developed

1977:

PC modem
invented  

Late 1980s:

TCP/IP protocol 

adopted and used by 

institutions 
worldwide

1983 :

commercial 

cellular networks 

developed

NSDD-97 (1983)
National Security

Telecommunications 

Policy

World Wide Web,
first meeting of 

the WWW 
consortium ;

1990s:

Fiber optics 
surpasses 

traditional cable

Congress codifies 

existing State 
Department 
authority over 
foreign policy 

related to 

communications 
and information 

policy

1.0B PCs in
use W/W

HSPD-7 (2003) 

Critical 

Infrastructure 
Identification , 
Prioritization, 
and Protection

2006:

latest revision 

of  ITU 

Constitution/
Convention

1900

1920       1940        1960        1970        1975            1980                1985                               1990 

1995                      2000            2005            2010 

Radio Act of 1912;
Regulated private 
communications 

1918, Congress 

outlaws wiretapping

W
A
L

Radio Act of 1927;
Outlawed intercept

of private 

communication 

1928 case: 
Olmstead

1975:

ARPANET

turned over to 
DoD’s Defense 
Communication 

Pres. Memo 252 (1963), 

Established National 

Communications System 

Agency

Brooks Act, 1965 
Established NIST
responsibility for
IT standards and 
technical assistance

1967 case:

Katz v.  United States

EO 12472 (1984) 
National security
and emergency 
preparedness 

telecommunications 

functions

EO 12333 (1981) 

United States 
Intelligence 
Activities

Electronic 

Communications 

Privacy Act

of 1986

Computer Security 

Act of 1987 

Counterfeit Access 

Device and

Computer Fraud and 

Abuse Act, 1984

Communications Act of 1934;

Formed the FCC

Modern ITU formed by merger of 

ITU Convention and IRC, 1934

Foreign Intelligence 

Surveillance Act
of 1978  (FISA)

C-13

Telecommun

-ications 
Act of 1996

Health 
Insurance

Portability and
Accountability 

Act of 1996

PDD-63
(1998)
Critical 

Infrastructure 

Protection

Gramm
Leach
Bliley 
Act

(1999)

Protect 
America
Act, 2007

FISA

Amendments
Act,  2008 

2002:
Federal 

Information 

Security  

Management Act;  
Homeland Security 

Act of 2002; 

Sarbanes-Oxley 

Act 

Intelligence
Reform and 
Terrorism

Prevention Act

2004

NSPD-54/
HSPD-23 
(2008)  

USA 

PATRIOT 
Act, 2001

USA PATRIOT Act and 
Terrorist Prevention 

Reauthorization Act, 2005 

