Draft NIST Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.1 

December 5, 2017 

 
1.   Introduction 

This companion Roadmap to the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity (Cybersecurity Framework or the Framework) describes plans for 
advancing the Framework development process, discusses the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology’s (NIST’s) next steps with the Framework, and identifies key 
areas of development, alignment, and collaboration. This plan provides a description of 
anticipated future activities related to the Framework and offers stakeholders another 
opportunity to participate actively in the continuing Framework development process. 
While the plan is focused on the Cybersecurity Framework, the results of work described 
in this roadmap are expected to be useful to a much broader audience to improve 
cybersecurity risk management in much the same way that the Framework itself is useful 
to many sectors and organizations that are not strictly defined as part of the critical 
infrastructure. This Roadmap reflects revisions to the original planning document 
released in February 20141 when Version 1.0 of the Framework was released, and 
contains updates corresponding with draft Version 1.1 of the Framework. 

2.   Evolution of the Cybersecurity Framework 

In accordance with Executive Order 13636,2 NIST utilized a year-long consultative process 
with stakeholders to create the Cybersecurity Framework. Released February 12, 2014, the 
Framework is an approach to cybersecurity risk management that aligns policy 
requirements, business needs, and technological methodologies. 

Since the release of the Cybersecurity Framework, in its role defined in the Cybersecurity 
Enhancement Act of 2014,3 NIST continues to be a convener of a public-private partnership 
and “facilitate and support the development of a voluntary, consensus-based, industry-led 
set of standards, guidelines, best practices, methodologies, procedures, and processes to 
cost-effectively reduce cyber risks.” Accordingly, NIST: 

●  Issued a Request for Information (RFI),4 December 11, 2015, regarding 

Cybersecurity Framework use; 

●  Published an RFI Analysis5 on March 24, 2016; 
●  Hosted a Workshop6 on April 6-7, 2016, in Gaithersburg, Maryland; 

                                                 
1 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/roadmap-021214.pdf  
2 [LINK] https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/executive-order-improving-critical-
infrastructure-cybersecurity  
3 [LINK] https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/1353/text  
4 [LINK] https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2015/12/11/2015-31217/views-on-the-framework-for-
improving-critical-infrastructure-cybersecurity  
5 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2016/03/cybersecurity-framework-comments-reveal-views-
framework-update-increased  
6 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/04/cybersecurity-framework-workshop-2016  
 

 

1 

DRAFT 

●  Published a proposed Draft Version 1.17 of the Cybersecurity Framework on 

January 10, 2017. This update sought to clarify, refine, and enhance the 
Framework, while minimizing change to current and potential users; 

●  Issued a Request for Comment (RFC),8 through the Federal Register, on the 

Cybersecurity Framework draft proposed updates;  

●  Received and analyzed over 120 responses to the RFC and published an initial RFC 

analysis9 on May 15, 2017; 

●  Hosted a workshop on May 16-17, 2017, to further discuss the proposed draft 

revisions10 and published a summary of the workshop;11 and 

●  Published for public comment a proposed Draft 2 of Version 1.1. of the 

Cybersecurity Framework on December 5, 2017. This update seeks to further 
clarify, refine, and enhance the Framework, while minimizing change to current 
and potential users.  

The Cybersecurity Framework is a living document, and will continue to be updated and 
improved with the input and feedback from industry, government, and academia. 

3.  Evolution of the Roadmap 

As the Framework has continued to evolve, so too has the Roadmap. Considering the 
continuous advancements in technology and the evolving cybersecurity landscape, the 
Roadmap will continue to highlight areas of development relevant to the Framework and 
also of broader interest. Topics previously addressed by the Roadmap such as 
Authentication and Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) have been researched, 
developed, and incorporated into the current draft of the Cybersecurity Framework 
Version 1.1. These focus areas may continue to be highlighted in future versions of the 
Roadmap as these areas evolve and mature or they may be replaced or supplemented by 
additional topics. 

New topics included in this version of the Roadmap include: 

●  Cyber-Attack Lifecycle; 
●  Measuring Cybersecurity; 
●  Referencing Techniques; 
●  Small Business Awareness and Resources; and 
●  Governance and Enterprise Risk Management. 

The new Cyber-Attack Lifecycle topic includes the Automated Indicator Sharing and Data 
Analytics items from the previous Roadmap, and incorporates the topic of coordinated 
vulnerability disclosure. The title Cyber-Attack Lifecycle reflects the importance of a 
holistic, approach that maximizes the value of threat intelligence, discerns threat events 
from the large volumes of available data, and reduces timelines to receive vulnerability 
information from researchers. To address a growing need for cybersecurity measurement 
that is aligned and supportive of organizational objectives and decisions, Measuring 

                                                 
7 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2017/01/nist-releases-update-cybersecurity-framework  
8 [LINK] https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/25/2017-01599/proposed-update-to-the-framework-
for-improving-critical-infrastructure-cybersecurity  
9 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/05/16/rfc2-response-initial-analysis-20170515.pdf  
10 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/05/cybersecurity-framework-workshop-2017  
11 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/2017/07/21/cybersecurity_framework_workshop_summary.pdf  

2 

DRAFT 

 

Cybersecurity is added as a Roadmap item. Referencing Techniques is added to provide 
Framework stakeholders an understanding of future intent for the Informative References 
portion of the Core, as well as the general process and methodology of relating one or more 
reference documents. A continued focus on cybersecurity best practices and 
implementation relative to small businesses is important to our Nation’s cumulative cyber-
posture. Finally, a continued stakeholder focus on board governance, organizational 
governance, and enterprise risk management necessitates a specific topic. 

Three previous Roadmap topics are renamed in this update. Authentication was renamed 
Identity Management to account for a broader range of important technical topics including 
authorization and identity proofing. Technical Privacy Standards has been renamed 
Privacy Engineering to better align with the concepts in related NIST publications such as 
Interagency Report 8062 - An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in 
Federal Systems. Conformance Assessment has been renamed Confidence Mechanisms to 
reflect a broader range of activities that instill digital trust. 

As NIST makes advances and receives feedback from public and private stakeholders on 
the Cybersecurity Framework and the Roadmap, these documents will continue to be 
revised and updated. 

4.  Areas for Development, Alignment, and Collaboration 

Several high-priority areas for development, alignment, and collaboration are listed by 
section below. 

4.1. Confidence Mechanisms 
4.2. Cyber-Attack Lifecycle 
4.3. Cybersecurity Workforce 
4.4. Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management 
4.5. Federal Agency Cybersecurity Alignment 
4.6. Governance and Enterprise Risk Management 
4.7. Identity Management 
4.8. International Aspects, Impacts, and Alignment 
4.9. Measuring Cybersecurity 
4.10. Privacy Engineering 
4.11. Referencing Techniques 
4.12. Small Business Awareness and Resources 

While this list of high-priority areas is not intended to be exhaustive, these are important 
topics identified by stakeholders that should inform future versions of the Framework. 
They require continued focus to evolve areas that have yet to be developed sufficiently or 
where further research into their relationship to the Cybersecurity Framework is needed. 

To be effective in addressing these areas, NIST will work with stakeholders to identify 
primary challenges, solicit input to address those identified needs, and collaboratively 
develop and execute action plans for addressing them. These areas may also reflect 
potential capabilities in the Cybersecurity Framework Core. As progress is made in each of 
these areas, they can be used in conjunction with, or as part of, the Framework to enhance 
or improve cybersecurity programs. 

 

3 

DRAFT 

4.1. Confidence Mechanisms 

Previously entitled Conformity Assessment, this Roadmap section was retitled to reflect a 
broader range of activities that instill digital trust. Whereas conformity assessment can be 
used to show that a product, service, or system meets specified cybersecurity risk 
management requirements, Confidence Mechanisms build upon conformity assessment to 
include means of determining the sufficiency and efficacy of organizational cybersecurity 
risk management, inclusive of product, service, and systems conformity. 

The output of confidence mechanisms can be used to enhance an organization’s 
understanding of its implementation of a Framework profile. Effective confidence 
mechanisms provide the needed level of assurance, are efficient, and have a sustainable 
and scalable business case. Critical infrastructures’ evolving implementation of Framework 
profiles should drive the identification of private sector conformity assessment activities.  

NIST continues to encourage the community to build and manage confidence mechanism 
programs to assist stakeholders. Several organizations have begun to develop such 
programs. For example, the British Standards Institute (BSI) is working to build a third-
party review of Cybersecurity Framework outcomes as part of an existing Certification to 
the International Organization for Standardization and the International Electrotechnical 
Commission (ISO/IEC) 27001. The Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA) is developing a Cybersecurity Framework-based audit program. And the NIST 
Baldridge Performance Excellence Program encourages self-assessment through its 
Cybersecurity Excellence Builder tool. While NIST does not endorse any commercial 
approach, NIST does encourage and support a diverse, market-based set of approaches to 
instill confidence. 

NIST will continue working with: 

•  Those who manage confidence mechanisms programs to assist industry in further 

leveraging these resources; and 

•  Private and public sector entities that have a need for conformity demonstration, to 

help understand how these organizations can leverage existing programs. 
 

4.2. Cyber-Attack Lifecycle 

Cybersecurity is closely linked to the threats an organization faces from those that would 
seek to exploit a vulnerability or weakness. Therefore, it is important to approach 
cybersecurity from the perspective of the cyber-attack lifecycle by identifying threat 
sources, threat events, and vulnerabilities that predispose an environment to attack. The 
cyber-attack lifecycle consists of the sequence of events that a malicious agent undertakes 
to successfully penetrate a network for nefarious purposes (e.g., data exfiltration, 
ransomware attacks, denial of service). Understanding the Tactics, Techniques and 
Procedures (TTP) an attacker may employ and the vulnerabilities an attacker may exploit 
are critical to effective cyber defense. To improve risk management capabilities, it is 
important that cyber threat information be readily available to support decision-making. 
This includes threat and vulnerability metrics that support determination of likelihood, 
impact, and, ultimately, risk. 

 

4 

DRAFT 

Timely communication and actionable information are critical to counter threat and 
address vulnerability. This includes a near-real time exchange of automated threat and 
vulnerability indicators between organizations and information sharing communities such 
as Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs), Information Sharing and Analysis 
Organizations (ISAOs), industry peers, and supply chain partners and exchanges with 
security service providers. Sharing indicators based on information that is discovered prior 
to and during incident response activities enables other organizations to deploy measures 
to detect, mitigate, and possibly prevent attacks as they occur. Additionally, communication 
between and among vendors, researchers and industry stakeholders is paramount to 
prudent handling of previously unknown vulnerabilities. Understanding the severity and 
indicators of a vulnerability, mitigating the effects of the vulnerability, and addressing the 
root cause of the vulnerability are just some of the activities that require coordination 
among those stakeholders. Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure (CVD) develops principles 
and best practices in coordinating management of vulnerabilities to benefit all 
stakeholders. 

Organizations use a combination of standard and proprietary mechanisms to exchange 
indicator and vulnerability information. These mechanisms have differing strengths and 
weaknesses and often require organizations to maintain specific process, personnel, and 
technical capabilities. To make these efforts more effective, appropriate guidelines and 
standards need to be defined and then adopted in products to enable organizations of 
various levels of capability and size to make use of indicators and other related 
information. 

To support this growing need, NIST SP 800-150 - Guide to Cyber Threat Information 
Sharing,12 was published in October 2016 and provides high-level guidance on how to form, 
join, and effectively participate in information sharing communities. Also, standards such 
as the International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 2914713 and ISO/IEC 
3011114 have been developed to outline CVD best practices. 

Creation of useful and necessary threat information requires the ability to analyze big data 
effectively and efficiently. This is achieved through data analytics, which is the compilation 
and analysis of various types of information with the goal of using this information to drive 
decision-making. The analysis of complex behaviors in large scale-systems can begin to 
address issues of provenance, attribution, and discernment of attack patterns. Possible 
applications of data analytics in this field include integration of threat feeds from varying 
sources, automated triage, data filtering, indicator tracking, visualization, and reporting. 

Several significant challenges must be overcome for the extraordinary potential of big data 
analytics to be realized, including the lack of: taxonomies for big data; mathematical and 
measurement foundations; analytic tools; measurement of integrity of tools; and 
correlation and causation. More importantly, the privacy implications in the use of these 
analytic tools must be addressed for legal and public confidence reasons. 

                                                 
12 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-150.pdf  
13 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/45170.html  
14 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/53231.html  

 

5 

DRAFT 

In continued collaboration with DHS and other relevant government participants, NIST 
plans to continue its Cyber-Attack Lifecycle research and participate in guidance 
development activities such as: 

•  Express cyber threat information using machine-readable formats and developing 

automated mechanisms for exchanging cyber threat information; 

•  Raise awareness of CVD among industry stakeholders; 
•  Support private and public sector efforts to further establish and streamline CVD 

approaches and methodologies; 

•  Support information sharing initiatives by public and private sector organizations 
such as Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) and Information Sharing 
and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs); 

•  Benchmark and measure some of the fundamental scientific elements of big data 

(algorithms, machine learning, topology, graph theory, etc.) through means such as 
research, community evaluations, datasets, and challenge problems; and 

•  Develop NIST Special Publications on the secure application of big data analytic 

techniques in such areas as access control, continuous monitoring, attack warning 
and indicators, and security automation. 
 

4.3. Cybersecurity Workforce 

A skilled cybersecurity workforce is needed to meet the unique cybersecurity needs of 
critical infrastructure. There is a well-documented shortage of cybersecurity 
practitioners;15; there is an even more serious shortage of qualified cybersecurity 
practitioners who also have an understanding of the unique challenges facing critical 
infrastructure owners and operators. As threats, vulnerabilities, and technology 
environments evolve, the cybersecurity workforce must continue to adapt to design, 
develop, implement, maintain and continuously improve the necessary cybersecurity 
practices within critical infrastructure environments. 

Various efforts, including the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), are 
fostering the education and training of a cybersecurity workforce for the future and 
establishing an operational, sustainable and continually improving cybersecurity education 
approach to provide a pipeline of skilled workers for the private sector and government. 
Organizations must understand their current and future cybersecurity workforce needs 
and develop hiring, acquisition, and training resources to raise the level of technical 
competence of those who build, operate, and defend data, systems, and networks 
delivering critical infrastructure services. 

Building on several years’ work with the Department of Defense (DoD) and the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS), and via extensive public-private partnerships, NIST has 
published the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NICE Framework).16 The NICE 
Framework provides a fundamental reference resource for describing and sharing 
information about cybersecurity work roles, the discrete tasks performed by staff within 
those roles, and the knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) needed to complete the tasks 

                                                 
15 [LINK] http://cyberseek.org/ - Interactive jobs heat map and career pathways portal 
16 [LINK] https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181  

 

6 

DRAFT 

successfully. The NICE Framework provides a common lexicon to categorize and describe 
cybersecurity work, improving communication about how to identify, recruit, develop, and 
retain cybersecurity staff.  

Many of the outcomes described in the Cybersecurity Framework Core are directly related 
to the roles, activities, and responsibilities of organizational personnel. The NICE 
Framework provides a complementary approach, describing the work roles that support 
accomplishment of the Cybersecurity Framework outcomes. In using the Cybersecurity 
Framework’s steps to develop a measurable action plan, organizations can identify the 
specific tasks and KSAs needed by those who will fulfill the functions, categories, and 
subcategories described in the Cybersecurity Framework Core. Appendix D.1 of the NICE 
Framework includes examples of this integration. 

Through NICE, NIST promotes cybersecurity workforce development activities via a public 
working group structure.17 These activities may include further definition of how NICE 
Framework work roles, tasks, and KSAs help to fulfill Cybersecurity Framework objectives. 
Additional future activities are expected to include: 

•  Continue to extend and integrate NICE activities across critical infrastructure 

sectors to raise awareness of workforce development tools; 

•  Emphasize coordination of K-12, higher education, and local employers in regions 

• 

across the nation; 
Identify and support applied research opportunities in areas including 
cybersecurity education, training, and workforce; and 

•  Convene conferences, workshops, webinars, and other events that support the 

development of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce resources; and 

•  Evolve NICE publications and resources as informed by the above activities. 

 

4.4. Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management 

Supply chains consist of organizations that design, produce, source, and deliver products 
and services. All organizations are part of, and dependent upon, product and service supply 
chains. Supply chain risk is an essential part of the risk landscape that should be included 
in organizational risk management programs. 

Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) is the process of identifying, assessing, and 
mitigating the risks associated with the distributed and interconnected nature of 
technology product and service supply chains. It covers the entire lifecycle of a system 
(including design, development, distribution, deployment, acquisition, maintenance, and 
destruction) as supply chain threats and vulnerabilities may intentionally or 
unintentionally compromise a technology product or service at any stage. 

Although many organizations may have robust internal risk management processes, supply 
chain criticality and dependency analysis, collaboration, information sharing, supplier 
management, and trust mechanisms remain a challenge. Organizations can struggle to 
identify their risks and prioritize their actions leaving the weakest links susceptible to 
penetration and disruption. Supply chain risk management, especially product and service 

                                                 
17 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/about/working-group   

 

7 

DRAFT 

integrity, is an emerging discipline characterized by diverse perspectives, disparate bodies 
of knowledge, and fragmented standards and best practices.  

Increasing adoption of supply chain risk management standards, practices and guidelines 
requires greater awareness and understanding of the risks associated with the time-
sensitive interdependencies throughout the supply chain, including in and between critical 
infrastructure sectors/subsectors. This understanding is vital to enable organizations to 
assess their risk, prioritize, and allow for timely mitigation. 

In recent years, the private-public supply chain community has advanced both technical 
guidance and related tools to support better management of supply chain risks. Some of 
these activities culminated in the October 2015 release of NIST SP 800-161, Supply Chain -
Risk Management Practices for Federal Information Systems and Organizations,18 which 
provides guidance on identifying, assessing, and mitigating supply chain risks at all 
organizational levels. The July 2017 draft Criticality Analysis Process Model (draft NISTIR 
817919) was engineered to work in conjunction with the SP 800-161 concepts.  SCRM 
concepts also have been integrated throughout draft NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 5 - Security and 
Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations20 controls. NIST, the General 
Services Administration (GSA), and the University of Maryland Robert H. Smith School of 
Business continue to collaborate and learn from CyberChain,21 a Web tool for measuring 
and assessing supply chain risk. 

International standards also advanced C-SCRM and related topics with stakeholders. Of 
note, ISO/IEC 2703622 was published in April 2014 to help organizations address 
Information Security for Supplier Relationships, and ISO/IEC 2024323 was released in 
September 2015 to guide organizations on how to Mitigate Maliciously Tainted and 
Counterfeit Products. 

However, challenges remain, particularly in organizational awareness of supply chain risks 
as well as awareness about the standards, best practices, guidance, and related tools 
available for use to mitigate many of these risks.  

As information and maturity around C-SCRM advances, NIST will remain focused on 
identifying, evaluating and developing effective technologies, tools, techniques, practices 
and guidance that help secure an organization’s supply chain. NIST will continue to raise 
awareness on this topic. Future activities will engage stakeholders to:  

•  Encourage broad industry engagement and leadership in supply chain risk 

management discussions and activities; 

•  Promote the mapping of existing supply chain risk management standards, practices 

• 

and guidelines to the Framework Core; 
Identify challenges in Framework adoption and determine appropriate support to 
enable effective supply chain risk management; 

                                                 
18 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-161.pdf  
19 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8179/draft 
20 [PDF] http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-53/sp800-53r5-draft.pdf  
21 [LINK] https://cyberchain.rhsmith.umd.edu 
22 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/59648.html  
23 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/67394.html  

 

8 

DRAFT 

•  Determine the key challenges to supply chain risk management (e.g., identifying and 

understanding mission critical functions and their dependencies, and conducting 
and validating prioritization) to enable more effective Framework implementation; 
and 

•  Evolve the NIST supply chain and criticality publications as informed by the above 

activities. 
 

4.5. Federal Agency Cybersecurity Alignment  

Several federal requirements directly apply to how federal agencies implement 
cybersecurity and the Framework: 

•  The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)24 requires federal 

agencies to implement agency-wide programs to provide information security for 
the information and information systems that support the operations and assets of 
the agency, including those provided or managed by another agency, contractor, or 
other source; 

•  The July 2016 update of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) A-130 Circular,25 

which establishes the complementary relationship between the NIST Risk 
Management Framework and the Cybersecurity Framework; 

•  Section 1(c)(ii) of the May 2017 Executive Order (EO) 13800 - Strengthening the 

Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure26 - requires each 
federal agency to use the Cybersecurity Framework to manage cybersecurity risk; 
and 

•  The May 2017 OMB Memorandum 17-25,27 which provides EO 13800 reporting 

guidance to federal agencies. 

While the Framework was developed with critical infrastructure owners and operators as 
the primary stakeholders, federal standards and guidelines were often cited by non-federal 
participants during development of the Framework as useful in managing cybersecurity 
risk.  For that reason, the Framework includes controls from NIST SP 800-53 -Security and 
Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, as informative 
references in the Framework Core. 

To assist federal agencies with integrating the Cybersecurity Framework and the Risk 
Management Framework, NIST issued a discussion draft of SP 800-37 - Revision 2, Risk 
Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations, 28 which includes 
incorporation of key Cybersecurity Framework, privacy risk management and systems 
security engineering concepts.29 NIST held an open workshop for additional stakeholder 

                                                 
24 [LINK] https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/2521/text  
25 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A130/a130revised.pdf  
26 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/05/11/presidential-executive-order-strengthening-
cybersecurity-federal  
27 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/M-17-25.pdf  
28 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-37/rev-2/draft/documents/sp800-37r2-discussion-
draft.pdf  
29 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-160/final 
 

 

9 

DRAFT 

engagement and feedback on the discussion draft of the Risk Management Framework, 
including its consideration of the Cybersecurity Framework. 

NIST issued draft report NISTIR 8170 - The Cybersecurity Framework: Implementation 
Guidance for Federal Agencies30 to support agency heads and senior cybersecurity 
leadership in Framework implementation planning. The draft summarizes eight private 
sector uses of the Framework, which may be applicable for federal agencies. By leveraging 
NISTIR 8170, agencies can better understand how to implement the Framework in 
conjunction with other NIST cybersecurity risk management standards and guidelines. 

To advance and evolve an integrated federal approach to cybersecurity risk management, 
NIST is also updating its suite of cybersecurity and privacy risk management publications 
(e.g., SP 800-39 - Managing Information Security Risk31) to provide additional guidance on 
how to integrate implementation of the Framework. Similarly, the larger suite of NIST 
security and privacy risk management publications will be updated in consideration of 
NISTIR 8170 feedback and general Framework value. 

Anticipated future NIST activities include: 

•  Reconcile public comments and publishing final versions of NISTIR 8170 and SP 

• 

800-37 revision 2; and 
Identify additional areas of alignment between existing and emerging standards, 
guidelines, frameworks, and other programs (e.g., Continuous Diagnostics and 
Mitigation) and the Framework. 

 

4.6. Governance and Enterprise Risk Management 

From its inception, the Cybersecurity Framework was designed to focus on and encourage 
a risk management approach within and among enterprises. As part of that strategy, NIST 
has aimed to support senior executive decision making with regard to cybersecurity risks. 
Additionally, private and public-sector participants involved in developing the Framework 
recognized and stressed at the outset that leadership “buy-in” to the approach was crucial 
to improving the nation’s cybersecurity. At the federal level, the importance of active 
engagement of senior leaders in cybersecurity risk management and the Cybersecurity 
Framework, has been reinforced by a May 11, 2017, Executive Order.32 

The Framework’s language, structure, and components offer a natural integration of 
cybersecurity and enterprise risk management, enhancing senior executive decision 
making and engagement. More specifically, the Framework stages consideration of 
cybersecurity in larger enterprise risk management discussion, and also enable easy 
translation of how those larger enterprise risk decisions affect cybersecurity. Those with 

                                                 
30 [PDF] http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/nistir-8170/nistir8170-draft.pdf  
31 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-39.pdf  
32 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/05/11/presidential-executive-order-strengthening-
cybersecurity-federal - The recent Executive Order 13800 on strengthening cybersecurity is another reinforcement 
about the crucial role of the heads of organizations: “Effective risk management requires agency heads to lead 
integrated teams of senior executives with expertise in IT, security, budgeting, acquisition, law, privacy, and 
human resources.” That Order also directs: “Effective immediately, each agency head shall use The Framework 
for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (the Framework) developed by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, or any successor document, to manage the agency's cybersecurity risk.”   

 

10 

DRAFT 

enterprise risk management responsibilities in an organization typically include C-suite 
officers (chief executive officers, chief operating officers, chief financial officials, chief 
information officers, etc.), while directors within a board must govern the organization 
through oversight of those officers. 

Given the importance of supporting senior executive risk decisions, the Framework’s native 
support of enterprise risk management, the close relationship between ERM and 
governance, and the on-going focus of these topics in the larger ecosystem, Governance and 
Enterprise Risk Management will be a Roadmap topic area. 

Inroads have been made in achieving these goals. For example, several organizations 
representing the interests of business leaders have incorporated the Cybersecurity 
Framework in relevant guidance. These include: the National Association of Corporate 
Directors, which has issued a Cyber Risk Oversight Handbook33 and the Kogod Cybersecurity 
Governance Center.34 Key among the considerations which appear to be influential and 
driving increased attention by boards and “C-suite” executives are the legal, regulatory, and 
media implications of their organizations’ risk management approaches - and how 
implementation of these strategies brings management of risk to practice. 

As an added tool to help drive the enterprise risk management process as well as the 
applicability of the Cybersecurity Framework at all levels within an organization, NIST 
produced the Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder (BCEB), Version 1.0. This self-
assessment tool is intended to help organizations better understand the effectiveness of 
their cybersecurity risk management efforts and identity improvement opportunities in the 
context of their overall organizational performance. The Builder blends organizational 
assessment approaches from the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program with the 
concepts and principles of the Cybersecurity Framework. Developed with industry input, 
including public comments on a draft version, the Builder was released in April 2017. 

In the next one-to-three years NIST intends to continue and enhance its efforts to engage 
the leadership ranks of private and public sector organizations, partnering with and 
leveraging other organizations. Among other things, NIST will engage stakeholders in 
discussions about how best to: 

•  Stage cybersecurity’s consideration in enterprise risk management decision making; 
•  Describe the difference between corporate governance and board governance; 
•  Determine how best to depict and describe the board-to-senior executive dialog; 

and 

•  Evolve NIST publications such as the BCEB and the Framework given the above 

dialogs. 

 

 

 

                                                 
33 [LINK] https://www.nacdonline.org/cyber  
34 [LINK] http://www.american.edu/kogod/research/cybergov/  

 

11 

DRAFT 

4.7. Identity Management 

Identity Management solutions have continued to evolve and improve since the 
Framework’s initial release, with both the public and private sectors making progress 
toward developing and implementing stronger standards, processes, technologies, and 
protocols. In particular, multi-factor authentication (MFA) solutions are increasingly used 
to augment passwords. New protocols – such as those defined by the Fast Identity Online 
(FIDO) and the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) will bring easy-to-use and cost-
effective MFA solutions to the consumer masses, with support by nearly every major 
browser and mobile manufacturer. These technologies are also being paired with biometric 
technology to make strong authentication more common and user-friendly, and 
increasingly, password-less. While adoption is trending in the right direction, the rate falls 
short of what is needed to best protect against cybersecurity threats, especially with “81 of 
hacking-related breaches [leveraging] either stolen and/or weak passwords35.” 

Although the use and adoption of identity technologies is evolving, challenges remain in 
aligning technology with risk management processes. This is exemplified by the plethora of 
personal information now available on social media or due to massive breaches of 
consumer data. To better align technology and risk management processes, NIST published 
a substantial 2017 update to the Special Publication 800-63 suite. NIST also continues 
development of associated implementation guides and National Cybersecurity Center of 
Excellence (NCCoE) reference models. 

As threats and risks continue to evolve, a static approach to identity no longer suffices. 
Identity management needs to become more risk-aligned, adaptive, and contextual with 
guidance capable of supporting flexibility, modularity, and agility – while never sacrificing 
personal privacy to achieve better outcomes. To support this, NIST continues to evolve 
processes for its standards and guidance efforts, including increasing use of approaches 
and tools to maximize stakeholder engagement and be responsive to a rapidly changing 
threat landscape. In addition, NIST will leverage the National Cybersecurity Center of 
Excellence to bring together important identity management and cybersecurity 
requirements that are needed to address specific business cybersecurity challenges. 

To positively participate and impact the growing identity ecosystem, NIST will: 

• 

Inform the development and enhancement of standards, guidelines, 
implementations and technology gaps through targeted NCCoE use cases, reference 
implementations, and technology deployments; 

•  Conduct focused research to better understand new and emerging technologies, 

their impact on existing standards, and the implementation of identity management 
solutions; 

•  Pilot innovative identity proofing technologies and processes so that a range of 

demographics can prove their identity remotely and access digital services; 

•  Continue active participation in national and international identity management 

standards, guidance, best practices, profiles, and frameworks to create an enhanced, 

                                                 
35 [LINK] 2017 Verizon Data Breach Report Executive Summary, 
http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/reports/rp_DBIR_2017_Report_execsummary_en_xg.pdf 

 

12 

DRAFT 

interoperable suite of secure, privacy-enhancing solutions, including authentication 
and authorization within the IoT; and 

•  Continue to foster the growth, adoption, and scaling of technology, such as MFA and 

identity proofing, by partnering with commercial, federal, and international 
stakeholders to overcome adoption barriers; 

•  Evolve NIST identity management guidelines and publications as informed by the 

above activities. 
 

4.8. International Aspects, Impacts, and Alignment 

Globalization and advances in technology have driven unprecedented increases in 
innovation, competitiveness, and economic growth. Critical infrastructure has become 
dependent on these enabling technologies for increased efficiency and new capabilities. 
Many governments are proposing and enacting strategies, policies, laws, and regulations 
covering information technology for critical infrastructure as a result. Because many 
organizations and most sectors operate globally or rely on the interconnectedness of the 
global digital infrastructure, these requirements are affecting, or may affect, how 
organizations operate, conduct business, and develop new products and services. Diverse 
or specialized requirements can impede interoperability, result in duplication, harm 
cybersecurity, and hinder innovation. In turn, this can significantly reduce the availability 
and use of innovative technologies to critical infrastructures in all industries and hamper 
the ability of organizations to operate globally and to effectively manage new and evolving 
risks. 

Currently, no common language or taxonomy exists among international entities relative to 
cybersecurity. Many countries are working to develop their own, unique standards and 
best practices which may make interoperability at the international level a more 
challenging and sometimes onerous process. To this end, international collaboration and 
alignment would lead to greater innovation and a more effective and efficient utilization of 
resources. Because the Framework references globally accepted standards, guidelines and 
practice, organizations domiciled inside and outside of the United States can use the 
Framework to efficiently operate globally and manage new and evolving risks. 

In December 2014, the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 affirmed NIST’s role in 
driving global alignment in consultation with international organizations, as well as 
governments of other nations. To support the law and Framework stakeholders, NIST has 
engaged in international alignment through both bi-lateral dialogs with governments of 
other nations and engagement with standards developing organizations. 

NIST continues to actively engage with the international community in an effort to increase 
utilization of the Cybersecurity Framework and further alignment with international 
standards. To date, NIST has participated in more than 30 government-to-government 
interactions to determine philosophy and disposition regarding Framework. These efforts 
have resulted in or supported some countries and international entities using the 
Framework or considering adopting a similar approach towards cybersecurity. For 
example: 

 

 

 

13 

DRAFT 

•  The Information-technology Promotion Agency (IPA) translation of the Framework 

to Japanese; 

•  The Italian National Framework for Cyber Security36 using the Framework as a 

foundation; 

•  The Israeli adaptation and translation of the Framework to Hebrew; 
•  The Bermuda Cybersecurity Framework Workshop, where the Bermudian 

government confirmed their use of the Framework and encouraged the voluntary 
use of Framework in private sector; and 

•  The Ontario Energy Board (OEB) using the Framework to measure cybersecurity 

efforts of non-bulk electric organizations.37 

NIST is also actively engaged with the ISO and IEC to map existing international standards 
to the Framework.  This work is expected to culminate in the publication of an ISO/IEC 
Technical Report summarizing that work. NIST will expand its efforts to communicate the 
intent and approach of the Framework to the international community, with the goal of 
seeking greater alignment and use. Among other things, NIST will: 

•  Continue to engage foreign governments and international organizations directly to 

explain the Framework and seek alignment of approaches when possible; 

•  Work with industry stakeholders to assist with their international engagement; and 
•  Exchange information and working with standards development organizations, 

industry, and sectors to ensure the Framework alignment and compatibility with 
existing and developing standards and practices. 

4.9. Measuring Cybersecurity 

Every organization wants to gain maximum value and effect for its finite cybersecurity-
related investments. This includes reducing risk and optimizing the potential reward of 
cybersecurity. Organizations frequently make go-ahead decisions, comparing scenarios 
that differ in projected cost, and estimated benefit and risk reduction. However, these 
scenarios are often based on “best guess.” Increasingly, senior executives are asking for a 
more accurate and quantitative portrayal of these factors and how they might change. 
Providing more accurate and quantifiable answers to these questions requires an aligned, 
modular, and systemic approach to cybersecurity measurement, so that measurement at 
more technical levels is supportive of high-level decision making. 

Since development work on the Framework was begun in 2013, measurement has been a 
recurrent area of interest and much discussion. That discussion, including a desire to have 
better information and tools to assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity strategies and 
actions, reflects the broader issue of measurement within the cybersecurity community. 
This is an under-developed topic, one in which there is not even a standard taxonomy for 
terms such as “measurement” and “metrics.” The development of reliable ways to measure 
risk and effectiveness would be a major advancement and contribution to the cybersecurity 
community. 

NIST is initiating a cybersecurity measurement program focusing on aligning technical 

                                                 
36 [LINK] http://www.cybersecurityframework.it  
37 [PDF] https://www.oeb.ca/sites/default/files/OEB-CS-Framework-WhitePaper-20170601.pdf  

 

14 

DRAFT 

measures to determine effect on high-level organizational objectives, as well as to support 
decision making by senior executives and oversight by boards of directors. The initiative 
will build on existing research and approaches, and will involve consultation with the 
research, business, and government sectors, including those already offering measures. The 
program will also rely on previous work such as NIST SP 800-55 - Performance 
Measurement Guide for Information Security.38 Likely activities within this program include: 

•  Research to understand challenges, insights, and gaps in cybersecurity 

measurement; 

•  Preliminary work to define a basic vocabulary and subdivide the diverse 

cybersecurity measurement topic space; 

•  Discussion of those work products and other critical topics at one or more public 

workshops; and 

•  Evolution of NIST SP 800-55 as informed by the above activities. 

 

4.10. Privacy Engineering  

A key challenge for the privacy field has been the difficulty of determining how to design 
information technologies and systems that protect individuals’ privacy, and by extension, 
civil liberties in an increasingly connected world. The Fair Information Practice Principles 
(FIPPs) - developed in the early stages of computerization and data aggregation to address 
the handling of individuals’ personal information - have been used as a basis for a number 
of laws, regulations, and frameworks in the U.S. and around the world. The FIPPs, as 
principles, provide an important set of general policy considerations, but lack the 
quantifiable elements necessary for system engineers to develop, implement, and assess 
privacy protections at a system level. 

Although cybersecurity provides some degree of privacy protection, individuals’ privacy 
cannot be achieved solely by securing personally identifiable information (PII). Privacy 
risks also can arise from the intentional or authorized processing of PII, including when 
cybersecurity measures are processing PII to provide increased security.39 Research is 
being conducted in the public and private sectors to improve current privacy practices, but 
many gaps remain. In particular, there are few identifiable technical standards or 
implementation guidelines to mitigate the impact of cybersecurity activities on individuals’ 
privacy or civil liberties. 

To address these circumstances, NIST is contributing to the development of the discipline 
of privacy engineering as a bridge between privacy policy and system-level 
implementation. NIST has established a program for privacy engineering with the goals of 
advancing 1) a lexicon to describe the field and 2) the development of widely adopted 
frameworks, models, methodologies, tools, and standards. In January 2017, NIST published 
NISTIR 8062 - An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in Federal 

                                                 
38 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-55/rev-1/final 
39 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf  - 
For example, security measures such as persistent activity monitoring can create concerns about the degree to which 
information is revealed about individuals that is unrelated to cybersecurity purposes. See section 3.5 of the CSF for 
additional considerations. 
 

15 

DRAFT 

 

Systems.40 The publication provides a foundation for the concepts of privacy engineering 
and risk management, and introduces a set of privacy engineering objectives and a privacy 
risk model. NIST also has developed a tool for organizations to use to conduct privacy risk 
assessments based on this privacy risk model. In addition, NIST is integrating guidance for 
privacy into its existing guidance for cybersecurity risk management, including current 
draft revisions to SP 800-37 - Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and 
Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy and 800-53, Security 
and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations.41/42 These activities 
promote repeatable and measurable approaches to privacy protection that can be 
communicated clearly across an organization and improve collaboration between the 
privacy and security teams. 

NIST will continue to work with stakeholders in the federal privacy community, academia, 
and the private sector to develop frameworks, models, methodologies, tools, and standards 
that can be used to achieve more effective privacy protections in systems. NIST’s activities 
will focus on building on its introductory work, including: 

•  Expand integration of privacy guidance into additional NIST risk management 

guidelines; 

•  Engage with standards development organizations to advance privacy engineering 

standards;   

•  Work collaboratively with other NIST programs such as IoT Cybersecurity efforts to 

advance integrated privacy and cybersecurity processes; and 

•  Promote the use and improvement of tools and solutions to engineer privacy 

protections into systems. 

 
4.11. Referencing Techniques 

Referencing Techniques has been added to this Roadmap to address the relationship of one 
set of cybersecurity requirements, controls, or outcomes (“references”) to another, such as 
defining the relationship between Framework outcomes and ISO 27001 requirements. 
These relationships are commonly referred to as mappings or crosswalks. References 
range far beyond the Framework Informative References. However, Informative 
References serve as an easy starting point for this topic. 

To handle the changing and growing cybersecurity standards, industry and sector specific 
recommended practices, technology specific implementation guides, and general guidelines 
landscape, the Informative References must adapt. These references serve as a translation 
layer for the principles expressed in the categories/subcategories of the Cybersecurity 
Framework Core. As such, additional informative references will help organizations 
address emerging needs when implementing the Cybersecurity Framework. 

To enable expansion of the Informative Reference to exhaustive mappings and to expand 
the number of Informative References, NIST is transitioning Informative References into an 

                                                 
40 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2017/NIST.IR.8062.pdf  
41 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-37/rev-2/draft/documents/sp800-37r2-discussion-
draft.pdf  
42 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/publications/sp/800-53/rev-5/draft/documents/sp800-53r5-draft.pdf  

16 

DRAFT 

 

on-line format. This catalog will provide users a basis for searching and selecting the most 
appropriate references to meet their needs. The resulting body of references is also viewed 
as foundational for future work standardizing language, mapping formats, and researching 
automation. 

Envisioned Roadmap work items include: 

•  Develop an anthology for describing the controls in a standardized format; 
•  Develop a governance model for maintaining and administering online Informative 

References; 

•  Collaborate with the current Informative Reference document owners to expand 

those mappings and make them available online; 

•  Engage additional parties in development of online Informative References; 
•  Discuss referencing language, format, process, and automation with stakeholders at 

upcoming workshops; 
Integrate existing technology security practices to security control catalog; and 

• 
•  Determine appropriate elements of the above dialog to include in NIST publications. 

 

4.12. Small Business Awareness and Resources 

The vulnerability of any one small business may not seem significant to many other than 
the company’s owner and employees. However, there are almost 29 million U.S. small 
businesses and nearly half of the U.S. private sector working population is employed in a 
small business.43 These businesses produce approximately 46 percent of our Nation’s 
private sector output and create 64 percent of all net new private sector jobs in the 
country. Therefore, a vulnerability common to many - or even just a few, key - small 
businesses could pose a threat to the Nation’s economic base. An information security 
incident can be detrimental to the business, its customers, employees, business partners 
and many others. It is important that small business leaders understand and have effective 
approaches to manage risks to their information, systems and networks. 

To address this need, NIST published NISTIR 7621 Revision 1 - Small Business Information 
Security.44 This report provides guidance on how small businesses can implement basic 
security for their information, systems, and networks and gives a basic overview of 
information security. NIST is also collaborating with the National Cyber Security Alliance 
(NCSA)45 on outreach avenues to small- and medium-sized businesses (SMBs). This 
includes participating in a webinar series to explain NIST cybersecurity resources to SMBs. 

NIST will collaborate with public and private sector partners to embark on a “listening 
tour” to hear first-hand from SMB owners about their cybersecurity needs. Based on these 
discussions, NIST will work with federal stakeholders and SMB owners and operators to 
address gaps in cybersecurity resources. Importantly, NIST will reflect the specific 
preferences of those SMBs in determining how best and at what level to provide those 
resources. These will leverage the capabilities of others and may include: 

                                                 
43 [LINK] https://www.sba.gov/  
44 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.7621r1.pdf  
45 [LINK] https://staysafeonline.org/  

 

17 

DRAFT 

•  Self-help educational material such as instructional presentations, pamphlets, 

guidance, and videos; 

•  Awareness of the importance and impact of cybersecurity and resources that help 
address cybersecurity through events and expanded use of social media channels; 
and 
“Starter” Framework Profiles specific to SMBs, tailored toward risk management of 
business processes important to small business owners and reducing effort 
necessary to customize Framework. 

• 

18 

DRAFT 

 

 

