	  

 
 

 

 
Governance of Cybersecurity: 
 2015 Report  

 
 
How Boards & Senior Executives  
Are Managing Cyber Risks 
 

  

 
 
Author:  Jody R. Westby  
Adjunct Professor, Georgia Institute of Technology 
CEO, Global Cyber Risk LLC 
 
October 2, 2015 

 
Research Sponsors:  

 	  

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

© 2015 by Jody R. Westby and Georgia Tech Information Security Center 

All rights reserved.  No part of the contents hereof may be reproduced in any form without the 

prior written consent of the copyright owners. 

Georgia Tech Information Security Center  

Georgia Institute of Technology 

Klaus Advanced Computing Building  

266 Ferst Drive 

Atlanta, GA 30332-0765  USA 

 (404) 385-2879  •  (404) 894-1155  (Fax) 

Wenke Lee, Ph.D., Director  

 

Jody R. Westby, Esq. 

Adjunct Professor, Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Computer Science,   

CEO, Global Cyber Risk LLC 
5125 MacArthur Blvd., NW 

Third Floor 

Washington, DC  20016 

(202) 255-2700  •  (202) 537-5073 (Fax) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
   

	  

 
 

 

ii	  

 

T Contents 
Table of Contents 
 
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................. iii 
Abbreviations .................................................................................................................. iv 
About Georgia Tech and GTISC ...................................................................................... 1 
About Jody R. Westby ...................................................................................................... 2 
About Financial Services Roundtable .............................................................................. 3 
About Forbes .................................................................................................................... 3 
About Palo Alto Networks ................................................................................................. 4 
Executive Summary ......................................................................................................... 5 
About the Survey ............................................................................................................ 11 
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 12 
I. 
Purpose of the Governance Survey ........................................................................ 12 
Background: Duty of Boards & Directors ................................................................ 12 
II.  Findings & Conclusion ............................................................................................. 15 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Who We Asked……………………………………………………………………………15 

Findings .................................................................................................................. 17 
Conclusions ............................................................................................................. 33 
III.  Recommendations ................................................................................................... 37 
Endnotes ........................................................................................................................ 39 

 
   

	  

 

iii	  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Abbreviations 
Abbreviations 
 
 
ABA 
 
ASIS 
 
CEO 
 
CERT 
 
CFO 
 
CIO 
 
CIP 
 
CISO 
 
CMU 
 
CoE 
 
COO 
 
CPO 
 
CRO 
CSO 
 
CyLab   
 
D&Os 
EU 
 
FFIEC   
FTC 
 
 
FSR  
GLBA 
 
GTISC   
GTRI 
 
HITECH Act 
HIPAA   
ISACA   
 
ISO 
 
ISS 
IEC 
 
 
IT 
 
ITU 
ITGI 
 
NERC   
 
NIST 
 
OIT 
 
PII 
PwC 
 
 
R&D 
 
SEC 
SOD 
 
 
U.S. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

American Bar Association 
American Society for Industrial Security 
Chief Executive Officer 
Computer Emergency Response Team 
Chief Financial Officer 
Chief Information Officer 
Critical Infrastructure Protection 
Chief Information Security Officer 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Council of Europe 
Chief Operating Officer 
Chief Privacy Officer 
Chief Risk Officer 
Chief Security Officer 
Carnegie Mellon CyLab 
Directors & Officers 
European Union 
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
Federal Trade Commission 
Financial Services Roundtable 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
Georgia Tech Information Security Center 
Georgia Tech Research Institute 
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health   Act 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
International Organization for Standardization  
Institutional Shareholder Services 
International Electrotechnical Commission 
Information Technology 
International Telecommunication Union 
Information Technology Governance Institute 
North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Office of Information Technology (Georgia Tech) 
Personally Identifiable Information 
PricewaterhouseCoopers 
Research & Development 
Securities and Exchange Commission 
Segregation of Duties 
United States 

 

 
   

	  

 

iv	  

 

About Georgia Tech and GTISC  
 
Located in Atlanta, Georgia, the Georgia Institute of Technology is a leading research 
university committed to improving the human condition through advanced science and technology.  
Ranked as the #7 best public university, Georgia Tech provides a focused, technologically based 
education to more than 21,500 undergraduate and graduate students. 

Georgia Tech has many nationally recognized programs, all top-ranked by peers and publications alike, 
and is ranked in the nation’s top 10 public universities by U.S. News and World Report. It is ranked: 

#3, Software Engineering Institution (2007) 
#6, Artificial Intelligence Program (2014) 
#6, Systems Program (2014) 
#8, Computer Theory Program (2014) 
#9, Graduate Computer Science Program (2014) 
#13, Programming Languages (2014) 

The School of Computer Science is defining the foundations and advancing the frontiers of computing.  Its 
mission is to invent the intellectual and architectural basis for computing; to educate students in the 
foundations and future of the field; to understand and realize the potential of computation in algorithms, 
systems, software, architecture, and networks; to invent and enable networks, computers, and platforms 
that advance our knowledge and benefit society; to educate practitioners and future leaders of computer 
science; and to be at the forefront of research, education, and service based on computer science. 

As a leading technological university, Georgia Tech has more than 100 centers focused on 
interdisciplinary research that consistently contribute vital research and innovation to American 
government, industry, and business. 

Comprised of faculty, staff, and students from multiple units across campus, the Georgia Tech Information 
Security Center (GTISC) is a catalyst for initiating a wide range of activities in both research and 
education. Members come from the College of Computing, College of Engineering, College of Business, 
College of Liberal Arts, the Georgia Tech Office of Information Technology (OIT) and the Georgia Tech 
Research Institute (GTRI). 

GTISC was established in 1998, when Georgia Tech hosted the Sam Nunn Policy Forum. Developed 
from Senator Nunn’s concept of educating citizens about important issues, the focus of the forum was the 
critical and strategic role of information security to the business community, to private citizens, and to all 
levels of government. As the program for this forum was developed, it became increasingly clear that 
Georgia Tech’s strengths in technology and policy, coupled with the pressing need for education and 
research in information security, meant that the Institute had a responsibility to lead in this area. 

 

 

 
   

	  

 

1	  

 

About Jody R. Westby 
 
Drawing upon a unique combination of more than 20 years of technical, legal, policy, and business 
experience, Ms. Westby provides consulting and legal services to public and private sector clients in the 
areas of privacy, cybersecurity, breach management and incident response, and cyber governance.  Her 
services include trusted advisory services to boards and senior management, security risk assessments, 
global compliance reviews, incident response planning, data mapping, and digital asset management. Her 
company, Global Cyber Risk LLC, is a strategic partner of Aon Global Risk Consulting and a preferred 
provider of privacy and security consulting services to Reed Smith. 
 
Ms. Westby serves as Adjunct Professor to the Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Computer 
Science. She authored Carnegie Mellon CyLab’s 2008, 2010, and 2012 Governance of Enterprise 
Security Survey reports and was lead author of CMU’s Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation 
Guide.1  Ms. Westby’s work on the governance responsibilities of boards and senior executives has been 
showcased by the CISO Executive Network and Bloomberg BNA’s Privacy & Security Law Report.   
 
Prior to founding Global Cyber Risk, Ms. Westby served as senior managing director for 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) where she was responsible for information security, privacy, information 
sharing, and critical infrastructure protection issues across the federal government.  She also was co-lead 
in launching their outsourcing practice.  Before joining PwC, Ms. Westby founded the Work-IT Group, and 
specialized in serving government and private sector clients on legal and regulatory issues associated 
with information technology and online business.  Ms. Westby has advised government officials and 
industry in countries around the world on the development of their legal frameworks for e-commerce and 
information security. 
 
Previously, Ms. Westby launched In-Q-Tel, an IT solutions/venture capital company founded by the CIA, 
was Senior Fellow & Director of IT Studies for the Progress & Freedom Foundation, and was Director of 
Domestic Policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.  She also practiced law with the New York firms of 
Shearman & Sterling and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.  
 
Ms. Westby is a professional blogger for Forbes on cybersecurity, cybercrime, and privacy issues.  She is 
co-chair of the American Bar Association’s (ABA) Privacy and Computer Crime Committee and was chair, 
co-author and editor of its International Guide to Combating Cybercrime, International Guide to Cyber 
Security, International Guide to Privacy, and Roadmap to an Enterprise Security Program (endorsed by 
the Global CSO Council).   She is author of the Legal Guide to Cybersecurity Research and the Legal 
Guide to Botnet Research, both published by the ABA. She was editor and co-author of the 2010 UN 
publication, The Quest for Cyber Peace.  Ms. Westby is co-chair of the ABA Cybercrime Committee 
(Criminal Justice Section) and just completed three terms on the ABA President’s Cybersecurity Task 
Force.  She served as co-chair of the World Federation of Scientists’ Permanent Monitoring Panel on 
Information Security and was appointed to the United Nations’ ITU High Level Experts Group on Cyber 
Security.  

Ms. Westby is a member of the bars of the District of Columbia, Colorado, and Pennsylvania, and of the 
ABA.  She received her B.A., summa cum laude, from the University of Tulsa and her J.D., magna cum 
laude, from Georgetown University Law Center.  She is a member of the Order of the Coif, the American 
Bar Foundation, and the Cosmos Club. 
 
   

 

	  

2	  

 

About Financial Services Roundtable 
 
Financial Services Roundtable (FSR) is the leading advocacy organization for America's financial services 
industry. With a 100-year tradition of service and accomplishment, FSR is a dynamic, forward-looking 
association advocating for the top financial services companies, keeping them informed on the vital policy 
and regulatory matters that impact their business. 
FSR members include the leading banking, insurance, asset management, finance, and credit card 
companies in America. FSR’s members are financing the American economy - creating jobs, expanding 
businesses, securing homes, businesses and retirement, insuring growth and building consumer 
confidence. 
With expanding Washington involvement in the financial sector, forming relationships and engaging with 
public officials and policymakers is critical to helping our members see around the curve, understand 
policies and regulations, and provide input to help shape them. 
FSR is driven at the CEO level, giving us a unique and influential voice in Washington. At every level of 
the government, FSR is working to ensure that our members' interests are well represented. 
www.FSRoundtable.org  
 
About Forbes 
 

Forbes Media encompasses Forbes and Forbes.com<http://Forbes.com> 
(www.forbes.com<http://www.forbes.com>), the leading business site on the Web that reaches on 
average 65 million people monthly. The company publishes Forbes, Forbes Asia and Forbes Europe, 
which together reach a worldwide audience of more than 6.5 million readers. It also publishes ForbesLife 
magazine, in addition to licensee editions in Africa, Argentina, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, 
Estonia, Georgia, India, Indonesia, Israel, Kazakhstan, Korea, Latvia, Middle East, Poland, Romania, 
Russia, Slovakia, Turkey, and Ukraine. 

http://ForbesWoman.com 
http://RealClearPolitics.com 
http://RealClearMarkets.com 
http://RealClearSports.com 
http://RealClearWorld.com.  

Other Forbes Media Web sites are: 
 
ForbesWoman.com  
RealClearPolitics.com 
 
RealClearMarkets.com   
  
RealClearSports.com 
RealClearWorld.com 
 
 
Together with Forbes.com, http://Forbes.com, these sites reach on average 36 million business decision 
makers each month. 
Steve Forbes serves as Chairman and Editor in Chief.  Mike Perlis is President and Chief Executive 
Officer. Lewis D’Vorkin is Chief Product Officer.  Meredith Kopit Levien is Chief Revenue Officer. 

3	  

 

 
   

 

	  

About Palo Alto Networks 
 

As the next-generation security company, Palo Alto Networks is leading a new era in cybersecurity by 
safely enabling all applications and preventing advanced threats against tens of thousands of 
organizations around the world. We are the fastest-growing security company in the market because of 
our deep expertise, commitment to innovation, and game-changing security platform.  By uniquely 
integrating our Next-Generation Firewall, Advanced Endpoint Protection, and Threat Intelligence Cloud, 
we enable our customers to focus on bringing an end to the era of breaches. 
Today’s cybersecurity challenges 

•  Lack of focus on cyber breach prevention puts critical assets at risk.   Building security that 

simply detects threats, with no other option than incident response, is too little, too late.  

•  Security has been categorized as simply an IT problem for too long.  Cyber risks are too 
important not to discuss in the boardroom – this is an existential issue for the entire enterprise.  

•  Too many point security products leave gaping holes in security postures.  Piecemeal 

security systems and point products that don’t share context across the entire cyberattack 
lifecycle are inadequate.  

•  Too many manual steps and cycles impede prevention and can’t scale. Most enterprise 

security teams are not resourced to manually handle thousands of daily alerts.  

 

Our unique answer 
The Palo Alto Networks Next-Generation Security Platform addresses these challenges by combining 
visibility across your network, endpoint, and cloud, with deep threat intelligence to provide automated 
protection and prevent cyberattacks, not just detect them. With this capability our platform enables 
customers to: 

•  Prevent successful cyberattacks by eliminating gaping holes in an organization’s cybersecurity 
posture. Our platform natively provides the right security capabilities and applies them at the right 
place, addressing all stages of the attack lifecycle. 

•  Safely enable applications and business operations because protection is based on fine-
grained visibility, correlation, and control of what matters most in today’s modern computing 
environments: applications, users, and content, not just ports and IP addresses. 

•  Eliminate the age-old compromise between security posture and business performance 
that organizations have faced for years because it is natively architected to operate in modern 
networks with new technology initiatives such as cloud computing, software-defined data centers, 
and mobility in mind.   

 

 
   

 

	  

 

4	  

 

Executive Summary 
 
It has long been recognized that directors and 
officers have a fiduciary duty to protect the assets 
of their organizations.  Today, this duty extends to 
digital assets and has been expanded by laws and 
regulations that impose specific privacy and 
cybersecurity obligations on companies.   
 
This is the fourth survey that Jody Westby has 
conducted on how boards of directors and senior 
management are governing the security of their 
organizations’ information, applications, and 
networks (digital assets).  First conducted in 2008, 
2010, and 2012 for Carnegie Mellon CyLab, and now through the Georgia Tech Information Security 
Center (GTISC), the surveys are intended to detect trends and measure the extent to which cyber 
governance is improving.  The 2012 and 2015 surveys are global governance surveys, enabling a 
comparison of responses from industry sectors and geographical regions. 
 

 	  

 
“The 2015 survey shows the 
needle has moved, and most 
boards have established Risk 
Committees and shifted risk 
oversight from the Audit 
Committee to the Risk 
Committee. Additionally, 
boards are now undertaking 
key oversight activities related 
to governance of 
cybersecurity….” 

The GTISC survey is based upon results received from 121 
respondents at the board or senior executive level from 1,927 
Forbes Global 2000 companies (6% response rate).  Forty-three 
percent (43%) of the respondents were inside or outside directors, 
and the remainder of the respondents was outside non-voting 
attendees and senior executives.  Thirty-four percent (34%) of the 
respondents were CEO or president, 12% were board chairs, and 
46% were chief financial officers.  The respondents also included 
strong representation from board committees: 25% of the 
respondents serve on a board Risk Committee, 19% serve on a 
Governance, Compliance, or Ethics Committee, and 14% were 
members of an Audit Committee. Seventy-three percent (73%) of 
the respondents were from critical infrastructure companies.   
 
The three previous surveys revealed that boards were not actively 
managing cyber risks and failed to understand the linkage between information technology (IT) risks and 
enterprise risk management.  The 2015 survey shows the needle has moved, and most boards have 
established Risk Committees and shifted risk oversight from the Audit Committee to the Risk Committee.  
The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds (63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing 
computer and information security, whereas only about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012, 
39% in 2010).  Boards are now undertaking key oversight activities related to governance of 
cybersecurity, such as reviewing security program assessments and top-level policies; assigning roles 
and responsibilities for privacy and security; and receiving regular reports on breaches and IT risks.  The 
weakest areas of cyber governance involved reviewing security budgets and assigning 
roles/responsibilities for key privacy and security personnel. 
 

5	  

 

 
   

 

	  

The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the number of boards reviewing cyber insurance, indicating 
that cyber risks are being considered as an enterprise risk.  The 2015 survey revealed that 48% of the 
respondent boards were reviewing their company’s insurance for cyber-related risks, compared with 28% 
in 2012 and 27% in 2010.  It is not certain, however, that boards know what type of insurance to purchase 
or know appropriate coverage limits. Only about half of the respondents (47-54%) indicated that they had 
quantified their business interruption and loss exposure from cyber events. 
Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments, and an increasing number of them are hiring outside 
experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.  Ninety-three percent (93%) of the 
respondents indicated their boards review risk assessment reports and 53% said they hire outside 
experts to assist on risk issues.  The highest degree of attention was being paid to cyber risks associated 
with supplier relationships.  Sixty-three percent (63%) of respondents said their board regularly or 
occasionally reviewed annual security program assessments.  Attention to incident response planning 
was high, with 74% of respondents indicating they had reviewed their company’s incident response plan, 
but only 46% said they had participated in a test scenario of the plan. 
Some of the biggest improvements over time have been organizational.  Respondents indicated that 53% 
of boards have a Risk Committee that is separate from an Audit Committee.  These results represent a 
significant improvement since the 2008 survey, when only 8% of boards had Risk Committees.  For the 
first time in all four surveys, the 2015 responses indicate the Risk Committee has the most responsibility 
for the oversight of risk, overcoming a role previously held by Audit Committees. 
Boards also are seeking more third party assistance in managing cyber and IT risks.  The survey 
respondents from 2010-2015 indicate a clear trend in Risk and 
IT/Technology Committees hiring more outside expertise.  
Another positive sign from the survey was the importance that boards 
are placing upon IT and security/risk expertise in board recruitment.  
Risk, security, and IT experience were ranked most valuable when 
recruiting for board directors, right after financial and management 
experience.  
Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key 
positions for security and risk officers, but lag in establishing privacy 
positions. The survey results indicate a steady rise in the number of CISOs (73%) at respondents’ 
companies, up from only 30% in 2008.  Only about one quarter (27%) of the respondents said they have a 
full-time CPO, up from 7% in 2008. 
Organizations tend to overlap privacy and security responsibilities, not understanding the inherent 
segregation of duties (SOD) issues associated with assigning responsibility for both roles to one person.  
More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%) indicated that they are responsible 
for both privacy and security.  Although this is down from 77% of CISOs and 30% of CROs in 2010 having 
responsibility for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.  CPOs are rarely assigned security 
responsibilities. 
Segregation of duty issues continue to be a problem in CISO/CIO reporting lines. In 2015, 40% of the 
respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in their organization.  Twenty-two percent 
(22%) of the respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CEO and 8% indicated that the 
CISO/CSO reported to the CFO.  The surveys from 2010, 2012 and 2015 show little change in this 
reporting structure, and changes to establish independent reporting likely will require board action.   
 
   

“Another positive sign 
from the survey was 
the importance that 
boards are placing 
upon IT and 
security/risk expertise 
in board recruitment.” 

 

	  

6	  

 

Another positive sign is the continued growth in cross-organizational committees or teams responsible for 
managing privacy and security issues across the company.  In 2008, only 17% of the respondents 
indicated their organization had a cross-organizational team, but in 2015, 79% of the respondents said 
their company has formed such a committee or team.  
 
Regional Conclusions 

•  North American (85%) and European (58%) boards are paying more attention to computer and 
information security, up from 40% and 19%, respectively, in 2012.  Asia remained unchanged at 
38%.  

•  The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention 
doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.  Europe had a 26% increase, but Asia was rather 
static with only a 3% increase.   

•  All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments (91-92%), but 

the North American region relied more heavily (59%) on outside experts to help with risk 
assessments and risk management.  Asia was close behind at 54%. 

•  Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards 

considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par 
with Europe (64-62%). 
In following best practices for cyber governance, the survey results indicated that Asian boards 
did best in reviewing annual budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North 
American boards excelled in reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security 
program assessments. 

• 

•  The survey revealed that Asia was far ahead of North America and Europe in understanding the 
importance of having a Risk Committee separate from the board Audit Committee, with 73% of 
Asian respondents reporting their organization had a Risk Committee.  Only 43% of North 
American boards and 42% of European boards had a Risk Committee separate from the Audit 
Committee. 

•  Most Asian boards have a Risk/Security Committee (98%), but North American and European 

boards lag behind at 48% and 58%, respectively.   

•  The value of risk and security experience for board service outranked IT experience in every 
region.  The respondents indicated that North American and European boards valued risk and 
security expertise second only to financial and management experience.  Asian respondents 
valued legal expertise slightly more than risk and security.  

•  North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for 

privacy and security. 

•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities for a CISO/CSO tended to be on the decline in 

North America and Asia, but on the increase in Europe. 

•  CIO reporting remains the dominant reporting structure for CISOs/CSOs across all regions, even 
though it creates SOD issues.  Europe is the only region to show a sizable shift from CISO/CSOs 
reporting to the CIO, moving from 50% in 2012 down to 33% in 2015.   

7	  

 

 
   

 

	  

•  All geographic regions indicated that 65% or more organizations have a cross-organizational 

team.  

 

Industry Sector Conclusions 

The 2015 survey confirmed the 2012 report’s finding that, overall, the financial sector has better privacy 
and security practices than other industry sectors.  The 2015 survey indicated significant improvements in 
the energy/utilities and industrial sectors, which often had the lowest scores in the 2012 survey.   

•  The 2015 survey revealed large increases in attention to cyber issues across industry sectors. 

The industrial sector had the largest improvement in oversight of computer and information 
security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).  The financial sector was close behind 
with a 35% increase (79% v. 44%) and energy/utilities and IT/telecom also improving with 33% 
increases.   

•  Vendor management is receiving more attention in every sector, with the financial sector leading 

on this issue. 

•  The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are 

reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).  The energy/utilities and 
financial sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management 
(62%) more than other sectors. 

•  The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier 

relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.  Similarly, board attention to cyber risks 
associated with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.   

•  The financial sector had the highest percentage of board involvement in every best practice area 

except reviewing roles and responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.  Across the 
board, the respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board 
governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best practice area. 

•  The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee 

separate from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk 
Committee. 

•  Financial sector boards had more board Risk/Security Committees (98%) and IT/Technology 
Committees (86%) than any other sector in both the 2012 and 2015 surveys.  The industrial 
sector was lowest with 44% of boards having a Risk/Security Committee, and the energy/utilities 
sector was only slightly ahead at 46%. 
Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic 
jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which was already the leader in this area and 
remains so at 38%.  The energy/utilities sector’s Risk Committees went from 0% in 2012 to 25% 
in 2015. 

• 

•  The energy/utilities and financial sectors place risk and security experience in a strong third place 

when valuing experience in the recruitment of directors, immediately following financial and 
management experience. The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other 
areas, such as academic and scientific experience. 

8	  

 

 
   

 

	  

•  The financial sector has the highest percentage (88%) of CISOs, followed closely by IT/Telecom 
(86%).  The financial sector is the only sector to have 100% CROs, with the next closest sector 
being IT/Telecom at 57%.  The high percentage of CPOs was in the IT/Telecom sector (64%). 
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry 

sectors. Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a 
CPO.  All industry sectors except IT/Telecom have more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled 
with both privacy and security responsibilities. The IT/Telecom sector dropped from 78% of 
CISOs with dual responsibilities in 2012 to a third (33%) in 2015, whereas the industrial sector 
went the other way, jumping from only 25% of CISOs assigned dual responsibilities in 2012 to 
60% in 2015. 

•  CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except energy/utilities.  Only 
the energy/utilities and financial sectors increased the percentage of CISO/CSOs reporting to the 
CEO/COO between 2012 and 2015. 

•  At least 81% of all industry sectors had a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which 

lagged behind at 62%. 

 

RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The survey revealed that governance of enterprise security has moved considerably since the 2008, 
2010, and 2012 surveys, but gaps remain in critical areas.  If boards and senior management take the 
following 12 actions, they could significantly improve their organizations’ security posture and reduce risk: 
1.  Establish a board Risk Committee separate from the Audit Committee and assign it responsibility 
for enterprise risks, including IT risks.  Recruit board directors with cybersecurity, IT governance, 
and risk management expertise. 

2.  Ensure that privacy and security roles within the organization are separated and that 

responsibilities are appropriately assigned.  The CIO, CISO/CSO, and CPO should report 
independently to senior management. 

3.  Evaluate the existing organizational structure and establish a cross-organizational team that is 

required to meet at least monthly to coordinate and communicate on privacy and security issues.  
This team should include senior management from human resources, public relations, legal, and 
procurement, as well as the CFO, the CIO, CISO/CSO, CRO, the CPO, and business line 
executives. 

4.  Review existing top-level policies to ensure they set a “tone from the top” and create a culture of 

cybersecurity and responsibility for systems and data.  Organizations can enhance their 
reputation by valuing cybersecurity and the protection of privacy and emphasizing it as a 
corporate value. 

5.  Review assessments of the organization’s cybersecurity program and ensure the program 

comports with best practices and standards and includes incident response, breach notification, 
business continuity/disaster recovery, and crisis communications plans. 

6.  Ensure that privacy and cybersecurity requirements for vendors (including law firms and cloud 

9	  

and outsource providers) are based upon key aspects of the organization’s cybersecurity program 
 

 

 
   

	  

and includes annual audits and control requirements.  Carefully review vendor notification 
procedures in the event of a breach or security incident. 

7.  Conduct an annual audit of the organization’s enterprise cybersecurity program, to be reviewed 

by the Audit Committee. 

8.  Conduct a separate annual risk assessment of the cybersecurity program and effectiveness of 

controls, to be reviewed by the board Risk Committee, and ensure that identified gaps or 
weaknesses are addressed. 

9.  Require regular reports from senior management on the status of the cybersecurity program, 

remediation activities, and recent incidents. 

10. Require annual board review of the budget for the cybersecurity program and its linkage to cyber 

risk management. 

11. Ensure incident response plans are comprehensive and can address a multi-pronged attack and 

dovetail with business continuity/disaster recovery plans.  Conduct a robust annual test of the 
plans, involving executives and board members.  

12. Evaluate cyber risks and potential business interruption and loss exposure costs and review 

adequacy of cyber insurance coverage. 

 

	  

 

10	  

 

	  

 
   

About the Survey 
 
GTISC sent a personal letter signed by Gov. Tim Pawlenty, CEO of the Financial Services Roundtable, 
and Mark McLaughlin, CEO of Palo Alto Networks, to directors and officers of Forbes Global 2000 
companies, asking them to complete a brief survey designed to help GTISC understand how boards and 
business leaders are managing cyber risks. Only one response per company was used in calculating 
response rates. 
 
The GTISC 2015 report on Governance of Cybersecurity is based upon 121 responses, representing a 
response rate of 6% out of a total of 1,927 surveys (based on one per company), which is equivalent to 
the 2012 survey.  Forty-one percent (41%) of the respondents are inside directors, 2% are outside 
directors, and 55% are non-directors, such as non-voting attendees and senior executives. Thirty-four 
percent (34%) of the respondents are CEO or president of their organization and 12% are board chairs.  
Exactly half of the respondents are senior executives, with chief financial officers comprising 38% of the 
respondents and corporate secretaries accounting for 6%.   
 
Since respondents may serve on several boards, the survey asked them to select only one organization 
as the focus of their responses and to base all of their answers on that one organization.  
 
The findings were analyzed according to actual responses, i.e., percentages reflect the number of 
participants who responded to the particular question, rather than the total number of participants. 
 
Please note that this survey is exploratory in nature and is based on voluntary (rather than randomly 
selected) respondents, and that these findings do not purport to represent the entire population of 
directors. 
 
GTISC and Jody Westby wish to gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Alison Hawkins, Vice President 
of Communications for the Financial Services Roundtable, who assisted in the finalization of this report, 
and Aneesh Khan, an employee of the Georgia Tech Information Security Center, who assisted in the 
calculation of the survey results and provided graphics assistance.  
 
 

 
   

	  

 

11	  

 

Introduction  

I. 
 
PURPOSE OF THE GOVERNANCE SURVEY 
 
This is the fourth survey conducted by Jody Westby to determine the degree to which boards and senior 
executives are governing privacy and security risks within their organizations.  As Distinguished Fellow, 
Ms. Westby conducted the 2008, 2010, and 2012 surveys and reports through Carnegie Mellon CyLab.  
As Adjunct Professor at Georgia Tech, she conducted the 2015 survey through the Georgia Tech 
Information Security Center (GTISC).  The surveys have remained consistent to enable the detection of 
trends and: 

•  Determine the degree to which boards and senior executives are exercising governance over 

cyber risks and implementing effective cyber risk strategies;    

•  Ascertain the board and organizational structure that is established for such governance; and 
• 

Identify the degree to which companies are following best practices for securing their digital 
assets and establishing cybersecurity programs. 

 
BACKGROUND: DUTY OF BOARDS & DIRECTORS 
 
The governance responsibilities of directors and officers (D&Os) have been in the spotlight since 2002 
with the fall of Enron and Arthur Andersen and the enactment of Sarbanes-Oxley.  D&O responsibility for 
cyber risks emerged with certainty following the Target breach in December 2013.  

Following Target, the multi-pronged attack on Sony Entertainment that resulted in (1) destruction of data, 
(2) disruption of networks, (3) theft of valuable intellectual property (movies), and (4) the theft and 
disclosure of highly confidential internal communications nearly brought Sony to its knees – the clear 
objective of the attackers.  Other attacks since then also have intended to inflict harm upon the target.  

The dependency of all organizations upon information technology (IT) systems and global networks has 
extended governance responsibilities to the use of IT and the protection of data and systems.  So, what is 
IT governance?  The IT Governance Institute (ITGI) states that: 

IT governance is the responsibility of the board of directors and executive management. It is 
an integral part of enterprise governance and consists of the leadership and organizational 
structures and processes that ensure that the organization’s IT sustains and extends the 
organization’s strategies and objectives.2 
  

Cybersecurity governance has now evolved into an international standard.  The International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have developed a standard 
for governance of information security, ISO/IEC 27014.  The standard sets out roles for both “executive 
management” and the “governing body.”  The governing body is the “person or group of people who are 
accountable for the performance and conformance of the organization.”3  Executive management is 
responsible for implementing the strategies and policies set by the governing body.  The standard 
explains what this governance means: 

 
   

	  

 

12	  

 

Governance of information security needs to align objectives and strategies for 
information security with business objectives and strategies, and requires compliance 
with legislation, regulations and contracts.  It should be assessed, analyzed and 
implemented through a risk management approach, supported by an internal control 
system.4 

 
 “It has long been 
recognized that D&Os 
have a fiduciary duty to 
protect the assets of their 
organizations.  Today, this 
duty extends to ‘digital 
assets’ – information, 
applications, networks.” 

It has long been recognized that D&Os have a fiduciary duty to protect 
the assets of their organizations.5  Today, this duty extends to “digital 
assets” – information, applications, and networks.  The 1996 Delaware 
Caremark Derivative Litigation case set forth important case law 
regarding a board’s duty to ensure that it has adequate information 
flows on risks. The court noted, “a director's obligation includes a duty 
to attempt in good faith to assure that a corporate information and 
reporting system, which the board concludes is adequate, exists, and 
that failure to do so under some circumstances may, in theory at least, 
render a director liable for losses caused by non-compliance with 
applicable legal standards.”6  The boards need to ensure they have 
adequate information flows and reporting on IT and cyber risks. 
 
Regulatory pressure for better IT controls began with Sarbanes-Oxley, which requires both management 
and external auditors to attest to the effectiveness of internal controls that provide meaningful assurance 
about the security of information assets.7  Initially, the SEC took a narrow interpretation of Sarbanes-
Oxley and focused only on financial controls.8  In late 2011, the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) issued guidelines that require public companies to disclose the risk of cyber incidents if they 
materially affect a registrant’s products, services, relationships with customers or suppliers, or competitive 
conditions, or if they make an investment in the company speculative or risky.9  Following the Target 
attack, the SEC opened examinations of several companies, probing whether they had properly handled 
and disclosed recent cyber incidents.10  More recently, the SEC has expanded its view of security controls 
and surveyed investment advisors and investment funds on their cybersecurity programs.  It subsequently 
issued guidance for these firms in April 2015 on measures to consider when addressing cybersecurity 
risks.11 
 
The Federal Reserve always has taken a broad view of cyber risk management, recommending reviews 
of all controls for cybersecurity, not just those related to financial reporting. In 2015, the Federal Reserve 
Board issued a Cybersecurity Assessment Tool, which incorporates principles from the Federal Financial 
Institution Examination Council’s (FFIEC) Information Technology Examination Handbook, and includes a 
comprehensive review of IT controls.  The explanation of the Tool includes a section on “Overview for 
Chief Executive Officers and Boards of Directors.”12 
 
The enactment of state and federal laws and regulations that impose specific privacy and security 
requirements on targeted industry sectors and types of data continues to grow.  For example, the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Health 
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), and state and foreign breach 
laws impose specific requirements pertaining to the security and privacy of data and networks and 
reporting of incidents.   
 

13	  

 

 
   

 

	  

The pressure on critical infrastructure industry sectors to secure their systems according to best practices 
and standards persists, with the U.S. energy sector already subject to the North American Electric 
Reliability Corporation (NERC) Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) standards.13  In 2014, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) released a voluntary Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure, pursuant to Executive Order 13636, which set forth recommended measures for a 
cybersecurity program.14 
 
The Target breach brought D&O responsibility for governing cybersecurity front and center.  Following the 
breach, the company’s chairman, CEO, and president, Gregg Steinhafel, was dismissed by the board, 
and the Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) called for the ouster of seven of the ten Target board 
members for failure to take appropriate actions to protect Target’s data and systems.15  Although the 
board members were reelected, ISS’s actions sent tremors through boardrooms around the globe.   
 
Subsequently, Target shareholders filed two derivative lawsuits against the directors and officers of 
Target as well as the company itself, claiming that the company knew the importance of protecting 
customer and cardholder data and failed to take appropriate steps to prevent the breach.  The claims 
included breach of fiduciary duty, waste of assets, gross mismanagement, and abuse of control.16  
Although a similar derivative suit against Wyndham Worldwide was dismissed, Target’s case and a more 
recent one against Home Depot remain in the courts,17 and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals recently 
reinstated a class action against Neiman-Marcus stemming from a breach, stating that “the Neiman 
Marcus customers should not have to wait until hackers commit identity theft or credit-card fraud in order 
to give the class standing, because there is an ‘objective reasonable likelihood’ that such an injury will 
occur.”18  

“We have entered a new 
era of cybercrime; attacks 
are targeting companies 
and intending to inflict 
harm.  Companies that do 
not prepare for multi-
pronged attacks are at 
risk.” 

 
Corporate data is at a higher risk of theft or misuse than ever before, 
and the systemic nature of recent attacks has alarmed both industry 
leaders and government officials around the world.  We have entered a 
new era of cybercrime; attacks are targeting companies and intending 
to inflict harm. Companies that do not prepare for multi-pronged attacks 
are at risk.   
Managing these cyber risks now requires active oversight by boards 
and senior executives. Failure to properly govern cybersecurity and 
privacy may result in legal actions by shareholders, victims, and 
regulators. Although Delaware case law provides strong protections to 
D&Os under the business judgment rule and recent case law,19 harm caused by security breaches may 
receive stricter scrutiny because: 

•  Security best practices and standards are well-developed, harmonized, and widely available; 
•  Many privacy and security laws require organizations to have an enterprise security program that 

is regularly reviewed and tested; 

•  The Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime,20 which has been signed by 54 countries and 
ratified by 47 (including the U.S.), holds companies civilly, administratively, or criminally liable for 
cybercrimes that benefit the company and were made possible due to the lack of supervision or 
control by someone in a senior management position, such as an officer or director.  Article 9 of 

 
   

	  

 

14	  

 

the European Union’s (EU) Council Framework Decision on attacks against information 
systems,21 which applies to all 28 EU member countries, mirrors the CoE language.  

 
At the core of cyber governance is the very difficult issue of (1) identifying the types of attacks that could 
cause a material impact on the company’s bottom line or operations, and (2) quantifying the impact of 
each type of attack.  Quantification takes specialized expertise.  As John Dempsey, global practice leader 
at Aon Global Risk Consulting, recently noted:  

Risk managers regularly model and quantify the potential severity of natural 
catastrophes, and while there are parallels, cyber risk quantification poses unique 
challenges.  We are now witnessing a paradigm shift in cyber loss exposure 
assessment.  Impacts can be global in scale and affect every facet of 
operations.  Recovery efforts can span months.  Reputational losses threaten 
survival.   Gone is the notion that a cyber-attack will cost a couple hundred bucks per 
breached record.  We are now realizing that a single well-planned malicious attack could 
wipe billions from the balance sheet.22 

 
Turning the tide against cybercriminals will require a dedicated, coordinated, vigilant effort and 
comprehensive risk management strategies that must be reviewed and refined on an ongoing basis to 
take into account changes in the threat environment, new innovations, and new legal and operational 
considerations.  
 
 
II.  Findings & Conclusion  
 
WHO WE ASKED 
 
The Governance Survey respondents were almost half (43%) board members and half (54%) 
senior executives or non-voting attendees.  
Forty-one percent (41%) of respondents were inside directors and 2% were outside directors.  Twelve 
percent (12%) of these directors were board chairs. The respondents also indicated that:  

Who$We$Asked$

38%$

34%$

12%$

14%$

9%$

6%$

25%$

19%$

8%$

ﬃ c e r$
n cial$ O
o r a t e$S
o r p
C
C

e c r e t a r y$
e r a
p
h ie f$ O

ﬃ c e r$

g$ O

n

A

u

A

a

e r n

v

o

G

B

a r d $C
o
o
d it$C
n c e / C

o

b

e r$
m i G

m
m

e

o

e$ M
e
R is k$C

e$ M
e
n c e$C

air$
m i G
p lia

h

m
m

b

e r$
m i G

m
m

e

o

e$ M

e

e r$
e$o f$t h

e$ A

b

n

m

o

e

N

e$

v

o

b

15	  

 

40%#
35%#
30%#
25%#
20%#
15%#
10%#
5%#
0%#

$
s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
R
$
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

$

E

C

n t$$
e
O $o r$P r e si d
a
h ie f$Fi n

C

 

Committee members;	   

•  14% of respondents were Audit 

•  19% of respondents were 

Governance, Compliance, or 
Ethics Committee members; and 

•  25% of respondents were Risk 

Committee members. 

 
Internal respondents were:  

CFO (38%)	   

CEO or President (34%) 

COO (9%) 
Corporate Secretary (6%). 

 
   

	  

The majority of the Governance Survey respondents (73%) were from critical infrastructure 
industry sectors, which increasingly face government pressure and/or regulatory compliance 
requirements with respect to the security of their IT systems and data.  These survey respondents 
represented: 
 

Who'We'Asked'(By'Sector)'

•  Energy and utility companies – 11% 
•  Financial sector – 35%  
•  Health care – 2%  
Industrials – 13% 
• 
IT and telecommunications companies – 12%. 
• 

'
Retailing,'2%'

'

Materials,'8%'

 Other'
Industry,'

8%'

 Energy'/'
U*li*es,'11%'

'

Industrials,'13%'

'
Financial,'35%'

'

7%'

 Consumer,'

IT'/'Telecon,'12%'

 
The remaining 27% of respondents represented 
consumer, materials, professional services, retailing, 
and other types of companies.  
 
Responses from four industry sectors had an 11% or 
higher response rate and are compared in this report: 
energy/utilities, financial, IT/telecom, and industrials. 
 
Survey respondents represented large to very large corporations. Since the respondent pool was 
drawn from the Forbes Global 2000 list, the respondents represented large or very large corporations.   
Half (50%) of the respondents were from very large corporations with annual revenues greater than 
USD10 billion. Thirty-six percent (36%) of the Governance Survey respondents came from large 
companies with annual revenues ranging between USD2.5 billion and USD10 billion, and 12% of 
respondents represented companies with revenues between USD1 billion and USD2.5 billion.   

Health'Care,'2%'

'

Who!We!Asked!(By!Region)!

La2n!America,!

!

3%!

 Australia!&!
Oceania,!2%!

 Europe,!31%!

 Asia,!21%!

North!America,!

!

38%!

Middle!East,!

!

3%!

 
Using the Forbes Global 2000 list, the 2015 survey 
represents the second analysis of cyber governance 
postures of major corporations around the world.  The 
first global survey was conducted in 2012.  Regions 
were aligned with those used by Internet World Stats 
to enable analysis of responses against Internet 
usage.23  Responses were primarily from three 
geographical regions: North America (38%), Europe 
(31%), and Asia (21%), although a smaller percentage 
of responses also were received from Latin America, 
Australia and Oceania, the Middle East, and Africa. 
Responses from three regions are compared in this 
report, with key countries noted below by Internet 
usage:  

North America: United States and Canada 
Europe:  EU countries, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, and Switzerland 
Asia:  China, India, Japan, Indonesia, South Korea, Philippines, Vietnam, Pakistan, and Thailand. 
 
 
   

 

	  

16	  

 

 

Finance 

Industrials 

IT/Telecom 

Europe  Asia 

Energy/Utilities 

Industrials 13% 
Industrials 15% 

IT/Telecom 12% 
IT/Telecom 12% 

North  
America 
2015  NA 38% 
2012  NA 40% 

EU 31%  Asia 21%  Energy/Utilities 11%  Finance 35% 
EU 30%  Asia 19%  Energy/Utilities 13%  Finance 33% 

This report analyzes and compares 2015 and 2012 results by geographic region and industry sector.  
These comparisons are particularly valid because the regional and industry respondent pools from the 
2015 and 2012 surveys are similar.  
 
Respondents by Geographic Region and Industry Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General survey questions may have comparisons from all four surveys (2015, 2012, 2010, 2008), but 
some questions were not asked in 2008, so only the last three survey responses are compared for these.  
 
FINDINGS  
 
Oversight & Governance 
 
The  findings  from  the  2015  Governance  Survey  indicate  that  boards  are  finally  paying  attention  to 
cybersecurity  issues.  The  2010  and  2012  surveys  showed  that  boards  were  actively  addressing  risk 
management, but attention to IT operations and computer and information security were two of the lowest 
ranked issues.   
 
In 2015, the percentage of boards actively addressing and governing computer and information 
security nearly doubled from previous surveys. The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds 
(63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing computer and information security, whereas only 
about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012, 39% in 2010). Computer and information security 
was the fifth highest rated issue of importance to boards in 2015, only surpassed by long term strategy 
and operational goals, risk management, compliance, and mergers and acquisitions.  

 Risk#Management#

Boards#More#Ac8vely#Governing#Computer#and#IT#Security#

Board attention to IT 
operations remained fairly 
static: 29% of boards actively 
addressed and governed IT 
operations in 2015 and 2012 
and 20% did in 2010.   
 
The area receiving the least 
attention was vendor 
management, but this area 
still showed a significant 
increase in attention from 2% 
in 2010, to 13% in 2012, and 
to 20% in 2015.  The lack of 
attention to vendor management is particularly concerning since this includes cloud providers and 
outsourcing of IT operations and business processes.  

 Computer#and#IT#Security#

 Vendor#Management#

IT#Opera8ons#

29%#
29%#

91%#
91%#

100%#

20%#

39%#

30%#

40%#

70%#

80%#

10%#

20%#

50%#

60%#

20%#

13%#

2%#

0%#

33%#

63%#

93%#

90%#

#

 

 
   

	  

2015#

2012#

2010#

17	  

 

2012 
North 
America 

40% 
30% 
12% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

Issue Addressed 
By Boards 

2015 
North  
America 
85%  
39% 
28%  

Computer & Info Sec 
IT Operations 
Vendor Management 

North American and European boards are paying more attention to computer and information 
security, but Asia is static.  Asia, however, remained unchanged at 38%.   
 
Regional Comparison Table:   
Issues Actively Addressed 
By Boards 
 
 
 
 
The  2015  survey  also  revealed  large  increases  in  attention  to  cyber  issues  across  industry 
sectors.  The  industrial  sector  had  the  largest  improvement  in  oversight  of  computer  and  information 
security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).  The financial sector was close behind with a 35% 
increase (79% v. 44%) and energy/utilities and IT/telecom also showed improvement with 33% increases.  
The  2015  survey  also  indicated  that  vendor  management  is  receiving  more  attention  in  every  sector, 
particularly energy/utilities, with a 23% increase over 2012, IT/telecom with a 15% increase, financial with 
a 12% increase, and industrial with a 6% increase. Boards in the financial sector pay the most attention to 
vendor management, with 36% of the respondent boards actively addressing this issue. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Issues Actively Addressed by Boards 
 

38% 
38% 
24% 
24% 
19%   10% 

58% 
   24% 
   13%  

19% 
19% 
9% 

Issue Addressed 
By Boards 

Computer & Info Sec 
IT Operations 
Vendor Management 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
62% 
23% 
23% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
29% 
14% 
0% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

79% 
48% 
36% 

44% 
36% 
28% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

64% 
14% 
0% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

31% 
31% 
15% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

50% 
25% 
6% 

13% 
19% 
0% 

 
 
The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the 
number of boards reviewing cyber insurance, 
indicating cyber risks are being considered as an 
enterprise risk.  
The 2015 survey revealed that 48% of the respondent 
boards were reviewing their company’s insurance for 
cyber-related risks, compared with 28% in 2012 and 
27% in 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

 
   

 

Boards!Not!Reviewing!Insurance!

Coverage!for!Cyber!Risks!

Don't!Know!/!
Not!applicable,!

7%!

 No,!44%!

!

Yes,!48%!

18	  

 

The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention 
doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.  Europe had a 26% increase (up to 45% from 19%), but 
Asia was rather static with only a 3% increase.   
 
 
Regional Comparison Table:   
Boards Reviewing Cyber Insurance  
Coverage 
 
24% 
 
All of these critical infrastructure sectors showed a sizeable improvement in board attention to 
cyber insurance coverage, with the utility/energy sector showing a gain of 48%.  It is surprising that 
the IT/telecom sector did not indicate a similar increase in board attention to this important risk area. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Boards Reviewing Cyber Insurance Coverage 

Boards 
Reviewing  
Cyber 
Insurance 
Coverage 
 

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
North  
America 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

70%  

35% 

45% 

19% 

27% 

Boards Reviewing  
Cyber Insurance Coverage 

 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
62% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
14% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

52% 

34% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

29% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

15% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

75% 

38% 

 
It is not certain that boards know what type of insurance to purchase or coverage limits.  When 
asked if their company had quantified the business interruption or loss exposure from a cyber incident, 
50% of the respondents said yes.  The regions and industry sectors were fairly consistent in their 
responses to this question.  
 

Boards$Review$Risk$Assessments$&$Rely$on$Outside$ExperEse$

 
Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments and an increasing number of them are hiring 
outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.   
 
Ninety-three percent (93%) of the 
respondents indicated their boards 
reviewed risk assessment reports, 
compared with 89% in 2012 and 82% 
in 2010.  Fifty-three percent (53%) 
said their boards used outside experts 
to help with risk assessments and risk 
management, up from 46% in 2012 
and 35% in 2010.  Most of this 
expertise was obtained from risk 
services (30%) and professional 
advisory services firms (70%).  
 

 Board$Reviews$Risk$Assessments$$

 Board$Uses$Outside$Experts$

100%#

93%$

53%$

89%$

46%$

82%$

35%$

10%#

20%#

30%#

40%#

50%#

80%#

70%#

60%#

90%#

0%#

2015$

2012$

2010$

Companies Quantifying Cyber Loss 
Exposure & Business Interruption 
 

North  
America 

54% 

Europe  Asia 

47% 

50% 

  Energy / 
Utilities 
54% 

 

Financial 

60% 

IT /  
Telecom 

43% 

Industrials 

44% 

 
   

	  

 

19	  

 

2015  
Europe 

Board Risk 
Management 

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
North  
America 
91%  

All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments, but the North 
American region relied more heavily on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk 
management (59%) than other regions.  Asia was close behind at 54%.   
 
Regional Comparison Table:   
Boards Reviewing Risk 
Assessments & Obtaining  
Outside Expertise 
 
 
 
The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are 
reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).  Energy/utilities board review of 
risk assessments also was 100%, but up a smaller amount from 93%. The energy/utilities and financial 
sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management (62%) more than 
other sectors. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Boards Reviewing Risk Assessments & Obtaining Outside Expertise 
Board Risk Management 

Reviewing 
Assessments 
Use Outside Experts 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

86% 

67% 

92% 

42% 

91% 

88% 

92% 

59% 

30% 

47% 

54% 

Risk 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
100% 
62% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
93% 
43% 

Reviewing Risk Assessments 
Use Outside Experts 

93% 
62% 

97% 
64% 

86% 
36% 

85% 
23% 

100% 
31% 

63% 
38% 

Boards$Increase$Scru;ny$of$Cyber$Risks$in$Supplier$Rela;onships#

 
There was a substantial increase in board attention to cyber risks when reviewing major supplier 
relationships. This jumped from 39% in 2010 and 2012 to 56% in 2015.  There was not much change, 
however, in boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business partnerships, 
acquisitions, or outsourcing relationships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Outsourcing$Agreements$

Supplier$Rela;onships$

Business$Partnerships$

60%$
57%$
57%$

Acquisi;ons$

67%$
67%$
67%$

67%$
67%$

39%$
39%$

100%#

2015$

2012$

2010$

20%#

40%#

60%#

80%#

69%$

56%$

0%#

20	  

 

 
   

 

	  

 
 

 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
North  
America 
62%  
74% 
62% 
62% 

Boards Considering 
Cyber Risks When  
Reviewing: 
Business Partnership 
Acquisition 
Supplier Relationship 
Outsourcing Agreements 

Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards considering 
cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par with Europe. 
Asian boards lag behind in this area at 41%.   
 
Regional Comparison Table:   
Boards Considering  
Cyber Risks 
 
 
 
 
 
The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier 
relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.  Similarly, board attention to cyber risks associated 
with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.  Overall, the industry sector 
data was harder to analyze in this area; some areas of consideration received more attention regarding 
cyber risks in 2015, while other went down from the 2012 survey.  For example, the percentage of 
energy/utility boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business partnerships 
increased by 30%, whereas the percentage of industrial sector boards doing this declined by 17%. These 
statistics may be more reflective of the issues that the respondent boards focused on in 2015. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Boards Considering Cyber Risks 

64% 
68% 
64% 
79% 

65% 
76% 
59% 
82% 

41% 
47% 
41% 
65% 

76% 
53% 
47% 
59% 

35% 
65% 
27% 
62% 

Boards Considering 
Cyber Risks When  
Reviewing: 
Business Partnership 
Acquisition 
Supplier Relationship 
Outsourcing Agreements 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
50% 
25% 
63% 
100% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

73% 
73% 
64% 
76% 

73% 
77% 
38% 
73% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

78% 
78% 
44% 
44% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

44% 
56% 
44% 
67% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

38% 
88% 
38% 
63% 

55% 
45% 
45% 
55% 

 
For the first time, the survey indicated that more boards regularly or occasionally engaged in 
every area of governance best practices related to privacy and security.  Board and executive 
governance activities considered best practices include reviewing security budgets, designating roles and 
responsibilities for the management of privacy and security, developing and reviewing top-level policies, 
receiving regular reports on security risks and incidents, reviewing annual risk assessments of the 
security program, and reviewing cyber incident response plans.  These activities strengthen the security 
posture of the company and help protect it against cyber attacks.  Although there were improvements in 
every area across the 2010, 2012, and 2015 reports, there is still room for improvement.  The weakest 
governance areas were reviewing annual security budgets and roles and responsibilities for privacy and 
security personnel; in 2012, respondents indicated more than half (53-56%) of the boards rarely or never 
engaged in these two activities, which are central to any security program. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21	  

 

 
   

 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46%$

2015$

2012$

2010$

Review$Incident$
Response$Plans$

ParBcipate$in$Test$

Scenarios$

Governance$Best$PracBces$D$Regularly$or$Occasionally$

82%$

72%$

71%$

74%$

67%$

61%$

63%$

56%$

90%#

80%#

70%#

60%#

50%#

40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#

64%$

53%$

39%$

47%$

36%$

36%$

50%$

41%$

23%$

Review$Security$

Budgets$

Review$Roles$and$
ResponsibiliBes$

Review$TopDLevel$

Policies$

Review$Risk$

Reports$

Receive$Incident$

Reports$

Review$Security$

Program$

Assessments$

When asked whether their boards receive information or are involved in activities related to these 
best practices, respondents indicated that boards regularly or occasionally engaged in them: 

•  Review annual budgets.  Fifty percent (50%) of respondents said their board regularly or 

occasionally reviewed and approved annual budgets for privacy and IT security programs, up 
from 41% in 2012, and 23% in 2010. 

•  Review roles and responsibilities.  Forty-seven percent (47%) of respondents indicated their 
board regularly or occasionally reviewed and approved roles and responsibilities of personnel 
responsible for privacy and security risks, up from 36% in 2012 and 2010. 

•  Review top-level policies.  Sixty-four percent (64%) of respondents said their board regularly or 
occasionally reviewed and approved top-level policies regarding privacy and security risks, up 
from 53% in 2012 and 39% in 2010.  

•  Receive reports on privacy and security risks.  Eighty-two percent (82%) of respondents said their 

board regularly or occasionally received reports from senior management regarding privacy and 
IT security risks, up from 72% in 2012 and 71% in 2010.  

•  Receive reports on security breaches or loss of data.  Sixty-nine percent (69%) of respondents 

said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed reports of security breaches or incidents 
involving the disclosure of personally identifiable information or theft of corporate data, up from 
61% in 2012.  This question was not asked in 2010.  

•  Review annual computer security program assessments.  Sixty-three percent (63%) of 

respondents said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed annual security program 
assessments, up from 56% in 2012.  This question was not asked in 2010. 

•  Review incident response plans and participate in test scenarios.  This was a new question for 

2015.  Seventy-four percent (74%) of the respondents indicated that they had reviewed their 
company’s incident response plan, but only 46% said they had participated in a test scenario 
against the plan.   

 
   

	  

 

22	  

 

71% 
66% 

50% 

47% 

   47% 

   63%  

 42% 

74% 
77% 

41%  

48% 

59%  

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

14% 

28% 

58% 

48% 

65% 

67% 

81%   62% 

41% 

50% 

69% 
50% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015 
North  
America 

2012 
North 
America 

Boards Regularly or 
Occasionally 
Engaging in Best 
Practices 
Review Annual 
Budgets 
Review Roles & 
Responsibilities  
Review Top-level 
Policies 
Review Risk Reports 
Review Security 
Incident & Breach 
Reports 
Review Security 
Program 
Assessments 
Review Incident 
Response Plans 
Participated in Test 
Scenario Against 
Response Plan 

An analysis of the regional results indicated that Asian boards did best in reviewing annual 
budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North American boards excelled in 
reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security program assessments.  North 
American respondents also indicated significant gains in engaging in reviewing annual budgets, roles and 
responsibilities, and top-level policies.  
 
Regional Comparison Table:   
Boards Regularly or 
Occasionally Engaging in 
Best Practices   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The financial sector continues to live up to its reputation of having 
the best security practices.  The sector had the highest percentage of 
board involvement in every best practice area except reviewing roles and 
responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.  The increased 
attention to cybersecurity issues is obvious when there are increases from 
2012 of more than 30 percentage points.  Across the board, the 
respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board 
governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best 
practice area. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Boards Regularly or Occasionally Engaging in Best Practices 
Boards Regularly or Occasionally 
Engaging in Best Practices 

“The increased 
attention to 
cybersecurity issues is 
obvious when there 
are increases from 
2012 of more than 30 
percentage points.” 

2015 
Industrial 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

54% 

48% 

74% 

41% 

71% 

50% 

85% 
54% 

71% 
48% 

55% 

53% 

85% 

50% 

91% 
70% 

80% 

58% 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

43% 
43% 
50% 
86% 
86% 

38% 
31% 
46% 
69% 
62% 

71% 

79% 
43% 

46% 

N/A 
N/A 

69% 
50% 
83% 
90% 
83% 

76% 

83% 
67% 

47% 
50% 
75% 
86% 
69% 

78% 

N/A 
N/A 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
38% 
31% 
54% 
85% 
77% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
29% 
21% 
21% 
71% 
50% 

69% 

77% 
39% 

36% 

N/A 
N/A 

 

Review Annual Budgets 
Review Roles & Responsibilities  
Review Top-level Policies 
Review Risk Reports 
Review Security Incident & Breach 
Reports 
Review Security Program 
Assessments 
Review Incident Response Plans 
Participated in Test Scenario 
Against Response Plan 

 

 
   

	  

2012 
Industrial 

44% 
56% 
63% 
81% 
63% 

44% 

63% 
31% 

44% 
25% 
38% 
50% 
56% 

50% 

N/A 
N/A 

23	  

 

48%#

53%#

Boards#With#Risk#Commi8ees#Separate#from#Audit#Commi8ees#

Board Committee Structure 
 
Some of the biggest improvements over time have been organizational.  How a board is organized 
and how it assigns committee responsibilities can significantly influence the effectiveness of its 
management activities and security posture.  Traditionally, boards have not separated risk management 
and audit responsibilities and established separate Risk and Audit Committees.   
 
Respondents indicated that 53% of 
boards have a Risk Committee that is 
separate from an Audit Committee.  
These results represent a significant 
improvement from the 2008 survey, when 
only 8% of boards had Risk Committees.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The survey revealed that Asia is far ahead of North America and Europe in understanding the 
importance of having a Risk Committee separate from the board Audit Committee.  
 
 
Regional Comparison Table:  
Boards With Risk Committee  
 
 
The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee separate 
from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk Committee. 
 
Industry Comparison Table: Boards With Risk Committee 
 

Boards 
With Risk 
Committee 
 

2015 
North  
America 
43%  

2012 
North 
America 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

60%#

50%#

40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#

2012 
Asia  

41% 

73% 

78% 

8%#

2008#

35% 

2010#

2012#

2015#

42% 

14%#

 

 

Boards With Risk  
Committee 

 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
23% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
36% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

86% 

78% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

43% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

31% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

38% 

44% 

 
The establishment of Risk Committees has led to the transfer of oversight of risk from Audit 
Committees to Risk Committees.  For the first time in all four surveys, the 2015 responses indicate 
the Risk Committee has the most responsibility for the oversight of risk.   
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   

	  

 

24	  

 

65%#

23%#

42%#

100%#

53%#

36%#

4%#

5%#

2008#

2010#

2012#

2015#

29%#

30%#

35%#

35%#

30%#

Risk#Commi3ee#

Audit#Commi3ee#

Full#Board#

90%#

80%#

70%#

60%#

50%#

40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#

Risk#Commi3ees#Overtake#Audit#Commi3ees#for#Risk#Management#

In 2008, only 4% of respondents 
indicated their board had 
assigned oversight of risk to a 
Risk Committee.  In 2010, that 
increased to 5%, in 2012 it went 
up to 30%, and in 2015 the Risk 
Committee surpassed all other 
committees for oversight of risk at 
42%.  In previous surveys, the 
Audit Committee was the 
dominant committee for risk 
management.   
 
 
Best practices and industry standards separate the audit and risk functions.  The reliance upon Audit 
Committees to manage risk issues creates segregation of duties (SOD) issues at the board level since the 
same committee that exercised oversight of operational aspects of privacy and security also conducted 
audits in these areas.    Carnegie Mellon’s Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation Guide 
provides step-by-step guidance on Risk Committee responsibilities for managing IT security risks.24 
 
Asian boards are the frontrunners in assigning responsibility for risk to a Risk Committee, leading the way 
at 48%.  It appears they shifted most responsibility from the full board to the Risk Committee, as the 15% 
drop in full board responsibility seems to have added 10% to the Risk Committee and 5% to the Audit 
Committee.  For the first time, North American boards also assigned Risk Committees the most 
responsibility for risk issues.  
 
Regional Comparison Table:      
Most Responsibility for  
Oversight of Risk  
 
 
 
The financial sector leads all industry sectors, with 70% of their boards assigning the Risk 
Committee the most responsibility for risk matters.  Energy/utilities and the IT/telecom sectors also 
showed significant gains in the percentage of Risk Committees having oversight of risk issues. The 
industrial sector, however, moved the responsibility for risk management to the full board, with 63% of 
these respondents indicating these issues were mostly managed at the board level.  
 
Industry Comparison Table:      
Most Responsibility for  
Oversight of Risk 
Most Responsibility for  
Oversight of Risk 

Most 
Responsibility for  
Oversight of Risk 
Risk Committee 
Audit Committee 
Full Board 

2015 
North  
America 
35%  
33% 
29% 

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
Industrial 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

2012 
Industrial 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

28% 
36% 
33% 

23% 
42% 
33% 

22% 
41% 
34% 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

48% 
19% 
33% 

38% 
14% 
48% 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
23% 
38% 
38% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
14% 
43% 
43% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 
33% 
53% 
13% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 
23% 
54% 
23% 

Risk Committee 
Audit Committee 
Full Committee 

 
 

 
   

	  

70% 
7% 
20% 

58% 
11% 
31% 

 

19% 
19% 
63% 

25% 
25% 
44% 

25	  

 

Risk/Security$CommiDees$Now$Common$

$

100%#

95%$

96%$

98%$

90%#

80%#

70%#

60%#

50%#

40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#

86%$

78%$

71%$

65%$

56%$

2015#

2012#

2010#

12%$

25%$

23%$

6%$

Audit$

Governance/Compliance$

Risk/Security$

IT/Telecom$

There is a clear trend of board Risk/Security 
Committees surpassing IT/Technology 
Committees in getting boards’ attention.  
When polled about the types of committees 
their boards have, respondents indicated that 
65% of boards have a Risk/Security Committee, 
up from 56% in 2012 and 12% in 2010.  
IT/Technology Committees remained static 
between 2012-15, staying in the 23-25% range, 
but that is still an improvement over 12% in 
2010.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

Boards With  
Risk/Security &  
IT/Tech Committees 
Risk/Security Committee 
IT/Tech Committee 

 
Most Asian boards had a Risk/Security Committee, but North American and European boards 
lagged behind at 48% and 58%, respectively.  North American boards showed a 20% gain in 
Risk/Security Committees between 2012 and 2015.  IT/Technology Committees showed little growth, 
except in Europe with a 10% gain.   
 
Regional Comparison Table:    
Boards With Risk/Security & IT/Technology Committees 
 
2015 
 
North  
 
America 
48%  
 
17% 
 
 
Financial sector boards have more board Risk/Security Committees (98%) and IT/Technology 
Committees (43%) than any other sector in both the 2012 and 2015 surveys.  Risk/Security 
Committees increased substantially in every sector.  
 
Industry Comparison Table:    
Boards With Risk/Security &  
IT/Technology Committees 
2015 
Boards With  
Energy/ 
Risk/Security &  
Utilities 
IT/Tech Committees 
46% 
Risk/Security Committee 
IT/Tech Committee 
15% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
36% 
14% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
Industrial 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

58% 
32% 

98% 
43% 

44% 
31% 

63% 
12% 

86% 
39% 

64% 
29% 

46% 
0% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

28% 
16% 

59% 
22% 

92% 
31% 

95% 
38% 

2012 
Industrial 

 
The  survey  respondents  from  2010-2015  indicated  a  clear  trend  in  Risk  and  IT/Technology 
Committees hiring more outside expertise.  In 2015, the Risk Committee hired outside expertise 30% 
of the time, up from 16% in 2012 and 5% in 2010.  
 
Risk Committees are hiring more outside expertise for risk management assistance in every 
region, with Asia leading at 36%.  In Asia the use of outside expertise for risk management equaled that 
of the Compensation Committee in both 2012 and 2015.  IT/Technology Committees also had an 
increase in the usage of outside experts, except in Asia, where respondents indicated a sharp decrease.   
 
 
 

26	  

 

 
   

 

	  

50% 
54% 
32% 

45% 
50% 
55% 

43% 
43% 
36% 

67% 
56% 
33% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

2012 
North 
America 

Boards Hiring Outside 
Expertise 

2015 
North  
America 
68%  
68% 
86% 

Full Board  
Audit Committee 
Compensation 
Committee 
Gov/Compliance/Ethics 
Committee 
Risk Committee 
IT/Technology 
Committee 

Regional Comparison Table:      
Boards Hiring Outside 
Expertise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic 
jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which already was the leader in this area and 
remained so at 38%.  The use of outside experts by IT/Technology Committees in the industrial sector 
increased from 0% to 40%; other sectors also increased in this area.   
 
Industry Comparison Table:      
Boards Hiring Outside Expertise 
 

23% 

32% 
27% 

25% 

10% 
15% 

14% 

36% 
7% 

22% 

33% 
22% 

29% 
85% 
91% 

50% 

18% 
3% 

29% 

26% 
13% 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
38% 
75% 
75% 
38% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
50% 
80% 
90% 
60% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

65% 
47% 
50% 
26% 

48% 
61% 
52% 
22% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

43% 
57% 
86% 
43% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

27% 
73% 
64% 
36% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

50% 
60% 
80% 
30% 

25% 
75% 
83% 
50% 

Boards Hiring Outside 
Expertise 

Full Board  
Audit Committee 
Compensation Committee 
Gov/Compliance/Ethics 
Committee 
Risk Committee 
IT/Technology Committee 

25% 
13% 

0% 
10% 

38% 
18% 

35% 
13% 

29% 
14% 

9% 
0% 

30% 
40% 

17% 
0% 

 
Fifty-nine percent (59%) of the respondents indicated that their board had an outside director with 
risk expertise and 23% said they had a director with cybersecurity expertise. These percentages 
have been generally consistent in the 2012 and 2010 surveys.   
 
Fifty-one percent (51%) of respondents indicated that their boards retain professional search firms to seek 
qualified candidates for their board, which is the same percentage as the 2012 survey.   
 
Geeks are good for boards.  Risk and security and IT experience ranked most valuable when 
recruiting for board directors after financial and management experience.  Early surveys indicated 
that boards favored traditional experience, such as financial, management, and legal backgrounds. The 
value boards are placing on directors having risk, security, or IT experience, however, has experienced 
steady growth since the 2010 survey, with risk and security expertise valued more than IT.  
 

 
   

	  

 

27	  

 

$Financial$

 Legal$

0%#

64%$
64%$

29%$

31%$

24%$

 Academic$

14%$

36%$

27%$

26%$

30%$

33%$

40%$

37%$

48%$

51%$

$

Management$

17%$

15%$

20%$

2015$

2012$

2010$

87%$

93%$

95%$

87%$

95%$

92%$

50%#

60%#

70%#

80%#

90%#

100%#

 Risk$and$Security$

10%#

20%#

30%#

40%#

 Informa9on$Tech$

 Government$Services$

 Scien9ﬁc/Engineering$

Importance$of$Exper9se$When$Recrui9ng$Directors$

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk and security experience outranked IT experience in every region.  The respondents indicated 
that North American and European boards valued risk and security expertise second only to 
financial and management experience.  Asian respondents valued legal expertise slightly more than 
risk and security.  
 
Regional Comparison Table:      
Expertise Very Important or 
Important When Recruiting  
Directors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In 2015, the energy/utilities and financial sectors placed risk and security experience in a strong third 
place for importance in experience when recruiting directors, immediately following financial and 
management experience. The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other areas, 
such as academic and scientific experience.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Expertise Very Important  
or Important When  
Recruiting 
Financial 
Management 
Academic 
IT 
Risk and Security 
Legal 
Scientific 
Government 

2015 
North  
America 
87%  
87% 
13% 
46% 
67% 
24% 
26% 
9% 

85% 
85% 
32% 
27% 
54% 
58% 
19% 
31% 

95% 
86% 
52% 
48% 
62% 
81% 
24% 
33% 

95% 
95% 
12% 
42% 
63% 
37% 
42% 
9% 

94% 
97% 
38% 
22% 
56% 
41% 
25% 
9% 

87% 
87% 
42% 
42% 
66% 
34% 
37% 
16% 

2012 
North 
America 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

28	  

 

 
   

 

	  

Industry Comparison Table:      
Expertise Very Important or 
Important When Recruiting  
Directors 
 

Expertise Very Important  
or Important When  
Recruiting 
Financial 
Management 
Academic 
IT 
Risk and Security 
Legal 
Scientific 
Government 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
100% 
100% 
31% 
23% 
85% 
31% 
54% 
23% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
86% 
79% 
43% 
7% 
50% 
21% 
64% 
14% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

86% 
83% 
29% 
52% 
76% 
43% 
2% 
12% 

100% 
97% 
33% 
42% 
75% 
58% 
11% 
22% 

86% 
86% 
57% 
50% 
43% 
14% 
43% 
21% 

92% 
85% 
31% 
62% 
69% 
62% 
54% 
15% 

94% 
94% 
27% 
31% 
50% 
38% 
56% 
19% 

94% 
88% 
25% 
31% 
50% 
44% 
0% 
25% 

29	  

 

 
Internal Organizational Roles & Responsibilities 
 
Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key positions for security and risk 
officers, but lagging in establishing privacy positions. The survey results indicated a steady rise in 
the number of CISOs at respondent companies.  Best practices call for clear roles and responsibilities 
with respect to privacy and security, with dedicated full-time personnel leading each area. The delegation of 
privacy and security responsibilities should serve as a check and balance and protect the company against 
segregation of duties (SOD) issues that can increase risk.  
 
The various titles for personnel responsible for privacy and security were given four options on the survey: 
chief privacy officer (CPO), chief information security officer (CISO), chief security officer (CSO), and chief 
risk officer (CRO).   

•  Almost three-fourths 

(73%) of the respondents 
indicated that their 
company has a full-time 
CISO, up from only 30% in 
2008.   

•  Half (51%) of the 

respondents said they 
have a CSO, up from 15% 
in 2008.   

•  Fifty-nine percent (59%) of 
the respondents indicated 
that they have a CRO, up 
from 27% in 2008. 

80%#

70%#

60%#

50%#

40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#

Companies$Improving$Security$&$Risk$Roles,$But$Lagging$on$Privacy$Roles#
#
73%$

64%$

39%$

30%$

51%$

51%$

36%$

15%$

27%$

18%$

11%$

7%$

59%$

56%$

2015$

2012$

2010$

2008$

38%$

27%$

CISO$

CSO$

CPO$

CRO$

•  Only about one quarter (27%) of the respondents said they have a full-time CPO, up from 7% in 

2008. 

 

 
   

	  

 

The management of privacy issues is concerning.  With a patchwork of laws and regulations around 
the globe on privacy and increased scrutiny by regulators, it is a red flag that only one-fourth 
(27%) of the Forbes Global 2000 respondents indicated they have a dedicated privacy officer.  This 
is not consistent with internationally accepted best practices and standards.  It is possible that some 
respondents indicated that they did not have someone in a particular position because the person in their 
organization did not have that specific title.  Any organization large enough to be included in the Forbes 
Global 2000 list should have a dedicated CIO, CISO/CSO, CPO, and CRO. 
 
North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for 
privacy and security, however both Asia and Europe substantially increased the percentage of 
CPOs between the 2012 and 2015 surveys.  
 
Regional Comparison Table:      
CISO, CSO, CPO, CRO  
 
 
 
 
 
The financial sector leads in the percentage (88%) of CISOs, followed closely by IT/Telecom (86%).  
The financial sector is the only sector to have 100% CROs, with the next closest sector being 
IT/Telecom at 57%.  The IT/Telecom sector had the highest percentage of CPOs (64%), which was likely 
due to requests for data from law enforcement and civil actions and other compliance requirements 
associated with its industry.  
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
CISO, CSO, CPO, CRO 

Companies with 
Full-time Dedicated 
Personnel for Role 
CISO 
CSO 
CPO 
CRO 

2015 
North  
America 
78%  
52% 
33% 
61% 

2012 
North 
America 

52% 
38% 
5% 
57% 

82% 
66% 
29% 
61% 

58% 
47% 
23% 
49% 

72% 
63% 
3% 
56% 

46% 
35% 
23% 
46% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

Companies with 
Full-time Dedicated 
Personnel for Role 
CISO 
CSO 
CPO 
CRO 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
69% 
46% 
8% 
38% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
50% 
57% 
7% 
57% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

88% 
62% 
31% 
100% 

81% 
67% 
17% 
89% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

86% 
79% 
64% 
57% 

69% 
79% 
0% 
54% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

63% 
25% 
13% 
38% 

50% 
38% 
13% 
25% 

90%#

80%#

70%#

Overlapping$Privacy$&$Security$Roles$Creates$SOD$Issues$

 
Organizations tend to overlap privacy and 
security responsibilities, not 
understanding the inherent SOD issues.  It 
is important that privacy and security 
responsibilities be separated to prevent a 
single point of failure, which can occur (a) 
when security personnel do not understand 
compliance requirements or needed privacy 
controls, or (b) when privacy personnel do not 
understand the technical security 
configuration or technical controls.25   
The survey revealed serious SOD issues 
between privacy and security roles.  More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%) 

2015$

2012$

2010$

CISO$

CRO$

51%$

26%$

46%$

58%$

47%$

0%$

0%$

60%#

50%#

30%#

20%#

44%$

10%#

0%#

CSO$

CPO$

77%$

29%$

32%$

40%#

9%$

 
   

 

	  

30	  

 

indicated that they were responsible for both privacy and security.  Although this was down from 77% of 
CISOs and 30% of CROs in 2010 with responsible for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.  Since 
2010, however, the surveys have indicated that CPOs rarely are assigned security responsibilities. 
 
Privacy is much more compliance driven and few IT and security technical personnel are attorneys, so 
saddling the CISO/CSO with privacy responsibilities invites a compliance issue or potential reputational 
and financial harm to the company.  Clearly, the designation of privacy and security roles and 
responsibilities is an area that requires more board attention. 
 
Overlapping responsibilities tend to be on the decline in North America and Asia but on the 
increase in Europe.  In North America, respondents indicated that overlapping security and privacy roles 
was on the decline, particularly with respect to CSO and CRO positions.  The same applied to Asia, 
except respondents indicated 17% of CPOs had overlapping responsibilities for security.   In Europe, 
unfortunately, there is a reverse trend, with more overlapping privacy and security responsibilities being 
assigned to one role.  
 
Regional Comparison Table:      
Overlapping Privacy &  
Security Responsibilities 
 
 
 
 
 
Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry 
sectors.  CISOs, CSO, and CROs have responsibility for both privacy and security at a much higher rate 
than CPOs.  Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a 
CPO.  All industry sectors except IT/Telecom had more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled with both 
privacy and security responsibilities. The IT/Telecom sector dropped from 78% of CISOs with dual 
responsibilities in 2012 to a third (33%) in 2015.  
 
Industry Comparison Table: 
Overlapping Privacy &  
Security Responsibilities 
 

Role Has 
Responsibility 
For Privacy & 
Security 
CISO 
CSO 
CPO 
CRO 

2012 
North 
America 

2015 
North  
America 

42%  
13% 
0% 
25% 

58% 
40% 
18% 
70% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

44% 
35% 
0% 
48% 

48% 
40% 
0% 
22% 

42% 
22% 
17% 
33% 

82% 
62% 
0% 
67% 

Role Has Responsibility 
For Privacy & Security  
 
CISO 
CSO 
CPO 
CRO 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
56% 
33% 
0% 
0% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
43% 
38% 
0% 
0% 

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

51% 
35% 
8% 
57% 

76% 
63% 
0% 
56% 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 
33% 
18% 
11% 
38% 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 
78% 
67% 
0% 
86% 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

60% 
25% 
0% 
17% 

25% 
33% 
0% 
0% 

 
There also are SOD issues in reporting lines when CISOs/CSOs report to chief information officers 
(CIOs), because the CIO then controls the budget for the security program and may override security 
configuration decisions or policies in favor of his/her own infrastructure architecture preferences, thereby 
compromising security.  In addition, the CIO may interfere with security procurements by favoring certain 
vendors or products without understanding the technological security differences between the products.    

31	  

 

 
   

 

	  

22%#

22%#

8%#

13%#

2015#

2012#

 CEO/COO#

6%#

4%#

#
CFO#

#
CIO#

40%#

38%#

 General#Counsel#

0%#

5%#

10%#

15%#

20%#

25%#

30%#

35%#

40%#

45%#

CISO/CSO#Repor=ng#to#CIO#Creates#SOD#Issues#

Although such reporting relationships 
are against best practices, in 2015, 
40% of the respondents indicated that 
the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in 
their organization.  Twenty-two percent 
(22%) of the respondents indicated that 
the CISO/CSO reported to the CEO and 
8% indicated that the CISO/CSO reported 
to the CFO.  The surveys from 2010, 
2012 and 2015 show little change in this 
reporting structure, and independent 
reporting lines likely will require board 
action.   
 
CIO reporting remains the dominant reporting structure for CISOs/CSOs across all regions.  
Although the Asian respondents indicated a preference for the CISO/CSO reporting to the CEO in 2012, 
that has reversed with the percentage dropping from 57% to 19%.  Likewise, in 2012, the North American 
respondents indicated that the CFO was a favored second choice for CISO/CSO reporting, but that 
dropped from 23% in 2012 to 9% in 2015.  Europe is the only region to show a sizable shift from 
CISO/CSOs reporting to the CIO, moving from 50% in 2012 to 33% in 2015. 
 
Regional Comparison Table:      
CISO/CSO Reporting Structure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Likewise, CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except 
energy/utilities.  Only the energy/utilities and financial sectors increased the percentage of CISO/CSOs 
reporting to the CEO/COO between 2012 and 2015.  In 2015, the IT/Telecom sector respondents 
dramatically reduced the percentage of CISO/CSOs reporting to CEOs from 54% to 29%.  The industrial 
sector jumped from 25% of CISO/CSOs reporting to CIOs in 2012 to 47% in 2015.  Having the CISO/CSO 
report to the CFO appears to be falling out of favor in every sector except energy/utilities.  
 
Industry Comparison Table:      
CISO/CSO Reporting Structure  
 

CEO/COO 
CFO 
CIO 
General Counsel 

2015 
North  
America 
15%  
9% 
51% 
4% 

5% 
23% 
44% 
   9% 

2012 
North 
America 

CISO/CSO 
Reports to 

33% 
10% 
33% 
10% 

19% 
7% 
26% 
4% 

13% 
3% 
50% 
0% 

57% 
5% 
19% 
0% 

2015  
Europe 

2012 
Europe 

2015  
Asia 

2012 
Asia  

2015 
Finance 

2012 
Finance 

2015  
IT/ 
Telecom 

2012 
IT/ 
Telecom 

2015 
Industrial 

2012 
Industrial 

2015 
Energy/ 
Utilities 
21% 
21% 
43% 
7% 

2012 
Energy/ 
Utilities 

7% 
14% 
50% 
0% 

CISO/CSO Reports to  
 

CEO/COO 
CFO 
CIO 
General Counsel  

 
 
 

 
   

	  

29% 
7% 
29% 
7% 

54% 
8% 
15% 
0% 

30% 
2% 
47% 
2% 

28% 
3% 
42% 
3% 

 

6% 
12% 
47% 
12% 

19% 
44% 
25% 
6% 

32	  

 

Organizations are showing significant gains in cross-organizational communication. 
One of the most significant improvements from the results of the four Governance Surveys is in the 
establishment of internal cross-organizational groups for communicating about privacy and security 
issues.   

• 

• 
• 
• 

In 2008, only 17% of the respondents indicated that their organizations had a cross-
organizational team 
In 2010, 65% of the organizations did;  
In 2012, 72% of the respondents indicated that such a committee had been established, and  
In 2015, 79% of the respondents had a cross-organizational committee or team.   

 
This is very encouraging and indicates that companies are learning that cross-organizational 
communication is essential to addressing insider threats, combating external attacks, closing governance 
gaps, and reducing legal liability. 
 
The benefit of cross-organizational committees is realized across the globe; all geographic regions 
indicated that 65% or more organizations had a cross-organizational team.  At least 81% of all industry 
sectors have a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which lags behind at 62%.  
 
 
 

IT /  
Telecom 

North  
America 

Europe  Asia 

Industrials 

Financial 

91% 

76% 

65% 

86% 

86% 

81% 

Organizations with cross- 
Organizational committee 
 

  Energy / 
Utilities 
61% 

 

• 

• 

CONCLUSIONS 
 
The following conclusions can be drawn from the findings of the 2015 GTISC Governance Survey: 
 

In 2015, the percentage of boards actively addressing and governing computer and information 
security nearly doubled from previous surveys. The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds 
(63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing computer and information security, 
whereas only about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012, 39% in 2010).  

•  The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the number of boards reviewing cyber insurance, 

indicating cyber risks are being considered as an enterprise risk.  The 2015 survey revealed that 
48% of the respondent boards were reviewing their company’s insurance for cyber-related risks, 
compared with 28% in 2012 and 27% in 2010. 
It is not certain that boards know what type of insurance to purchase or appropriate coverage 
limits. Only about half of the respondents (47-54%) indicated they had quantified their business 
interruption and loss exposure from cyber events. 

•  Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments and an increasing number of them are hiring 

outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.  Ninety-three percent (93%) 
of the respondents indicated their boards review risk assessment reports and 53% said they hire 
outside experts to assist on risk issues. 

•  There was a substantial increase in board attention to cyber risks when reviewing major supplier 

relationships. This jumped from 39% in 2010 and 2012 to 56% in 2015.  There was not much 

 
   

 

	  

33	  

 

change, however, in boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business 
partnerships, acquisitions, or outsourcing relationships. 

•  For the first time, the 2015 survey shows that more boards are regularly or occasionally engaging 
in every area of governance best practices related to the governance of privacy and security. The 
weakest areas of oversight continue to be reviewing annual security budgets and assigning roles 
and responsibilities for personnel responsible for these areas. 

•  Sixty-three percent (63%) of respondents said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed 

annual security program assessments.  Attention to incident response planning was high, 
with74% of respondents indicating they had reviewed their company’s plan, but only 46% said 
they had participated in a test scenario of the plan. 

•  Some of the biggest improvements over time have been organizational.  Respondents indicated 

that 53% of boards have a Risk Committee that is separate from an Audit Committee.  These 
results represented a significant improvement since the 2008 survey, when only 8% of boards 
had Risk Committees.   

•  The establishment of Risk Committees has led to the transfer of oversight of risk from Audit 
Committees to Risk Committees.  For the first time in all four surveys, the 2015 responses 
indicate the Risk Committee has the most responsibility for the oversight of risk, overcoming a 
role previously held by Audit Committees. In 2008, only 4% of respondents indicated their board 
had assigned oversight of risk to a Risk Committee.  In 2010, that increased to 5%, in 2012 it 
went up to 30%, and in 2015 the Risk Committee surpassed all other committees for oversight of 
risk at 42%. 

•  There is a clear trend of board Risk/Security Committees (65%) surpassing IT/Technology 

Committees (23-25%) in getting boards’ attention; in 2010 only 12% of boards had Risk/Security 
and IT/Technology Committees. 

•  The survey respondents from 2010-2015, however, indicate a clear trend in Risk and 

IT/Technology Committees hiring more outside expertise.  

•  Fifty-nine percent (59%) of the respondents indicated that their board had an outside director with 

risk expertise and 23% said they had a director with cybersecurity expertise.  

•  Risk and security and IT experience ranked most valuable when recruiting for board directors 

after financial and management experience.  

•  Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key positions for security and risk 
officers, but lag in establishing privacy positions. The survey results indicated a steady rise in the 
number of CISOs (73%) at respondents’ companies, up from only 30% in 2008.  Only about one 
quarter (27%) of the respondents said they have a full-time CPO, up from 7% in 2008. 

•  Organizations tend to overlap privacy and security responsibilities, not understanding the inherent 
SOD issues.  More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%) indicated that 
they are responsible for both privacy and security.  Although this is down from 77% of CISOs and 
30% of CROs in 2010 with responsible for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.  CPOs are 
rarely assigned security responsibilities. 
In 2015, 40% of the respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in their 
organization.  Twenty-two percent (22%) of the respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO 

• 

34	  

 

 
   

 

	  

reported to the CEO and 8% indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CFO.  The surveys 
from 2010, 2012 and 2015 show little change in this reporting structure, and changes to require 
independent reporting likely will require board action.   

•  Organizations are showing significant gains in cross-organizational committees or teams, up from 

17% in 2008 to 79% in 2015.  

 
Regional Conclusions 

•  North American (85%) and European (58%) boards are paying more attention to computer and 
information security, up from 40% and 19%, respectively, in 2012.  Asia remained unchanged at 
38%.  

•  The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention 
doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.  Europe had a 26% increase, but Asia was rather 
static with only a 3% increase.   

•  All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments (91-92%), but 

the North American region relied more heavily (59%) on outside experts to help with risk 
assessments and risk management.  Asia was close behind at 54%. 

•  Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards 

considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par 
with Europe (64-62%). 
In following best practices for cyber governance, the survey results indicated that Asian boards 
did best in reviewing annual budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North 
American boards excelled in reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security 
program assessments. 

• 

•  The survey revealed that Asia was far ahead of North America and Europe in understanding the 
importance of having a Risk Committee separate from the board Audit Committee, with 73% of 
Asian respondents reporting their organization had a Risk Committee.  Only 43% of North 
American boards and 42% of European boards had a Risk Committee separate from the Audit 
Committee. 

•  Most Asian boards have a Risk/Security Committee (98%), but North American and European 

boards lag behind at 48% and 58%, respectively.   

•  The value of risk and security experience for board service outranked IT experience in every 
region.  The respondents indicated that North American and European boards valued risk and 
security expertise second only to financial and management experience.  Asian respondents 
valued legal expertise slightly more than risk and security.  

•  North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for 

privacy and security. 

•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities for a CISO/CSO tended to be on the decline in 

North America and Asia, but on the increase in Europe. 

 
   

	  

 

35	  

 

•  CIO reporting remains the dominant reporting structure for CISOs/CSOs across all regions, even 
though it creates SOD issues.  Europe is the only region to show a sizable shift from CISO/CSOs 
reporting to the CIO, moving from 50% in 2012 down to 33% in 2015.   

•  All geographic regions indicated that 65% or more organizations have a cross-organizational 

team.  

 

Industry Sector Conclusions 

The 2015 survey confirmed the 2012 report’s finding that, overall, the financial sector has better privacy 
and security practices than other industry sectors.  The 2015 survey indicated significant improvements in 
the energy/utilities and industrial sectors, which often had the lowest scores in the 2012 survey.   

•  The 2015 survey revealed large increases in attention to cyber issues across industry sectors. 

The industrial sector had the largest improvement in oversight of computer and information 
security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).  The financial sector was close behind 
with a 35% increase (79% v. 44%) and energy/utilities and IT/telecom also improving with 33% 
increases.   

•  Vendor management is receiving more attention in every sector, with the financial sector leading 

on this issue. 

•  The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are 

reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).  The energy/utilities and 
financial sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management 
(62%) more than other sectors. 

•  The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier 

relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.  Similarly, board attention to cyber risks 
associated with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.   

•  The financial sector had the highest percentage of board involvement in every best practice area 

except reviewing roles and responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.  Across the 
board, the respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board 
governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best practice area. 

•  The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee 

separate from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk 
Committee. 

•  Financial sector boards had more board Risk/Security Committees (98%) and IT/Technology 
Committees (86%) than any other sector in both the 2012 and 2015 surveys.  The industrial 
sector was lowest with 44% of boards having a Risk/Security Committee, and the energy/utilities 
sector was only slightly ahead at 46%. 
Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic 
jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which was already the leader in this area and 
remains so at 38%.  The energy/utilities sector’s Risk Committees went from 0% in 2012 to 25% 
in 2015. 

• 

36	  

 

 
   

	  

 

•  The energy/utilities and financial sectors place risk and security experience in a strong third place 

when valuing experience in the recruitment of directors, immediately following financial and 
management experience. The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other 
areas, such as academic and scientific experience. 

•  The financial sector has the highest percentage (88%) of CISOs, followed closely by IT/Telecom 
(86%).  The financial sector is the only sector to have 100% CROs, with the next closest sector 
being IT/Telecom at 57%.  The high percentage of CPOs was in the IT/Telecom sector (64%). 
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry 

sectors. Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a 
CPO.  All industry sectors except IT/Telecom have more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled 
with both privacy and security responsibilities. The IT/Telecom sector dropped from 78% of 
CISOs with dual responsibilities in 2012 to a third (33%) in 2015, whereas the industrial sector 
went the other way, jumping from only 25% of CISOs assigned dual responsibilities in 2012 to 
60% in 2015. 

•  CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except energy/utilities.  Only 
the energy/utilities and financial sectors increased the percentage of CISO/CSOs reporting to the 
CEO/COO between 2012 and 2015. 

•  At least 81% of all industry sectors had a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which 

lagged behind at 62%. 

 
III.  Recommendations 
 
The survey revealed that governance of enterprise security has moved considerably since the 2008, 
2010, and 2012 surveys, but gaps remain in critical areas.  If boards and senior management take the 
following 12 actions, they could significantly improve their organizations’ security posture and reduce risk: 
1.  Establish a board Risk Committee separate from the Audit Committee and assign it responsibility 
for enterprise risks, including IT risks.  Recruit board directors with cybersecurity, IT governance, 
and risk management expertise. 

2.  Ensure that privacy and security roles within the organization are separated and that 

responsibilities are appropriately assigned.  The CIO, CISO/CSO, and CPO should report 
independently to senior management. 

3.  Evaluate the existing organizational structure and establish a cross-organizational team that is 

required to meet at least monthly to coordinate and communicate on privacy and security issues.  
This team should include senior management from human resources, public relations, legal, and 
procurement, as well as the CFO, the CIO, CISO/CSO, CRO, the CPO, and business line 
executives. 

4.  Review existing top-level policies to ensure they set a “tone from the top” and create a culture of 

cybersecurity and responsibility for systems and data.  Organizations can enhance their 
reputation by valuing cybersecurity and the protection of privacy and emphasizing it as a 
corporate value. 

 
   

	  

 

37	  

 

5.  Review assessments of the organization’s cybersecurity program and ensure the program 

comports with best practices and standards and includes incident response, breach notification, 
business continuity/disaster recovery, and crisis communications plans. 

6.  Ensure that privacy and cybersecurity requirements for vendors (including law firms and cloud 

and outsource providers) are based upon key aspects of the organization’s cybersecurity program 
and includes annual audits and control requirements.  Carefully review vendor notification 
procedures in the event of a breach or security incident. 

7.  Conduct an annual audit of the organization’s enterprise cybersecurity program, to be reviewed 

by the Audit Committee. 

8.  Conduct a separate annual risk assessment of the cybersecurity program and effectiveness of 

controls, to be reviewed by the board Risk Committee, and ensure that identified gaps or 
weaknesses are addressed. 

9.  Require regular reports from senior management on the status of the cybersecurity program, 

remediation activities, and recent incidents. 

10. Require annual board review of the budget for the cybersecurity program and its linkage to cyber 

risk management. 

11. Ensure incident response plans are comprehensive and can address a multi-pronged attack and 

dovetail with business continuity/disaster recovery plans.  Conduct a robust annual test of the 
plans, involving executives and board members.  

12. Evaluate cyber risks and potential business interruption and loss exposure costs and review 

adequacy of cyber insurance coverage. 

 

	  

 

38	  

 

 

 	  

 
   

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

Endnotes 

1 Jody R. Westby & Julia Allen, Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation Guide, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Software Engineering Institute, Technical Note CMU/SEI-2000-TN-020, 2007, 
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/07.reports/07tn020.html (hereinafter “Westby & Allen”).  
 
2 Board Briefing on IT Governance, 2nd ed., IT Governance Institute, 2003 at 10, 
http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Research/ResearchDeliverables/Pages/Board-Briefing-on-IT-
Governance-2nd-Edition.aspx (emphasis added). 
 
3 International Organization for Standardization & International Electro technical Commission, 
Governance of Information Security, ISO/IEC 27014 (2013), Section 3.2, 
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:27014:ed-1:v1:en (hereinafter “ISO/IEC 27014”). 
 
4 ISO/IEC 27014 at section 4.1.  
 
5 See Jody R. Westby, Testimony Before the House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee 
on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental Relations and the Census, Sept. 22, 2004, 
http://www.cccure.org/Documents/Governance/westby1.pdf .  For a discussion regarding the fiduciary 
duty of boards and officers and the extension of that duty to protect the digital assets of their 
organizations, see Jody R. Westby, ed., International Guide to Cyber Security, American Bar Assn., 
Privacy & Computer Crime Committee, 2004 at 189-93. 
 
6 In re Caremark Derivative Litigation, 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996), 
http://www.wlrk.com/docs/INRECAREMARKINTERNATIONALINCDERIVATIVELITIGATION.pdf.  
 
7 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. Law 107-204, Sections 302, 404, 
http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/gwbush/sarbanesoxley072302.pdf.  
 
8 See, “Commission Guidance Regarding Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial 
Reporting Under Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,” 17 CFR Part 241, June 
27, 2007 at 4-5, https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf. 
 
9 “CF Disclosure Guidance: Topic 2, Cybersecurity,” Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of 
Corporate Finance, Oct. 13, 2011, http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.  
 
10 David Michaels, “Hacked Companies Face SEC Scrutiny Over Disclosure,” BloombergBusiness, July 7, 
2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-07-02/hacked-companies-face-sec-scrutiny-over-
disclosure.  
 
11 “Cybersecurity Guidance, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of Investment 
Management, April, 2015, http://www.sec.gov/investment/im-guidance-2015-02.pdf.  

 
   

	  

 

39	  

 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

12 FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool, “Overview for Chief Executive Officers and Boards of 
Directors,” http://www.ffiec.gov/cyberassessmenttool.htm.  
 
13 North American Electric Reliability Corporation, CIP Standards, 
http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx .  
 
14 Cybersecurity Framework, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/.  
 
15 Paul Ziabro and Joanne S. Lublin, “ISS’s View on Target Directors Is a Signal on Cybersecurity,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2014, http://www.wsj.com/articles/iss-calls-for-an-overhaul-of-target-board-
after-data-breach-1401285278; see also Elizabeth A. Harris, “Advisory Group Opposes Re-election of 
Most of Target’s Board,” The New York Times, May 28. 2014, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/business/advisory-group-opposes-re-election-of-most-of-targets-
board.html?_r=0. 
 
16 Kevin LaCroix, “Target Directors and Officers Hit with Derivative Suits Based on Data Breach,” Feb. 3, 
2014, http://www.dandodiary.com/2014/02/articles/cyber-liability/target-directors-and-officers-hit-with-
derivative-suits-based-on-data-breach/.  
 
17 Kevin LaCroix, “Dismissal Granted in Cyber Breach-Related Derivative Suit Filed Against Wyndham 
Officials, Oct. 21. 2014, http://www.dandodiary.com/2014/10/articles/cyber-liability/dismissal-granted-in-
cyber-breach-related-derivative-suit-filed-against-wyndham-officials/.  
 
18 “Data Breach Plaintiffs Have Standing Against Neiman-Marcus, PRWeb News Release, Sept. 13, 2015, 
http://www.prweb.com/releases/2015/07/prweb12859656.htm.  
 
19 In re Citigroup Inc. Shareholder Derivative Action, No. 3338-CC, 2009 WL 481906 (Del. Ch. Feb. 24, 
2009), http://www.delawarelitigation.com/uploads/file/int99(1).pdf ; Stone v. Ritter, 911 A.2d 362, 366–67 
(Del. 2006), http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/data2/delawarestatecases/93-2006.pdf.  
 
20 Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime – Budapest, 23.XI.2001 (ETS No. 185) (2002), 
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/Commun/QueVoulezVous.asp?NT=185&CL=ENG, Council of Europe 
Convention on Cybercrime Explanatory Report, Nov. 8, 2001, 
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Reports/Html/185.htm. 
 
21 Proposal for a Council Framework Decision on attacks against information systems, Commission of the 
European Communities, Article 9, Apr. 19, 2002, COM(2002) 173 final, 2002/0086 (CNS), http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52002PC0173; see also Proposal for a Directive of the 
European Parliament and of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing Council 
Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, Explanatory Memorandum, European Commission, COM(2010) 517, 
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/policies/crime/1_en_act_part1_v101.pdf. 
 

 
   

	  

 

40	  

 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

22 Email from John D. Dempsey to Jody R. Westby, Sept. 6, 2015, 11:42 a.m.  Disclosure: The author’s 
firm, Global Cyber Risk LLC, is a strategic partner of Aon Global Risk Consulting, and the two companies 
jointly offer a service evaluating cybersecurity programs and quantifying cyber risks.  
 
23 See Internet World Stats, http://www.internetworldstats.com. 
 
24 Westby & Allen at 57-58. 
 
25 For a full discussion on the appropriate assignment of roles and responsibilities for all organizational 
personnel and boards of directors, see Westby and Allen at 19-31, Appendix C. 
 

 
   

	  

 

41	  

 

