THE DIGITAL AGE

THE DEFINITIVE CYBERSECURITY GUIDE

FOR DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS

NAVIGATING THE DIGITAL AGE:
The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide 

for Directors and Offi cers

Published by

 

Navigating the Digital Age: The Deﬁ nitive 
Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and 
Ofﬁ cers

Publisher: Tim Dempsey

Editor: Matt Rosenquist

Design and Composition: Graphic World, Inc.

Printing and Binding: Transcontinental Printing

Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers
is published by:
Caxton Business & Legal, Inc.
27 North Wacker Drive, Suite 601
Chicago, IL 60606
Phone: +1 312 361 0821
Email: tjd@caxtoninc.com

First published: 2015
ISBN: 978-0-9964982-0-3

Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers
© October 2015

Cover illustration by Tim Heraldo

Copyright in individual chapters rests with the authors. No photocopying: copyright licenses do not apply.

DISCLAIMER

Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers (the Guide) contains 
summary information about legal and regulatory aspects of cybersecurity governance and is current as of 
the date of its initial publication (October 2015). Although the Guide may be revised and updated at some 
time in the future, the publishers and authors do not have a duty to update the information contained in 
the Guide, and will not be liable for any failure to update such information. The publishers and authors 
make no representation as to the completeness or accuracy of any information contained in the Guide.

This  guide  is  written  as  a  general  guide  only.  It  should  not  be  relied  upon  as  a  substitute  for  specifi c 
professional advice. Professional advice should always be sought before taking any action based on the 
information provided. Every effort has been made to ensure that the information in this guide is correct at 
the time of publication. The views expressed in this guide are those of the authors. The publishers and 
authors do not accept responsibility for any errors or omissions contained herein. It is your responsibility 
to verify any information contained in the Guide before relying upon it. 

 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Introduction
New York Stock Exchange – Tom Farley, President

No issue today has created more concern within corporate 
C-suites  and  boardrooms  than  cybersecurity  risk.  With 
the  ability  to  shatter  a  company’s  reputation  with  their 
customers and draw criticism from shareholders, lawsuits 
from  affected  parties,  and  attention  from  the  media,  the 
threat of cyber risk is ubiquitous and insidious. No com-
pany,  region,  or  industry  is  immune,  which  makes  the 
responsibility to oversee, manage, and mitigate cyber risk 
a top-down priority in every organization.

The New York Stock Exchange has long advocated that 
exemplary governance and risk oversight is fundamental 
to  the  health  of  individual  companies,  as  well  as  to  the 
sound  operation  of  our  capital  markets.  In  other  words, 
we  too  take  the  threat  very  seriously.  Today,  managing 
cybersecurity risk has expanded far beyond the realm of 
IT; it has become a business continuity necessity to ensure 
shareholder  value  remains  intact  and  that  privacy  and 
corporate intellectual property is protected. Accordingly, 
those  responsibilities  are  weighing  heavily  on  corporate 
executives and directors, making it vital for them to better 
understand  and  prepare  for  the  evolving  cybersecurity 
landscape.

Cyber  risk  ultimately  poses  a  threat  to  confi dence,  a 
foundational aspect of U.S. corporate issuers and markets. 
We are taking a leadership role on many fronts, such as 
reducing  market  fragmentation  and  complexity,  as  well 
as  increasing  effi ciency  through  the  highest  levels  of 
intelligence, analytics, and technology. Confi dence in the 
integrity and security of our assets is concurrent with our 
success—as it is for every other company operating in the 
public markets today.

Moreover,  because  the  public  markets  have  become 
increasingly  reliant  on  interdependent  technology  sys-
tems, the threat looms even larger. As we witnessed dur-
ing the 2008 fi nancial crisis, rarely does any failure happen 
in a vacuum; therefore, the threat of systemic disruption 
has  taken  on  an  even  higher  level  of  prominence  and 
concern among regulators and policymakers worldwide.

It is important that companies remain vigilant, taking 
steps to proactively and intelligently address cybersecurity 

iii  ■

 INTRODUCTION

risk  within  their  organizations.  Beyond  the 
technological solutions developed to defend 
and  combat  breaches,  we  can  accomplish 
even  more  through  better  training,  aware-
ness,  and  insight  on  human  behavior. 
Confi dence,  after  all,  is  not  a  measure  of 
technological systems, but of the people who 
are entrusted to manage them.

With 

from 

insights 

the  preeminent 
authorities  on  cybersecurity  today,  this 
groundbreaking, practical guide to cyberse-
curity has been developed to refl ect a body 
of  knowledge  that  is  unsurpassed  on  this 
topic. At the heart of effective risk manage-
ment must be a thorough understanding of 
the  risks  as  well  as  pragmatic  solutions. 
Thank  you  for  your  continued  partnership 
with the New York Stock Exchange, and we 
look forward to continuing to support your 
requirements in this dynamic landscape.

■  iv 

Foreword
Visa Inc. – Charles W. Scharf, CEO

For  years,  cybersecurity  was  an  issue  that  consumers, 
executive management, and boards of directors took for 
granted.  They  were  able  to  do  so  because  the  technolo-
gists  did  not.  The  technologists  worked  every  day  to 
protect  their  systems  from  attack,  and  they  were  quite 
effective for many years. We sit here today in a very dif-
ferent  position.  The  threats  are  bigger  than  ever  before 
and  growing  in  frequency  and  severity  every  day. 
Cybersecurity is now something everyone needs to think 
about, whether it’s in your personal or professional life. 
What worked in the past is not enough to protect us in the 
present and future.

So what has changed?
First of all, the technology platforms of today are big-
ger targets than ever given the breadth and criticality of 
items they control. Second, the amount and value of the 
data  that  we  all  produce  and  store  has  grown  exponen-
tially.  The  data  is  a  gold  mine  for  criminals.  Third,  the 
interconnectedness  of  the  world  just  makes  it  easier  for 
more  people—regardless  of  geography—to  be  able  to 
steal  or  disrupt.  And  fourth,  the  perpetrators  are  more 
sophisticated, better organized, better funded, and harder 
to bring to justice than ever before.

So the problem is different, and what we all do about it 

is different.

This is not simply an IT issue. It is a business prob-
lem  of  the  highest  level.  Protecting  our  data  and  our 
systems is core to business today. And that means that 
having  an  outstanding  cybersecurity  program  also 
can’t  detract  from  our  objectives  around  innovation, 
speed, and performance.

Security has been a top priority at Visa for decades. It 
is  foundational  to  delivering  our  brand  promise.  To  be 
the  best  way  to  pay  and  be  paid,  we  must  be  the  most 
secure way to pay and be paid. We cannot ask people to 
use our products unless they believe that we are just that. 
Thus  we  must  guard  carefully  both  the  security  of  our 
own network and company and the security of the broader 
payments ecosystem.

v  ■

FOREWORD

There  are  several  elements  that  we  have 
found to be critical to ensuring an effective 
security program at Visa.

 䊏 Be open and honest about the effectiveness 
of  your  security  program  and  regularly 
share an honest assessment of your security 
posture with the executive team and board.

We use a data-driven approach that scores 
our  program  across  fi ve  categories:  risk 
intelligence, malware prevention, vulner-
ability  management,  identity  and  access 
management, and detection and response. 
Scores move up and down not only as our 
defenses  improve  or  new  vulnerabilities 
are discovered but also as threats change. 
The  capabilities  of  the  adversaries  are 
growing,  and  you  need  a  dynamic 
approach to measurement.

 䊏 Invest 

in  security  before 

investing 
elsewhere. A well-controlled environment 
gives  you  the  license  to  do  other  things. 
Great  and 
innovative  products  and 
services  will  only  help  you  win  if  you 
have a well-protected business.

 䊏 Don’t  leave  the  details  to  others. Active, 
hands-on  engagement  by  the  executive 
team and the board is required. The risk 
is existential. Nothing is more important. 
Your  involvement  will  produce  better 
results  as  well  as  make  sure  the  whole 
organization  understands 
just  how 
important the issue is.

 䊏 Never  think  you’ve  done  enough.  The 
bad  guys  are  smart  and  getting  smarter. 
They  aren’t  resting,  and  they  have  more 
resources  than  ever.  Assume  they  will 
attack.

Defending against cyberthreats is not some-
thing that we can solve for our company in a 
vacuum. At Visa, we must protect not only 
our  own  network  but  the  whole  payments 
ecosystem.  This  came  to  life  for  us  in  late 
2013 when some of the largest U.S. retailers 
and fi nancial institutions in the U.S. reported 
data breaches. Tens of millions of consumer 

■  vi 

accounts had been compromised—a pivotal 
moment for our industry.

The  losses  experienced  by  our  clients, 
combined with the impact on consumer con-
fi dence,  galvanized  our  industry  to  take 
actions  that,  we  believe,  will  have  a  mean-
ingful  and  lasting  effect  on  how  the  world 
manages  sensitive  consumer  data—not  just 
payments.

We are taking action as an ecosystem, to 
collaborate  and  share  information  across 
industries  and  with  law  enforcement  and 
governments and to develop new technolo-
gies that will allow us to prevent attacks and 
respond to threats in the future.

 䊏 Protect  payments  at  physical  retailers. 
Fraudsters  have  targeted  the  point-of-
sale environment at leading U.S. retailers, 
capturing consumer account information 
and  forcing  the  reissuance  of  millions 
of  payment  cards.  As  an  industry  we 
are  rapidly  introducing  EMV  (Europay, 
MasterCard,  and  Visa)  chip  payment 
technology  in  the  United  States.  Chip-
enabled  payment  cards  and  terminals 
work  in  concert  to  generate  dynamic 
data with each transaction, rendering the 
transaction data useless to fraudsters.

 䊏 Protect  online  payments.  Consumer 
purchases online and with mobile devices 
are growing at a signifi cant rate. In order 
to  prevent  cyberattacks  and  fraudulent 
use of consumer accounts online, Visa and 
the  global  payments  industry  adopted 
a  new  payment  standard  for  online 
payments. The new standard replaces the 
16-digit  account  number  with  a  digital 
token  that  is  used  to  process  online 
payments  without  exposing  consumer 
account information.

 䊏 Collaborate  and  share 

information. 
Sharing  threat  intelligence  is  a  necessity 
rather  than  a  “nice  to  have,”  allowing 
merchants,  fi nancial  institutions,  and 
payment  networks  like  Visa  to  rapidly 
detect  and  respond  to  cyberattacks. 
Public  and  private  partnerships  are 
also  critical  to  creating  the  most  robust 

community  of  threat  intelligence,  so  we 
also  work  closely  with  law  enforcement 
and  governments.  At  the  heart  of  Visa’s 
security strategy is the concept of “cyber 
fusion,” which is centered on the principle 
of  shared  intelligence—a  framework  to 
collect, analyze, and leverage cyberthreat 
intelligence,  internally  and  externally, 
to  build  a  better  defense  for  the  whole 
ecosystem.

Championing  security  is  one  of  Visa’s  six 
strategic  goals.  This  is  an  area  where  there 
are no grades—it is pass or fail, and pass is 
the  only  option.  Cybersecurity  needs  to  be 
part  of  the  fabric  of  every  company  and 
every  industry,  integrated  into  every  busi-
ness  process  and  every  employee  action. 
And  it  begins  and  ends  at  the  top.  It  is  job 
number one.

  FOREWORD

  vii  ■

 TABLE OF CONTENTS

■  viii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
iii 

 INTRODUCTION
New York Stock Exchange  —  Tom Farley, President

v 

 FOREWORD
Visa Inc.  —  Charles W. Scharf, CEO

Introductions — The cyberthreat in the digital age
3 

1. PREVENTION: CAN IT BE DONE?

Palo Alto Networks Inc.  —  Mark McLaughlin, CEO

9 

2. THE THREE Ts OF THE CYBER ECONOMY

The Chertoff Group  —  Michael Chertoff, Executive Chairman 
and Former United States Secretary of Homeland Security and Jim 
Pfl aging, Principal

17 

3. CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES

Georgia Institute of Technology, Institute for Information 
Security & Privacy  —  Jody R. Westby, Esq., Adjunct Professor

27 

4. INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS
Institutional Shareholder Services Inc.  —  Patrick McGurn, 
ISS Special Counsel and Martha Carter, ISS Global Head 
of Research

33 

5. TOWARD CYBER RISKS MEASUREMENT

World Economic Forum  —  Elena Kvochko, co-author of 
Towards the Quantifi cation of Cyber Threats report and Danil 
Kerimi, Director, Center for Global Industries

37 

6. THE EVOLVING CYBERTHREAT AND AN ARCHITECTURE 

FOR ADDRESSING IT
Internet Security Alliance  —  Larry Clinton, CEO

43 

7.  EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH

Former CIO of The United States Department 
of Energy  —  Robert F. Brese

I. Cyber risk and the board of directors
51 

8. THE RISKS TO BOARDS OF DIRECTORS AND BOARD MEMBER 

OBLIGATIONS
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP  —  Antony Kim, Partner; 
Aravind Swaminathan, Partner; and Daniel Dunne, Partner

  TABLE OF CONTENTS

57 

9. WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES: THE SEC’S 

PUSH TO REGULATE PUBLIC COMPANIES’ CYBER DEFENSES 
AND DISCLOSURES
Fish & Richardson P.C.  —  Gus P. Coldebella, Principal 
and Caroline K. Simons, Associate

65 

10. A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS

Internet Security Alliance and National Association 
of Corporate Directors  —  Larry Clinton, CEO of ISA 
and Ken Daly, President and CEO of NACD

71 

11. ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT

Stroz Friedberg LLC  —  Erin Nealy Cox, Executive Managing 
Director

79 

12. DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING: 

HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS
Dell SecureWorks  —  Mike Cote, CEO

II. Cyber risk corporate structure
87 

13. THE CEO’S GUIDE TO DRIVING BETTER SECURITY BY ASKING THE RIGHT 

QUESTIONS
Palo Alto Networks Inc.  —  Davis Hake, Director 
of Cybersecurity Strategy

91 

14.  ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE 

AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM
Coalfi re  —  Larry Jones, CEO and Rick Dakin, CEO 
(2001-2015)

III. Cybersecurity legal and regulatory 

considerations

101 

15. SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY 

AND BIG DATA
Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive 
Vice President; Dean Forbes, Senior Associate, Agatha O'Malley, 
Senior Associate, Jaqueline Cooney, Lead Associate and 
Waiching Wong, Associate

107 

16. OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES

Data Risk Solutions: BuckleySandler LLP & Treliant Risk 
Advisors LLC  —  Elizabeth McGinn, Partner; Rena Mears, 
Managing Director; Stephen Ruckman, Senior Associate; 
Tihomir Yankov, Associate; and Daniel Goldstein, Senior 
Director

  ix  ■

 TABLE OF CONTENTS

■  x 

115 

17. RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED 

TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS
Baker & McKenzie  —  David Lashway, Partner; John Woods, 
Partner; Nadia Banno, Counsel, Dispute Resolution; and 
Brandon H. Graves, Associate

121 

18. LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE
K&L Gates LLP  —  Roberta D. Anderson, Partner

129 

19. CONSUMER PROTECTION: WHAT IS IT?

Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker LLP  —  Melissa 
Ventrone, Partner and Lindsay Nickle, Partner

137 

20. PROTECTING TRADE SECRETS IN THE AGE OF CYBERESPIONAGE

Fish & Richardson P.C.  —  Gus P. Coldebella, Principal

143 

151 

21. CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS 

FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS
Latham & Watkins LLP  —  Jennifer Archie, Partner

22. INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS, 

AND RULES OF THE ROAD
Kaye Scholer LLP  —  Adam Golodner, Partner

157 

23. MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT

Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP  —  Brian Finch, 
Partner

163 

24. COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS 

FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES
Littler Mendelson P.C.  —  Philip L. Gordon, Esq., Co-Chair, 
Privacy and Background Checks Practice Group

IV: Comprehensive approach to 

cybersecurity

171 

177 

25. DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING 

THREAT ENVIRONMENT
Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive 
Vice President; Sedar LaBarre, Vice President; Matt Doan, 
Senior Associate; and Denis Cosgrove, Senior Associate

26. DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH 

WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES
Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive Vice President; 
Jason Escaravage, Vice President; and Christian Paredes, 
Associate

  TABLE OF CONTENTS

V. Design best practices
187 

27. WHAT ARE THEY AFTER? A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY 

RISK MANAGEMENT
Intercontinental Exchange & New York Stock 
Exchange  —  Jerry Perullo, CISO

193 

28. BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION

Palo Alto Networks Inc.

VI. Cybersecurity beyond your network
207 

29. SUPPLY CHAIN AS AN ATTACK CHAIN

Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive 
Vice President; Tony Gaidhane, Senior Associate; 
and Laura Eise, Lead Associate

213 

30. MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING
Covington & Burling LLP  —  David N. Fagan, Partner; 
Nigel L. Howard, Partner; Kurt Wimmer, Partner; Elizabeth H. 
Canter, Associate; and Patrick Redmon, Summer Associate

219 

31. A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER

Delta Risk LLC  —  Thomas Fuhrman, President

229 

32. THE INTERNET OF THINGS

The Chertoff Group   —  Mark Weatherford, Principal

VII. Incident response
237 

33. WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS

U.S. Department of Justice  —  CCIPS Cybersecurity Unit

243 

34. PLANNING, PREPARATION, AND TESTING FOR AN ENTERPRISE-WIDE 

INCIDENT RESPONSE
Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Jason Escaravage, Vice President;
Anthony Harris, Senior Associate; James Perry, Senior Associate; 
and Katie Stefanich, Lead Associate

249 

35. DETECTION, ANALYSIS, AND UNDERSTANDING OF THREAT VECTORS
Fidelis Cybersecurity  —  Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist

255 

36. FORENSIC REMEDIATION

Fidelis Cybersecurity  —  Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist 
and Ryan Vela, Regional Director, Northeastern North America 
Cybersecurity Services

  xi  ■

 TABLE OF CONTENTS

■  xii 

261 

37. LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION

Rackspace Inc.  —  Brian Kelly, Chief Security Offi cer

267 

38. CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE

BakerHostetler  —  Theodore J. Kobus, Partner and Co-Leader, 
Privacy and Data Protection; Craig A. Hoffman, Partner; 
and F. Paul Pittman, Associate

275 

39. COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT

Sard Verbinnen & Co  —  Scott Lindlaw, Principal

VIII. Cyber risk management 

investment decisions

283 

40. OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE

Axio Global, LLC  —  Scott Kannry, CEO and David White, 
Chief Knowledge Offi cer

289 

41. INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE

Lockton Companies Inc.  —  Ben Beeson, Senior Vice President, 
Cybersecurity Practice

IX. Cyber risk and workforce development
297 

42. CYBER EDUCATION: A JOB NEVER FINISHED

NYSE Governance Services  —  Adam Sodowick, President

301 

43. COLLABORATION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN TECHNICAL 
AND NONTECHNICAL STAFF, BUSINESS LINES AND EXECUTIVES
Wells Fargo & Company  —  Rich Baich, CISO

307 

44. CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Lori Zukin, Principal; Jamie Lopez, 
Senior Associate; Erin Weiss Kaya, Lead Associate; and Andrew 
Smallwood, Lead Associate

313 

45. BUILDING A CYBER-SAVVY BOARD

Korn Ferry  —  Jamey Cummings, Senior Client Partner; 
Joe Griesedieck, Vice Chairman and Co-Leader, Board and 
CEO Services; and Aileen Alexander, Senior Client Partner

319 

46. EVALUATING AND ATTRACTING YOUR NEXT CISO: MORE SOPHISTICATED 

APPROACHES FOR A MORE SOPHISTICATED ROLE
Egon Zehnder  —  Kal Bittianda, Selena Loh LaCroix, 
and Chris Patrick

325 

 CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Introductions — The 
cyberthreat in the digital age

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Prevention: Can it be done?
Palo Alto Networks Inc. – Mark McLaughlin, CEO

Frequent headlines announcing the latest cyber breach of 
a major company, government agency, or organization are 
the norm today, begging the questions of why and will it 
ever end?

The  reason  cybersecurity  is  ingrained  in  news  cycles, 
and  receives  extraordinary  investments  and  focus  from 
businesses  and  governments  around  the  world,  is  the 
growing  realization  that  these  breaches  are  putting  our 
very  digital  lifestyle  at  risk.  This  is  not  hyperbole.  More 
and more, we live in the digital age, in which things that 
used to be real and tangible are now machine-generated or 
only exist as bits and bytes. Consider your bank account 
and  total  absence  of  tangible  money  or  legal  tender  that 
underlies it; you trust that the assets exist because you can 
“see” them when you log in to your account on the fi nan-
cial institution’s website. Or the expectation you have that 
light, water, electricity, and other utility services will work 
on command, despite your having little to no idea of how 
the command actually results in the outcome. Or the com-
fort in assuming that of the 100,000 planes traversing the 
globe on an average day, all will fl y past each other at safe 
distances and take off and land at proper intervals. Now, 
imagine that this trust, reliance, and comfort could not be 
taken  for  granted  any  longer  and  the  total  chaos  that 
would ensue. This is the digital age; and with all the effi -
ciencies and productivity that has come with it, more and 
more we trust that it will just “work.”

This  reliance  on  digital  systems  is  why  the  tempo  of 
concern due to cyberattacks is rising so rapidly. Business 
leaders, government leaders, education leaders, and mili-
tary leaders know that there is a very fi ne line separating 
the smoothly functioning digital society built on trust and 
the chaotic breakdown in society resulting from the ero-
sion of that trust. And it is eroding quickly. Why is that, 
and  do  we  have  any  analogies? And,  more  importantly, 
can it be fi xed?

3  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE  CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

■   Machine vs. human
At the heart of the cybersecurity battle is a 
math  problem.  It  is  relatively  simple  to 
understand, but hard to correct. One of the 
negative  offshoots  of  the  ever-decreasing 
cost  of  computing  power  is  the  ability  for 
cyber  criminals  and  adversaries  to  launch 
increasingly  numerous  and  sophisticated 
attacks  at  lower  and  lower  costs.  Today, 
bad actors without the capability to develop 
their  own  tools  can  use  existing  malware 
and  exploits  that  are  often  free  or  inex-
pensive 
to  obtain  online.  Similarly, 
advanced  hackers,  criminal  organizations, 
and  nation-states  are  able  to  use  these 
widely available tools to launch successful 
intrusions and obscure their identity. These 
sophisticated adversaries are also develop-
ing and selectively using unique tools that 
could  cause  even  greater  harm.  This  all 
adds  up  to  tremendous  leverage  for  the 
attackers. (See Figure 1.)

In the face of this increasing onslaught in 
the  sheer  number  of  attacks  and  levels  of 
sophistication,  the  defender  is  generally 
relying  on  decades-old  core  security  tech-
nology,  often  cobbled  together  in  multiple 
layers  of  point  products;  there  is  no  true 
visibility  of  the  situation,  nor  are  the  point 
products  designed  to  communicate  with 
each other. As a result, to the extent attacks 
are detected or lessons are learned from an 

FIGURE

■  4 

attack,  responses  are  highly  manual  in 
nature.  Unfortunately,  humans  facing  off 
against machines have little to no leverage, 
and  cyber  expertise  is  increasingly  hard  to 
come by in the battle for talent. Flipping the 
cost curve on its head with automation and 
a next-generation, natively integrated secu-
rity platform is required if there is any hope 
of reducing the “breach du jour” headlines. 
(See Figure 2.)

It  is  unlikely  that  the  number  of  attacks 
will abate over time. On the contrary, there is 
every reason to expect that their number will 
continue to grow. In fact, we can also expect 
that  the  “attack  surface”  and  potential  tar-
gets  will  also  continue  to  grow  as  we  con-
stantly  increase  the  connections  of  various 
things to the Internet.

An  understandable  but  untenable 
response  to  this  daunting  threat  environ-
ment is to assume that prevention is impos-
sible, so we must simply detect and respond 
to  all  intrusions.  The  fundamental  problem 
with this approach is that without signifi cant 
prevention  no  combination  of  people,  pro-
cess,  and  technology  can  prioritize  and 
respond to every intrusion that could signifi -
cantly impact a network and those who rely 
on  it.  The  math  problem  is  simply  insur-
mountable.  Quite  simply,  detection  and 
response should be supplements to, instead 
of substitutes for, prevention.

As computing power becomes less 
expensive,the cost for launching automated 
attacks decreases. This allows the number 
of attacks to increase at a given cost.

The attack math

Number of 
successful attacks

Cost of launching a
successsful attack

  PREVENTION: CAN IT BE DONE?   

FIGURE

Harnessing automation and integrated 
intelligence can continually raise the cost 
of making an attack successful, eventually 
decreasing the number of successful attacks.

The attack math

Cost of launching a
successsful attack

So,  the  strategy  must  be  to  signifi cantly 
decrease  the  likelihood,  and  increase  the 
cost,  required  for  an  attacker  to  perform  a 
successful  attack.  To  be  more  specifi c,  we 
should  not  assume  that  attacks  are  going 
away  or  that  all  attacks  can  be  stopped. 
However,  we  should  assume,  and  be  very 
diligent  in  ensuring,  that  the  cost  of  a  suc-
cessful attack can be dramatically increased 
to the point where the incidence of a success-
ful attack will sharply decline.

When this point is reached, and it will not 
come  overnight,  then  we  will  be  able  to 
quantify  and  compartmentalize  the  risk  to 
something acceptable and understood. It’s at 
that  point  that  cyber  risks  will  be  real  and 
persistent but that they will leave the head-
lines and fade into the background of every-
day  life,  commerce,  communications,  and 
interaction. This should be our goal. Not to 
eliminate  all  risk,  but  to  reduce  it  to  some-
thing that can be compartmentalized. There 
is a historical analogy to this problem and an 
approach to solve it.

■   Sputnik analogy
The analogy, which is imperfect but helpful, 
is  the  space  race.  In  1957  the  Soviet  Union 
launched  Sputnik.  The  result  was  panic  at 
the  prospect  that  this  technology  provided 
the  Soviets  with  an  overwhelming  advan-
tage  to  deliver  a  nuclear  attack  across  the 

Number of
successsful attacks

U.S.  Suddenly,  the  very  way  of  life  in  the 
Western  world  was  deemed,  appropriately 
so,  at  risk.  The  comfort  and  confi dence  of 
living  in  a  well-protected  and  prosperous 
environment  was  shattered  as  citizens  lost 
trust in their ability to follow their daily rou-
tines and way of life. It appeared as though 
there  was  an  insurmountable  technological 
lead,  and  everywhere  people  turned  there 
was anxiety and cascading bad news.

In  the  years 

immediately  following 
Sputnik, the main focus was on how to sur-
vive  a  post–nuclear-war  world.  Items  like 
backyard  bomb  shelters  and  nonperishable 
food  items  were  in  great  demand,  and 
schools were teaching duck-and-cover drills. 
In  other  words,  people  were  assuming 
attacks  could  not  be  prevented  and  were 
preparing  for  remediation  of  their  society 
post-attack.

However, this fatalistic view was tempo-
rary. America relied on diplomacy and tradi-
tional  forms  of  deterrence  while  devoting 
technological  innovation  and  ingenuity  to 
breakthroughs  such  as  NASA’s  Mercury 
program. While it took a decade of resourc-
es, collaboration, trial, and effort, eventually 
the Mercury program and succeeding efforts 
changed  the  leverage  in  the  equation.  The 
space-based attack risk was not eliminated, 
but it was compartmentalized to the point of 
fading into the background as a possible but 

  5  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE  CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

not probable event. It was at this stage that 
the  panic  and  confusion  receded  from  the 
headlines and daily reporting. We will know 
we  are  in  good  shape  in  the  cyber  battle 
when  we  have  reached  this  point.  So,  how 
do we get there?

As  with  all  things  in  life,  ideas  and  phi-
losophy  matter.  This  is  true  because  if  you 
do  not  know  what  you  are  trying  to  get 
done, it’s unlikely that you will get it done. 
In  the  space  race  analogy,  the  philosophy 
shifted  over  time  from  one  that  primarily 
assumed  an  attack  was  imminent  and 
unstoppable  with  the  majority  of  planning 
and resources geared toward life in the post-
attack world, to one of prevention where the 
majority  of  resources  and  planning  were 
geared  to  reduce  the  probability  and  effec-
tiveness of an attack.

Importantly, the risk of an attack was not 
eliminated, but the probability of occurrence 
and success was reduced by vastly increas-
ing  the  cost  of  a  successful  attack.  It  was 
previously noted that no analogy is perfect, 
so the analogy of “cost” here for space-based 
attacks and cyberattacks is, of course, meas-
ured 
in  different  ways.  Most  notably, 
cyberthreats  are  not  the  sole  purview  of 
superpower  nations,  and  the  technological 
innovation most likely to reverse the cost of 
successful  attacks  is  most  likely  to  come 
from  industry,  not  governments.  However, 
the principle is the same in that a prevention 
philosophy is much more likely to result in 
prevention capabilities being developed, uti-
lized, and continually refi ned over time.

■   Is prevention possible?
The  obvious  question  then  is  whether  pre-
vention is possible. I think that most security 
professionals and practitioners would agree 
that total prevention is not possible. This is 
disheartening but also no different from any 
other  major  risk  factor  that  we  have  ever 
dealt with over time. So, the real question is 
whether  prevention  is  possible  to  the  point 
where the incidence of successful attacks is 
reduced  to  something  manageable  from  a 
risk perspective. I believe that this is possible 
over time. In order to achieve this outcome, 

■  6 

it  is  an  imperative  that  cost  leverage  is 
gained in the cyber battle. This leverage can 
be attained by managing the cyber risk to an 
organization through the continual improve-
ment  and  coordination  of  several  key  ele-
ments: technology, process and people, and 
intelligence sharing.

Technology
It is very apparent that traditional or legacy 
security technology is failing at an alarming 
rate. There are three primary reasons for this:

 䊏 The  fi rst  is  that  networks  have  been 
built  up  over  a  long  period  of  time  and 
often  are  very  complicated  in  nature, 
consisting  of  security  technology  that 
has  been  developed  and  deployed  in  a 
point  product,  siloed  approach.  In  other 
words, a security “solution” in traditional 
network architecture of any size consists 
of  multiple  point  products  from  many 
different  vendors  all  designed  to  do  one 
specifi c task, having no ability to inform 
or  collaborate  with  other  products.  This 
means  that  the  security  posture  of  the 
network is only as “smart” overall as the 
least smart device or offering. Also, to the 
extent that any of the thousands of daily 
threats is successfully detected, protection 
is highly manual in nature because there is 
no capability to automatically coordinate 
or communicate with other capabilities in 
the network, let alone with other networks 
not  in  your  organization.  That’s  a  real 
problem  because  defenders  are  relying 
more and more on the least leverageable 
resource  they  have—people—to  fi ght 
machine-generated attacks.

 䊏 Second, these multiple point solutions are 
often  based  on  decades-old  technology, 
like stateful inspection, which was useful 
in the late 1990s but is totally incapable of 
providing security capabilities for today’s 
attack landscape.

 䊏 And  third,  the  concept  of  a  “network” 
has  morphed  continues  to  do  so  at  a 
rapid  pace  into  something  amorphous 
in  nature:  the  advent  of  software  as  a 
service (SaaS) providers, cloud computing, 

mobility, the Internet of Things, and other 
macrotechnology  trends  that  have  the 
impact  of  security  professionals  having 
less and less control over data.

In  the  face  of  these  challenges,  it  is  critical 
that  a  few  things  are  true  in  the  security 
architecture of the future:

 䊏 First  is  that  advanced  security  systems 
designed  on  defi nitive  knowledge  of 
what  and  who  is  using  the  network  be 
deployed. In other words, no guessing.

integrated  as  possible 

 䊏 Second  is  that  these  capabilities  be  as 
natively 
into 
a  platform  such  that  any  action  by 
any  capability  results  in  an  automatic 
reprogramming of the other capabilities.

 䊏 Third  is  that  this  platform  must  also 
be  part  of  a  larger,  global  ecosystem 
that enables a constant and near-real-time 
sharing of attack information that can be 
used  to  immediately  apply  protections 
preventing  other  organizations  in  the 
ecosystem from falling victim to the same 
or similar attacks.

 䊏 Last  is  that  the  security  posture  is 
consistent  regardless  of  where  data 
resides  or  the  deployment  model  of  the 
“network.”  For  example,  the  advanced 
integrated  security  and  automated 
outcomes must be the same whether the 
network is on premise, in the cloud, or has 
data stored off the network in third-party 
applications.  Any  inconsistency  in  the 
security is a vulnerability point as a general 
matter. And,  as  a  matter  of  productivity, 
security should not be holding back high-
productivity deployment scenarios based 
on  the  cloud,  virtualization,  SDN,  NFV, 
and other models of the future.

Process and people
Technology  alone  is  not  going  to  solve  the 
problem. It is incumbent upon an executive 
team  to  ensure  their  technical  experts  are 
managing  cybersecurity  risk  to  the  organi-
zation.  Most  of  today’s  top  executives  did 
not attain their position due to technological 
and cybersecurity profi ciency. However, all 

  PREVENTION: CAN IT BE DONE?   

successful  leaders  understand  the  need  to 
assess  organizational  risk  and  to  allocate 
resources  and  effort  based  on  prioritized 
competing  needs.  Given  the  current  threat 
environment and the math behind success-
ful attacks, leaders need to understand both 
the  value  and  vulnerabilities  residing  on 
their  networks  and  prioritize  prevention 
and response efforts accordingly.

Under  executive  leadership,  it  is  also 
very  important  that  there  is  continued 
improvement  in  processes  used  to  manage 
the  security  of  organizations.  People  must 
be  continually  trained  on  how  to  identify 
cyberattacks and on the appropriate steps to 
take in the event of an attack. Many of the 
attacks that are being reported today start or 
end with poor processes or human error. For 
example,  with  so  much  personal  informa-
tion being readily shared on social network-
ing, it is simple for hackers to assemble very 
accurate  profi les  of  individuals  and  their 
positions in companies and launch socially 
engineered  attacks  or  campaigns.  These 
attacks can be hard to spot in the absence of 
proper training for individuals, and diffi cult 
to control in the absence of good processes 
and procedures regardless of how good the 
technology is that is deployed to protect an 
organization.

A  common  attack  on  organizations  to 
defraud  large  amounts  of  money  via  wire 
transfers counts on busy people being poor-
ly  trained  and  implementing  spotty  pro-
cesses.  In  such  an  attack,  the  attacker  uses 
publicly  available  personal  information 
gleaned  off  social  networking  sites  to  iden-
tify  an  individual  who  has  the  authority  to 
issue a wire transfer in a company. Then the 
attacker  uses  a  phishing  attack,  a  carefully 
constructed  improper  email  address  that 
looks  accurate  on  a  cursory  glance,  seem-
ingly  from  this  person’s  manager  at  the 
company  telling  the  person  to  send  a  wire 
transfer right away to the following coordi-
nates. If the employee is not trained to look 
for  proper  email  address  confi guration,  or 
the company does not have a good process 
in  place  to  validate  wire  transfer  requests, 
like requiring two approvals, then this attack 

  7  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE  CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

often succeeds. It is important that technol-
ogy,  process,  and  people  are  coordinated, 
and that training is done on a regular basis.

Intelligence sharing
Given the increasing number and sophistica-
tion of cyberattacks, it is diffi cult to imagine 
that  any  one  company  or  organization  will 
have  enough  threat  intelligence  at  any  one 
time to be able to defeat the vast majority of 
attacks.  However,  it  is  not  hard  to  imagine 
that  if  multiple  organizations  were  sharing 
what they are seeing from an attack perspec-
tive with each other in close to real time, that 
the  combined  intelligence  would  limit  suc-
cessful  attacks  to  a  small  number  of  the 
attempted  attacks.  This  is  the  outcome  we 
should  strive  for,  as  getting  to  this  point 
would  mean  that  the  attackers  would  need 
to design and develop unique attacks every 
single time they want to attack an organiza-
tion, as opposed to today where they can use 
variants of an attack again and again against 
multiple  targets.  Having  to  design  unique 
attacks every time would signifi cantly drive 
up  the  cost  of  a  successful  attack  and  force 
attackers to aggregate resources in terms of 
people and money, which would make them 
more  prone  to  be  visible  to  defenders,  law 
enforcement, and governments.

The  network  effect  of  defense  is  why 
there is such a focus and attention on threat 
intelligence  information  sharing.  It  is  early 
days  on  this  front,  but  all  progress  is  good 
progress, and, importantly, organizations are 
now  using  automated  systems  to  share 
threat intelligence. At the same time, analyti-
cal capabilities are being rapidly developed 
to make use and sense of all the intelligence 
in  ways  that  will  result  in  advanced  plat-
forms  being  able  to  reprogram  prevention 
capabilities  in  rapid  fashion  such  that  con-
nected networks will be constantly updating 
threat capabilities in an ever-increasing eco-
system.  This  provides  immense  leverage  in 
the cybersecurity battle.

■   Conclusion
There is understandable concern and atten-
tion  on  the  ever-increasing  incidence  of 
cyberattacks. However, if we take a longer 
view of the threat and adopt a prevention-
fi rst  mindset,  the  combination  of  next-
generation  technology,  improvements  in 
processes and training, and real-time shar-
ing  of  threat  information  with  platforms 
that can automatically reconfi gure the secu-
rity posture, can vastly reduce the number 
of successful attacks and restore the digital 
trust we all require for our global economy.

■  8 

SecurityRoundtable.org

The three Ts of the cyber economy
The Chertoff Group — Michael Chertoff, Executive 
Chairman and Former United States Secretary 
of Homeland Security, and Jim Pfl aging, Principal

Thanks to rapid advances in technology and thinking, over 
the last decade we have seen entire industries and countries 
reinvented in large part because of the power of the Internet 
and related innovations. Naturally, these developments cre-
ated new opportunities and risks, and none is greater than 
cybersecurity.  Today,  business  leaders,  academics,  small 
business  owners,  and  school  kids  know  about  hackers, 
phishing, identify theft, and even “bad actors.”

In  late  2014,  the  Sony  Pictures  Entertainment  breach 
led to debates over data security, free speech, and corpo-
rate management as well as the details of celebrity feuds 
and paychecks. The idea of cybersecurity is rising to the 
fore of our collective consciousness. Notable cybersecuri-
ty breaches, including those at Target, Anthem BlueCross, 
and the U.S. Offi ce of Personnel Management, have dem-
onstrated that no organization or individual is immune to 
cyberthreat.  In  short,  the  cybersecurity  environment  has 
changed  dramatically  over  the  past  several  years,  and 
many of us have struggled to keep up. Many fi rms now 
fi nd  themselves  in  an  environment  where  one  of  their 
greatest business risks is cyber risk, a risk that has rapidly 
risen from an afterthought to primary focus.

How do we create more opportunity and a safer world 
while protecting privacy in an interconnected world? This 
question is not just for policy makers in government and 
leaders  of  global  Fortune  500  businesses.  It  affects  the 
neighborhood  small  business,  the  academic  community, 
investors and, of course, our children.

Answering that question requires an understanding of 
the three Ts—technology, threat, and trust. Why? Because 
these  are  big  interrelated  ideas  that  have  a  signifi cant 
effect on business strategy, policy, and public opinion. For 
starters, you need to know about the three Ts, think about 

9  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

them,  and  decide  how  you  are  going  to 
embrace the fi rst, deal with the second, and 
shape the last.

technologies 

■  Technology
Today we live in a golden age of innovation 
driven  by 
that  dominate 
headlines—cloud  computing,  mobility,  big 
data, social media, open source software, vir-
tualization, and, most recently, the Internet of 
Things. These tectonic shifts allow individu-
als, government, and companies to innovate 
and  reinvent  how  they  interact  with  each 
other. These forces mandate that we redefi ne 
what, how, and where we manage any busi-
ness. We need to challenge core assumptions 
about markets, company culture, and the art 
of  the  possible.  The  winners  will  be  those 
who  leverage  these  innovations  to  reduce 
costs  and  deliver  better,  lower-priced  prod-
ucts. Take Table 1 below, for example:

TABLE 
TABLE

Market capitalization 
 
(or private estimates, USD 
A good reputation
in millions)

3/31/2005

3/31/2015

Amazon

Apple

Google

Uber

AT&T

$13,362

$30,580

$64,180

N/A

$78,027

Citigroup

$244,346

$207,275

$752,160

$378,892

$41,000

$175,108

$165,488

General 
Electric

Kodak

$388,007

$274,771

$6,067

$794

Sources: Capital IQ, Fortune

It is easy to see the relationship between 
innovation and valuation. Some companies, 
such  as  Kodak,  did  not  react  fast  enough 
and  lost  their  market  as  a  result.  Others, 
such as AT&T, have invested heavily in new 

■  10 

technology and are thriving. Still, the advan-
tage  lies  with  the  fi rms  who  not  only 
embraced  the  Internet  but  also  built  their 
entire business around it: Amazon, Google, 
and  Uber.  Finally,  there  is  Apple,  which 
came of age with the Internet and morphed 
into  a  wildly  successful  global  leader  with 
the introduction of the iPhone.

There  have  been  applications  for  these 
technologies,  with  signifi cant  impact,  in  a 
variety of industries. In transportation, Uber 
is  a  great  example  of  transforming  a  perva-
sive but sedentary sector into a newly reimag-
ined  market.  Uber  used  emerging  technolo-
gies  to  disrupt  seemingly  distinct  segments 
such  as  auto  rental  and  even  automotive 
manufacturing. In the electrical sector, smart 
meters,  transformers,  and  switches  have 
given utilities greater control over their distri-
bution networks while their customers have 
gained greater control of their consumption.

However,  the  golden  age  of  innovation 
has  a  dark  side. A  new  class  of  "bad  guys" 
has  emerged  and  is  taking  advantage  of 
"holes"  in  these  new  technologies  and  our 
online  behavior  to  create  new  risks.  This 
leads us to the second T—Threat.

■  Threat
Lifecycle
It is almost cliché to talk about the pervasive-
ness and escalating impact of cybersecurity 
attacks.  However,  it  is  useful  to  provide  a 
map  that  can  help  us  better  understand 
where we may be heading to help us prepare 
and to develop more lasting defenses.

Using a simple x-y graph, we can create an 
instructive  map,  in  which  x  represents  the 
severity  of  the  impact  and  y  the  "actor"  or 
perpetrator.  Impact  can  be  divided  into  the 
following  stages:  embarrassment, 
theft, 
destruction to a target fi rm or asset, and wide-
spread  destruction.  The  actors  also  can  be 
grouped into four escalating stages: individu-
als,  hacktivists,  cyber  organized  crime,  and 
nation-states. See Figure 1. Given the impor-
tance of understanding threat, business lead-
ers should understand how the map applies 
to  their  business.  To  aid  in  this  understand-
ing, it is useful to cover a few examples that 
illustrate various stages of these threats.

FIGURE

Nation-
states

Cyber
organized
crime

R
 
O
 
T
 
C
A

 

Hacktivist

HBGary

Individual

Embarrass

  THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY   

??

Sony

Saudi Aramco

JPMorganChase

Target

Steal

customer

info

Disrupt

operations and
destroy property

Destroy

business and
future earnings

Widespread
disruption

and destruction

INTENT  &  IMPACT

In 2011, a high-profi le attack was under-
taken  by  Anonymous,  the  prominent 
“hacktivist” collective, in which it attacked 
the security services fi rm HBGary Federal. 
The  attack  was  precipitated  by  HBGary’s 
CEO,  Aaron  Barr,  claiming  in  a  Financial 
Times  article  that  his  fi rm  had  uncovered 
the  identities  of  Anonymous  leaders  and 
planned  on  releasing  these  fi ndings  at  a 
security conference in San Francisco the fol-
lowing  week.1  Anonymous  responded  by 
hacking into HBGary’s networks, eventually 
posting  archives  of  company  executives’ 
emails on fi le-sharing websites, releasing a 
list of the company’s customers, and taking 
over the fi rm’s website. Although the attack 
did affect HBGary fi nancially, Anonymous’ 
primary  motivation  was  to  embarrass 
Aaron Barr and HBGary.

More recent attacks have been perpetrat-
ed  by  better-organized  criminal  gangs  and 
have had a greater impact. For instance, the 
Target  breach,  believed  to  have  been  the 

work  of  criminals  operating  in  Eastern 
Europe,  netted  40  million  credit  and  debit 
card  numbers  and  70  million  customer 
records and was largely responsible for the 
company’s 46 percent drop in profi t in Q4 of 
2013  when  compared  to  2012.2  The  attack 
also resulted in a serious decline in the com-
pany’s  stock  price  and  led  the  company’s 
board  to  fi re  their  CEO.  The  attack  is  esti-
mated  to  have  netted  its  perpetrators 
approximately $54 million in profi t from the 
sale  of  stolen  card  details  on  black  market 
sites—quite  the  motivation  for  a  criminal 
enterprise.

Another  high-profi le  attack,  directed 
against  Sony  Pictures  Entertainment,  is 
alleged to have been the work of hackers sup-
ported  by  the  government  of  North  Korea. 
The  attackers  managed  to  secure  not  only  a 
copy  of  The  Interview,  which  had  offended 
and  motivated  the  North  Korean  state,  but 
also  a  vast  trove  of  data  from  the  corporate 
network,  including  the  personal  and  salary 

  11  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

details  of  tens  of  thousands  of  employees, 
internal email traffi c, and other highly sensi-
tive information. The attack led the company 
to delay the release of its big-budget fi lm, and 
it  generated  weeks  of  headlines.  The  attack 
also forced the company to take a variety of 
computer systems offl ine. Although the long-
term impact of the attack is unclear, it has had 
a dramatic impact on the studio’s reputation, 
stock price, and earnings.

What is next? In the future, we can expect 
a continued rise in the severity of cyberthreats. 
Well-fi nanced  criminal  gangs  and  well-
resourced nation-states appear to be increas-
ingly capable and willing to engage in attacks 
that cause signifi cant damage.

Boards and risk
After the initial shock of “how is this possi-
ble,”  every  business  leader  has  to  consider 
what it means for his or her business. Just a 
few  years  ago,  many  viewed  cybersecurity 
threats as a technical problem best left to the 
company  CIO  or  CISO.  Increasingly,  CEOs 
and  boards  are  coming  to  the  realization 
cybersecurity threats are a business risk that 
demands C-level and board scrutiny.

Corporate  boards  have  begun  to  look  at 
cybersecurity  risk  in  much  the  same  way 
they would look at other risks to their busi-
ness,  applying  risk  management  frame-
works  while  evaluating  the  likelihood  and 
impact of cyber risk. Boards also have begun 
to look at ways to transfer their risk, leading 
insurance  companies  to  offer  cybersecurity 
insurance  products.  In  their  evaluation  of 
cyber risk, companies are also taking a hard 
look at the second order effects of a cyberat-
tack,  notably  the  ability  for  a  successful 
attack to undermine customers’ trust in the 
company. A successful attack often leads to 
the revelation of sensitive, personally identi-
fi able  information  on  customers,  eroding 
consumer  confi dence  in  the  fi rm.  Many  of 
the commonly understood risk management 
frameworks and related insurance products 
now being used recognize this and make it 
clear that corporate boards must have a thor-
ough understanding of the third T, Trust.

■  12 

■  Trust
One  of  the  greatest  casualties  in  the  ever-
increasing  torrent  of  cyberthreats  is  trust—
specifi cally,  the  trust  consumers  have  in 
business,  the  trust  citizens  and  business 
have  in  government,  and  the  trust  govern-
ment  has  in  business.  This  should  be  trou-
bling  for  all  corporate  executives  and  gov-
ernment leaders because trust is precious to 
all  relationships  and  is  critical  to  effective 
workings of commerce and government. As 
we know, it takes years to build, but it is easy 
to lose. For instance, a single data breach can 
undo  years  of  effort  and  cause  immediate 
and lasting reputation loss.

Measuring trust
Recent  consumer  surveys  suggest  that  con-
sumers are tired of dealing with fraudulent 
charges and are raising their expectations for 
how their favorite brands and websites pro-
tect consumer data and personally identifi a-
ble information. In May 2015, Pew Research 
released  a  study  in  which  74  percent  of 
Americans  said  it  was  “very  important”  to 
be  “in  control  of  who  can  get  info  about 
you.”  Edelman,  one  of  the  world’s  largest 
public relations fi rms, does an annual study 
called The Trust Barometer. The 2015 edition 
of  this  survey  showed  a  huge  jump  in  the 
importance  consumers  place  in  privacy  of 
their personal data. The study revealed that 
80  percent  of  consumers,  across  dozens  of 
countries and industries, listed this as a top 
issue in evaluating brands they trust. Finally, 
HyTrust, an emerging technology company, 
published a study on the impact of a cyber 
breach on customer loyalty and trust. Of the 
2,000 consumers surveyed, 52 percent said a 
breach would cause them to take their busi-
ness elsewhere.3 What business can afford to 
lose 50 percent of its customers?

What these numbers make clear is that con-
sumers  are  paying  attention  to  cybersecurity 
issues  and  that  failure  to  address  these  con-
cerns comes at a company’s own risk. Recent 
attacks  have  served  as  learning  moments  for 
many  companies  and  consumers,  allowing 
them to gain a fi rmer understanding of just 

how damaging such an attack can be. However, 
with this knowledge comes increased expecta-
tions for how companies safeguard their data 
and that of their consumers.

Role of industry
Fortunately, industry is moving in this direc-
tion,  and  many  companies  have  begun  to 
consider  cyber  risk  in  their  corporate  plan-
ning.  In  2014,  the  National  Association  of 
Corporate  Directors  issued  a  call  to  action, 
which  included  fi ve  steps  that  its  members 
should take to ensure their enterprises prop-
erly  address  cyber  risk.  These  include  the 
following:

 䊏 Treating cyber risk as an enterprise risk
 䊏 Understanding  the  legal  implications  of 

cyber risks

 䊏 Discussion  of  cyber  risk  at  board 
meetings, giving cyber risk equal footing 
with other risks

 䊏 Requiring  management 

to  have  a 

measureable cybersecurity plan

 䊏 The  development  of  a  plan  at  the  board 
level  on  how  to  address  cyber  risks, 
including which risks should be avoided, 
accepted,  mitigated,  or  transferred  via 
insurance.

Although this guidance is an excellent start, 
we at The Chertoff Group believe that indus-
try  has  to  go  further  and  move  toward  a 
common cyber risk management framework 
that  allows  everyone  to  understand  the 
cyber risks to a business and how the com-
pany  intends  to  address  them.  This  model 
would be a corollary to the General Accepted 
Accounting Principles (GAAP), the standard 
accounting  guidelines  and  framework  that 
underlies  the  fi nancials  and  planning  of 
almost  any  business.  The  emergence  of 
GAAP  in  the  1950s  made  it  signifi cantly 
easier  for  investors,  regulators,  and  other 
stakeholders  to  gain  a  clear  understanding 
of a business and its fi nancials, allowing for 
comparisons across industries and sectors.

In parallel, banks, insurers, and other pro-
viders  of  risk  mitigation  are  scrambling  to 

  THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY   

develop cyber risk mitigation products. Many 
of  the  insurance  industry’s  largest  players, 
including  Allstate,  Travelers,  Marsh,  and 
Tennant,  have  moved  to  offer  companies 
cyber insurance products, although the imma-
turity of the market has created complications 
for insurers and potential customers. Insurers 
have had a hard time calculating their risk and 
thus appropriate premiums for potential cus-
tomers,  while  customers  have  sometimes 
found  their  insurance  quotes  too  expensive. 
Fortunately, time and the accompanying set-
tling of industry standards and actuarial data 
will help to mature and grow this market.

Role of government
Effective  risk  management—for  govern-
ments or private enterprises—starts with an 
honest  understanding  of  the  situation  and 
recognition  that  information  sharing  with 
partners is essential. Information sharing, of 
course, starts with agreeing on common val-
ues,  and  then  trusting  vetted,  capable,  and 
reliable partners. Information sharing can be, 
and  must  be,  something  that  takes  place  at 
and across all levels. The Constitution charg-
es the federal government with the responsi-
bility  of  providing  for  the  defense  of  the 
nation while protecting the privacy and civil 
liberties  of  our  citizens,  a  diffi cult  balance 
that  requires  trust  in  the  government  and 
processes by which we reach that balance.

As we discuss the role of government in 
information  sharing  and  building  trust,  we 
have  to  acknowledge  the 
impact  the 
Snowden  revelations  have  had  on  public 
trust  in  government.  Fundamentally,  we 
have to determine what we want the role of 
government  to  be  and  engage  in  legal 
reforms  that  refl ect  that  role.  Laws  such  as 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, enacted 
in 1986 and amended fi ve times since then, 
and  the  Electronic  Controls  Privacy  Act 
(ECPA),  which  dates  to  1986,  have  to  be 
updated to refl ect the signifi cant changes in 
technology and practice that have occurred 
since they were envisioned.

Beyond these efforts, we need to establish 
or reinforce agreed-upon rules and programs 

  13  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

for  government  data  collection  on  citizens 
and  the  legal  frameworks  that  manage  the 
transfer  of  that  data  between  governments 
for  judicial  and  law  enforcement  purposes. 
Importantly, this initiative must provide for 
mutual  accountability  for  all  participants. 
These  initiatives  have  to  lay  out  clearly  the 
roles of all participants and, in our opinion, 
reinforce and strengthen the role for NSA in 
helping this nation deal with the adversaries 
that  are  using  information  technology  to 
harm us.

On the international front, in response to 
mounting  concerns  over  data  privacy,  data 
security  and  the  rise  of  online  surveillance, 
governments  around  the  world  have  been 
seeking  to  pass  new  data  protection  rules. 
Several  governments,  including  Germany, 
Indonesia,  and  Brazil,  have  considered 
enacting “data localization” laws that would 
require the storage, analysis, and processing 
of  citizen  and  corporate  data  to  occur  only 
within their borders.

However,  many  of  these  proposals  are 
likely  to  impose  economic  harm  and  sow 
seeds of distrust. For example, several of the 
proposals  under  consideration  would  force 
companies  to  build  servers  in  locations 
where the high price of local energy and the 
lack of trained engineers could translate into 
higher  costs  and  reduced  effi ciencies. 
Furthermore, requiring that data reside in a 
server  based  in  Germany  instead  of  one  in 
Ireland  will  do  little  to  prevent  spies  from 
accessing  that  data  if  they  are  determined 
and capable.

So, what should we do? It is critical that 
policymakers  and  technology  providers 
work together to develop solutions that keep 
online  services  available  to  all  who  rely  on 
them.  We  must  develop  principles  that  can 
serve as a framework for coordinated multi-
lateral action between states and across the 
public and private sectors. We must be pre-
pared to lead abroad and at home with effec-
tive ideas.

Public  private  partnerships  (PPPs)  are 
important  pieces  of  the  solution  and  are 
good  models  of  trust  that  we  should  lever-
age  going  forward.  First,  the  formation  of 

■  14 

Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centers 
(ISACs) was a Clinton Administration initia-
tive  to  build  PPPs  across  critical  infrastruc-
ture  sectors.  These  sector-by-sector  ISACs 
have  proven  to  be  models  of  trust.  The 
Financial  Services  ISAC  has  truly  epito-
mized  these  ideas  and  is  considered  by 
many  to  be  the  leading  ISAC  in  sharing 
threat information. This model has been rep-
licated in other industries and led President 
Obama to call for an expansion of the infor-
mation  sharing  model  to  smaller  groups  of 
companies through Information Sharing and 
Analysis  Organizations  (ISAOs).  Another 
example  is  a  U.S.  government-industry  ini-
tiative to combat botnets, in which the gov-
ernment is working with the Industry Botnet 
Group  to  identify  botnets  and  minimize 
their impacts on personal computers.

■  Technology, threat, and trust in the 

boardroom

What do the three Ts of the cyber economy 
mean  for  you?  Here  are  just  a  few  of  the 
questions every leader has to consider:

 䊏 Are we using technology for competitive 

advantage?

 䊏 Are we secure? How do you know? Do we 
have  a  framework,  a  GAAP-equivalent 
for  cyber  risk,  that  gives  me  the  tools  to 
understand and measure risk?

 䊏 Are  we  a  good  steward  of  the  data  we 

collect about our customers?

Each of us needs answers to these questions. 
Your response will have a big impact on the 
future of your organization.

A  few  years  ago,  there  was  a  common 
story  in  security  circles  about  two  types  of 
companies: those who knew they had been 
hacked and those who had been hacked but 
did not know it. Going forward, we will talk 
about  companies  in  terms  of  who  cares 
about  cybersecurity:  in  some  companies,  it 
will be the entire executive suite; in others, 
it  will  just  be  the  CISO  or  CIO.  Your  com-
pany doesn’t want to fall into the latter cat-
egory. Use the three Ts to help your organi-
zation  manage  cyber  risk  and  leverage  the 

  THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY   

fantastic opportunities in this golden age of 
innovation.

Works Cited
1.  See Joseph Menn, “Cyberactivists warned 
of  arrest,”  The  Financial  Times,  February 
5, 2011, Available at http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/87dc140e-3099-11e0-9de3-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz3cg7emYx4.

2.  See Maggie McGrath, “Target Profi t Falls 
46% On Credit Card Breach And The Hits 
Could Keep On Coming,” Forbes, February 
26, 2014, Available at http://www.forbes.
com/sites/maggiemcgrath/2014/02/26/

target-profit-falls-46-on-credit-card-
breach-and-says-the-hits-could-keep-
on-coming/.

3.  See  “Consumers 

Increasingly  Hold 
Companies  Responsible 
for  Loss  of 
Confi dential  Information,  HyTrust  Poll 
Shows,” HyTrust, October 1, 2014, Available 
at  http://www.hytrust.com/company/
n e w s / p re s s - re l e a s e s / c o n s u m e r s -
increasingly-hold-companies-responsible-
loss-confi dential-info,  Additional  survey 
data  available  at  http://www.hytrust.
com/sites/default/files/HyTrust_
consumer_poll_results_with_charts2.pdf.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  15  ■

Cyber governance best practices
Georgia Institute of Technology, Institute for Information 
Security & Privacy – Jody R. Westby, Esq., Adjunct Professor

■   The evolution of cybersecurity governance
Corporate governance has evolved as a means of protect-
ing  investors  through  regulation,  disclosure,  and  best 
practices. The United Nations Guidance on Good Practices 
in Corporate Governance Disclosure noted:

Where  there  is  a  local  code  on  corporate  governance, 
enterprises  should  follow  a  “comply  or  explain”  rule 
whereby  they  disclose  the  extent  to  which  they  fol-
lowed  the  local  code’s  recommendations  and  explain 
any deviations. Where there is no local code on corpo-
rate governance, companies should follow recognized 
international good practices.1

The  Business  Roundtable  (BRT),  one  of  America’s  most 
prominent business associations, has promoted the use of 
best practices as a governance tool since it published its 
fi rst Principles of Corporate Governance in 2002. In its 2012 
update, BRT noted:

Business Roundtable continues to believe, as we noted 
in Principles of Corporate Governance (2005), that the 
United  States  has  the  best  corporate  governance, 
fi nancial  reporting  and  securities  markets  systems  in 
the world. These systems work because of the adop-
tion  of  best  practices  by  public  companies  within  a 
framework  of  laws  and  regulations  that  establish 
minimum  requirements  while  affording  companies 
the ability to develop individualized practices that are 
appropriate  for  them.  Even  in  the  challenging  times 
posed by the ongoing diffi cult economic environment, 
corporations  have  continued  to  work  proactively  to 
refi ne  their  governance  practices,  and  develop  new 
practices,  as  conditions  change  and  “best  practices” 
continue to evolve.2

17  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

Increases in cybercrime and attacks on corpo-
rate systems and data have propelled discus-
sions  regarding  governance  of  cyber  risks 
and  what  exactly  boards  and  senior  execu-
tives  should  be  doing  to  properly  manage 
this new risk environment and protect corpo-
rate assets. The topic reached a crescendo in 
May 2014 when the Institutional Shareholder 
Service (ISS) called for seven of the ten Target 
board  members  not  to  be  re-elected  on  the 
grounds that the failure of the board’s audit 
and corporate responsibility committees “to 
ensure  appropriate  management  of  these 
risks set the stage for the data breach, which 
has resulted in signifi cant losses to the com-
pany and its shareholders.”3

Over the past decade, the concept of cyber-
security governance has evolved from infor-
mation  technology  (IT)  governance  and 
cybersecurity best practices. The Information 
Systems  Audit  and  Control  Association 
(ISACA) has been a frontrunner in IT govern-
ance best practices with the COBIT (Control 
Objectives  for  Information  and  Related 
Technology)4 framework. ISACA founded the 
IT  Governance  Institute  (ITGI)  in  1998  to 
advance the governance and management of 
enterprise IT. The ITGI defi nes IT governance: 

IT governance is the responsibility of the 
board of directors and executive manage-
ment.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  enterprise 
governance and consists of the leadership 
and  organisational  structures  and  pro-
cesses that ensure that the organisation’s 
IT sustains and extends the organisation’s 
strategies and objectives.5

Gartner has a similar defi nition.6

■   Cybersecurity program standards and best 

practices7

As  IT  systems  became  vulnerable  through 
networking and Internet connectivity, secur-
ing  these  systems  became  an  essential  ele-
ment of IT governance. The fi rst cybersecu-
rity  standard  was  developed  by  the  British 
Standards Institute in 1995 as BS 7799. Over 
time,  this  comprehensive  standard  proved 
its  worth  and  ultimately  evolved  into  ISO 

■  18 

17799  and  then  ISO/IEC  27001.8  ISO/IEC 
27001  is  the  most  accepted  cybersecurity 
standard globally.

Today, the ISO/IEC 27000 series of infor-
mation  security  standards  is  comprised  of 
nearly  30  standards.  ISO,  of  which  the 
American  National  Standards 
Institute 
(ANSI) is the member body representing U.S. 
interests for the development of international 
standards,  has  additional  information  secu-
rity  standards  outside  of  the  27000  series.9 
ISO  information  security  standards  cover  a 
range of topics, such as security controls, risk 
management,  the  protection  of  personally 
identifi able  information  (PII)  in  clouds,  and 
control  systems.  Additional  security  stand-
ards  also  have  been  developed  for  fi nancial 
services,  business  continuity,  network  secu-
rity,  supplier  relationships,  digital  evidence, 
and incident response.10

Improving  Critical 

The  U.S.  National  Institute  of  Standards 
and  Technology  (NIST)  has  developed  a 
comprehensive  set  of  cybersecurity  guid-
ance  and  Federal  Information  Processing 
Standards  (FIPS),11  including  a  Framework 
for 
Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity  (Framework).12  The  NIST 
guidance  and  standards  are  world-class 
materials  that  are  publicly  available  at  no 
charge.  NIST  recognized  existing  standards 
and  best  practices  by  mapping 
the 
Framework to ISO/IEC 27001 and COBIT.

Other  respected  cybersecurity  standards 
have been developed for particular purpos-
es, such as the protection of credit card data 
and  electrical  grids.  The  good  news  is  that 
cybersecurity  best  practices  and  standards 
are  harmonized  and  requirements  can  be 
mapped.  This  is  particularly  important 
because as companies buy and sell operating 
units  or  subsidiaries  or  merge,  they  may 
have  IT  systems  and  documentation  based 
upon  several  standards  or  best  practices. 
Thus,  the  harmonization  of  standards  ena-
bles companies to blend IT departments and 
security programs and continue to measure 
maturity.

Some companies may need to align with 
multiple  standards.  For  example,  electric 
transmission  and  distribution  companies 

  CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES   

will  need  to  meet  the  North  American 
Electric  Reliability  Corporation  Critical 
Infrastructure Protection (NERC-CIP) stand-
ards, as well as the Payment Card Industry 
Data  Security  Standard  (PCI  DSS)  if  they 
take  credit  cards,  and  some  other  broad 
security program standard, such as ISO/IEC 
27001 or NIST for their corporate operations.
Even  with  harmonization,  it  is  important 
that companies choose at least one standard to 
align their cybersecurity program with so pro-
gress and security maturity can be measured. 
In  determining  which  standard  to  use  as  a 
corporate  guidepost,  organizations  should 
consider the comprehensiveness of the stand-
ard. Although standards requirements may be 
mapped, each standard does not contain the 
same  or  equivalent  requirements.  Thus,  it  is 

important  to  understand  the  breadth  and 
reach of the standard and to choose one that 
meets the organization’s security and compli-
ance needs. 

ISO/IEC  27001,  which  can  be  obtained 
from ANSI at http://webstore.ansi.org, is a 
comprehensive standard and a good choice 
for  any  size  of  organization  because  it  is 
respected  globally  and  is  the  one  most 
commonly  mapped  against  other  stand-
ards. One should not make the mistake of 
believing  that  all  standards  contain  a  full 
set of requirements for an enterprise secu-
rity program; they do not. Some standards, 
such as NERC-CIP or PCI, set forth security 
requirements  for  a  particular  purpose  but 
are not adequate for a full corporate secu-
rity program.

Leading cybersecurity standards and best practices include: 
 䊏 The International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the information security series, 

http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.htm?qt=information+security&published=on&
active_tab=standards&sort_by=rel (also available from ANSI at http://www.ansi.org)
 䊏 The American National Standards Institute (ANSI)—the U.S. member body to ISO. 

Copies of all ISO standards can be purchased from ANSI at http://webstore.ansi.org/

 䊏 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800 (SP-800) 

series and Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/index.html

 䊏 Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL), http://www.itlibrary.org/.
 䊏 International Society of Automation (ISA), https://www.isa.org/templates/two-

column.aspx?pageid=131422

 䊏 Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA), the Control Objectives 

for Information and Related Technology (COBIT), http://www.isaca.org/cobit/pages/
default.aspx

 䊏 Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI SSC), https://www.

pcisecuritystandards.org/

 䊏 Information Security Forum (ISF) Standard of Good Practice for Information Security, 

https://www.securityforum.org/shop/p-71-173

 䊏 Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute, Operationally Critical 

Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE), http://www.cert.org/resilience/
products-services/octave/

 䊏 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations for security 

programs, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/combined/
index.html

 䊏 North American Electric Reliability Corporation Critical Infrastructure Protection 

(NERC-CIP), http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx

 䊏 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Regulatory Guide 5.71, Cyber Security Programs 

for Nuclear Facilities, https://scp.nrc.gov/slo/regguide571.pdf

  19  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

Some  information  security  standards, 
such as NERC-CIP, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory 
cybersecurity  requirements,  PCI  standards 
for  credit  card  data,  and  HIPAA  security 
requirements  are  mandatory.  Portions  of 
NIST  guidance  are  mandatory  for  federal 
government  contractors  and  U.S.  govern-
ment agencies and departments. The remain-
der of the standards listed are voluntary. 

In  addition  to  the  leading  cybersecurity 
standards listed in the shaded box, additional 
standards  have  been  developed  for  certain 
industry sectors because they require height-
ened security protections. For example, ISO/
IEC 27015 was developed as additional secu-
rity  requirements  for  fi nancial  organizations; 
ISO/IEC  27799  was  developed  for  informa-
tion security in health systems using ISO/IEC 
27002 (the controls portion of ISO/IEC 27001); 
27011 was developed for telecommunications 
systems  using  ISO/IEC  27002;  and  ISO/IEC 
27019  was  developed  for  industrial  control 
system security for the energy utility industry.
The value of using a standard as a guide-
post for the development, maintenance, and 
maturity of a security program is that it sets 
forth best practices for cybersecurity and is 
updated  as  required  to  meet  changing 
threats,  technological  innovation,  and  com-
pliance requirements. Standards also enable 
boards and senior executives to understand 
how  comprehensive  their  organization’s 
security program is and provide an objective 
basis  for  audits  and  cybersecurity  assess-
ments.  Evaluating  a  cybersecurity  program 
against a leading standard enables an organ-
ization to measure progress, assess the effec-
tiveness of controls, identify gaps and defi -
ciencies, and measure program maturity.

■   Cyber governance standards and best practices
Cyber  governance  standards  and  best  prac-
tices  have  evolved  over  the  past  20  years  as 
companies have increased connectivity to the 
Internet  and  networks  and  as  cyberattacks 
have continued to rise. Directors and offi cers 
(D&Os)  have  a  fi duciary  duty  to  protect  the 
organization’s assets and the value of the cor-
poration.  The  increased  dependence  on  IT 
systems  and  data  in  corporate  operations 

■  20 

necessarily  extends  this  duty  to  include  the 
protection of the organization’s digital assets 
(data,  networks,  and  software).  As  a  conse-
quence,  the  governance  of  cyber  risks  has 
become  increasingly  important  for  boards  of 
directors  and  senior  management.  This 
includes  exercising  good  risk  management, 
validating  the  effectiveness  of  controls,  and 
ensuring compliance requirements are met.

An  increase  in  shareholder  derivative 
suits  against  D&Os  for  failure  to  protect 
against  breaches  also  has  heightened  atten-
tion on cybersecurity at the board and senior 
management level. Target was hit with share-
holder  derivative  suits  for  failure  to  protect 
the company and its data from a breach,13 as 
was Wyndham Hotels on similar grounds.14

In addition, cybersecurity has become an 
important  compliance  issue  that  carries  the 
risk  of  headlines  concerning  enforcement 
actions,  investigations,  and  breaches  of  per-
sonally identifi able information. Several state 
and federal laws impose privacy and securi-
ty  requirements  on  targeted  industry  sec-
tors  and  types  of  data.  For  example,  the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), the Health Information Technology 
for  Economic  and  Clinical  Health  Act 
(HITECH Act), and state breach laws impose 
specifi c requirements pertaining to the secu-
rity and privacy of data and networks.

So,  what  does  cyber  governance  mean? 
What actions should board members be tak-
ing?  Who  should  be  involved—the  entire 
board or just certain committees? Cyber gov-
ernance means more than D&Os periodically 
asking  interesting  questions  or  receiving 
reports regarding the company’s cybersecu-
rity program. There is now an international 
standard, ISO/IEC 27014, on the governance 
of information security, which sets out roles 
and  responsibilities  for  executive  manage-
ment and boards of directors and is applica-
ble to all types and sizes of organizations. 

The standard notes: 

[G]overnance  of  information  security 
provides  a  powerful  link  between  an 
organization’s governing body, executive 

  CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES   

management  and  those  responsible  for 
implementing and operating an informa-
tion security management system. It pro-
vides  the  mandate  essential  for  driving 
information  security  initiatives  through-
out the organization.15

The  objectives  of  the  standard  are  to  align 
security  program  and  business  objectives 
and strategies, deliver value to stakeholders 
and the board, and ensure information risks 
are adequately managed.16

The  difference  between  IT  governance 
and information security governance is that 
the  latter  is  focused  on  the  confi dentiality, 
integrity,  and  availability  of  information, 
whereas governance of IT is focused on the 
resources required to acquire, process, store, 
and  disseminate  information.17  ISO/IEC 
27014 sets forth six principles as foundation 
for information security governance:

 1.  “Establish organization-wide information 
security”:  information  security  activities 
should encompass the entire organization 
and  consider  the  business,  information 
security, physical and logical security, and 
other relevant issues.

 2.  “Adopt 

a 

risk-based 

approach”: 
governance  decisions  should  be  based  on 
the  risk  thresholds  of  a  company,  taking 
into  account  competitiveness  issues,  legal 

and  compliance  obligations,  reputational 
risks,  business  interruption,  and  fi nancial 
losses; allocate the resources needed for the 
risk-based approach.

an 

information 

 3.  “Set the direction of investment decisions”: 
establish 
security 
investment  strategy  that  meets  business 
and  security  requirements; 
integrate 
security  considerations 
into  existing 
business and investment processes.

 4.  “Ensure  conformance  with  internal  and 
external  requirements”:  ensure  policies 
and  procedures 
legal, 
regulatory,  and  contractual  obligations; 
routinely audit such compliance.

incorporate 

 5.  “Foster a security-positive environment”: 
accommodate  human  behavior  and 
the  needs  of  users;  promote  a  positive 
information security environment through 
training and tone from the top.

 6.  “Review  performance 

in  relation  to 
business  outcomes”:  ensure  the  security 
program supports business requirements, 
review impact of security on business as 
well as controls.18

ISO/IEC 27014 sets forth separate roles and 
responsibilities  for  the  board  and  executive 
management within fi ve processes: Evaluate, 
Direct, Monitor, Communicate, and Assure. 
These are set forth in abbreviated form in the 
following table.19

Board of directors

Executive management

Evaluate

Ensure business initiatives take information 

Ensure information security supports 

security into consideration

business objectives

Review reports on information security 

performance, initiate prioritized actions

Submit new security projects with 

signifi cant impact for board review

Direct

Establish risk thresholds of organization

Ensure security and business objectives are 

aligned

Approve security strategy and overarching 

Develop security strategy and overarching 

policy

policy

Allocate adequate resources for security 

Establish a positive culture of cybersecurity

program

Continued

  21  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

Board of directors

Executive management

Monitor

Assess effectiveness of security program

Determine appropriate metrics for security 

Ensure compliance and legal obligations 

are met

program 

Provide input to board on security 
performance results, impacts on 
organization

Evaluate changes to operations, legal 

Keep board apprised of new developments 

frameworks, and impact on information 
security

affecting information security

Communicate

Report to investors/shareholders on 

Inform board of security issues that require 

whether information security is adequate 
for business

their attention

Provide results of external audits or reviews 

and identifi ed actions to executive team

Ensure board’s actions and decisions 
regarding security are acted upon

Recognize compliance obligations, business 

needs, and expectations for information 
security

Assure

Order independent reviews/audits of 

Support reviews/audits commissioned by 

security program

board

■   Beyond ISO/IEC 27014: Other best practices 

and guidance

At  present,  the  only  guidance  NIST  has 
developed that addresses information secu-
rity governance is its 2006 Special Publication 
800-100,  Information  Security  Handbook:  A 
Guide  for  Managers.  This  publication,  how-
ever, is written for a federal audience and is 
more technical than other materials directed 
toward boards and senior executives.

ISACA’s IT Governance Institute updated 
its Board Briefi ng on IT Governance in 2014,20 
which sets forth an approach similar to ISO/
IEC 27014, but is based on ISACA’s COBIT 
best  practices.  The  Board  Briefi ng  includes 
questions  board  members  should  ask  and 
also checklists, tool kits, roles and responsi-
bilities,  and  other  helpful  materials.  The 
Board Briefi ng focuses on fi ve activity areas: 
Strategic  Alignment,  Value  Delivery,  Risk 
Management,  Resource  Management,  and 
Performance Measurement. The publication 

■  22 

is  IT-focused,  however,  and  does  not  men-
tion  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  chief 
information  security  offi cers  (CISOs).  The 
separation  of  the  role  of  the  chief  informa-
tion security offi cer from the chief informa-
tion offi cer (CIO) (in other words, not having 
the CISO report to the CIO), is a best practice 
that the Board Briefi ng ignores. It assigns all 
responsibilities  to  the  CIO,  IT  Strategy 
Committee,  IT  Steering  Committee,  IT 
Architecture Review Board, and Technology 
Council.  Nevertheless,  it  is  a  valuable 
resource  for  boards  and  executive  teams 
seeking  to  implement  good  cyber  govern-
ance practices. 

Finally,  Carnegie  Mellon  University’s 
Software Engineering Institute developed the 
Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation 
Guide in 2007 as a guide for boards and execu-
tives  on  governing  enterprise  security  pro-
grams.21 It is still quite instructive and includes 
a  model  organizational  structure  for  cyber 

governance;  composition  of  a  cross-
organizational  privacy/security  committee; 
sample  mission,  goals,  and  objectives  for  a 
board Risk Committee; and an explanation of 
the critical activities in an enterprise security 
program, including who should lead and be 
involved in them, and the outputs (artifacts) 
to be developed. It indicates where the board 
has a role for governance oversight and sets 
forth roles and responsibilities for the critical 
players, as well as shared responsibilities, for 
the following:

 䊏 chief  security  offi cer/chief  information 

security offi cer

 䊏 chief privacy offi cer
 䊏 chief information offi cer
 䊏 chief fi nancial offi cer
 䊏 general counsel
 䊏 business line executives
 䊏 human resources
 䊏 public relations
 䊏 business managers
 䊏 procurement
 䊏 operational personnel
 䊏 asset owners
 䊏 certifi cation authority.

■   Additional considerations in cybersecurity 

governance

Board  structure  plays  a  signifi cant  role  in 
cybersecurity  governance. A  Risk  Committee 
is the best choice for governance of cybersecu-
rity  because  IT  risks  must  be  managed  as 
enterprise risks and integrated into enterprise 
risk management and planning. Many compa-
nies place all oversight for cybersecurity in the 
board  Audit  Committee,  which  can  substan-
tially increase the workload of that committee. 
Placing  cyber  governance  with  the  Audit 
Committee  also  creates  segregation  of  duties 
issues  at  the  board  level  because  the  Audit 
Committee  is  auditing  the  security  program, 
determining  remediation  measures,  and  then 
auditing this work the following year.

One  of  the  most  important  aspects  of 
cybersecurity  governance  is  the  identifi ca-
tion  of  vulnerabilities  that  could  have  a 
material  impact  on  corporate  operations 
and/or  bottom  line.  It  is  easy  for  board 

  CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES   

members  to  become  inundated  in  technical 
data  and  issues  and  lose  sight  of  the  major 
risks  that  must  be  managed.  In  part,  CIOs 
and CISOs need to develop better executive 
and  board  communication  skills  when 
reporting  on  cybersecurity  program  activi-
ties and incidents. Outside experts can also 
help  separate  which  cybersecurity  govern-
ance issues should be directed to the execu-
tive  management  team  and  which  are  for 
board consideration.

Once  the  critical  vulnerabilities  that 
require board and executive attention have 
been  identifi ed,  the  next  step  is  to  deter-
mine the information fl ows that are needed 
to keep the board and senior management 
informed  and  enable  informed  decision-
making. These two steps—identifi cation of 
cyber-related  vulnerabilities  and  associ-
ated  information  flows—should  be  fol-
lowed  by  an  analysis  of  the  board’s  and 
senior  management’s  roles  in  incident 
response and business continuity/disaster 
recovery. 

The  Target  breach  revealed  how  disas-
trous it can be when a company’s executive 
team and board are not prepared to manage 
a  major  cybersecurity  incident.  The  breach 
was clever but not terribly diffi cult to recov-
er from; as ISS pointed out so clearly, it was 
Target’s  executive  team  and  board  who 
failed  to  protect  the  company’s  data  and 
ensure a robust incident response plan was 
in place that involved their participation. 

Cybersecurity  governance  is  an  area 
where an independent adviser can provide 
valuable guidance to a board and executive 
team  by  reviewing  available  reports  and 
assessing  the  current  state  of  the  security 
program,  identifying  key  vulnerabilities 
and  associated  information  fl ows  that 
should be directed to the board, advising on 
the  threat  environment,  and  establishing 
the  proper  organizational  structures  for 
effective  cybersecurity  governance.  These 
activities should be undertaken in a collab-
orative fashion with IT and security leaders 
and in the spirit of helping them gain visi-
bility  and  support  for  security  program 
initiatives. 

  23  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

■   Dutiful dozen
There are some actions that boards can take 
to  ensure  they  are  managing  cyber  risks 
and meeting their fi duciary duty. Following 
is  a  list  of  a  dozen  actions  that  are  within 
best practices, which can be used as a start-
ing  point  and  checklist  for  governance 
activities:

A dozen best practices for cyber governance
  1.  Establish  a  governance  structure  with 
a  board  Risk  Committee  and  a  cross-
organizational internal team.

  2.  Identify  the  key  cyber  vulnerabilities 
the  organization’s 

associated  with 
operations.

  3.  Identify  the  security  program  activities 
over  which  boards  and  executives 
should  exercise  oversight,  and  identify 
the  key  information  fl ows  and  reports 
that will inform board and executives on 
the management of cyber vulnerabilities 
and security program activities.

  4.  Identify  legal  compliance  and  fi nancial 

exposures from IT systems and data.

  5.  Set  the  tone  from  top  that  privacy  and 
security  are  high  priorities  for  the 
organization,  and  approve  top-level 
policies on acceptable use of technology 
and  compliance  with  privacy  and 
security policies and procedures.

  6.  Review the roles and the responsibilities 
of  lead  privacy  and  security  personnel, 
and ensure there is segregation of duties 
between IT and security functions.

  7.  Ensure 

that  privacy  and  security 
responsibilities  are  shared,  enterprise 
issues that apply to all personnel.

  9.  Review and approve annual budgets for 

security programs.

 10.  Review  annual  risk  assessments,  the 
maturity  of  the  security  program,  and 
support continual improvement.

 11.  Retain a trusted adviser to independently 
inform  the  board  on  changes  in  the 
threat  environment,  provide  assistance 
on  governance  issues,  and  advise  on 
response  issues  in  the  event  of  a  major 
cyber incident.

■  24 

 12.  Evaluate 

the  adequacy  of  cyber 
insurance  against  loss  valuations  and 
ensure  adequate  risk  strategies  are  in 
place for cyber risks.

Many  organizations  also  are  struggling 
with  how  to  integrate  cybersecurity  into 
their  enterprise  risk  management  process. 
Most  business  operations 
today  are 
dependent upon IT systems and the confi -
dentiality, availability, and integrity of their 
data. Following are another dozen guiding 
points on integrating cyber risks into enter-
prise risk management.:

A dozen best practices for integrating cybersecurity into 
enterprise risk management
  1.  Understand  the  business’s  strategies, 

objectives, and needs for IT and data.

  2.  Inventory  assets  (data,  applications, 
ownership, 

hardware), 
classifi cation, and risk categorization.

assign 

  3.  Map  legal  requirements  to  data  for  all 

jurisdictions.

  4.  Evaluate the security of vendors, business 

partners, and supply chain linkages.

  5.  Align  the  cybersecurity  program  with 

best practices and standards.

  6.  Ensure  controls  are  determined  and 

metrics identifi ed.

  7.  Conduct a risk assessment to establish a 

baseline for cyber risk management.

  8.  Develop  cyber  risk  strategies  (block  the 
risk, cyber insurance, other compensating 
controls, all of these).

 10.  Use  technical  tools  and  services  to 
provide  integrated  data  on  threats  and 
attacks.

 11.  Make  cyber 

training  and  security 
compliance part of annual performance 
reviews for all personnel.

 12.  Stay abreast of innovation and changes 
in  the  threat  environment  as  well  as 
changing operational requirements. 

  9.  Design 

system 

architecture 

to 
accommodate  business  goals  and 
objectives,  meet  security  and  legal 
requirements,  and  detect  or  prevent 
unauthorized usage.

■   Conclusion
Best  practices  and  standards  now  require 
boards  and  senior  management  to  exercise 
governance over cybersecurity programs and 
associated risks. Laws such as Gramm-Leach-
Bliley,  the  Health  Insurance  Portability  and 
Accountability  Act,  and 
the  Federal 
Information  Security  Management  Act  all 
require  executive  oversight  of  security  pro-
grams. Each organization’s operations, system 
architecture,  policies  and  procedures,  and 
culture vary, thus, cyber risk management has 
to  be  tailored  to  the  organization.  Boards 
should  know  what  standards/best  practices 
their organization is using to implement their 
security program and determine an approach 
for their own governance activities. Checklists 
and  the  use  of  ISO/IEC  27014,  the  ISACA 
Board  Briefi ng  on  IT  Governance,  and  the 
Carnegie  Mellon  University’s  Governing  for 
Enterprise Security Implementation Guide are all 
useful resources that will help ensure boards 
are meeting their fi duciary duty and protect-
ing the assets of the organization.

References
1.  Guidance  on  Good  Practices  in  Corporate 
Governance  Disclosure,  United  Nations 
Conference  on  Trade  and  Development 
(UNCTAD),  New  York  &  Geneva,  2006, 
http://unctad.org/en/docs/iteteb20063_
en.pdf.

2.  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance  2012, 
Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate 
Governance  and  Financial  Regulation, 
Aug.  17,  2012,  http://corpgov.law.
harvard.edu/2012/08/17/principles-of-
corporate-governance-2012/.

  4.  Elizabeth  A.  Harris,  “Advisory  Group 
Opposes Re-election of Most of Target’s 
Board,”  The  New  York  Times,  May  28, 
2014, 
http://www.nytimes.com/
2014/05/29/business/advisory-group-
opposes-re-election-of-most-of-targets-
board.html?_r=0 (quoting ISS report).

  4.  COBIT  is  an  acronym  for  Control 
Objectives  for  Information  and  Related 
Technology.  Information  on  the  COBIT 
5  framework  for  the  governance  and 

  CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES   

management of enterprise IT is available 
at  http://www.isaca.org/cobit/pages/
default.aspx.

  5.  Board  Briefi ng  on  IT  Governance,  IT 
Governance  Institute,  2nd  ed.,  2014  at 
10,  http://www.isaca.org/restricted/
Documents/26904_Board_Briefing_
fi nal.pdf.

  6.  Gartner,  IT  Glossary,  “IT  Governance,” 
http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/
it-governance.

  7.  The  term  “cybersecurity  best  practice” 
may  be  used  interchangeably  with 
“standard” in the cybersecurity context, 
as the standards embody best practices. 
The term “standard” is commonly used 
to  refer  to  mandatory  requirements. 
With respect to cybersecurity programs, 
however, there is no bright line between 
best  practices  and  standards.  Some 
standards,  such  as  NERC-CIP  and 
HIPAA,  are  mandatory  for  certain 
organizations,  while  other  standards, 
such  as 
ISO/IEC,  are  voluntary. 
Other  standards,  such  as  the  Federal 
Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 
and  NIST  guidance  (the  800  Special 
Publication  series)  are  voluntary  for 
some entities and mandatory for others.
  8.  Wikipedia,  “BS  7799,”  https://en.

wikipedia.org/wiki/BS_7799.

  9.  International 

Organization 

for 
Standardization,  Information  Security, 
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.
htm?qt=information+security&publis
hed=on&active_tab=standards&sort_
by=rel.

 10.  Id.
 11.  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology, Computer Security Division, 
Computer  Security  Resource  Center, 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
PubsSPs.html.

 12.  Framework 

for 

Improving  Critical 
Infrastructure  Cybersecurity,  National 
Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology, 
Version 1.0, Feb. 12, 2014, http://www.
nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/
cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf.

  25  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

 13.  See, e.g., Kevin LaCroix, “Target Directors 
and  Offi cers  Hit  with  Derivative  Suits 
Based  on  Data  Breach,”  Feb.  3,  2014, 
http://www.dandodiary.com/2014/02/
articles/cyber-liability/target-directors-
and-officers-hit-with-derivative-suits-
based-on-data-breach/.

 14.  See,  e.g.,  Jon  Talotta,  Michelle  Kisloff,  & 
Christopher Pickens, “Data Breaches Hit 
the Board Room: How to Address Claims 
Against  Directors  &  Offi cers,”  Hogan  & 
Lovells, Chronicle of Data Protection, Jan. 
23,  2015,  http://www.hldataprotection.
com/2015/01/articles/cybersecurity-
data-breaches/data-breaches-hit-the-
board-room/.

 15.  ISO/IEC  27014  (2013),  Governance 
of  Information  Security,  “Summary,” 
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.
htm?qt=27014&sort=rel&type=simple&
published=on.

 16.  Id. at 4.2. “Objectives.”
 17.  Id. at 4.4. “Relationship.”
 18.  Id. at 5.2. “Principles.”
 19.  Id.  at  5.3.  “Processes.”  The 

full 
requirements  of  the  standard  should  be 
reviewed prior to use by an organization; 
ISO 27014 is available at http://www.iso.
org/iso/home/search.htm?qt=27014&
sort=rel&type=simple&published=on.

 20.  Board  Briefi ng  on  IT  Governance,  IT 
Governance  Institute,  2nd  ed.,  2014, 
http://www.isaca.org/restricted/
Documents/26904_Board_Briefing_
fi nal.pdf.

 21.  Jody R. Westby & Julia H. Allen, Governing 
Implementation  Guide, 
for  Enterprise 
Carnegie  Mellon  University,  Software 
Engineering  Institute,  2007,  http://
globalcyberrisk.com/wp-content/
uploads/2012/08/Governing-for-
Enterprise-Sec-Impl-Guide.pdf.

■  26 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Investors’ perspectives on cyber 
risks: Implications for boards
Institutional Shareholder Services Inc. – Patrick McGurn, 
ISS Special Counsel and Martha Carter, 
ISS Global Head of Research

Although  pundits  proclaimed  2014  as  the  “Year  of  the 
Data  Breach”  and  a  signifi cant  “no”  vote  at  Target’s 
annual meeting put directors on notice that sharehold-
ers want to know about potential risks, few 2015 corpo-
rate disclosure documents provide evidence that boards 
increased transparency with respect to cyber oversight. 
Despite  prodding  from  top  regulators  and  investors’ 
calls for greater transparency, companies continue to fall 
short  on  disclosure  in  their  key  governance  disclosure 
documents of cybersecurity risks and their board’s over-
sight  of  them.  Equally  concerning  is  the  limited  infor-
mation  regarding  cyber  risk  oversight  provided  by 
boards  at  a  handful  of  fi rms  that  were  the  targets  of 
2014’s most widely publicized breaches. Boards would 
benefi t  from  an  understanding  of  investors’  perspec-
tives  and  adoption  of  best  practices  in  disclosure  on 
cyber risks.

■  Target’s breach led to boardroom backlash
Target’s high-profi le data breach made headlines world-
wide.  Despite  this,  neither  Target’s  2014  proxy  state-
ment nor the company’s initial annual meeting-related 
engagement  materials  discussed  in  a  meaningful  way 
the massive data theft or the board’s responses to it. As 
part  of  its  research  process  leading  up  to  the  annual 
meeting, 
(ISS) 
engaged  with  members  of  the  Target  board  to  learn 
more about the directors’ oversight of cyber risks before 
and after the breach. In the end, ISS opined in its 2014 
annual meeting report on Target that the members of the 
board’s Audit and Corporate Responsibility committees 
had  “failed  to  provide  suffi cient  oversight  of  the  risks 
facing  the  company  that  potentially  led  to  the  data 

Institutional  Shareholder  Services 

27  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

breach.”  Accordingly,  ISS  recommended 
votes  against  the  members  of  those  two 
board oversight panels. ISS acknowledged 
the  board’s  actions  in  the  wake  of  the 
breach  but  found  that  the  committees 
“failed  to  appropriately  implement  a  risk 
assessment structure that could have better 
prepared the company for a data breach.”

After  investors’  concerns  emerged  before 
the meeting, the company engaged in a solic-
itation  effort  to  defend  the  board’s  response 
to  the  breach.  When  the  votes  were  tallied, 
none  of  the  members  of  Target’s  audit  and 
governance  panels  received  support  from 
more than 81 percent of the votes cast. Target 
lead  director  James A.  Johnson  received  the 
lowest  support—62.9  percent  of  the  votes 
cast. According to ISS’ Voting Analytics data-
base of institutional investors’ voting records, 
governance professionals at funds connected 
to nearly half of Target’s top 10 largest inves-
tors  cast  votes  against  one  or  more  of  the 
company’s directors.

In  the  direct  wake  of  the  2014  data 
breach  issues  and  the  dearth  of  proxy-
related  disclosure  on  those  matters,  SEC 
Commissioner Luis A. Aguilar fi red a shot 
across  the  bow  of  boards  that  lack  disclo-
sure. In a June 10, 2014, speech (“Boards of 
Directors, Corporate Governance and Cyber 
Risks: Sharpening the Focus”) delivered at 
a New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)–hosted 
cybersecurity  conference,  Aguilar  said, 
“[B]oard  oversight  of  cyber-risk  manage-
ment is critical to ensuring that companies 
are  taking  adequate  steps  to  prevent,  and 
prepare for, the harms that can result from 
such  attacks.  There  is  no  substitution  for 
proper  preparation,  deliberation,  and 
engagement  on  cybersecurity 
issues.” 
Noting  the  wide  damage  crater  caused  by 
cyber events, Aguilar noted that the board-
room  plan  should  include  “whether,  and 
how,  the  cyber-attack  will  need  to  be  dis-
closed  internally  and  externally  (both  to 
customers and to investors).”

■  Shareholders care about breaches
Are  shareholders  apathetic  about  data 
breaches?  Some  media  reports  equate  the 

■  28 

lack  of  sharp,  downward  stock  movements 
in the wake of disclosures of hacks or other 
data breaches (or quick rebounds from such 
price  drops  when  they  occur)  with  share-
holders’  apathy  over  cybersecurity  prob-
lems.  In  a  recent  Harvard  Business  Review 
article  (Why  Data  Breaches  Don’t  Hurt  Stock 
Prices, March 31, 2015), cybersecurity strate-
gist  Elena  Kvochko  and  New  York  Times 
Chief Technology Offi cer Rajiv Pant dismiss 
this easy explanation. They argue that muted 
stock price reactions to data breaches refl ect 
the absence of timely information and qual-
ity  tools  to  price  cyber  risk:  “Shareholders 
still  don’t  have  good  metrics,  tools,  and 
approaches  to  measure  the  impact  of  cyber 
attacks on businesses and translate that into 
a  dollar  value  .  .  .  The  long  and  mid-term 
effects  of  lost  intellectual  property,  disclo-
sure of sensitive data, and loss of customer 
confi dence  may  result  in  loss  of  market 
share, but these effects are diffi cult to quan-
tify.”  Faced  with  this  information  vacuum, 
Kvochko  and  Pant  note  that  “shareholders 
only react to breach news when it has direct 
impact  on  business  operations,  such  as 
litigation charges (for example, in the case of 
Target) or results in immediate changes to a 
company’s expected profi tability.”

Indeed,  stock  prices  may  not  tell  the 
whole  story.  Contrary  to  the  conventional 
wisdom, recent survey data show investors 
understand  the  long-term  risks  stemming 
from  hacks  and  they  may  actually  shy 
away  from  investing  in  companies  with 
multiple  breaches.  A  recent  survey—
conducted  by  FTI  Consulting  on  behalf  of 
consulting giant KPMG LLP—of more than 
130  global  institutional  investors  with  an 
estimated  $3  trillion  under  management 
found  that  cyber  events  may  affect  inves-
tors’  confi dence  in  the  board  and  demand 
for the affected companies’ shares.

Investors  opined  that  less  than  half  of 
boards of the companies that they currently 
invest  in  have  adequate  skills  to  manage 
rising  cyberthreats.  They  also  believe  that 
43  percent  of  board  members  have  “unac-
ceptable  skills  and  knowledge  to  manage 
innovation  and  risk  in  the  digital  world.” 

  INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS  

More  ominously  for  boards,  four  of  fi ve 
investor respondents (79 percent) suggest-
ed that they may blacklist stocks of hacked 
fi rms.  As  for  a  remedy,  86  percent  of  the 
surveyed  investors  told  KPMG  and  FTI 
that they want to see increases in the time 
boards spend on addressing cyber risk.

■  Investors raise the bar for disclosure
Insights  on  the  gap  between  investors’ 
expectations and boardroom practices were 
gleaned  from  PwC’s  juxtaposition  of  two 
surveys that it conducted in the summer of 
2014,  one  of  863  directors  in  PwC’s  2014 
Annual  Corporate  Directors  Survey,  and  the 
other  of  institutional  investors  with  more 
than  $11  trillion  in  aggregate  assets  under 
management in PwC’s 2014 Investor Survey.

 䊏 Nearly  three  quarters  (74  percent)  of 
investors  told  PwC  that  they  believe 
it  is  important  for  directors  to  discuss 
their  company’s  crisis  response  plan  in 
the  event  of  a  major  security  breach. 
Only  about  half  of  directors  (52  percent) 
reported having such discussions.

 䊏 Roughly  three  out  of  four  (74  percent) 
investors  urged  boards  to  boost  cyber 
risk  disclosures  in  response  to  the  SEC’s 
guidance, but only 38 percent of directors 
reported discussing the topic.

 䊏 Similarly, 68 percent of investors believe it is 
important for directors to discuss engaging 
an  outside  cybersecurity  expert,  but  only 
42 percent of directors had done so.

 䊏 Fifty-fi ve  percent  of  investors  said  it 
was  important  for  boards  to  consider 
designating  a  chief  information  security 
offi cer, 
their  companies  did  not 
have  one  in  place.  Only  half  as  many 
directors  (26  percent)  reported  that  such 
a personnel move had been discussed in 
the boardroom.

if 

 䊏 Finally,  45  percent  of  investors  believe 
it  is  important  for  directors  to  discuss 
the  National 
Institute  of  Standards 
and  Technology  (NIST)/  Department 
of  Homeland  Security  cybersecurity 
framework, but only 21 percent of directors 
reported their boards had done so.

■  ISS policy respondents indicate a disclosure 

framework

What level of detail do investors expect to 
see about these issues in disclosures regard-
ing  cyberthreats?  In  2014,  as  part  of  ISS’ 
2015  policy-formulation  process,  we  asked 
institutional  investors  to  weigh  the  factors 
they  assess  in  reviewing  boardroom  over-
sight  of  risk,  including  cyberthreats.  A 
majority  of  the  shareholder  respondents 
indicated  that  the  following  are  all  either 
“very”  or  “somewhat”  important  to  their 
voting  decisions  on  individual  directors 
elections:

 䊏 role  of  the  company’s  relevant  risk 

oversight committee(s)

 䊏 the  board’s  risk  oversight  policies  and 

procedures

 䊏 directors’  oversight  actions  prior  to  and 

subsequent to the incident(s)

 䊏 changes in senior management.

Notably,  shareholders  do  not  appear  to  be 
looking  for  scapegoats.  Disclosures  about 
boardroom  oversight  action  subsequent  to 
an  incident  drew  more  demand  than  fi r-
ings.  An  eye-popping  85  percent  of  the 
respondents  cited  such  crisis  management 
and “lessons learned” disclosures as “very 
important.”  In  contrast,  only  46  percent  of 
the  shareholders  indicated  that  changes  in 
senior management are “very important” to 
them when it came time to vote on director 
oversight.

■  2015 disclosures provide few insights
Despite prodding by the SEC and numerous 
indications  from  investors,  many  boards 
continue  to  lack  disclosure  of  cyberthreats 
in  their  fl agship  documents—the  proxy 
statement  and  the  10-K.  Only  a  handful  of 
the companies that drew widespread cover-
age of their data breaches during 2014 men-
tion  the  events  in  their  proxy  statements, 
and many cite materiality concerns to avoid 
discussing  the  data  breaches  in  detail  in 
their 10-Ks.

In sharp contrast to the absence of infor-
mation  in  Target’s  2014  proxy  statement, 

  29  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

however, another big box retailer provided 
investors  with  a  window  into  the  board’s 
role  in  cyber  risk  oversight  in  its  2015 
proxy materials. Home Depot addressed its 
2014  data  breach,  which  affected  up  to 
56  million  customers  who  shopped  at  the 
company’s  stores  between  April  2014  and 
September  2014,  with  a  concise  (roughly 
1000-word)  explanation  of  the  steps  taken 
by the board before and after the company’s 
breach.

The proxy statement disclosures include a 
brief summary of the depth and duration of 
the  breach,  an  explanation  of  the  board’s 
delegation of oversight responsibility to the 
audit committee, and an outline of remedial 
steps that the board took in response to the 
event.

Notably,  Home  Depot’s  disclosures  gen-
erally align with all the pillars identifi ed by 
investors in their responses to the ISS policy 
survey:

First,  Home  Depot’s  board  details  the 
delegation of risk oversight to the audit com-
mittee and describes the directors’ relation-
ship with the company’s internal audit and 
compliance team:

. 

. 

The  Audit  Committee  .  .  .  has  primary 
responsibility for overseeing risks related 
to  information  technology  and  data  pri-
vacy  and  security. 
.  The  Audit 
Committee  stays  apprised  of  signifi cant 
actual  and  potential  risks  faced  by  the 
Company in part through review of quar-
terly  reports  from  our  Enterprise  Risk 
Council  (the  “ERC”).  The  quarterly  ERC 
reports  not  only  identify  the  risks  faced 
by the Company, but also identify wheth-
er primary oversight of each risk resides 
with a particular Board committee or the 
full Board . . . The chair of the ERC, who 
is  also  our  Vice  President  of  Internal 
Audit and Corporate Compliance, reports 
the ERC’s risk analyses to senior manage-
ment  regularly  and  attends  each  Audit 
Committee meeting. The chair of the ERC 
also  provides  a  detailed  annual  report 
regarding the Company’s risk assessment 

■  30 

and  management  process  to  the  full 
Board.”

Next,  the  Home  Depot  disclosure  provides 
some  color  on  the  board’s  risk  oversight 
policies and procedures:

For a number of years, IT and data secu-
rity risks have been included in the risks 
reviewed on a quarterly basis by the ERC 
and  the  Audit  Committee  and  in  the 
annual report to the Board on risk assess-
ment  and  management.  In  the  last  few 
years,  the  Audit  Committee  and/or  the 
full  Board  have  also  regularly  received 
detailed  reports  on  IT  and  data  security 
matters  from  senior  members  of  our  IT 
and  internal  audit  departments.  These 
reports  were  given  at  every  quarterly 
Audit  Committee  meeting  in  fi scal  2014, 
including  an  additional  half-day  Audit 
Committee session devoted exclusively to 
these  matters  that  was  held  prior  to  the 
discovery of the Data Breach. The topics 
covered  by  these  reports  included  risk 
management  strategies,  consumer  data 
security, the Company’s ongoing risk mit-
igation activities, and cyber security strat-
egy and governance structure. . . .

To  further  support  our  IT  and  data 
security  efforts,  in  2013  the  Company 
enhanced  and  expanded  the  Incident 
Response  Team  (“IRT”)  formed  several 
years  earlier.  The  IRT  is  charged  with 
developing action plans for and respond-
ing rapidly to data security situations. . . . 
The  IRT  provided  daily  updates  to  the 
Company’s  senior  leadership  team,  who 
in  turn  periodically  apprised  the  Lead 
Director,  the  Audit  Committee  and  the 
full Board, as necessary.

The  Home  Depot  board  also  highlights  its 
cyber-risk  oversight  actions  prior  to  the 
incident:

the  Board’s  and 

Under 
the  Audit 
Committee’s  leadership  and  oversight, 
the Company had taken signifi cant steps 

  INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS  

to  address  evolving  privacy  and  cyber 
security risks before we became aware of 
the Data Breach:

 䊏 Prior  to  the  Data  Breach  and  in  part 
in  reaction  to  breaches  experienced 
by  other  companies,  we  augmented 
our  existing  security  activities  by 
launching  a  multi-work  stream  effort 
to  review  and  further  harden  our 
IT  and  data  security  processes  and 
systems. This effort included working 
extensively  with  third-party  experts 
and  security  fi rms  and  has  been 
subsequently  modifi ed  and  enhanced 
based on our learnings from the Data 
Breach experience.

 䊏 In  January  2014,  as  part  of  the  efforts 
described  above,  we  began  a  major 
payment  security  project  to  provide 
enhanced encryption of payment card 
data at the point of sale in all of our U.S. 
stores. . . . Upon discovery of the Data 
Breach,  we  accelerated  completion 
of  the  project  to  September  2014, 
offering signifi cant new protection for 
customers. The new security protection 
takes  raw  payment  card  information 
and scrambles it to make it unreadable 
to unauthorized users. . . .

 䊏 We are rolling out EMV “chip-and-PIN” 
technology  in  our  U.S.  stores,  which 
adds  extra  layers  of  payment  card 
protection for customers who use EMV 
chip-and-PIN enabled cards. . . .

Finally, the Home Depot board discusses the 
boardroom  oversight  actions  taken  subse-
quent  to  the  incident  including  changes  in 
senior management:

Following  discovery  of  the  Data  Breach, 
in  addition  to  continuing  the  efforts 
described  above,  the  Company  and  the 
Board  took  a  number  of  additional 
actions:

 䊏 We  formed  an 

internal  executive 
committee,  the  Data  Security  and 

Privacy  Governance  Committee, 
to  provide  further  enterprise-wide 
oversight  and  governance  over  data 
security.  This  committee 
reports 
quarterly to the Audit Committee.

 䊏 We  are  in  the  process  of  further 
augmenting  our  IT  security  team, 
including  by  adding  an  offi cer  level 
Chief Information Security Offi cer and 
hiring additional associates focused on 
IT and data security.

 䊏 We  are  reviewing  and  enhancing  all 
of our training relating to privacy and 
data security, and we intend to provide 
additional  annual  data 
security 
training for all of our associates before 
the end of Fiscal 2015.

 䊏 Our Board, the Audit Committee, and 
a special committee of the Board have 
received regular updates regarding the 
Data  Breach.  In  addition  to  the  IT 
and data security initiatives described 
above, 
the  Board,  supported  by 
the  work  of  its  Audit  and  Finance 
Committees,  has 
reviewed  and 
authorized the expenditures associated 
with  a  series  of  capital  intensive 
projects  designed  to  further  harden 
our  IT  security  environment  against 
evolving data security threats.

■  Boards would benefi t from engagement 

and disclosure

Although  the  good  news  is  that  cybersecu-
rity has seemingly come to the forefront for 
many directors, the bad news is that share-
holders are not yet getting the transparency 
they need to assess the quality of boardroom 
oversight. The signifi cant “no” vote against 
the Target board at its 2014 annual meeting, 
coupled with survey data, show that share-
holders are far from apathetic when it comes 
to assessing cyber risk oversight.

■  Target’s lessons learned
In  the  wake  of  its  challenging  2014  annual 
meeting,  Target  hosted  calls  or  held  meet-
ings with shareholders representing approx-
imately 41% of shares voted. The majority of 

  31  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

these  conversations  were  led  by  Director 
Anne Mulcahy. In light of this feedback and 
with the assistance of a third-party strategy 
and  risk  management  and  regulatory  com-
pliance consultant, the board “embarked on 
a  comprehensive  review”  of  risk  oversight 
at  the  management,  board,  and  committee 
levels.  As  a  result  of  this  comprehensive 
review,  in  January  2015,  the  Target  board 
“clarifi ed and enhanced” its practices to pro-
vide  more  transparency  about  how  risk 
oversight is exercised at the board and com-
mittee  levels.  As  part  of  this  revamp,  the 
board reallocated and clarifi ed risk oversight 

responsibilities among the committees, most 
notably by elevating the risk oversight role 
of  the  corporate  risk  &  responsibility  com-
mittee  (formerly  known  as  the  corporate 
responsibility committee).

Examples  such  as  Home  Depot  and  the 
Target  board’s  2015  disclosures  provide 
more transparency on risk oversight and are 
a good framework for other boards to follow. 
Boards  would  be  wise  to  raise  their  games 
by  disclosing  more  details  of  their  board 
oversight  efforts  and  engaging  with  inves-
tors when cyber incidents occur, or they may 
run the risk of a loss of investor confi dence.

■  32 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Toward cyber risks measurement
Elena Kvochko, Author, Towards the Quantifi cation 
of Cyber Threats report; and Danil Kerimi, Director, 
Center for Global Industries, World Economic Forum

As most companies in the U.S. already use some form of 
cloud-based solutions, the digital footprint of enterprises 
is growing, and so are the risks. Technological solutions 
have always focused on convenience, transparency, and 
an  ever-increasing  ability  to  share  information  and  col-
laborate,  while  built-in  security  hasn’t  been  a  priority 
until  recently.  Now  enterprises  are  shifting  away  from 
this model. Growing privacy and security concerns affect 
customer perception. According to Deloitte, 80% of cus-
tomers  are  aware  of  recent  cyber  breaches,  and  50%  of 
them are ready to switch brands if they feel their informa-
tion  may  be  compromised.  Experian  reported  that  now 
cyber  breaches  are  as  devastating  for  the  reputation  of 
organizations  as  environmental  disasters  and  poor  cus-
tomer service.

Most executives recognize that cyber risks are no longer 
on the horizon but are an imminent cost of doing business. 
Companies  are  actively  looking  for  effective  mitigation 
actions. Recent surveys show that cybersecurity is already 
part  of  the  agenda  of  80%  of  corporate  boards  (up  from 
around  30%  4  years  ago).  Companies  are  adjusting  their 
enterprise  risk  management  frameworks  and  including 
cyber risks and accompanying controls as part of the nec-
essary risk management actions. Traditional controls intro-
duced for in-house infrastructure no longer work, as more 
and more operations are performed in the cloud. Just as in 
any healthy ecosystem, these environments present great 
opportunities for stakeholders to interact with each other 
and with the content, but they also carry inherent risks.

Risk  mitigation  approaches  and  technologies  lag 
behind the sophistication of the threat. In fact, our ear-
lier  research  with  the  World  Economic  Forum  and 
McKinsey showed that 90% of executives feel they only 

33  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

have “nascent” and “developing” capabili-
ties  to  combat  cyberthreats.  In  this  situa-
tion when cyber breaches have become an 
inevitable reality of doing business, execu-
tives  ask  themselves,  “What  does  it  mean 
for  my  business,  how  probable  is  it  that  a 
devastating breach will happen to us, and 
how much could it cost us?” Still, very few 
organizations  have  developed  ways  to 
assess  their  cyber  risk  exposure  and  to 
quantify them.

In  this  chapter,  we  discuss  the  cyber 
value-at-risk framework introduced by the 
Partnering for Cyber Resilience initiative of 
the World Economic Forum and released at 
the Annual Summit in Davos in 2015. More 
than  50  organizations,  including  Wipro, 
Deloitte  (project  advisor),  and  Aon,  have 
contributed  to  this  effort.  The  framework 
laid  the  foundations  for  modeling  cyber 
risks and encouraged organizations to take 
a  quantitative  approach  toward  assessing 
their  cyber  risks  exposure,  which  could 
also  help  make  appropriate  investment 
decisions.

We  were  delighted  to  see  many  spin-off 
projects and initiatives that were initiated as 
part of this work and hope they will contrib-
ute  to  better  risk  management  tools.  Our 
research  showed  that  the  aggregate  impact 
of  cybercrime  on  the  global  economy  can 
amount to $3 trillion in terms of slow down 
in digitization and growth and result in the 
slower  adoption  of  innovation.  Multiple 
other  studies  showed  signifi cant  negative 
impact  of  cyber  breaches.  CSIS  established 
that the annual cost of economic espionage 
reaches $445 billion. Target's breach cost the 
company  more  than  $140  million,  a  large 
portion  of  which  went  to  cover  litigation 
costs.  Interestingly,  however,  Aon  research 
shows that more than 80% of breaches cost 
the companies less than $1 million.

■   Value-at-risk
How  can  companies  defi ne  their  risk  expo-
sure and the level of investments, as well as 
priority  areas  for  these  investments?  To 
answer this question, we turned to the value-
at-risk concept. The concept goes back to the 

■  34 

fi nancial services industry and describes the 
risk appetite and potential losses for a port-
folio  that  an  institution  will  incur  over  a 
defi ned period of time and is expressed in a 
probability to insure the loss.

In the cyber value-at-risk, we introduced 
three major pillars, according to which com-
panies can model their risk exposure: exist-
ing  vulnerabilities,  value  of  the  assets,  and 
profi le of an attacker. A complete cyber value-
at-risk  allows  us  to  answer  the  question: 
“Given a successful cyberattack, a company 
will lose not more than X amount of money 
over period of time with 95% accuracy.” The 
application of these models will depend on 
particular  industries,  companies,  and  avail-
able data and should be built for an organi-
zation. We discussed specifi c indicators that 
can  potentially  be  used  to  populate  the 
model.  Mathematically,  these  components 
can be brought together and used to build a 
stochastic  model.  For  example,  vulnerabili-
ties can be measured in the number of exist-
ing  unpatched  vulnerabilities,  not  up-to-
date software, number of successful compro-
mises,  or  results  of  internal  and  external 
audits.  They  can  be  benchmarked  against 
the maturity of existing controls and security 
of  networks,  applications,  data,  etc.  The 
maturity  of  defending  systems  has  to  be 
benchmarked  against  the  threat  environ-
ment,  hence  the  profi le  of  an  attacker  com-
ponent becomes important. In this model, it 
would be important to look into their moti-
vations  (e.g.,  fi nancial  gain,  destruction  of 
assets,  espionage),  the  tools  they  are  using, 
and  the  innovative  approaches.  Because 
cyber breaches are criminal activity, nontech-
nical factors, such as behavioral motivations, 
are to be considered. The component of the 
value of assets of many organizations is dif-
fi cult  to  establish.  This  includes  tangible 
assets, such as fi nancial fl ows, infrastructure, 
and products, and intangible assets, primarily 
data  assets  (customer  and  employee  data, 
business  strategies,  intellectual  property), 
brand, reputation, and trust of stakeholders. 
Although  cost  of  business  interruption  can 
be qualifi ed easier, the impact on intangible 
assets  is  still  subject  to  approximation.  The 

impact  of  losing  these  assets  can  be  unno-
ticed  in  the  short  term  but  may  hurt  long-
term  profi tability  and  market  leadership  of 
an organization.

The cyber value-at-risk model has a num-
ber  of  limitations,  including  availability  of 
data, diffi culties in calculating probabilities, 
and  applicability  across  various  industries, 
but it presents a fi rst step and incentives for 
organizations  to  move  toward  quantitative 
risk management. By publishing the model, 
we aimed to encourage more industry stake-
holders to develop comprehensive quantita-
tive approaches to cyber risks measurement 
and management. For further examples and 
information,  please  refer  to  Wipro’s  use  of 
cyber  value-at-risk  for  its  clients,  Deloitte’s 
continuous  development  cyber  value-at-
risk,  Rod  Becktom’s  cybervar  model,  and 
CXOWare’s  Cyber  Risk  application  model. 
The  Institute  of  Risk  Management  (IRM) 
announced  that  it  will  release  a  cyber  risk 
quantifi cation framework to help companies 
assess their cyber risks exposure. The call to 
action  from  the  Partnering  for  Cyber 
Resilience  effort  was  that  to  develop  a  uni-
fi ed  framework  that  can  be  used  by  indus-
tries to reduce uncertainty around cyber risks 
implications on businesses in the absence of 
dominant models and frameworks. Aon has 
defi ned important ways in which quantifi ca-
tion  of  cyberthreats  can  lead  to  better  busi-
ness decisions. First, as the conversation has 
shifted  from  technology  and  information 
security  departments  to  boardrooms,  the 
question  of  costs  and  risks  becomes  ever 
more prevalent. It helps show the scale and 
the  impact  that  cyberthreats  can  have  on 
fi nancial targets and overall competitiveness 
of  organizations;  helps  defi ne  and  narrow 
down  the  investments  required  to  mitigate 
those threats; makes it easy to paint compel-
ling pictures, build scenarios, and make busi-
ness cases; and helps make a determination 
whether  any  parts  of  the  risk  can  be  trans-
ferred.  Deloitte  has  put  together  a  compre-
hensive  model  for  modular  approach  to 
cyber  risk  measurement  introducing  the 
following  components:  probability  model 
(“attractiveness  and  resilience  determine 

  TOWARD CYBER RISKS MEASUREMENT   

breach  probability  distribution”);  hacker 
model  (mapping  out  motivations  of  adver-
saries in relation to the organization); attack 
model  (attack  types  and  characteristics); 
asset and loss model (potential loss given a 
successful  attack);  security  model  (describ-
ing  organizations’  security  posture),  and 
company  model  (modeling  organizations’ 
attractiveness  as  a  target).  Cyberpoint’s 
Cy-var  models  looks  at  “time-dependent 
valuation  of  assets”  while  taking  into 
account  an  organization’s  security  posture 
and includes variables such as the values of 
intellectual property assets, IT security con-
trols  in  place  to  protect  those  assets  and 
other  related  risks,  infrastructure  risks,  a 
time horizon, and a probability of an attack.
At the same time, all stakeholders came to 
agreement  that  quantifying  risks  is  a  chal-
lenging task. In a workshop organized togeth-
er with Deloitte, the World Economic Forum 
Partnering  for  Cyber  Resilience  members 
defi ned  the  attributes  of  an  ideal  model  of 
cyber risks quantifi cation: applicability across 
various  industries;  ease  of  interpretation  by 
experts and executives alike; association with 
real  data  and  measurable  security  events; 
scalability  across  organizations  or  even 
across the industry; at the same, not relying 
on data that are currently absent within most 
organizations.

Although  the  cyber  value-at-risk  frame-
work  doesn’t  specify  how  to  calculate  the 
fi nal  number,  it  presents  core  components 
and  gives  examples  of  how  these  compo-
nents  can  be  quantifi ed.  This  complete 
model,  however,  could  be  characterized  by 
general  applicability  across  various  indus-
tries. For it to be effective, it has to be vali-
dated  by  the  industry  stakeholders.  Cyber 
value-at-risk aimed to bring together “tech-
nical, behavioral and economic factors from 
both internal (enterprise) and external (sys-
temic) perspectives.” As a next step, it would 
be  important  to  understand  dependencies 
between  various  components  in  the  frame-
work and ways to incorporate these models 
into existing enterprise risk frameworks. It is 
important  to  remember  that  organizations 
should be wary of new emerging risks and 

  35  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

consider  cyber  risks  in  addition  to  broader 
technology or operational risks.

Overall, the goal was to help raise aware-
ness of cyber risks as a standing and regular 
cost of doing business and help fi nd a way 
to  measure  and  mitigate  those  risks.  This 
can  be  done  through  standardization  of 
various  risk  factors  and  indicators  into  a 
normal distribution.

The components that we looked at in this 
chapter help bring together various risk fac-
tors  via  “measures  of  risk  likelihood  and 
impact.” To achieve a more granular level of 
sophistication, quantifi cation and standardi-
zation  metrics  must  mature.  Some  of  the 
main cited obstacles are availability of data 
to  build  models,  lack  of  standardized  met-
rics and tools, lack of visibility within enter-
prise,  and  inability  to  collect  data  and 
dubbed models internally. The variables and 
components  of  the  model  can  be  brought 
together into a stochastic model, which will 
show  the  maximum  loss  given  a  certain 
probability  over  a  given  period  of  time.  It 
was discussed that close to real-time sharing 
of data between organizations could address 
some  of  the  main  challenges  of  datasets' 
availability  and  provide  enough  data  to 
build models.

Although a silver bullet to achieve cyber 
resilience  doesn’t  exist,  organizations  con-
sider comprehensive frameworks for quanti-
fying  and  mitigating  risk  factors,  including 
cyber  risks.  Following  this  model,  compa-
nies  will  assess  their  assets  and  existing 
controls, quantify vulnerabilities, and know 

their attackers and threats. The most signifi -
cant challenge so far is the absence of input 
variables,  quality  of  existing  datasets  and, 
following  these,  no  standardized  measures 
to assess cyber risk exposures. Building such 
a model would require efforts in data classi-
fi cation,  encourage  a  strong  organization 
leadership,  process  improvement  and  col-
laboration, as well improve decision making 
across various business areas. For example, 
the car industry, mortgage industry, or most 
insurances  have  agreed  on  a  standardized 
metrics and data collection; the same should 
happen 
for  cyber  risks  measurement. 
Understanding dependencies between these 
variables  and  what  they  mean  for  various 
industries  should  be  a  subject  for  cross-
industry  collaboration  so  that  input  varia-
bles  are  unifi ed.  The  main  benefi ts  of  this 
approach  are  seen  in  the  ability  to  support 
decision-making  processes,  quantify  the 
damage at a more granular level, and defi ne 
appropriate  investments.  This  would  help 
stimulate  the  development  of  risk  transfer 
markets  and  emergence  of  secondary  risk 
transfer products to mitigate and distribute 
the  risks.  For  organizations,  the  focus  will 
shift  from  an  attacker  to  assets  and  how  to 
secure  them  in  such  a  distributed  digital 
ecosystem,  where  everything  is  vulnerable. 
As  more  robust  quantitative  cyber  risks 
models emerge and the industries are mov-
ing  toward  a  standardized  recognizable 
model, the confi dence of digital ecosystems 
stakeholders and their ability to make effec-
tive decisions will also rise.

Based on Towards the Quantifi cation of Cyber 
Threats report.

■  36 

SecurityRoundtable.org

The evolving cyberthreat and an 
architecture for addressing it
Internet Security Alliance – Larry Clinton, CEO

According  to  the  Pentagon’s  2015  Annual  Report,  “The 
military’s  computer  networks  can  be  compromised  by 
low to meddling skilled attacks. Military systems do not 
have  a  suffi ciently  robust  security  posture  to  repel  sus-
tained attacks. The development of advanced cyber tech-
niques  makes  it  likely  that  a  determined  adversary  can 
acquire a foothold in most DOD systems and be in a posi-
tion to degrade DOD missions when and if they choose.”
If the cyber systems of the world’s most sophisticated 
and  best  funded  armed  forces  can  be  compromised  by 
“low to meddling skilled attacks,” how safe can we expect 
discount retailers, movie studios, or any other corporate 
or public systems to be?

That is not even the bad news.

■   Things are getting much worse: Three reasons
1. The system is getting weaker.
The bad news is that the cyber systems that have become 
the underpinning of virtually all of aspects of life in the 
digital age are becoming increasing less secure. There are 
multiple reasons for this distressing trend. First, the sys-
tem  is  getting  technologically  weaker.  Virtually  no  one 
writes code or develops “apps” from scratch. We are still 
relying  on  many  of  the  core  protocols  designed  in  the 
1970s  and  80s.  These  protocols  were  designed  to  be 
“open,”  not  secure.  Now  the  attacking  community  is 
going  back  through  these  core  elements  of  the  Internet 
and discovering still new vulnerabilities. So as new func-
tionalities come online, their own vulnerabilities are sim-
ply  added  to  the  existing  and  expanding  vulnerabilities 
they  are  built  upon.  The  reality  is  that  the  fabric  of  the 
Internet  is  riddled  with  holes,  and  as  we  continue  to 
stretch that fabric, it is becoming increasingly less secure.
Additionally,  vulnerabilities  in  many  open  source 
codes, widely in use for years, are becoming increasingly 
apparent  and  being  exploited  by  modern  “zero-day” 

37  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

attacks,  and  the  patching  system  we  have 
relied on to remediate the system can’t keep 
pace.  Huge  vulnerabilities 
such  as 
Heartbleed  and  Shellshock  have  existed 
within  open  source  code  for  years  only  to 
be  revealed  recently  when  scrutinized  by 
fresh eyes.

Within hours of the Heartbleed vulnerabil-
ity becoming public in 2014, there was a surge 
of  attackers  stepping  up  to  exploit  it.  The 
attackers  exploiting  the  vulnerability  were 
much faster than the vendors could patch it. 
This  is  a  growing  trend.  In  2014  it  took 
204 days, 22 days, and 52 days to patch the top 
three zero-day vulnerabilities. In 2013 it took 
only  four  days  for  patches  to  arrive.  Even 
more disturbing is that the top fi ve zero-day 
attacks in 2014 were actively used for a com-
bined 295 days before patches were available.
Moreover,  because  almost  no  one  builds 
from  scratch  anymore,  the  rate  of  adoption 
for open source programming as a core com-
ponent of new software greatly exceeds the 
vetting  process  for  many  applications.  As 
the code gets altered into new apps, the risks 
continue to multiply. In 2015 Symantec esti-
mates  there  are  now  more  than  a  million 
malicious apps in existence. In fast-moving, 
early  stage  industry,  developers  have  a 
strong  incentive  to  offer  new  functionality 
and features, but data protection and priva-
cy policies tend to be a lesser priority.

The risks created by the core of the system 
becoming  intrinsically  weaker  is  being  fur-
ther  magnifi ed  by  the  explosion  of  access 
points to the system, many with little or no 
security built into their development. Some 
analysts are already asserting that there are 
more  mobile  devices  than  there  are  people 
on the earth. If that is not yet literally true, it 
will shortly be.

It is now common for individuals to have 
multiple mobile devices and use them inter-
changeably for work and leisure often with-
out  substantial  security  settings.  Although 
this certainly poses a risk of data being stolen 
directly  from  smartphones,  the  greater  con-
cern  is  that  mobile  devices  are  increasingly 
conduits to the cloud, which holds increasing 
amounts  of  valuable  data.  The  number  of 

■  38 

new  access  points  to  large  amounts  of  data 
resulting from the explosion in the number of 
mobile devices vastly increases the challeng-
es to securing cyberspace.

However, the rise in use of mobile devices 
pales  in  comparison  to  the  coming  Internet 
of Things (IoT). The IoT, embedded comput-
ing  devices  with  Internet  connections, 
embraces a wide range of devices, including 
home security systems, cars, smart TVs, and 
security  cameras.  Like  the  bring-your-own-
device (BYOD) phenomenon, the coming of 
the IoT further undermines the overall secu-
rity of the system by dramatically increasing 
the  vectors,  making  every  new  employee’s 
internet-connected device, upon upgrade, a 
potential threat vector.

2. The bad guys are getting better.
Just  after  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  NSA 
coined a new term, the “APT,” which stood 
for  the  advanced  persistent  threat.  The  APT 
referred  to  ultrasophisticated  cyberattack 
methods  being  practiced  by  advanced 
nation-state actors. These attacks were char-
acterized  by  their  targeted  nature,  often 
focused  on  specifi c  people 
instead  of 
networks,  their  continued  and  evolving 
nature,  and  their  clever  social  engineering 
tactics. These were not “hackers” and “script 
kiddies.” These were pros for whom cyberat-
tacks were their day job.

They  were  also  characterized  by  their 
ability  to  compromise  virtually  any  target 
they  selected. APTs  routinely  compromised 
all  anti-virus  intrusion  detection  and  best 
practices.  They  made  perimeter  defense 
obsolete.

Now  these  same  attack  methods,  once 
practiced only by sophisticated nation-states, 
are  widely  in  use  by  common  criminals. 
Whereas a few years ago these attacks were 
confi ned to nations and the Defense Industrial 
Complex,  they  now  permeate  virtually  all 
economic sectors.

The APT now stands for the average persis-

tent threat.

The 

increasing  professionalism  and 
sophistication  of  the  attack  community  is 
fueled by the enormous profi ts cyberattacks 

  THE EVOLVING CYBERTHREAT AND AN ARCHITECTURE FOR ADDRESSING IT  

are  generating—routinely  estimated  in  the 
hundreds of billions of dollars and growing. 
It  is  now  apparent  that  attackers  are  not 
going to rely on reusing the same old meth-
ods. Instead, like any smart, successful, and 
growing  enterprise,  they  are  investing  in 
R&D  and  personnel  acquisition.  They  are 
seeking  to  grow  their  business,  including 
fi nding  new  vulnerabilities  in  older  infra-
structures  and  thus  widening  the  surface 
available for attack.

3. The economics of cybersecurity favor the attackers.
Cyberattacks are relatively cheap and easy to 
access.  Virtually  anyone  can  do  an  Internet 
search  and  fi nd  vendors  to  purchase  attack 
methods  for  a  comparatively  small  invest-
ment.  The  attacker’s  business  plans  are 
expansive  with  extremely  generous  profi t 
margins. Multiple reports suggest hundreds 
of billions of dollars in criminal cyber reve-
nue each year. They can use virtually identi-
cal attack methods against multiple targets. 
The  vast  interconnection  of  the  system 
allows attackers to exploit weaker links who 
have  permitted  access  to  more  attractive 
targets,  and  their  “market”  is  accessible  to 
them worldwide.

Meanwhile,  cyber  defense  tends  to  be 
almost  inherently  a  generation  behind  the 
attackers,  as  anticipating  the  method  and 
point of attack is extremely diffi cult. From a 
business  investment  perspective  it  is  hard 
to  show  return  on  investment  (ROI)  to 
attacks  that  are  prevented,  making  ade-
quate  funding  a  challenge.  Moreover,  law 
enforcement  is  almost  nonexistent—we 
successfully prosecute less than 2% of cyber 
criminals, so there is little to discourage the 
attackers from being bold. Furthermore, as 
we  have  already  illustrated,  notwithstand-
ing  consumers  tend  to  prefer  utility  and 
function  over  security,  which  provides  a 
disincentive for investors to enhance devic-
es  with  added  security,  which  often  slows 
or limits utility.

This  little-understood  imbalance  of  the 
economic  incentives  is  exacerbated  by  the 
fact that many of the technologies and busi-
ness  practices  that  have  recently  driven 

corporate  growth,  innovation,  and  profi ta-
bility also undermine cybersecurity.

Technologies such as VOIP or cloud com-
puting bring tremendous cost effi ciencies but 
dramatically  complicate  security.  Effi cient, 
even necessary, business practices such as the 
use of long supply chains and BYOD are also 
economically  attractive  but  extremely  prob-
lematic from a security perspective.

Corporate  boards  are  faced  with  the 
conundrum of needing to use technology to 
grow and maintain their enterprises without 
risking the corporate crown jewels or hard-
won public faith in the bargain. In addition, 
the  fears  and  potential  losses  from  cyber 
events tend to be speculative and future ori-
ented,  whereas  most  corporate  leaders  (as 
well as the citizen investors who have their 
401(k)s tied up in the stock market) tend to 
make their decisions with an eye toward the 
next quarter or two.

The national security equation
Finally,  from  the  national  security  perspec-
tive, Internet economics are also complicated. 
This  economic  puzzle  is  important  to  solve 
because  multiple  independent  studies  indi-
cate  that  the  number  one  problem  with 
securing critical infrastructure from cyberat-
tack  is  economic.  As  the  2014  National 
Infrastructure  Protection  Plan  makes  clear, 
the public and private sectors have aligned, 
but not identical, perspective on cybersecu-
rity  based  on  their  differing,  and  legally 
mandated, roles and obligations.

The  private  sector  is  legally  required  to 
invest  to  maximize  shareholder  value. 
Although shareholder value is enhanced to 
some degree by security investment, gener-
ally  security  is  considered  a  cost  center  in 
the corporate world. As with most corporate 
investments, security is a mater of cost ben-
efi t  for  the  private  sector.  What  this  trans-
lates to is that the private sector may legiti-
mately judge that there is a level of security 
that  goes  beyond  their  commercial  interest 
and hence their legally mandated obligation 
to  their  shareholders.  An  example  is  the 
common  case  of  pilfering  in  many  retail 
stores,  wherein  the  owner  may  be  aware 

  39  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

that 5% of his inventory is “walking out the 
back  door”  every  month.  The  reason  he 
doesn’t  hire  more  guards  or  put  up  more 
cameras or other security measures is that 
the cost benefi t presumably suggests it will 
cost him 6% to do so, and hence the better 
business decision is to tolerate this level of 
insecurity.

Government  doesn’t  have  that  luxury. 
The  government  is  charged  with  providing 
for  the  common  defense.  Surely,  they  have 
economic  considerations  with  respect  to 
security; however, they are also mandated to 
a higher level of security largely irrespective 
of cost to provide for national security, con-
sumer  protection,  privacy,  and  other  non-
economic considerations.

In  the  Internet  space,  government  and 
industry are using the same networks. This 
means the two users of the systems have dif-
fering  security  requirements—both  legiti-
mate  and  backed  by  lawful  authority. 
Moreover,  requiring  greater  cybersecurity 
spending,  beyond  commercial  interest  as 
suggested by some, could run afoul of other 
government  interests  such  as  promoting 
innovation, competitiveness, and job growth 
in a world economy (presumably not follow-
ing U.S.-based requirements).

Finally,  the  presumption  that  requiring 
increased  security  spending  by  commercial 
entities up to the government risk tolerance 
is in the corporate self-interest is complicat-
ed  by  the  data  that  have  emerged  after 
highly  publicized  cyber  breaches.  One  year 
after  the  Target  breach,  which  would  pre-
sumably damage the company’s image prof-
itability and reputation, Target’s stock price 
was  up  22%,  suggesting  such  predictions 
were incorrect. Similarly, 6 months after the 
high-profi le  cyberattacks  on  Sony  (the  sec-
ond  high-profi le  cyberattack  for  Sony  in  a 
few years), Sony’s stock price was up 26%.

■   Some good news: Enlightened policy working 

in partnership

Traditional regulatory efforts fail
In  2012  President  Obama  offered  a  legisla-
tive  proposal  to  Congress  suggesting  that 

■  40 

the  Department  of  Homeland  Security 
(DHS)  be  given  authority  to  set  minimum 
standards for cybersecurity over the private 
sector.  Subsequently  two  bills  were  offered 
in  the  Senate,  one  by  the  Chairman  of  the 
Senate  Commerce  Committee,  Senator  Jay 
Rockefeller  (D-WV)  with  Senator  Olympia 
Snow  (R-ME)  and  separately  by  Senate 
Homeland Security Chairman Joe Lieberman 
(D-CN)  and  Senator  Susan  Collins  (R-ME). 
Both bills largely followed the Obama para-
digm  of  DHS  setting  regulatory  mandates 
for the private sector with substantial penal-
ties available for noncompliance.

Despite  strong  backing  from  the  Senate 
Majority Leader Harry Reid and much of the 
military  establishment,  the  bills  could  not 
get  out  of  committee.  Even  though  Reid 
exercised his parliamentary power to control 
the  Senate  agenda,  there  was  not  enough 
support to even get the bills to the fl oor for 
consideration, let alone vote on it.

There was certainly industry opposition to 
these  bills,  but  what  killed  them  was  the 
bipartisan realization that the traditional reg-
ulatory model was an ill fi t for cybersecurity. 
Government agencies’ ability to craft regula-
tions  that  could  keep  up  with  cyberthreats 
was  highly  questionable.  Early  efforts  to 
apply  traditional  regulation  to  cyberspace, 
such  as  HIPAA  in  the  health-care  industry, 
had  not  generated  success.  Indeed  health 
care  is  widely  considered  one  of  the  least 
cyber secure of all critical infrastructures.

However,  with  cyber  systems  becoming 
increasingly ubiquitous and insecure threat-
ening  economic  development  and  national 
security,  there  was  obvious  need  for  an 
affi rmative and effective approach. The non-
regulatory,  collaborative  model  selected 
largely  followed  the  “social  contract”  para-
digm previously promoted by industry gov-
ernment analysts.

The social contract approach
In  2013  President  Obama  reversed  course 
180  degrees.  In  an  executive  order  on 
cybersecurity the president abandoned the 
government-centric  regulatory  approach 

  THE EVOLVING CYBERTHREAT AND AN ARCHITECTURE FOR ADDRESSING IT  

embodied  in  his  previous  legislative  pro-
posals and the Senate bills. Instead, he sug-
gested  a  public  private  partnership—a 
social  contract—that  would  address  the 
technical as well as economic issues that are 
precluding the development of a cyber sys-
tem that can become sustainably secure. In 
this new partnership, industry and govern-
ment  would  work  together  to  identify  a 
framework of standards and practices wor-
thy of industry based on cyber risk assess-
ments  conducted  by  the  companies.  The 
president  ordered  that  the  framework  be 
voluntary, prioritized, and cost effective. If 
there were an economic gap between what 
ought  to  be  done  and  what  would  be 
accomplished 
through  normal  market 
mechanisms,  a  set  of  market  incentives 
would be developed to promote voluntary 
adoption  of  the  framework.  Although 
industry  that  operates  under  regulatory 
systems would remain subject to regulatory 
authority,  no  new  regulatory  authority  for 
cybersecurity would be part of the system. 
Instead, a partnership system based on vol-
untary  use  of  consensus  standards  and 
practices  and  reinforced  through  market 
incentives would be built.

The cyber social contract model has sub-
stantial  precedent  in  the  history  of  infra-
structure development in the United States. 
In the early twentieth century the innovative 
technologies  were  telephony  and  electricity 
transport.  Initially  the  private  companies 
that provided these technologies, because of 
natural  economies,  served  primarily  high-
density and affl uent markets. Policy makers 
of  the  era  quickly  realized  that  there  was  a 
broader social good that would be served by 
having  universal  service  of  these  services 
but also realized that building out that infra-
structure  would  be  costly  and  uneconomic 
either for industry or government.

Instead  of  government  taking  over  the 
process  or  mandating  that  industry  make 
uneconomic  investment,  the  policy  makers 
designed  a  modern  social  contract  with 
industry.  If  industry  would  build  out  the 
networks and provide universal electric and 

telephone service at affordable rates, govern-
ment  would  guarantee  the  investment  pri-
vate  industry  would  make  in  building  and 
providing  the  service.  This  agreement 
ensured  enough  funds  to  build,  maintain, 
and upgrade the system plus make a reason-
able rate of return on the investment. Thus 
were born the privately owned public utili-
ties and the rate of return regulation system.
The result was that the U.S. quickly built 
out the electric and communications systems 
for the expanding nation, which were gener-
ally considered the best in the world. Some 
have argued this decision was foundational 
to  the  U.S.'s  rapid  expansion  and  develop-
ment,  which  turned  it  from  a  relatively 
minor power in the early part of the twenti-
eth century to the world’s dominant super-
power less than a generation later.

Although  the  Obama  social  contract 
approach  to  cybersecurity  has  different 
terms  than  that  of  previous  infrastructure 
development,  the  paradigm 
is  similar. 
Similar modifi cations of the incentive model 
are also in use in other areas of the economy, 
such as environment, agriculture, and trans-
portation, but this is the fi rst application in 
the cybersecurity fi eld.

Although  it  is  in  its  formative  stages,  at 
this point early indications for the social con-
tract approach are positive. The cybersecuri-
ty framework development process conduct-
ed by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) has been completed and 
received  virtually  unanimous  praise.  In  an 
exceedingly  rare  development,  the  Obama 
approach to cybersecurity closely tracks with 
that outlined by the House Republican Task 
Force  on  Cyber  Security.  Bipartisan  bills 
using liability incentives, instead of govern-
ment  mandates,  are  moving 
through 
Congress, and additional incentive programs 
are under development.

■   Conclusion
The  cybersecurity  problem  is  extremely 
serious  and  becoming  more  so.  An  inher-
ently  insecure  system  is  becoming  weaker. 
The  attack  community  is  becoming  more 

  41  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

sophisticated and enjoys massive economic 
incentives  over  the  defender  community. 
Traditional  government  methods  to  fi ght 
criminal  activity  have  not  matured  to 
address the threat and may be inappropri-
ate  to  meet  the  dynamic  nature  of  this 
uniquely  twenty-fi rst  century  problem. 
Fortunately,  at  least  the  U.S.  government 

seems to have developed a consensus strat-
egy  to  better  leverage  public  and  private 
resources  to  combat  cyberthreats  without 
excessively  compromising  other  critical 
social  needs. Although  there  are  some  ini-
tial signs of progress, the road to creating a 
sustainably  secure  cyber  system  will  be 
long and diffi cult.

■  42 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Effective cyber risk management: 
An integrated approach
Former CIO of the U.S. Department 
of Energy – Robert F. Brese

In its 2015 Data Breach Report, Verizon found that in 60% 
of the nearly 80,000 security incidents reviewed, including 
more than 2,000 confi rmed data breaches, cyber attackers 
were able to compromise an organization within minutes. 
Alarmingly,  only  about  one  third  of  the  compromises 
were discovered within days of their occurrence. This is 
not good news for C-suites and boardrooms. Data breach-
es, compromises in which data loss is unknown, denial of 
service  attacks,  destructive  malware,  and  other  types  of 
cybersecurity  incidents  can  lead  to  lost  revenue,  reputa-
tion  damage,  and  even  lawsuits,  as  well  as  short-  and 
long-term 
liabilities  affecting  a  company’s  future. 
Although “getting hacked” may seem, or even be, inevita-
ble,  the  good  news  is  that  by  taking  an  integrated 
approach  to  risk  management,  cybersecurity  risk  can  be 
effectively managed.

But  who  is  responsible  for  this  integrated  approach, 
and what does it include? Although often the case, man-
aging  cybersecurity  risk  should  not  be  left  solely  to  the 
chief  information  offi cer  (CIO)  and  chief  information 
security  offi cer  (CISO).  Even  though  these  professionals 
are  capable,  only  an  integrated  information  (i.e.,  data), 
information technology, and business approach will ena-
ble a company to effectively manage cybersecurity risk as 
a component of an organization’s overarching enterprise 
risk  program.  There  is  also  a  movement  for  board-level 
involvement  and  reporting,  resulting  in  a  risk  to  board 
members’  tenure  if  they  are  not  considered  to  be  suffi -
ciently  engaged  in  the  oversight  of  cybersecurity  risk 
management  and  incident  response.  As  an  example,  in 
2014,  Institutional  Shareholders  Services  (ISS)  recom-
mended that shareholders of Target stock vote against all 
seven of the directors that were on the board at the time of 
the  highly  publicized  2013  breach.  Although  somewhat 
shocking,  it  should  be  inherently  obvious  that  effective 

43  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

cybersecurity  risk  management  is  key  to 
meeting the fi duciary responsibilities of cor-
porate offi cers and the board.

To  ensure  success,  managing  cybersecu-
rity  risk  must  be  an  ongoing  and  iterative 
process, not a one-time, infrequent, or check-
the-box  activity.  This  area  of  risk  manage-
ment  must  grow  with  the  company  and 
change  with  ever-evolving  cyber  threats. 
Data  holdings  and  information  technology 
(IT)  systems,  and  the  Internet-connected 
environment in which they operate, change 
at a pace that is more rapid than many of the 
other variables affecting enterprise risk. Not 
only must the right stakeholders be engaged 
at  the  right  levels  within  an  organization, 
but  also  the  right  automated  tools  and 
processes  must  be  in  place  to  support  risk 
decision making and monitoring.

■   Perfect security is a myth
As in physical security, there is no such thing 
as  perfect  IT  (cyber)  security.  All  the  fi re-
walls,  encryption,  passwords,  and  patches 
available  cannot  create  a  zone  of  absolute 
safety  that  enables  a  company  to  operate 
unimpeded  and  free  of  concern  regarding 
the  cybersecurity  threat.  However,  perfect 
security is not required, or even desired. The 
effects of too little security are fairly obvious. 
However,  too  much  security  unnecessarily 
constricts the business’ ability to operate by 
reducing the effectiveness and effi ciency of a 
customer’s access to the company’s products 
and services and unnecessarily constraining 
internal  and  business-to-business  (B2B) 
interactions.  Effective  risk  management 
fi nds  the  balance  between  the  needs  of  the 
business to operate and the needs and cost of 
security. In fi nding this balance, the company 
will  be  able  to  compete  successfully  in  its 
market while protecting the critical informa-
tion and assets on which its success relies.

■   Enterprise risk management
Gartner, Inc., the world’s leading IT research 
and advisory company, has found that cyber-
security  risk  management  programs  have 
experienced trouble in scaling with corporate 
initiatives  in  mobility,  cloud,  big  data,  and 

■  44 

collaboration. They also predict that the digi-
tal  industrial  economy,  and  the  Internet  of 
Things (IoT), will result in even greater diffi -
culty. However, attempting to scale cyberse-
curity risk management in isolation from an 
organization’s  enterprise  risk  program  only 
exposes  the  organization  to  greater  risk  by 
creating a gap in risk oversight.

Nearly  every  company  has  established 
processes to manage enterprise risk. Larger 
companies  often  have  a  chief  risk  offi cer 
(CRO) or equivalent individual who is inde-
pendent  of  the  business  units  and  is  given 
the  authority  and  responsibility  to  manage 
the  enterprise  risk  processes.  Incorporating 
cybersecurity  into  the  mix  of  corporately 
managed  risks  should  be  a  priority.  Some 
may argue that cybersecurity is too different 
from the other risks a company faces, such as 
market  risk,  credit  risk,  currency  risk,  or 
physical  security  risk,  to  be  managed  in  a 
similar manner. However, although cyberse-
curity  may  seem  more  “technical,”  the 
desired  outcome  of  the  treatment  is  the 
same, that is to eliminate, mitigate, transfer, 
or accept risk affecting the company’s future. 
One  thing  is  certain:  not  all  cybersecurity 
risk  can  be  eliminated  through  controls  or 
transferred  through  insurance,  so  residual 
risk  must  accepted.  Making  good  decisions 
requires an integrated, formal approach.

■   The cybersecurity risk management process
There  are  several  key  steps  that  should  be 
taken  to  effectively  integrate  cybersecurity 
risk  management  into  the  company’s  enter-
prise risk management process. This chapter 
doesn’t attempt to explain the details of any 
particular process but instead focuses on com-
mon attributes that should be used, including 
risk framing and assessment, controls assess-
ment, risk decision-making, residual risk sign-
off, risk monitoring, and accountability. Figure 1 
provides  a  visual  of  the  process.  For  addi-
tional details on approaches to cybersecurity 
risk  management,  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) Computer 
Security  Resource  Center  (CSRC),  interna-
tional  standards  organizations,  and  other 
industry sources may be consulted.

  EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  

FIGURE

The cybersecurity risk management process

Risk

Framing &
Assessment

Controls

Assessment

Accountability

Risk

Decision
Making

Residual

Risk Sign-off

Risk

Monitoring

Risk  Framing  and  Assessment:  The  ini-
tial  activities  in  risk  management  include 
risk  framing  and  assessment  and  controls 
assessment.  CIOs  and  CISOs  have  been 
assessing  the  risk  to  IT  systems  for  many 
years and are well informed on the range of 
cybersecurity  threats  and  vulnerabilities 
that affect corporate risk. However, the con-
sequences  (i.e.,  business  impact)  may  or 
may not be well understood, depending on 
how close the relationship between IT and 
the line of business leaders has been in the 
past.  The  engagement  between  IT  and  the 
line of business owners is crucial and must 
result in clarity about the type and amount 
of risk the business is willing to accept with 
respect to the

confi dentiality 
disclosure);

(preventing  unauthorized 

integrity (preventing unauthorized modifi ca-
tion or destruction); and

availability  (ensuring  data  and  systems  are 
operational when needed)

of the information and systems on which 
the business relies. Once IT understands the 
business  owner’s  risk  threshold,  the  CIO 
and  CISO  can  begin  planning,  implement-
ing,  and  assessing  the  appropriate  security 
controls.

Controls  Assessment:  Preparing  an 
appropriate  response  to  risk  requires  the 
assessment  of  potential  controls.  Controls 
include all of the tools, tactics, and processes 

a  company  has  to  avoid,  mitigate,  share, 
transfer, or accept risk. This means that cor-
porate  structure,  training  and  awareness 
programs,  physical  security,  and  other 
options should be considered in addition to 
traditional IT controls. Cyber insurance may 
also  be  considered.  Again,  the  CIO  and 
CISO cannot do this alone, and there should 
be active engagement across all the various 
business  lines,  business  support,  and  IT 
organizations  that  can  contribute  to  identi-
fying potential controls and the impact they 
may have on cybersecurity risk.

Risk Decision Making: A crucial element 
of risk response is the decision-making pro-
cess. Decisions are made regarding what will 
be  done  and  what  will  not  be  done  in 
response  to  each  risk.  A  balance  must  be 
struck  between  protecting  systems  and 
information and the need to effectively run 
the  business  that  relies  on  them.  Other  fac-
tors  that  should  be  considered  include  the 
amount  of  risk  reduction  related  to  imple-
mentation  and  maintenance  costs  and  the 
impacts on employee training and certifi ca-
tion requirements.

An acceptable course of action is identi-
fi ed and agreed to by the business, and then 
controls are implemented and initially eval-
uated  for  effectiveness.  If  the  controls  per-
form acceptably, then the sign-off and moni-
toring  processes  can  begin.  If  not,  then  a 
new  course  of  action  must  be  developed, 
which  may  require  further  controls  assess-
ment  to  respond  to  the  risk  or  even  addi-
tional framing and assessment to adjust the 
risk tolerance.

  45  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

Residual  Risk  Sign-Off:  The  sign-off  of 
residual risk closes the decision-making pro-
cess. This should be the role of the business 
because it is the operational customer of the 
risk management process. Additionally, this 
should  be  a  formal,  documented  activity. 
The  decisions  on  how  each  risk  will  be 
treated and/or accepted must be articulated 
in  a  manner  such  that  the  signatory  and 
reviewers  (i.e.,  regulators,  etc.)  can  clearly 
understand the risk treatment plan and the 
residual risk being accepted. Once the resid-
ual  risk  is  formally  accepted,  the  system  is 
typically  placed  into  operation.  The  formal 
recognition  of  the  residual  risk  also  helps 
build a culture of risk awareness in the busi-
ness units.

Risk  Monitoring:  Monitoring  risk  is  an 
ongoing process. Each monitoring activity is 
designed with a purpose, type, and frequen-
cy  of  monitoring.  Typically,  a  risk  register 
has been developed during the risk framing 
and  assessment  phase  and 
leveraged 
throughout all steps of the risk management 
process.  The  register  also  serves  as  a  refer-
ence  for  auditors.  The  register  should  con-
tain  the  risks  that  matter  most  and  be  rou-
tinely updated and reviewed with the busi-
ness over time. If the likelihood or severity 
of consequences changes, or if other physical 
or  IT  environmental  factors  change,  the 

TABLE

treatment plan and/or the accepted level of 
residual risk may require revision. If so, the 
previous  process  steps  should  be  revisited. 
The  frequency  of  review  should  be  in  rela-
tion to the likelihood and severity of the risk. 
Because most companies have a large num-
ber  of  systems,  each  with  their  own  risk 
register,  an  automated  system  is  typically 
used to aid monitoring and review.

to 

Accountability:  Last  and  most  important, 
we  have 
consider  accountability. 
Accountability  is  not  about  who  to  blame 
when something goes wrong. As stated earli-
er, the likelihood of something going wrong is 
high.  Accountability  ensures  a  formal  risk 
management  process  is  followed  and  that 
effective  decision-making  is  occurring.  One 
person  should  be  accountable  for  the  risk 
management  process;  however,  numerous 
individuals will be 
or 
responsible 
accountable 
for 
the  various  steps, 
and  many  more 
will  be  consulted 
informed 
and 
along 
the  way. 
One  option 
to 
ensure  roles  and 
responsibilities are 
clearly  articulated 

A responsibility assign-
ment matrix (RAM), also 
known as RACI matrix/
'reisi:/ or ARCI matrix 
or linear responsibility 
chart (LRC), describes 
the participation by var-
ious roles in completing 
tasks or deliverables for 
a project or business 
process.

Process Step

CIO

CISO

LOB

CRO

Risk Framing and 
Assessment

Controls Assessment

Risk Decision-Making

Residual Risk Sign-Off

Risk Monitoring

Accountability

A

A

C

C

A

R

R

R

R

R

R

C

C

C

A

A

C

C

C

I

C

I

C

A

CEO

C

I

I

I

I

C

Board

C

I

I

I

I

C

■  46 

  EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  

is by using a RACI matrix (see insert) to iden-
tify which person or organization is responsi-
ble, accountable, consulted, or informed. Table 
1 provides an example but should be adjusted 
to  align  to  the  enterprise  risk  management 
and governance processes of the company.

■   Information supporting cybersecurity risk 

management

No  risk  management  is  a  precise  science, 
including  cybersecurity  risk  management. 
Throughout  the  risk  management  process, 
the information required for success has to be 
“good enough” to recognize and understand 
risks to the level necessary to support effec-
tive  decision-making.  Although  complex 
mathematical  models  may  work  to  manage 
some risks the company faces, forcibly creat-
ing objectivity when little or none exists can 
actually result in poor or ineffective decisions 
by  creating  a  focus  on  the  numbers  rather 
than on the meaning of the risk analysis. So, 
using big bucket approach categories such as 
low,  moderate,  and  high  or  unlikely,  likely, 
and very likely may be adequate.

■   Stakeholder engagement
A key success factor of ensuring that fi duci-
ary responsibilities are fulfi lled in a compa-
ny’s  cybersecurity  risk  management  pro-
gram is the right level of stakeholder engage-
ment.  Leaving  the  program  to  the  CRO  or 
the CIO alone should not be considered due 
diligence.  Framing  and  assessing  risk 
requires a clear understanding of corporate 
risk  tolerance.  The  line  of  business  lead 
should have the responsibility to sign off on 
the residual risk, but to make good risk deci-
sions,  the  perspectives  of  other  individuals 
and  organizations  in  the  company  must  be 
consulted  and  taken  into  consideration. 
Depending on the system(s) for which risk is 
being  evaluated,  some  potential  stakehold-
ers  include  the  CIO,  CISO,  chief  fi nancial 
offi cer (CFO), legal counsel, and other line of 
business owners and external partners with 
supporting  or  dependent  relationships.  If 
there is signifi cant potential to affect the cus-
tomer  experience,  there  may  be  a  need  to 

conduct  user  acceptance  testing  or  experi-
ence surveys as well.

■   Evaluating maturity of an organization’s 
cybersecurity risk management program

Cybersecurity  risk  management  programs 
aren’t  born  effective  and  are  not  immedi-
ately  prepared  to  scale  with  the  business. 
Equally  important  as  making  effective  risk 
management decisions and accepting resid-
ual risk is the continuous evaluation of the 
process  itself.  Numerous  IT,  cybersecurity, 
and  business  consultants,  as  well  as  trade 
associations  have  published  guidance, 
checklists,  and  suggested  questions  for 
board  members.  Although  there  are  many 
ways  for  the  C-suite  and  board  to  stay 
engaged,  a  company’s  cybersecurity  risk 
management  program  must  continuously 
mature  to  ensure  future  success.  To  under-
stand a program’s growing maturity, ques-
tions  should  be  focused  on  evaluating 
improvements  in  how  well  risk  is  under-
stood and treated, the effectiveness of busi-
ness leader and general employee participa-
tion,  how  responsive  the  risk  management 
process  is  to  change,  and  the  capability  to 
effectively respond to an incident.

How  consistent  is  the  understanding  of 
the  company’s  tolerance  for  cybersecurity 
risk across the C-suite and senior managers? 
How  deep  in  the  organization  does  this 
understanding go?

How  well  do  line  of  business  owners 
understand the cybersecurity risks associat-
ed with their business? Are sound and effec-
tive  risk  management  and  acceptance  deci-
sions being made in a timely manner to meet 
business needs?

How clearly are roles and responsibilities 
understood,  and  how  well  do  role  owners 
adhere  to  and  fulfi ll  their  responsibilities? 
Do  employees  report  cybersecurity  issues 
and are they incorporated into the risk mon-
itoring process?

When threats, vulnerabilities, or other con-
ditions  change,  does  the  risk  management 
process  respond  and,  when  necessary,  make 
sustainable changes to the risk treatment plan?

  47  ■

INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE

How  effective  is  the  cyber  incident 
response plan? Is it regularly exercised and 
are lessons learned from exercises and prior 
incidents leveraged to improve the plan?

■   Effective communications
Long-term effectiveness in cybersecurity risk 
management requires all employees to fulfi ll 
their  responsibilities  of  the  security  of  the 
organization  for  which  they  work.  Creating 
a  company  culture  of  cybersecurity  risk 
awareness is critical and is fostered through 
effective  communications.  Leadership  must 
understand  how  risk  is  being  measured 
across the enterprise, articulate what level is 
acceptable, and balance the cost they are will-
ing incur for this level of security. Employees 
must  understand  the  basics  of  the  various 
cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities and 
the  importance  of  their  daily  decisions  and 
actions  as  they  go  about  their  business. 
Regular training and awareness activities are 
essential and can be similar to the “see some-
thing,  say  something”  campaigns  related  to 
physical  security.  Additionally,  employees 
must be empowered and rewarded for iden-
tifying cybersecurity issues.

Communications  are  also  important  to 
build strong relationships, not only through 
customer assurances but also with external 
partners  and  suppliers.  Communicating 
cybersecurity  requirements  and  expecta-
tions to business partners can improve risk 

to  mitigating 

decision-making as well as lead to coopera-
tive  approaches 
risk. 
Cybersecurity  risks  also  exist  in  the  supply 
chain,  and  communicating  cybersecurity 
requirements  and  vetting  suppliers  for  cer-
tain critical components or services can effec-
tively reduce risk. Had Target, Home Depot, 
and  certain  other  high-profi le  cyberattack 
victims built stronger cybersecurity relation-
ships  with  external  partners,  their  risk  of 
becoming a victim may have been reduced.

■   Conclusion
C-suites and boards should not fear cyberse-
curity. By integrating cybersecurity risk man-
agement into the enterprise risk management 
process  and  by  effectively  engaging  IT  and 
business executives, cybersecurity risk can be 
understood  and  managed.  Building  a  risk-
aware  culture  is  important  to  ensuring  the 
quality  of  the  ongoing  risk  monitoring  pro-
cess.  When  cyberthreats  and  vulnerabilities 
are  regularly  evaluated,  employees  are 
empowered  to  report  issues  and  business 
executives are aware of potential impacts to 
their operations, the company’s cybersecuri-
ty  defenses  become  more  agile  and  respon-
sive and the overall risk remains under con-
trol. Finally, continuous evaluation of the risk 
management process, including its effective-
ness  and  responsiveness  to  change  and  to 
incidents, is necessary to ensure effectiveness 
is sustained.

■  48 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Cyber risk and the 
board of directors

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

The risks to boards of directors 
and board member obligations
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP – Antony Kim, Partner; 
Aravind Swaminathan, Partner; and Daniel Dunne, Partner

As cyberattacks and data breaches continue to accelerate 
in number and frequency, boards of directors are focusing 
increasingly on the oversight and management of corpo-
rate  cybersecurity  risks.  Directors  are  not  the  only  ones. 
An  array  of  federal  and  state  enforcement  agencies  and 
regulators, most notably the Department of Justice (DOJ), 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  Financial  Industry 
Regulatory  Authority  (FINRA),  and  state  Attorneys 
General,  among  others,  identify  board  involvement  in 
enterprise-wide cybersecurity risk management as a cru-
cial factor in companies’ ability to appropriately establish 
priorities,  facilitate  adequate  resource  allocation,  and 
effectively respond to cyberthreats and incidents. As SEC 
Commissioner  Luis  A.  Aguilar  recently  noted,  “Boards 
that  choose  to  ignore,  or  minimize,  the  importance  of 
cybersecurity  responsibility  do  so  at  their  own  peril.”1 
Indeed, even apart from the regulators, aggressive plain-
tiffs’  lawyers,  and  activist  shareholders  are  similarly 
demanding that boards be held accountable for cyberse-
curity. Shareholder derivative actions and activist investor 
campaigns  to  oust  directors  are  becoming  the  norm  in 
high-profi le security breaches.

Directors have clearly gotten the message. A survey by 
the  NYSE  Governance  Services  (in  partnership  with  a 
leading  cybersecurity  fi rm)  found  that  cybersecurity  is 
discussed at 80% of all board meetings. However, the same 
survey  revealed  that  only  34%  of  boards  are  confi dent 
about their respective companies’ ability to defend them-
selves against a cyberattack. More troubling, a June 2015 
study by the National Association of Corporate Directors 
found that only 11% of respondents believed their boards 
possessed a high level of understanding of the risks associ-
ated with cybersecurity.2 This is a diffi cult position to be in: 
aware of the magnitude of the risks at hand but struggling 

51  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

to understand and fi nd solutions to address 
and mitigate them.

In this chapter, we explore the legal obli-
gations of boards of directors, the risks that 
boards  face  in  the  current  cybersecurity 
landscape,  and  strategies  that  boards  may 
consider in mitigating that risk to strengthen 
the corporation and their standing as dutiful 
directors.

 I.  Obligations of Board Members

The term “cybersecurity” generally refers to 
the  technical,  physical,  administrative,  and 
organizational safeguards that a corporation 
implements  to  protect,  among  other  things, 
“personal  information,”3  trade  secrets  and 
other intellectual property, the network and 
associated  assets,  or  as  applicable,  “critical 
infrastructure.”4 This defi nition alone should 
leave no doubt that a board of directors’ role 
in  protecting  the  corporation’s  “crown  jew-
els” is essential to maximizing the interests of 
the corporation’s shareholders.

Generally, directors owe their corporation 
fi duciary duties of good faith, care, and loy-
alty,  as  well  as  a  duty  to  avoid  corporate 
waste.3 The specifi c contours of these duties 
are  controlled  by  the  laws  of  the  state  in 
which the company is incorporated, but the 
basic  principles  apply  broadly  across  most 
jurisdictions  (with  Delaware  corporations 
law often leading the way). More specifi cal-
ly, directors are obligated to discharge their 
duties  in  good  faith,  with  the  care  an  ordi-
narily prudent person would exercise in the 
conduct  of  his  or  her  own  business  under 
similar circumstances, and in a manner that 
the director reasonably believes to be in the 
best interests of the corporation. To encour-
age individuals to serve as directors and to 
free corporate decision making from judicial 
second-guessing, courts apply the “business 
judgment  rule.”  In  short,  courts  presume 
that  directors  have  acted  in  good  faith  and 
with reasonable care after obtaining all mate-
rial information, unless proved otherwise; a 
powerful  presumption  that  is  diffi cult  for 
plaintiffs  to  overcome,  and  has  led  to  dis-
missal  of  many  legal  challenges  to  board 

■  52 

action  or  inaction.  To  maximize  their  per-
sonal protection, directors must ensure that, 
if the unthinkable happens and their corpo-
ration falls victim to a cybersecurity disaster, 
they have already taken the steps necessary 
to  preserve  this  critical  defense  to  personal 
liability.

In the realm of cybersecurity, the board of 
directors has “risk oversight” responsibility: 
the board does not itself manage cybersecurity 
risks; instead, the board oversees the corpo-
rate systems that ensure that management is 
doing so effectively. Generally, directors will 
be  protected  by  the  business  judgment  rule 
and will not be liable for a failure of oversight 
unless there is a “sustained or systemic fail-
ure of the board to exercise oversight—such 
as an utter failure to attempt to assure a rea-
sonable  information  and  reporting  system 
exists.” This is known as the Caremark test,5 
and  there  are  two  recognized  ways  to  fall 
short:  fi rst,  the  directors  intentionally  and 
entirely fail to put any reporting and control 
system in place; or second, if there is a report-
ing and control system, the directors refuse to 
monitor  it  or  fail  to  act  on  warnings  they 
receive from the system.

The risk that directors will face personal 
liability  is  especially  high  where  the  board 
has  not  engaged  in  any  oversight  of  their 
corporations’  cybersecurity  risk.  This  is  a 
rare case, but other risks are more prevalent. 
For example, a director may fail to exercise 
due  care  if  he  or  she  makes  a  decision  to 
discontinue  funding  an  IT  security  project 
without  getting  any  briefi ng  about  current 
cyberthreats  the  corporation  is  facing,  or 
worse, after being advised that termination 
of  the  project  may  expose  the  company  to 
serious threats. If an entirely uninformed or 
reckless decision to de-fund renders the cor-
poration vulnerable to known or anticipated 
risks  that  lead  to  a  breach,  the  members  of 
the board of directors could be individually 
liable for breaching their Caremark duties.

 II.  The Personal Liability Risk to Directors

Boards of directors face increasing litigation 
risk in connection with their responsibilities 

  THE RISKS TO BOARDS OF DIRECTORS AND BOARD MEMBER OBLIGATIONS  

for  cybersecurity  oversight,  particularly  in 
the form of shareholder derivative litigation, 
where  shareholders  sue  for  breaches  of 
directors’ fi duciary duties to the corporation. 
The rise in shareholder derivative suits coin-
cides  with  a  2013  Supreme  Court  decision 
limiting the viability of class actions that fail 
to  allege  a  nonspeculative  theory  of  con-
sumer  injury  resulting  from  identity  theft.6 
Because  of  a  lack  of  success  in  consumer 
class  actions,  plaintiffs’  lawyers  have  been 
pivoting to shareholder derivative litigation 
as  another  opportunity  to  profi t  from  mas-
sive data breaches.

In  the  last  fi ve  years,  plaintiffs’  lawyers 
have  initiated  shareholder  derivative  litiga-
tion  against  the  directors  of  four  corpora-
tions that suffered prominent data breaches: 
Target  Corporation,  Wyndham  Worldwide 
Corporation,  TJX  Companies,  Inc.,  and 
Heartland  Payment  Systems,  Inc.  Target, 
Heartland, and TJX each were the victims of 
signifi cant cyberattacks that resulted in the 
theft of approximately 110, 130, and 45 million 
credit  cards,  respectively.  The  Wyndham 
matter, on the other hand, involved the theft 
of  only  approximately  600,000  customer 
records;  however,  unlike  the  other  three 
companies,  it  was  Wyndham’s  third  data 
breach in approximately 24 months that got 
the company and its directors in hot water. 
The signs point to Home Depot, Inc., being 
next  in  line.  A  Home  Depot  shareholder 
recently brought suit in Delaware seeking to 
inspect certain corporate books and records. 
A “books and records demand” is a common 
predicate for a shareholder derivative action, 
and  this  particular  shareholder  has  already 
indicated that the purpose of her request is 
to  determine  whether  Home  Depot’s  man-
agement breached fi duciary duties by failing 
to  adequately  secure  payment  information 
on its data systems, allegedly leading to the 
exposure of up to 56 million customers’ pay-
ment card information.

Although  there  is  some  variation  in  the 
derivative claims brought to date, most have 
focused on two allegations: that the directors 
breached their fi duciary duties by making a 
decision that was ill-advised or negligent, or 

by  failing  to  act  in  the  face  of  a  reasonably 
known  cybersecurity  threat.  Recent  cases 
have included allegations that directors:

 䊏 failed  to  implement  and  monitor  an 

effective cybersecurity program;

 䊏 failed  to  protect  company  assets  and 
business  by  recklessly  disregarding 
cyberattack risks and ignoring red fl ags;

 䊏 failed 

to 

implement  and  maintain 
internal  controls  to  protect  customers’ 
or  employees’  personal  or  fi nancial 
information;

 䊏 failed  to  take  reasonable  steps  to  timely 
notify  individuals  that  the  company’s 
information  security  system  had  been 
breached;

 䊏 caused  or  allowed  the  company  to 
disseminate  materially 
and 
misleading statements to shareholders (in 
some instances, in company fi lings).

false 

Board members may not be protected from 
liability by the exculpation clauses in their 
corporate  charters.  Although  virtually  all 
corporate  charters  exculpate  board  mem-
bers  from  personal  liability  to  the  fullest 
extent of the law, Delaware law, for exam-
ple,  prohibits  exculpation  for  breaches  of 
the duty of loyalty, or breaches of the duty 
of  good  faith  involving  “intentional  mis-
conduct”  or  “knowing  violations  of  law.” 
As a result, because the Delaware Supreme 
Court  has  characterized  a  Caremark  viola-
tion  as  a  breach  of  the  duty  of  loyalty,7 
exculpation  of  directors  for  Caremark 
breaches  may  be  prohibited.  In  addition, 
with  the  myriad  of  federal  and  state  laws 
that touch on privacy and security, directors 
may  also  lose  their  immunity  based  on 
“knowing  violations  of  law.”  Given  the 
nature of shareholder allegations in deriva-
tive  litigation,  these  are  important  consid-
erations,  and  importantly,  vary  depending 
on the state of incorporation.

Directors should also be mindful of stand-
ard  securities  fraud  claims  that  can  be 
brought against companies in the wake of a 
data  breach.  Securities  laws  generally  pro-
hibit public companies from making material 

  53  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

statements  of  fact  that  are  false  or  mislead-
ing. As companies are being asked more and 
more  questions  about  data  collection  and 
protection  practices,  directors  (and  offi cers) 
should  be  careful  about  statements  that  are 
made regarding the company’s cybersecurity 
posture and should focus on tailoring cyber-
security-related  risk  disclosures  in  SEC  fi l-
ings  to  address  the  specifi c  threats  that  the 
company faces.

Cybersecurity  disclosures  are  of  keen 
interest  to  the  SEC,  among  others.  Very 
recently,  the  SEC  warned  companies  to  use 
care in making disclosures about data secu-
rity and breaches and has launched inquiries 
to  examine  companies’  practices  in  these 
areas.  The  SEC  also  has  begun  to  demand 
that  directors  (and  boards)  take  a  more 
active role in cybersecurity risk oversight.

Litigation is not the only risk that direc-
tors  face.  Activist  shareholders—who  are 
also  customers/clients  of  corporations—
and  proxy  advisors  are  challenging  the  re-
election of directors when they perceive that 
the board did not do enough to protect the 
corporation  from  a  cyberattack.  The  most 
prominent example took place in connection 
with Target’s data breach. In May 2014, just 
weeks  after  Target  released 
its  CEO, 
Institutional  Shareholder  Services  (ISS),  a 
leading  proxy  advisory  fi rm,  urged  Target 
shareholders  to  seek  ouster  of  seven  of 
Target’s ten directors for “not doing enough 
to  ensure  Target’s  systems  were  fortifi ed 
against security threats” and for “failure to 
provide  suffi cient  risk  oversight”  over 
cybersecurity.

Thoughtful,  well-planned  director 
involvement  in  cybersecurity  oversight,  as 
explained below, is a critical part of a com-
prehensive program, including indemnifi ca-
tion  and  insurance,  to  protect  directors 
against  personal 
liability  for  breaches. 
Moreover, it can also assist in creating a com-
pelling narrative that is important in brand 
and reputation management (as well as liti-
gation  defense)  that  the  corporation  acted 
responsibly  and  reasonably  (or  even  more 
so) in the face of cybersecurity threats.

■  54 

 III. Protecting Boards of Directors

From  a  litigation  perspective,  boards  of 
directors  can  best  protect  themselves  from 
shareholder derivative claims accusing them 
of  breaching  their  fi duciary  duties  by  dili-
gently overseeing the company’s cybersecu-
rity program and thereby laying the founda-
tion  for  invoking  the  business  judgment 
rule.  Business  judgment  rule  protection  is 
strengthened  by  ensuring  that  board  mem-
bers receive periodic briefi ngs on cybersecu-
rity  risk  and  have  access  to  cyber  experts 
whose  expertise  and  experience  the  board 
members  can  rely  on  in  making  decisions 
about  what  to  do  (or  not  to  do)  to  address 
cybersecurity risks. Most importantly, direc-
tors cannot recklessly ignore the information 
they receive, but must ensure that manage-
ment  is  acting  reasonably  in  response  to 
reported  information  the  board  receives 
about risks and vulnerabilities.

Operationally,  a  board  can  exercise  its 
oversight in a number of ways, including by 
(a) devoting board meeting time to presenta-
tions  from  management  responsible  for 
cybersecurity and discussions on the subject, 
to help the board become better acquainted 
with  the  company’s  cybersecurity  posture 
and  risk  landscape;  (b)  directing  manage-
ment to implement a cybersecurity plan that 
incentivizes  management  to  comply  and 
holds  it  accountable  for  violations  or  non-
compliance; (c) monitoring the effectiveness 
of such plan through internal and/or exter-
nal  controls;  and  (d)  allocating  adequate 
resources  to  address  and  remediate  identi-
fi ed  risks.  Boards  should  invest  effort  in 
these  actions,  on  a  repeated  and  consistent 
basis,  and  make  sure  that  these  actions  are 
clearly documented in board and committee 
packets, minutes, and reports.
 

(a)  Awareness.  Boards  should  consider 
appointing a chief information security 
offi cer  (CISO),  or  similar  offi cer,  and 
meet  regularly  with  that  individual 
and  other  experts  to  understand  the 
threat 
company’s  risk 
actors,  and  strategies 
to  address 

landscape, 

  THE RISKS TO BOARDS OF DIRECTORS AND BOARD MEMBER OBLIGATIONS  

that  risk.  Appointing  a  CISO  has  an 
additional benefi t. Reports suggest that 
companies that have a dedicated CISO 
detected  more  security  incidents  and 
reported lower average fi nancial losses 
per incident.8
     Boards should also task a committee 
or  subcommittee  with  responsibility 
for cybersecurity oversight, and devote 
time  to  getting  updates  and  reports 
on  cybersecurity  from  the  CISO  on 
a  periodic  basis.  As  with  audit 
committees  and  accountants,  boards 
can  improve  oversight  by  recruiting 
a  board  member  with  aptitude  for 
the  technical  issues  that  cybersecurity 
presents, and placing that individual on 
the  committee/subcommittee  tasked 
with  responsibility  for  cybersecurity 
oversight. Cybersecurity presentations, 
however, need not be overly technical. 
Management  should  use  established 
analytical risk frameworks, such as the 
National  Institute  for  Standards  and 
Technology “Framework for Improving 
Critical  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity,” 
(usually  referred  to  as  the  “NIST 
Cybersecurity  Framework”)  to  assess 
and measure the corporation’s current 
cybersecurity  posture.  These  kinds 
of  frameworks  are  critical  tools  that 
have  an  important  role  in  bridging 
the communication and expertise gaps 
between  directors  and  information 
security  professionals  and  can  also 
help  translate  cybersecurity  program 
maturity  into  metrics  and  relative 
relationship  models  that  directors  are 
accustomed to using to make informed 
decisions  about  risk.  It  is  principally 
through  their  use  that  directors  can 
become 
to 
exercise good business judgment.

sufficiently 

informed 

implementation 

and 
enforcement. Boards should require that 
management implement an enterprise-
wide  cybersecurity  risk  management 
plan and align management’s incentives 
to  meet  those  goals.  Although  the 

(b)  Plan 

 

 

 

 

(c)  Monitor 

builds 

systems, 

details  of  any  cybersecurity  risk 
management  plan  should  differ  from 
company  to  company,  the  CISO  and 
management  should  prepare  a  plan 
that  includes  proactive  cybersecurity 
assessments of the company’s network 
and 
employee 
awareness  of  cybersecurity  risk  and 
requires  periodic  training,  manages 
engagements  with  third  parties  that 
are  granted  access  to  the  company’s 
network  and  information,  builds  an 
incident  response  plan,  and  conducts 
simulations  or  “tabletop”  exercises  to 
practice and refi ne that plan. The board 
should  further  consider  incentivizing 
the CISO and management for company 
compliance  with  cybersecurity  policies 
and procedures (e.g., bonus allocations 
for  meeting  certain  benchmarks)  and 
create  mechanisms  for  holding  them 
responsible for noncompliance.

compliance.  With 

an 
enterprise-wide  cybersecurity  risk 
management  plan  fi rmly  in  place, 
boards  of  directors  should  direct 
that  management  create  internal  and 
external controls to ensure compliance 
and  adherence  to  that  plan.  Similar 
to  internal  fi nancial  controls,  boards 
should direct management to test and 
certify  compliance  with  cybersecurity 
policies and procedures. For example, 
assuming that management establishes 
a  policy  that  software  patches  be 
installed  within  30  days  of  release, 
management  would  conduct  a  patch 
audit,  confi rm  that  all  patches  have 
been  implemented,  and  have  the 
CISO certify the results. Alternatively, 
boards  can  also  retain  independent 
cybersecurity  fi rms  that  could  be 
engaged  by  the  board  to  conduct  an 
audit,  or  validate  compliance  with 
cybersecurity policies and procedures, 
just  as  they  would  validate  fi nancial 
results in a fi nancial audit.

(d)  Adequate  resource  allocation.  With 
information  in  hand  about  what  the 

  55  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

company’s  cybersecurity  risks  are, 
and an analysis of its current posture, 
boards  should  allocate  adequate 
resources to address those risks so that 
management  is  appropriately  armed 
and funded to protect the company.

As  criminals  continue  to  escalate  the  cyber-
war, boards of directors will increasingly fi nd 
themselves  on  the  frontlines  of  regulatory, 
class  plaintiff,  and  shareholder  scrutiny. 
Directors are well-advised to proactively ful-
fi ll  their  risk  oversight  functions  by  driving 
senior management toward a well-developed 
and  resilient  cybersecurity  program.  In  so 
doing,  board  members  will  not  only  better 
protect  themselves  against  claims  that  they 
failed to discharge their fi duciary duties, but 
will strengthen their respective organizations’ 
ability  to  detect,  respond,  and  recover  from 
cybersecurity crises.

Endnotes
 1.  SEC  Commissioner  Luis  A.  Aguilar, 
Remarks  at  the  N.Y.  Stock  Exchange, 
Boards of Directors, Corporate Governance 
and  Cyber-Risks:  Sharpening  the  Focus 
(June 10, 2014).

 2.  Press  Release,  Nat’l  Assoc.  of  Corp. 
Dir.,  Only  11%  of  Corporate  Directors 
Say  Boards  Have  High  Level  of  Cyber-
Risk  Understanding  (June  22,  2015) 
https://www.nacdonline.org/AboutUs/
PressRelease.cfm?ItemNumber=15879.

 3.  Personal information is defi ned under a 
variety of federal and state laws, as well 
as  industry  guidelines,  but  is  generally 
understood to refer to data that may be 
used  to  identify  a  person.  For  example, 
state breach notifi cation laws in the U.S. 
defi ne  personal  information,  in  general, 
as  including  fi rst  name  (or  fi rst  initial) 
and  last  name,  in  combination  with 
any  of  the  following:  (a)  social  security 
number;  (b)  driver’s  license  number  or 

other  government-issued  identifi cation; 
(c)  fi nancial  or  credit/debit  account 
number plus any security code necessary 
to  access  the  account;  or  (d)  health  or 
medical information.

 4.  Critical  infrastructure  refers  to  systems, 
assets,  or  services  that  are  so  critical 
that  a  cyberattack  could  cause  serious 
harm  to  our  way  of  life.  Presidential 
Policy  Directive  21  (PPD-21)  identifi es 
the  following  16  critical  infrastructure 
sectors:  chemicals,  commercial  facilities, 
communications,  critical  manufacturing, 
dams,  defense  industrial  base,  emergency 
services,  energy,  fi nancial  services,  food 
and  agriculture,  government  facilities, 
healthcare  and  public  health,  information 
technology, nuclear, transportation, waste, 
and wastewater. See Critical Infrastructure 
Sectors,  Department  of  Homeland 
Security,  available  at  http://www.dhs.
gov/critical-infrastructure-sector.

 5.  For  Delaware  corporations,  directors’ 
compliance  with  their  oversight  function 
is  analyzed  under  the  test  set  out  in  In  re 
Caremark Int’l, Inc. Derivative Litig., 698 A.2d 
959 (Del. Ch. 1996).

 6.  See Clapper v. Amnesty Int’l USA, 133 S. Ct. 
1138 (2013). Consistent with Clapper, most 
data  breach  consumer  class  actions  have 
been  dismissed  for  lack  of  “standing”: 
the  requirement  that  a  plaintiff  has 
suffered  a  cognizable  injury  as  a  result 
of  the  defendant’s  conduct.  That  has 
proven challenging for plaintiffs because 
consumers  are  generally  indemnifi ed 
by  banks  against  fraudulent  charges  on 
stolen credit cards, and many courts have 
rejected generalized claims of injury in the 
form of emotional distress or exposure to 
heighted risk of ID theft or fraud.

 7.  Stone v. Ritter, 911 A.2d 362, 370 (Del. 2006).
 8.  Ponemon Inst., 2015 Cost of Data Breach 
Study: Global Analysis (May 2015), http://
www-03.ibm.com/security/data-breach/.

■  56 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Where cybersecurity meets 
corporate securities: The SEC’s 
push to regulate public companies’ 
cyber defenses and disclosures
Fish & Richardson P.C. – Gus P. Coldebella, 
Principal and Caroline K. Simons, Associate

The  risks  associated  with  cyberattacks  are  a  large  and 
growing concern for American companies, no matter the 
size or the industry. If a company is publicly traded, how-
ever,  there’s  a  signifi cant  additional  impetus  for  execu-
tives’  cyber  focus:  the  ever-increasing  attention  the  U.S. 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  pays  to 
cybersecurity issues. The SEC, as one of the newest gov-
ernment players in the cybersecurity space, is fl exing its 
regulatory muscles—including by mandating and scruti-
nizing  cybersecurity  risk  disclosures,  prodding  compa-
nies  to  disclose  additional  information,  and  launching 
investigations after a breach comes to light.

This  chapter  explores  the  SEC’s  expanding  role  as 
cyber regulator and the growing nexus between cyberse-
curity  and  corporate  securities.  It  gives  companies  a 
primer on the background and sources of the SEC’s cyber 
authority, discusses tricky disclosure and securities regu-
lation-related issues, and provides a potential framework 
for  companies  to  think  about  whether,  how,  and  when 
they  should  publicly  disclose  cybersecurity  risks,  and—
when the inevitable happens—cyberattacks.

■   The SEC’s authority to regulate cybersecurity
Generally, a company’s duty to disclose material infor-
mation  under  U.S.  securities  laws  arises  only  when  a 
statute or SEC rule requires it, and currently, no existing 
laws or rules explicitly refer to disclosure of cyber risks 
or incidents. Even so, the SEC has made it clear that it 
will  use  authorities  already  on  the  books  to  promote 
cybersecurity  in  public  companies.  During  the  SEC’s 
March  2014  “Cybersecurity  Roundtable,”  Chairman 
Mary  Jo  White  said  that,  although  the  SEC’s  “formal 
jurisdiction  over  cybersecurity  is  directly  focused  on 
the integrity of our market systems, customer data pro-
tection,  and  disclosure  of  material  information,  it  is 

57  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

incumbent on every government agency to 
be informed on the full range of cybersecu-
rity  risks  and  actively  engage  to  combat 
those  risks  in  our  respective  spheres  of 
responsibility.”  In  other  words—formal 
jurisdiction  notwithstanding—the  SEC 
will  use  every  tool  it  has  to  combat  cyber 
risks.

To divine the SEC’s position on cyberse-
curity,  companies  and  experienced  counsel 
may look to a patchwork of non-binding staff 
guidance, SEC offi cials’ speeches, and espe-
cially  staff  comment  letters  on  companies’ 
public  fi lings.  Given  that  cyber  disclosures 
can  have  an  effect  on  corporate  reputations 
and  stock  price,  give  would-be  attackers 
information  about  vulnerabilities,  and  trig-
ger  shareholder  and  other  litigation  and 
government 
companies 
anguish over exactly when, what, and how 
much to disclose. To answer these questions, 
it  is  crucial  to  understand  the  background 
and  contours  of  existing  requirements  and 
the SEC’s expectations.

investigations, 

■   History and background of the SEC’s 

cybersecurity oversight

In May 2011, Senator Jay Rockefeller sent a 
letter to then-SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro 
urging  the  SEC  to  “develop  and  publish 
interpretive  guidance  clarifying  existing 
disclosure requirements pertaining to infor-
mation security risk.” Rockefeller, frustrated 
with Congress’s inability to pass cybersecu-
rity legislation, identifi ed the SEC’s control 
over corporate public disclosure as a vehicle 
to promote security in the absence of legisla-
tion. Five months after the Rockefeller letter, 
in October 2011, the Division of Corporation 
Finance (the “Division”) issued CF Disclosure 
Guidance: Topic No. 2 (the “Guidance”). Even 
though  it’s  not  an  SEC  rule  itself,  the 
Guidance  announced  the  Division’s  view 
that—”although  no  existing  disclosure 
requirement explicitly refers to cybersecurity 
risks  and  cyber  incidents”—existing  SEC 
rules, such as Regulation S-K, “may impose” 
obligations to disclose cybersecurity and cyber 
events in a company’s periodic reporting.

■  58 

■   Contours of the SEC’s staff guidance
Taking  its  cues  from  Regulation  S-K,  the 
Guidance details the key places where cyber-
security  disclosures  may  appear  in  a  com-
pany’s  10-Ks  and  10-Qs.  The  main  focuses 
are as follows:

 䊏 Risk  factors.  The  company’s  risk  factors 
are the central place for cyber disclosure. 
If  cybersecurity  is  among  the  most 
signifi cant  factors  making  investment 
in  the  company  risky,  the  risk  factor 
disclosure  should  take  into  account 
“all available relevant information” from 
past  attacks,  the  probability  of  future 
attacks  occurring,  the  magnitude  of 
the  risks—including  third-party  risk, 
and  the  risk  of  undetected  attacks—
and  the  costs  of  those  risks  coming 
to  pass,  including  the  potential  costs 
and 
from 
misappropriation of IP assets, corruption 
of  data,  or  operational  disruption.  The 
risk factor should also describe relevant 
insurance coverage.

consequences 

resulting 

 䊏 MD&A. If the costs or other consequences 
of  a  cyberattack  represent  a  material 
trend,  demand,  or  uncertainty  “that  is 
reasonably likely to have a material effect 
on  the  registrant’s  results  of  operations, 
liquidity,  or  fi nancial  condition  or  would 
cause  reported  fi nancial 
information 
not  to  be  necessarily  indicative  of  future 
operating  results  or  fi nancial  condition,” 
the company should address cybersecurity 
risks  and 
its 
Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis 
of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of 
Operations (MD&A).

incidents 

cyber 

in 

 䊏 Description  of  business.  If  one  or  more 
cyber  incidents  materially  affected  the 
company’s  products,  services,  customer 
or  supplier  relationships,  or  competitive 
conditions, 
suggests 
disclosure in the “Description of Business” 
section.

the  Guidance 

 䊏 Legal proceedings. If any litigation arose as 
a result of a cyber incident, the Guidance 
suggests disclosure if material.

 䊏 Financial  statements.  If  signifi cant  costs 
are  associated  with  cyber  preparedness 
or remediation, they should appear in the 
company’s fi nancial statements.

risk 

requesting 

■   SEC post-guidance practice
Of course, guidance is just guidance unless 
the SEC, through its actions, gives it teeth. 
And  the  SEC  has.  Under  Sarbanes-Oxley, 
the Division reviews every public compa-
ny’s reports at least once every three years, 
and  the  Division  has  focused  intensely 
on cyber disclosures since the Guidance—
especially 
factor  disclosures. 
Responding  to  a  follow-up  letter  from 
Senator  Rockefeller 
that 
the SEC enshrine the Guidance as a formal 
SEC  rule,  Schapiro’s  successor  Mary  Jo 
White took pains to stress that active staff 
review  of  cybersecurity—using  existing 
disclosure  rules—was  an  SEC  priority. 
In  her  May  1,  2013  letter,  White  revealed 
that  the  Division  had  already  issued 
approximately  50  cyber-related  comment 
letters.  And  many  more  have  been  sent 
since  then.  Google,  Amazon,  AIG,  Quest 
Diagnostics, and Citigroup are just some of 
the  scores  of  public  companies  that 
received letters from staff urging enhanced 
disclosures of their cyber risks. The lessons 
we  can  learn  from  those  exchanges  are 
detailed below.

■   Tips for preparing 10-K and 10-Q cyber 

disclosures

According  to  a  recent  survey  by  Willis, 
87%  of  Fortune  500  companies  claim  to 
have  complied  with  the  Guidance.  The 
SEC’s  “enforcement”  of  it  through  com-
ment  letters  has  given  it  the  muscle  and 
imprimatur  of  a  rule.  Certain  noteworthy 
trends  that  emerge  from  these  letters 
follow:

Trend 1: Staff pushes for all cyber incidents 
to  be  disclosed—material  or  not.  Materiality 
is  the  touchstone  of  disclosure.  Even  so, 
and  even  though  the  Guidance  calls  for 
disclosure  of  “cyber  incidents...  that  are 
individually, or in the aggregate, material,” 

  WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES

staff  comments  have  consistently  urged 
companies  to  disclose  past  data  breaches 
that  are  not  material,  even  in  the  face  of 
companies’ well-reasoned positions to the 
contrary.  For  instance,  Amazon  resisted 
disclosing a past cyberattack at its subsidi-
ary  Zappos  because  it  said  the  entire 
Zappos  operation  was  not  material  to 
Amazon’s  consolidated  revenues.  SEC 
staff  pushed  Amazon  to  disclose  it  any-
way, to place the risk factor “in appropri-
ate  context.”  A  version  of  this  comment 
appears in letter after letter. By fi rst man-
dating  cybersecurity  risk  factors  via  the 
Guidance,  and  then  urging  even  non-
material  incidents  to  be  included  in  those 
risk factors for “context,” the staff appears 
to be pushing for disclosure of past cyber 
events notwithstanding materiality.

Trend 2: Staff will research cyber incidents—
and  ask  about  them.  Division  staff  is  inde-
pendently  monitoring  breaches  and  com-
paring  them  with  company  disclosures. 
When  a  breach  has  been  reported  by  a 
company  or  in  the  press,  but  there  is  no 
concomitant  disclosure  in  the  company’s 
fi lings—especially where the company has 
already  acknowledged  susceptibility  to 
attack as a risk factor—the staff will likely 
notice. Citigroup discovered this when the 
staff referred to press reports about a 2011 
breach  that  supposedly  affected  360,000 
credit  card  accounts  and  asked  why  no 
10-Q  disclosure  was  made.  The  staff’s 
practice  is  to  ask  for  analysis  supporting 
the conclusion that no further disclosure is 
necessary, including a discussion of mate-
riality  from  a  fi nancial  and  reputational 
risk standpoint. Moreover, when a compa-
ny  discloses  that  a  particular  kind  of 
potential  breach  may  be  material,  the 
staff’s  comment  letter  almost  always  asks 
the company to disclose whether that kind 
of  breach  has  already  occurred—and  if  it 
has,  to  disclose  it,  material  or  not  (see 
Trend 1). Taken together, these trends sug-
gest that the SEC may be using its author-
ity  to  make  up  for  the  lack  of  a  federal 
breach notifi cation law.

  59  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Trend  3:  Staff  is  interested  not  only  in  the 
disclosure,  but  the  pre-disclosure  process.  As 
Chairman White has stated, even with the 
absence of a direct law or regulation directly 
compelling  companies  to  adopt  strict 
cybersecurity  measure,  the  SEC  is  exercis-
ing its power to indirectly prod companies 
to analyze and strengthen their cybersecu-
rity  programs  through  issuing  disclosure 
guidance  and  bringing 
investigations, 
enforcement actions, and litigation against 
companies  that  fall  short.  In  this  way  the 
SEC  has  taken  on  a  larger  mission  than 
simply requiring disclosure—it is using its 
existing  authorities  to  steer  companies  to 
engage  in  a  deep,  searching  process  to 
evaluate  cyber  risk.  Whether  or  not  you 
think the SEC is the appropriate regulator 
of  this  area,  such  a  searching  analysis  is 
important  to  securing  a  company’s  digital 
assets. Management should engage in and 
document its analysis of the effects of cyber 
incidents  on  the  company’s  operations, 
with  special  attention  to  probability  of 
various types of attacks and their potential 
cost,  from  a  quantitative  and  qualitative 
standpoint.  It  should  do  so  not  just  to 
weather the storm of a possible SEC inquiry, 
but because such an analysis brings neces-
sary  executive-level  oversight  to  a  crucial 
area of enterprise risk.

Trend 4: Third-party risk is on the staff’s mind. 
Staff  is  encouraging  companies  to  look 
beyond  their  four  walls  to  the  cyber  risk 
posed  by  the  use  of  vendors.  Staff  will  ask 
whether the company’s vendors have experi-
enced cyberattacks, and request assessment—
and  disclosure—if  a  breach  at  a  third-party 
vendor  could  have  a  material  effect  on  the 
company.  The  SEC  likely  believes  that  if 
public  companies  are  required  to  disclose 
risks in their supply chain in addition to their 
own,  third-party  cybersecurity  will  improve 
as a result.

■   In the heat of battle: 8-K disclosure 

questions during an attack

Of course, 10-Ks and 10-Qs are not the only 
reports  public  companies  produce—certain 

■  60 

enumerated  material  corporate  events,  such 
as termination of executive offi cers or chang-
es in auditors, must be reported on a “current 
basis” on Form 8-K. However, no currently-
existing  securities  law  or  rule  expressly 
requires  cyberattacks—material  or  other-
wise—to be reported on Form 8-K. Generally, 
reporting  cyber  events  is  entirely  voluntary. 
Companies  that  do  so  use  Form  8-K’s  Item 
8.01, “Other Events,” which is used to volun-
tarily report events that the company consid-
ers  to  be  of  importance  to  investors.  Public 
companies  must  navigate  issues  such  as 
materiality, selective disclosure, trading, and 
effect  on  stock  price,  all  in  an  environment 
where  disclosure  of  a  cyber  event  is  almost 
sure to draw a lawsuit, a government investi-
gation, or other unwanted scrutiny. No one-
size-fi ts-all answer exists—it is almost always 
a  judgment  call.  In  this  section,  we  detail 
some of the questions and analysis that com-
panies should consider regarding whether to 
disclose  an  attack  on  Form  8-K,  and  if  so, 
when.  One  way  to  think  about  these  ques-
tions  is  outlined  in  the  decision  tree  on  the 
next page (Figure 1).

Why  consider  disclosure  if  you  don’t  have 
to?  Even  if  no  rule  mandates  disclosure, 
companies  and  experienced  counsel  know 
that there are frequently upsides to disclo-
sure—especially  in  a  world  where  securi-
ties litigation, derivative suits, and enforce-
ment  actions  are  lurking.  Instead  of  pro-
voking  shareholder  litigation,  might  an 
announcement  ward  it  off?  Can  an  8-K 
eliminate  a  plaintiff’s  or  regulator’s  argu-
ment that an insider traded on the basis on 
material non-public information? The chart 
on the next page (Table 1) lays out some of 
the  possible  advantages—along  with  the 
more well-known disadvantages—that com-
panies should consider.

Is the cyberattack material? The determina-
tion of whether a cyber event is material is 
not  clear-cut.  First,  the  Supreme  Court  has 
rejected  a  bright-line,  quantitative  rule  for 
materiality—instead  reaffi rming  Basic  v. 
Levinson’s  formulation  that  any  nonpublic 
information that signifi cantly alters the total 

  WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES

Fish & Richardson 8-k Disclosure Decision Tree

No

Yes

Will you disclose

anyway via website,
to third parties, etc.?

No

Maybe not

Really? Are you sure?

Yes

Yes

No

No

Is discovery of the breach

(by the gov't or public)

likely or inevitable?

No

Is there a potential
Regulation FD issue?

Yes

Will the disclosure itself

harm the company?

No

Not sure
Will it compromise

security?

Will it trigger securities or

other litigation

or investigations?

No

No

LEAN TOWARD
8-K DISCLOSURE

FIGURE

Is it material?

Yes

No

Yes

Is there a separate

obligation to disclose?
(state PII laws, trading

rules)?

Not sure

No

No

Will insiders trade

while in possession of

this information?

Does it make prior

statement misleading?

Does the cost and 

consequence of the breach 

substantially affect you 
or your ﬁnancial outlook?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

LEAN AGAINST
8-K DISCLOSURE

TABLE

n
o
s
d
r
a
h
c
i
R
&
h
s
i
F

 

 

Pros

Cons

1.  May eliminate potential class 

1.  If incident is truly not material and 

x
i
r
t
a

M

 
s
n
o
C
d
n
a

 

 
s
o
r
P
K
-
8

 

plaintiffs’ argument that 
information was not known 
to the market or was not 
adequately disclosed, cutting 
off potential securities claims 
to the date of the 8-K

2.  May counter allegations that 

insiders were trading on 
basis of material nonpublic 
information about the breach 
(so long as insider trades 
happen after 8-K issued)

was not going to be discovered, 
could needlessly cause reputational 
harm and draw litigation and other 
unwanted scrutiny

2.  May be seen as concession that 
incident was material (although 
companies frequently disavow 
materiality in 8-K), and even if not 
material, may make incident seem 
bigger than it is

Continued

  61  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

TABLE

Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros
Pros

Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons
Cons

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
&
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
3.  Can eliminate a potential Reg 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
FD selective disclosure issue if 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
company has to reveal incident 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
to employees, third parties, 
others
others
others
others
others
others
others
others
others
others

4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
4.  Quick, full disclosure may stave 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
off regulatory scrutiny (but see 
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)
“Cons”)

5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
5.  Allows company to own the 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
message, rather than giving 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
control of the message to 
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else
someone else

3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 
3.  May trigger stock price drop—and if 

so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
so, likely to draw shareholder litigation 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
claiming that pre-8-K disclosures were 
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading
materially misleading

4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
4.  Even if no stock price drop, may 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
draw other types of litigation and 
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny
regulatory scrutiny

5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 
5.  Could draw other hackers to test 

company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses
company’s defenses

mix of information available to shareholders 
could  well  be  material.  Second,  even  when 
the  scope  of  an  attack  has  come  into  focus, 
the effects of cyberthefts are frequently hard 
to quantify. Although it is relatively easy for 
a company to decide to announce a breach of 
customer personal information (because the 
breach will likely have to be disclosed under 
state law and because remediation costs may 
be  signifi cant),  what  should  a  company  do 
about,  for  example,  theft  of  trade  secrets, 
such as source code for a big-selling software 
product? Without more (such as the thieves’ 
development and marketing of a competing 
product), such a theft may not have a mate-
rial  effect  on  the  company’s  fi nancial  state-
ments. Adding to the diffi cult nature of this 
inquiry:  companies  must  be  aware  that  an 
initial  determination  that  the  event  is  not 
material—if the event later becomes public—
is  likely  to  be  critically  reexamined  with 
20/20  hindsight,  months  or  years  after  the 
event,  by  shareholders,  plaintiffs’  lawyers, 
regulators, and the press. So careful analysis 
and documentation of the company’s deter-
mination are important.

Is there a duty to correct or to update? If the 
company  made  public  statements  about  its 
information  systems  or  other  aspects  of  its 

operations affected by a cyberattack, and the 
statements  were  inaccurate  or  misleading 
when  made,  the  company  has  an  obligation 
to  correct  the  statements—even  if  it  only 
learned of the inaccuracy afterwards. Failure 
to comply with this “duty to correct” can pro-
vide  plaintiffs’  lawyers  with  fodder  for 
a suit alleging that purchasers or sellers relied 
on  the  inaccurate  statement  to  their  detri-
ment.  Moreover,  even  if  the  company’s  for-
ward-looking statements were accurate when 
made,  some  courts  have  found  a  “duty  to 
update” when circumstances change (such as 
when  an  attack  happens),  and  the  forward-
looking statement becomes inaccurate.

Do  you  have  another  legal  obligation  to  dis-
close?  Other  disclosure  requirements  may  be 
at play, such as any state notifi cation laws that 
require companies to inform affected individ-
uals  if  their  personally  identifi able  informa-
tion  (PII)  was  stolen  during  an  attack.  If  the 
company  is  listed  on  an  exchange  such  as 
NYSE  or  NASDAQ,  the  trading  markets 
themselves  may  also  have  rules  requiring 
timely notifi cation of material events. Frankly, 
it is easier for a company to decide to announce 
a data breach on Form 8-K—and to accrue the 
benefi ts to fi ling an 8-K—if it is going to dis-
close for another reason, or already has.

■  62 

Are  you  going  to  disclose  anyway?  Is  the 
incident likely to become widely known? Absent 
a  mandatory  disclosure  requirement,  a 
company may still have reasons to disclose 
the  attack  to  stakeholders.  There  may  be 
contractual  obligations  to  customers  or 
other  third  parties  to  communicate  about 
breaches involving their information. Even 
without  a  contractual  obligation,  a  breach 
may affect a company’s vendors, suppliers, 
or  partners,  and  the  company  may  choose 
to  disclose  the  incident  to  them.  A  sound 
operating assumption is that once the com-
pany discloses an incident to even a single 
third  party,  it  is  likely  to  become  widely 
known.  Thus,  the  company  should  have 
a  coordinated,  unifi ed  disclosure  strategy 
to  ensure  that  all  interested  parties  are 
informed in a consistent manner, and very 
close  in  time.  Companies  can  use  affi rma-
tive disclosure to mitigate any reputational 
harm  or  embarrassment  that  could  arise 
from  having  the  narrative  created  on  your 
behalf  by  the  media,  security  researchers, 
hackivists, or worse.

Any such disclosure raises potential issues 
under the SEC’s Regulation Fair Disclosure, 
or Reg FD. Reg FD prohibits companies from 
selectively  disclosing  material  non-public 
information  to  analysts,  institutional  inves-
tors, and certain others without concurrently 
making widespread public disclosure. Many 
companies  that  communicate  with  third 
parties—as did J.P. Morgan after its October 
2014 breach—will issue a Form 8-K to make 
sure  their  communications  do  not  violate 
Reg FD. It is worth considering whether dis-
closures  on  a  company’s  website,  or  other-
wise to customers, vendors, or other parties, 
trigger a Reg FD requirement.

What to do about trading? Another reason 
that  the  materiality  determination  is  a 
tricky one is that insiders in possession of 
material  nonpublic  information  may  not 
trade  while  in  possession  of  that  informa-
tion. If there is even a chance that the cyber 
incident may be material, an early call that 
a  public  company  general  counsel  must 
make  is  whether  to  close  the  trading 

  WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES

window  for  insiders.  Even  after  the  inci-
dent’s details are known, if the company is 
leaning  against  declaring  the  incident 
material,  the  question  is  whether  to  dis-
close  the  incident—material  or  not—on 
Form 8-K, so no later allegation of insider 
trading can stick. (Of course, if the incident 
is  material,  no  trading  by  insiders  should 
occur until information about the incident 
is made public.)

When to disclose? The decision to disclose 
is  only  half  of  the  8-K  equation—another 
question is, when? Target took two months 
after  the  world  knew  of  its  massive  data 
breach to issue an 8-K; Morningstar, which 
releases an 8-K regularly on the fi rst Friday 
of every month, disclosed its 2012 breach a 
little more than one month after becoming 
aware of it. Some companies, such as health 
insurer  Anthem,  choose  instead  to  wait 
until  the  next  periodic  report. A  challenge 
facing  a  victim  company  is  to  balance  the 
benefi ts  of  prompt  disclosure  against  the 
potential  downsides.  Because  a  disclosure 
should  be  accurate  and  not  misleading 
when  made,  a  company  should  grasp  the 
scope of the cyber incident before disclos-
ing. In a typical breach, however, it is rare 
for  an  entity  to  be  able  to  immediately 
assess  the  attack’s  scope—investigations 
take time. Therefore, a factor to consider in 
deciding  when  to  disclose  is  the  pace  and 
progress  of  the  post-breach  investigation, 
which  will  allow  the  company  to  under-
stand  the  extent  of  the  attack. A  company 
confronts  an  unenviable  disclosure  dilem-
ma: disclose based on the state of the world 
as  you  know  it  right  now,  and  later  be 
accused of not telling the whole story? Or 
disclose  when  you  have  a  better  grasp  of 
what  actually  happened,  but  face  accusa-
tions  of  allowing  earlier  (and  potentially 
rosier)  cybersecurity  disclosures  to  persist 
uncorrected?  Generally,  companies  should 
resist falling into the immediate disclosure 
trap,  because  in  our  experience  a  cyber 
incident  looks  very  different  at  the  end  of 
the fi rst week than it does at the end of the 
fi rst  day.  Furthermore,  the  company  will 

  63  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

not want to have to correct itself after mak-
ing its cyber disclosure—it will want to get 
it right the fi rst time.

■   SEC cybersecurity enforcement
The  SEC  has  not  yet  brought  an  enforce-
ment  action  against  a  public  company 
related  to  its  cybersecurity  disclosures.  It 
has,  however,  opened  investigations  look-
ing  not  only  into  whether  companies  ade-
quately  prepared  for  and  responded  to 
cyber incidents but also as to the suffi ciency 
of their disclosures relating to the breaches. 
Target’s  February  2014  Form  8-K  fi ling 

revealed that the SEC was among the gov-
ernment  agencies  investigating  the  2013 
data breach, including “how it occurred, its 
consequences, and our responses.”

With the growing threat of cyberattacks 
and mounting pressure from Congress and 
the  public,  future  regulatory  and  enforce-
ment actions are almost assured. Companies 
should be prepared for additional scrutiny, 
review their existing disclosures in light of 
the  Guidance  and  the  SEC’s  stated  priori-
ties, and apply these principles to the pub-
lic  disclosure  and  related  questions  that 
will arise post-breach.

■  64 

SecurityRoundtable.org

A cybersecurity action plan 
for corporate boards
Internet Security Alliance, NACD – Larry Clinton, CEO 
of ISA and Ken Daly, President and CEO of NACD

With  the  majority  of  cyber  networks  in  the  hands  of  the 
private sector, and the threats to these systems apparent and 
growing, organizations need to create an effective method 
to govern and manage the cyber threat. This responsibility 
ultimately falls to the corporate board of directors. In fact, the 
word cyber is derived from the same Greek word, kybernan, 
from which the word govern also derives.

■  How is cyber risk different from other corporate risks?
Although corporate boards have a long history of man-
aging  risks,  the  digital  age  may  create  some  unique 
challenges. To begin with, the nature of corporate asset 
value  has  changed  signifi cantly  in  the  last  20  years. 
Eighty  percent  of  the  value  of  Fortune  500  companies 
now  consists  of  intellectual  property  (IP)  and  other 
intangibles. 

With this rapidly expanding “digitalization” of assets 
comes  a  corresponding  digitalization  of  corporate  risk. 
However, many of the traditional assumptions and under-
standings about physical security don’t apply to securing 
digital assets.

First, unlike many corporate risks, such as natural dis-
asters,  cybersecurity  risks  are  the  product  of  conscious 
and  often  better-resourced  attackers,  including  nation 
states  and  state  affi liates.    This  means  that  the  attack 
methods,  like  the  technology,  will  change  constantly, 
responding to defensive techniques and often in a highly 
strategic  fashion.  This  characteristic  of  cyberattacks 
means  that  the  risk  management  system  must  be  a 
dynamic 24/7/365 fl exible process—a full team sport—
requiring participation from all corners of the organiza-
tion rather than being the primary responsibility of any 
one particular entity.

Second, with many traditional human-based corporate 
risks, such as criminal activity, companies can plug into a 

65  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

in  defending 

well-defi ned  legal  superstructure  including 
enforcement power, which can greatly assist 
the  organization 
itself. 
Unfortunately,  in  the  cyber  world  this  sys-
tem  is  dramatically  underdeveloped.  In 
addition  to  the  major  problem  of  many 
attackers  actually  receiving  state  support, 
the  international  criminal  legal  system  has 
not evolved to the point where there is any-
thing close to the cooperation and coordina-
tion  generally  available  in  the  physical 
world. As a result, current estimates are that 
law  enforcement  is  able  to  apprehend  and 
convict less than 2% of cyber criminals. 

Third,  corporate  cybersecurity  is  not  con-
fi ned  to  traditional  corporate  boundaries. 
Whereas in the physical world a particularly 
conscientious  organization  might  be  able 
defend  itself  by  having  an  especially  strong 
security  perimeter,  the  cyber  world  is  essen-
tially borderless. A fundamental characteristic 
of cyber systems is that they are interconnect-
ed  with  other,  independent  systems.  For 
example,  the  highly  publicized  breach  of 
Target  was  accomplished  by  exploiting  vul-
nerabilities in Target’s air conditioner vendor. 
In  another  well-publicized  case,  a  well-
defended  energy  installation  was  compro-
mised by malware placed on the online menu 
of a Chinese restaurant popular with employ-
ees  who  used  it  to  order  lunch.  This  means 
that  a  board  must  consider  not  only  their 
“own” security but that of all the entities with 
whom  they  interconnect,  including  vendors, 
customers, partners, and affi liates.

Fourth,  unlike  many  physical  risks,  in 
which the security effort is to create a perim-
eter around an asset, so many modern corpo-
rate  assets  are  in  fact  digital.  Cyber  risk 
must be considered as an integral part of the 
business  process.  A  good  deal  of  modern 
corporate  growth,  innovation,  and  profi ta-
bility is inherently tied to digital technology. 
Rare is the entity that has by now not built 
the benefi ts of digitalization into their busi-
ness plan in many different ways, including 
online  marketing,  remote  business  produc-
tion,  employee  use  of  personal  mobile 
devices,  cloud  computing,  big  data,  out-
sourced  process,  and  off-site  employment. 

■  66 

However,  many  digital  technologies  and 
business processes that drive business econ-
omies come with major cybersecurity risks, 
which as discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 6), 
can put the corporation at a long-term cata-
strophic risk.

This means that cyber risk must be con-
sidered not as an addendum to a business 
process or asset, but as a central feature of 
the business process. In the modern world, 
cybersecurity  is  as  central  to  business 
decisions as legal and financial considera-
tions.  Thus,  a  board’s  consideration  of 
fundamental  business  decisions  such  as 
mergers, acquisitions, new product devel-
opment,  partnerships,  and  marketing 
must include cybersecurity.

■  Are corporate boards concerned about 

cybersecurity?

Although some critics have assumed that the 
publicity from high-profi le corporate breaches 
is prima facie evidence of corporate inatten-
tion to cybersecurity, the evidence does not 
support that proposition.

Corporate spending on cybersecurity has 
doubled  over  the  past  few  years  and  now 
totals more than $100 billion a year.  By com-
parison, the total annual budget for the U.S. 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  only 
about  $60  billion—including  TSA  and 
immigration—with only $1 billion for cyber-
security. Total U.S. government spending on 
cybersecurity  is  generally  estimated  to  be 
near  $16  billion.  Moreover,  recent  surveys 
indicate  cybersecurity  now  tops  the  list  of 
issues corporate boards must face—replacing 
leadership  succession,  and  two  thirds  of 
board members are seeking even more time 
and attention paid to cybersecurity.

Although the data seems to show conclu-
sively  that  corporate  boards  are  aware  of 
and becoming ever more interested in cyber-
security,  the  novelty  and  complexity  of  the 
issue has led to a fair amount of uncertainty 
as to how to approach it.

One recent survey found that despite the 
“spotlight on cyber security getting bright-
er” that nearly half of directors had not dis-
cussed  the  company’s  crisis  response  plan 

in  the  event  of  a  breach,  67%  had  not  dis-
cussed the company’s cyber insurance cov-
erage, nearly 60% had not discussed engag-
ing  an  outside  cybersecurity  expert,  more 
than 60% had not discussed risk disclosures 
in  response  to  SEC  guidance,  and  slightly 
more than 20% had discussed the National 
Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 
(NIST) cybersecurity framework. 

■  A corporate board action plan 

for cybersecurity

In an effort to fi ll the gap between awareness 
and targeted action, The National Association 
of Corporate Directors (NACD), in conjunc-
tion  with  AIG  and  the  Internet  Security 
Alliance,  published  their  fi rst  Cyber  Risk 
Oversight Handbook for corporate boards in 
June  2014.  The  handbook  was  the  fi rst  pri-
vate  sector  document  endorsed  by  the  U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security as well as 
the  International  Audit  Foundation  and  is 
available free of charge either through DHS 
or  NACD.  It  identifi ed  fi ve  core  principles 
for corporate boards to enhance their cyber 
risk oversight.

The fi ve principles can be conceptualized 
into two categories. Principles 1, 2, and 3 deal 
with board operations. The fi nal two princi-
ples deal with how the board should handle 
the senior management.

 1.  Understand  that  cybersecurity  is  an 

enterprise-wide risk management issue.

The  board  has  to  oversee  management  in 
setting  the  overall  cyber  strategy  for  the 
organization, including how cybersecurity is 
understood  in  terms  of  the  business.  It  is 
critical that the board not approach the topic 
simply  by  thinking,  “What  if  we  have  a 
breach?” Virtually every organization will be 
successfully  breached.  The  board  has  to 
understand the issue is how to manage the 
risks caused by breaches, not to focus solely 
on how to prevent them.

One useful metaphor is to think of corpo-
rate cybersecurity in a similar fashion to how 
we  think  of  our  own  personal  health. 
Obviously, it is impractical to be totally germ 

  A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS  

free, even as a goal. The goal is to keep your 
system healthy enough so that you can fi ght 
off  the  germs  that  will  inevitably  attack  it. 
When  you  do  get  sick,  as  we  all  eventually 
do, you detect and understand the infection 
promptly  and  accurately  and  get  access  to 
the  appropriate  expertise  and  treatment  so 
that you can return to your normal routine as 
soon as possible—ideally wiser and stronger.
Thinking of cybersecurity narrowly as an 
IT issue to be addressed simply with techni-
cal solutions is a fl awed strategy. The single 
biggest  vulnerability  in  cyber  systems  is 
people.  Insiders,  whether  they  are  poorly 
trained, distracted, angry, or corrupted, can 
compromise many of the most effective tech-
nical solutions. 

Building on the NACD model, the Institute 
of Internal Auditors (IIA) extended NACD’s 
principle  1  by  commenting  that  the  board 
should  receive  an  internal  annual  health 
check  of  the  organization’s  cybersecurity 
program  that  covers  all  domains  of  the 
organization’s  cybersecurity,  including  an 
assessment  of  if  the  enterprise  risk  levels 
have improved or deteriorated from year to 
year,  and  comments  specifically 
that 
“Sarbanes-Oxley  compliance  provides  little 
assurance  of  an  effective  security  program 
to manage cyber risks.” 

 2.  Directors  must  understand  the  legal 

implications of cyber risk.

The  legal  situation  with  respect  to  cyberse-
curity  is  unsettled  and  quickly  evolving. 
Boards  should  be  mindful  of  the  potential 
legal  risks  posed  to  the  corporation  and 
potentially to the directors on an individual 
or collective basis. For example, high-profi le 
attacks  may  spawn  lawsuits,  including 
shareholder derivative suits alleging that the 
organization’s  board  neglected  its  fi duciary 
duty by failing to take steps to confi rm the 
adequacy  of  the  company’s  protections 
against  breaches  of  customer  data.  To  date 
juries have tended not to fi nd for the plain-
tiffs  in  these  cases,  but  that  could  change 
with time and boards need to be aware of the 
risk of court suits.

  67  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Prudent steps for directors to take include 
maintaining records of discussions related to 
cyber  risks  at  the  board  and  key  committee 
meetings. These records may include updates 
about  specifi c  risk  as  well  as  reports  about 
the company’s overall security program and 
how  it  is  addressing  these  risks.  Evidence 
that board members have sought out special-
ized  training  to  educate  themselves  about 
cyber  risk  may  also  be  helpful  in  showing 
due diligence.

No  one  standard  applies,  especially  for 
organizations  who  do  business  in  multiple 
jurisdictions.  Some  countries,  including  the 
U.S.  have  received  specifi c  guidance  from 
securities  regulators.  Many  countries  have 
passed a variety of laws, some of which may 
be confusing or confl icting with mandates in 
other  countries.  It  is  critical  that  organiza-
tions systematically track the evolving laws 
and regulations in their markets and analyze 
their legal standing.

Again, building on the NACD model, IIA 
emphasizes that this legal analysis must be 
extended  to  third  parties  and  recommends 
that the board get a report of all the critical 
data that are being managed by third-party 
providers  and  be  sure  the  organization  has 
appropriate  agreements  in  place,  including 
audits  of  these  providers.  The  board  ought 
to  communicate  that  a  “chain  of  trust”  is 
expected  with  these  third-party  providers 
that they have similar agreements with their 
down-stream relationships.

 3.  Board  members  need  adequate  access  to 

cybersecurity expertise.

Most board meetings are incredibly pressed 
for time, and often there are multiple issues 
and people who feel they need more board 
time. Add to this the fact that most acknowl-
edge that directors lack the needed expertise 
to evaluate cyber risk, and the board is left 
with  the  conundrum  of  how  to  get  enough 
time to become properly educated to address 
this serious issue.

One answer is to increase the use of out-
side experts working directly with the board 
to provide independent assessments. Indeed, 

■  68 

some  boards  are  now  recruiting  cyber  pro-
fessionals for board seats to assist in analyz-
ing and judging staff reports. Another tech-
nique  is  to  schedule  periodic  “deep-dives” 
for the full board. Many organizations have 
delegated the task to a special committee—
often  audit  but  sometimes  a  risk  or  even 
technology  committee—although  no  one 
approach  has  been  demonstrated  clearly 
superior.  A  proliferation  of  committees  can 
exacerbate the board time problem, and due 
care must be paid to overload any one com-
mittee, such as audit, with issues that are not 
inherently in their expertise lane.

Still another technique is to empower the 
board  with  the  right  questions  to  ask  and 
require  that  the  outside  or  internal  experts 
answer the questions in understandable ter-
minology. The NACD Cyber Risk Handbook 
provides  lists  of  5  to  10  simple  and  direct 
questions  for  board  members  covering  the 
key  issues  such  as  strategy  and  operation 
readiness,  situational  awareness,  incident 
response, and overall board “cyber literacy.”
At minimum, boards can take advantage 
of  the  company's  ongoing  relationships 
with  law  enforcement  agencies  and  regu-
larly make adequate time for cybersecurity 
at  board  meetings.  This  may  be  through 
interaction  with  CISOs  or  as  part  of  the 
audit  or  similar  committee  reports.  More 
appropriately,  boards,  as  discussed  above, 
should  integrate  these  questions  into  gen-
eral business discussions.

The fi nal two principles offered by NACD 
focus on how boards should deal with senior 
management:

 4.  Directors need to set an expectation that 
management  have  an  enterprise-wide 
cyber  risk  management  framework  in 
place.

It  is  important  that  someone  be  thinking 
about cybersecurity, from an enterprise-wide 
perspective  (i.e.,  not  just  IT)  every  day. 
Corporations  have  introduced  a  variety  of 
models,  chief  risk  offi cer,  chief  fi nancial 
offi cer, chief operating offi cer as well as the 
more traditional CIO and CISO models. The 

important aspect to ensure, however, is that 
the  risk  management  is  truly  organization 
wide, including the following steps:

 䊏 establish  leadership  with  an  individual 

with cross-departmental expertise

 䊏 appoint  a  cross-organization  cyber  risk 
management  team  including  all  relevant 
stakeholders  (e.g.,  IT,  HR,  compliance, 
GC, fi nance, risk)

 䊏 meet regularly and report directly to the 

board

 䊏 develop  an  organization-wide  cyber 
risk  management  plan  with  periodic 
tests  reports  and  refi nements.  At  a 
more  technical  level,  the  Cyber  Security 
Framework  developed  by  the  National 
Institute  of  Standards  and  Technologies 
(NIST) is a useful model. 

 䊏 develop  an  independent  and  adequate 
budget  for  the  cyber  risk  management 
team.

One  mechanism  to  implement  the  frame-
work  is  to  create  a  “cybersecurity  balance 
sheet”  that  identifi es,  at  a  high  level,  the 
company’s  cyber  assets  and  liabilities  and 
can provide a scorecard for thinking through 
management  progress  in  implementing  the 
security  system.  The  balance  sheet  may 
begin  with  identifying  the  organization’s 
“crown  jewels.”  This  is  an  important  exer-
cise because it is simply not cost effi cient to 
protect  all  data  at  the  maximum  level. 
However,  the  organization’s  most  valued 
data must be identifi ed (e.g., IP, patient data, 
credit  card  data).  Other  corporate  data  can 
be  similarly  categorized  as  to  its  relative 
security needs.

The next step is to discuss the strategy for 
securing  data  at  each  level.  This  strategy 
generally involves a consideration of people, 
process, and technology.

At the technology process levels there are 
a  range  of  options  available  with  good 
research indicating cost-effective methods to 
secure  lower-level  data  and  thus  reserving 
deployment  of  more  sophisticated,  and 
hence costly, measures to be reserved for the 
higher valued data. 

  A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS  

At the people level, it is important to follow 
leading  practices  for  managing  personnel, 
especially  with  respect  to  hiring  and  fi ring. 
Ongoing  cybersecurity  training  is  similarly 
important and most effective if cybersecurity 
metrics  are  fully  integrated  into  employee 
evaluation and compensation methods.

Of  special  attention  is  the  inclusion  of 
senior  and  other  executive  level  personnel 
who, research has shown, are highly valued 
targets  and  often  uniquely  lax  in  following 
through on security protocols. 

The  asset  management  process  then  can 
be considered in light of the business prac-
tices that may create liabilities.

For example, the expansion of the number 
of access points brought on by the explosion 
in mobile devices and the emerging “Internet 
of Things” (connecting cars, security camer-
as,  refrigerators,  etc.  to  the  Internet)  really 
increases vulnerability (see Chapter 6).

Still  a  different  type  of  vulnerability  can 
occur in the merger and acquisition process. 
Here management may feel pressure  to gen-
erate  value  through  the  merging  of  highly 
complex  and  technical  information  systems 
on  accelerated  pace.  In  discussions  with 
management,  the  board  must  carefully 
weigh  the  economics  of  the  IT  effi ciencies 
the company seeks with the potential to miss 
or create vulnerability by accessing a system 
that is not well enough understood or had its 
defi ciencies mitigated.

 5.  Based on the plan, management needs to 
have a method to assess the damage of a 
cyber event. They need to identify which 
risks can be avoided, mitigated, accepted, 
or transferred through insurance.

Organizations  must  identify  for  the  board 
which data, and how much, the organization 
is willing to lose or have compromised. Risk 
mitigation  budgets  then  must  be  allocated 
appropriately  between  defending  against 
basic and advanced risks.

This principle highlights the need for the 
“full-team”  approach 
to  cybersecurity 
advocated  under  principle  4.  For  example, 
the  marketing  department  may  determine 

  69  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

that a particular third-party vendor is ideal 
for a new product. The CISO may determine 
that  this  vendor  does  not  have  adequate 
security.  Marketing  may,  nevertheless, 
decide it is worth the risk to fulfi ll the busi-
ness  plan  and  presumably  senior  manage-
ment may support marketing, but condition 
approval  on  the  ability  to  transfer  some  of 
this  additional  risk  with  the  purchase  of 
additional insurance.

This  is  an  example  of  the  process  pro-
ceeding  appropriately,  wherein  cyber  risk 
is  integrated  into  business  decisions  con-
sistent and managed on the front end con-
sistent  with  the  organization’s  business 
plan.

If  an  organization  follows  these  princi-
ples,  it  should  be  well  on  its  way  to  estab-
lishing a sustainably secure cyber risk man-
agement system.

■  70 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Establishing a board-level 
cybersecurity review blueprint
Stroz Friedberg LLC — Erin Nealy Cox, 
Executive Managing Director

Over the last two years cybersecurity has leaped to the top 
of the boardroom agenda. If you’re like most board mem-
bers, though, you haven’t had enough time to fi gure out 
how to think about cybersecurity as part of your fi duciary 
responsibility, and you’re not quite certain yet what ques-
tions to ask of management. You may even harbor a secret 
hope 
issues, 
cyberthreats will soon be rendered obsolete by relentless 
advancement.

technology-related 

that, 

like  many 

Don’t  count  on  it.  Cybersecurity  is  taking  its  place 
among the catalog of enterprise risks that demand board-
room attention for the long term. It comes along with the 
digital transformation that is sweeping through virtually 
all industries in the global economy. As businesses “digi-
tize” all aspects of their operations, from customer inter-
actions  to  partner  relationships  in  their  supply  chains, 
entire  corporations  become  electronically  exposed—and 
vulnerable to cyberattack.

Cybersecurity risk is not new. However, in the last two 
years multiple high-profi le attacks have hit brands we all 
trusted  with  our  personal  information,  making  for  big 
headlines  in  the  media  and  signifi cant  reputational  and 
fi nancial damage for many of the victimized companies. 
What’s more, corporate heads have rolled: CIOs and even 
CEOs  have  departed  as  a  direct  result  of  breaches.  The 
ripple effect continues. Cybersecurity legislation is a per-
ennial  agenda  item  for  governments  and  regulators 
around  the  world,  and  shareholder  derivative  lawsuits 
have  struck  the  boards  of  companies  hit  by  high-profi le 
cyberattacks.

Although  directors  have  added  cybersecurity  enter-
prise risk to their agendas, there is no standard way for 
boards to think about cybersecurity, much less time-tested 
guidelines to help them navigate the issue. This chapter’s 
goal is to help directors evolve their mindsets for thinking 

71  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

about  the  enterprise  risk  associated  with 
cybersecurity  and  provide  a  simple  blue-
print  to  help  directors  incorporate  cyberse-
curity into the board’s overall enterprise risk 
strategy.

■   Establishing the right blueprint for 

boardroom cybersecurity review

For boards, cybersecurity is an issue of enter-
prise  risk.  As  with  all  enterprise  risks,  the 
key focus is mitigation, not prevention. This 
universally  understood  enterprise  risk 
guideline is especially helpful in the context 
of cybersecurity because no one can prevent all 
cyber breaches. Every company is a target, and 
a suffi ciently motivated and well-resourced 
adversary can and will get into a company’s 
network.

Consequently, terms like “cyber defense” 
are  insuffi cient  descriptors  of  an  effective 
posture  because  they  evoke  the  image  that 
corporations  can  establish  an  invincible 
perimeter around their networks to prevent 
access  by  bad  actors.  Today,  it’s  more  accu-
rate to think of the board-level cybersecurity 
review  goal  as  “cyber  resilience.”  The  idea 
behind  the  cyber  resilience  mindset  is  that, 
because  you  know  network  breaches  will 
happen,  it  is  more  important  to  focus  on 
preparing to meet cyberthreats as rapidly as 
possible  and  on  mitigating  the  associated 
risks.

Also  important  to  a  board  member’s 
cybersecurity mindset is to be free from fear 
of  the  technology.  Remember,  the  issue  is 
enterprise risk—not technical solutions. Just 
as  you  need  not  understand  internal  com-
bustion engine technology to write rules for 
safe driving, you need not be excluded from 
the  cybersecurity  risk  discussion  based  on 
lack of technology acumen. Although this is 
liberating,  in  a  sense,  there  is  also  a  price: 
directors cannot deny their fi duciary respon-
sibility  to  oversee  cybersecurity  risk  based 
on lack of technology acumen.

Given a focus on enterprise risk (not tech-
nology)  and  risk  mitigation  (not  attack 
prevention), the correct blueprint for cyber-
security review at the board level can best be 

■  72 

expressed through the following three high-
level questions:

 1.  Has  your  organization  appropriately 
assessed  all 
its  cybersecurity-related 
risks?  What  reasonable  steps  have  you 
taken to evaluate those risks?

 2.  Have  you  appropriately  prioritized  your 
cybersecurity  risks,  from  most  critical  to 
noncritical?  Are  these  priorities  properly 
aligned  with  corporate  strategy,  other 
business  requirements,  and  a  customized 
assessment  of  your  organization’s  cyber 
vulnerabilities?

 3.  What  actions  are  you  taking  to  mitigate 
cybersecurity risks? Do you have a regularly 
tested, resilience-inspired incident response 
plan with which to address cyberthreats?

Naturally, these questions are proxies for the 
industry-specifi c  and/or  situation-specifi c 
questions  particular  to  each  organization 
that  will  result  in  that  organization’s  most 
productive cybersecurity review. The key to 
formulating the relevant questions for your 
organization  is  to  fi nd  the  right  balance 
between asking enough to achieve the assur-
ance appropriate to board oversight, but not 
so much that management ends up spinning 
wheels unnecessarily.

The rest of this chapter is a guide to fram-
ing  board-level  cybersecurity  review  issues 
for your organization by exploring meaning-
ful ways to apply these high-level questions 
in a variety of circumstances and industries. 
The next step is yours, or your board’s: use 
this  blueprint  to  drive  cybersecurity  enter-
prise  risk  discussions  with  management, 
critical  stakeholders,  and  external  experts. 
Doing  so  will  help  achieve  cyber  resilience 
for your organization.

■   The board’s cyber resilience blueprint
Boards are very comfortable managing fi nan-
cial  issues  and  risks.  They  have  audit 
committees,  they  have  compensation  com-
mittees, their members include former CFOs 
(to  populate  those  committees),  and  they 
have plenty of experience reviewing fi nancial 

  ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT  

statements and analyzing profi t and loss. The 
knowns  are  known  and  the  unknowns  are 
few, if any.

It is useful to juxtapose this stable, com-
fortable picture with the state of board-level 
cybersecurity  discussion—that  is,  you  may 
not yet be certain what questions to ask, or 
know  what  to  expect  from  management’s 
responses. To help accelerate you toward the 
same level of stability and comfort you have 
managing  fi nancial  issues,  the  following 
board-level cybersecurity review blueprint is 
organized into six areas:

 1.  Inclusive 

board-level 

discussion: 
empowering all directors to be accountable 
for cybersecurity

 2.  Proactive  cyber 

risk  management: 
incorporating cybersecurity into all early 
stage business decisions

 3.  Risk-oriented prioritization: differentiating 
assets for varying levels of cyber protection
 4.  Investment  in  human  defenses:  ensuring 
the organization’s cybersecurity investment 
goes beyond technical to include awareness, 
education,  and  training  programs  for 
employees

 5.  Assessments of third-party relationships: 
limiting cyber exposure through business 
partners
 6.  Incident 

and 
procedures:  mitigating  potential  risks 
when breaches occur.

response 

policies 

1. Inclusive board-level discussion
Given  the  rapidly  growing  threat  posed  by 
cybercrime  and  the  potentially  devastating 
consequences of a major breach, it is critical 
that every director have enough of an under-
standing of cyber risk to be able to take an 
active  part  in  the  board’s  cybersecurity 

review  process,  and  that  these  discussions 
take  place  regularly—preferably  at  every 
meeting of the board.

A  committee  responsible  for  studying 
cybersecurity  risk  can  cover  both  of  these 
aspects  of  participation.  With  such  a 
committee,  someone  on  the  board  (i.e.,  the 
committee  chair)  becomes  the  stakeholder 
charged with becoming educated about cyber-
security risk and educating the broader group. 
Although the board will never need to know 
how to confi gure a fi rewall, there is much to 
learn about the nature of cybersecurity risks, 
their potential impacts on your organization, 
and successful mitigation approaches. It may 
also be appropriate to appoint a director with 
cybersecurity expertise for this purpose.

Establishing such a committee also fulfi lls 
the  goal  of  consistent  cybersecurity  discus-
sion. The chair can give a report, arrange for 
reports  from  the  CIO  or  CISO,  or  facilitate 
talks  by  outside  experts  on  issues  around 
which  additional  subject  matter  expertise 
proves useful. Threat intelligence is an exam-
ple of an excellent topic for an outside expert 
because  it’s  not  a  specialty  most  organiza-
tions have in house or that can be justifi ably 
developed. A person or organization steeped 
in  analyzing  the  tools,  approaches,  and 
behaviors  of  threat  actors  can  look  at  your 
organization’s  profi le  and  provide  custom-
ized  insight  that  accelerates  the  board’s 
cybersecurity education.

To  empower  all  directors  to  engage  in 
cybersecurity  review,  board-level  discus-
sions should address issues in the enterprise 
risk language with which boards are already 
familiar.  One  requisite,  therefore,  is  that 
boards  not  stand  for  technical  jargon.  Even 
reports from the CIO should be delivered in 
plain language free of specialized terms.

Active inclusion, in sum:
 䊏 Establish a cybersecurity risk committee, or add the subject to an existing enterprise 

risk committee.

 䊏 Discuss cybersecurity risk at every board meeting.
 䊏 Empower all directors to become educated and comfortable discussing cybersecurity risk.

  73  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

2. Proactive cyber risk management
It  is  important  to  incorporate  discussion  of 
cybersecurity  risk  in  all  business  decisions, 
from  the  beginning,  because  it  is  much 
harder  and  far  less  effective  to  consider 
cybersecurity after the fact. Whether a deci-
sion has to do with corporate strategy, new 
product  launches,  facilities,  customer  inter-
action, M&A, legal or fi nancial issues, man-
agement should always proactively consider 
cybersecurity risk.

As an example, take the white-hot omni-
channel marketing trend, which has retailers 
using mobile technology to collect data from 
their  customers,  and  then  exploiting  that 
knowledge  to  better  target  marketing  and 
promotions—sometimes,  at  the  moment  a 
customer  walks  into  the  store.  Obviously, 
such  retailers  are  gathering  more  informa-
tion about their customers than ever before. 
How  will  they  protect  it?  Do  the  mobile 
applications  that  make  these  approaches 
possible  expose  their  organizations  to  new 
vulnerabilities? No matter how exciting the 
revenue-driving opportunity, these are ques-
tions  that  retail  boards  should  be  asking 
management as part of the decision to pur-
sue  such  initiatives.  Management  should 
respond  with  some  variation  of,  “Our  soft-
ware vendor says their security is `X, and in 
addition, we’re doing our own testing to see 
how vulnerable the software may be before 
we introduce it to our customers.”

Boards should extrapolate the thinking in 
the  above  example  to  all  aspects  of  their 
business  decision-making.  To  apply  proac-
tive  thinking  to  cyber  strategy,  consider 
growth through M&A. Boards should think 
through  M&A  cybersecurity  risks  in  multi-
ple  dimensions.  To  name  three:  adding 

cybersecurity analysis of the target to their 
diligence  process;  protecting  their  M&A 
process  from  cyber  breaches;  and  potential 
cyber  exposure  resulting  from  post-deal 
integration.

In  both  of  these  examples,  it  should  be 
clear how challenging it would be to address 
cybersecurity  concerns  after  the  initiative 
gets underway.

3. Risk-based prioritization
Everyone’s  resources  are  limited.  Because 
there are an infi nite number of cybersecurity 
measures  in  which  a  company  can  invest, 
the trick is to prioritize such measures based 
on a customized assessment of the most seri-
ous  threats  facing  your  organization.  Such 
assessments  should  be  approached  along 
two  primary  dimensions:  your  organiza-
tion’s  most  valuable  assets  and  its  greatest 
cyber vulnerabilities.

Often, your most critical assets are obvi-
ous:  payment  card  data  for  a  retailer,  the 
script of an upcoming franchise sequel for 
a  movie  studio,  the  source  code  at  the 
heart  of  a  software  company’s  bestselling 
product.  Every  board’s  cybersecurity 
review must ask management what meas-
ures  are  being  taken  to  protect  a  compa-
ny’s  most  critical  assets,  beginning  with 
development  and  on  through  production 
and distribution. Beyond the most critical 
are other assets that require differentiated 
gradations  of  protection.  Identifying  and 
prioritizing  those  assets  is  an  information 
governance  challenge,  so  the  board  also 
has to understand the organization’s infor-
mation  governance  policy  and  have  a 
sense  for  the  quality  of  its  execution.  Has 
the company identifi ed what are sensitive 

Proactive cyber risk management, in sum:
 䊏 Think about potential cybersecurity risk from the outset of all business initiatives from 

corporate strategy to new types of customer interaction.

 䊏 Think particularly about new kinds of risk associated with emerging digital business 

initiatives.

■  74 

  ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT  

data and where they are being held? What 
data  are  not  sensitive  and  where  are  they 
being  held?  Are  your  retention  policies 
ensuring you keep the information that is 
important  and  throw  away  everything 
else?  We’ve  all  read  headlines  about 
breaches  that  could  have  been  less  sensa-
tional  if  the  victims  had  better  retention 
practices.

The  second  dimension—your  compa-
ny’s  cyber  vulnerabilities—is  where  cus-
tomized  threat  intelligence  plays  a  role. 
Analyzing  your  network  for  weaknesses, 
learning  where  sensitive  information  is 
stored and how it is protected, and assess-
ing your environment: the competitiveness 
of  your  industry  (e.g.,  how  valuable  your 
intellectual  property  is  to  others)  and  the 
way  information  fl ows  in  concert  with 
business  processes  (e.g.  whether  or  how 
you store sensitive information about con-
sumers  or  clients,  what  countries  you  do 
business in, and what that implies for your 
security).

The board’s cybersecurity review should 
include discussion of both dimensions, and 
the issues should be discussed often—these 
risks  are  not  static.  They  can  vary  signifi -
cantly  over  time  and  depend  on  evolving 
Internet  connectivity  and  infrastructure 
complexity.

4. Investment in human defenses
Cyber  defense  and  cyber  resilience  are  as 
much  human  matters  as  they  are  matters 
of  products  and  technology  confi gura-
tions.  Although  security  technologies  for 
protection and response are indeed neces-
sary,  boards  should  also  ask  about  enter-
prise-wide  cybersecurity  education  and 

awareness.  Furthermore,  investments  in 
human  defenses  should  be  aligned  to  the 
insights  from  customized  threat  intelli-
gence  so  they  are  focused  on  the  ‘most 
valuable/most  vulnerable’  prioritization 
discussed in the previous section.

When  looking  at  cybersecurity  invest-
ment,  board  reviews  should  include  classic 
IT  spending  on  systems  that  authenticate 
user identity and manage access, as well as 
compliance with applicable laws and regula-
tions.  However,  that’s  just  the  baseline. 
Boards need to think further, to issues such as 
the following:

How  well  does  our  IT  knowledge/expertise 
align with the kind of challenges suggested by 
our threat intelligence reports?

Are  we  appropriately  augmenting  our  inter-
nal staff with outside expertise?

Should we hire “white hat” hackers to attack 
our networks in search of gaps?

Should  we  test  our  employees’  anti-phishing 
awareness/ability?

No matter how well your security technol-
ogy works, hackers can always go after the 
weakest  link—humans—through  a  combi-
nation of tactics known as social engineer-
ing  and  spear  phishing.  The  only  defense 
against  these  phenomena  is  enterprise-
wide  education.  Ongoing  education  and 
awareness  programs,  such  as  spear  phish-
ing training, should be part of the cyberse-
curity 
investment.  Boards  should  ask 
about, support, and ensure these programs 
are aligned with business requirements.

Risk-based prioritization, in sum:
 䊏 Optimize limited resources by prioritizing along two dimensions: what’s most valuable 

and what’s most vulnerable.

 䊏 Ensure the quality of policies and practices around the organization’s approach to 

information governance so that all assets are protected appropriately.

  75  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Human investment, in sum:
Supplement appropriate investment in information security products with continuous 
enterprise-wide cybersecurity awareness, education, and training programs.

5. Assessments of third-party relationships
Those  of  us  paying  close  attention  to  the 
stories behind 2014’s cyber breach headlines 
know that in many cases the so-called “attack 
vectors”  came  through  third-party  relation-
ships.  Bad  actors  breached  a  business  part-
ner (that likely had weaker security than the 
intended  target)  and  then  used  that  part-
ner’s access credentials to break into the tar-
get company.

But this is only one way in which third-
party  relationships  create  security  vulnera-
bilities. As business collaboration surges, for 
example,  the  amount  of  confi dential,  trade 
secret, and intellectual property information 
that  is  being  shared  among  employees  of 
business partners skyrockets. This electronic 
fl ow  of  mission  critical  information,  often 
across the open Internet, creates an environ-
ment ready-made for economic espionage. It 
used to be such cases were a particular thorn 
in  the  side  of  only  a  few  sectors,  such  as 
defense,  energy,  and  technology.  Today,  all 
kinds of industries are targeted.

A  board’s  cybersecurity  review  should 
include an understanding of how the organ-
ization  conducts  cyber  due  diligence  on 
third  parties.  Boards  need  a  clear  under-
standing of the third parties their organiza-
tions  do  business  with  and  must  prioritize 
those  relationships  in  terms  of  high,  medi-
um,  and  low  risk.  Once  a  partner  is  identi-
fi ed  as  high  risk  (e.g.,  they  have  access  to 
your corporate network), that partner’s own 
security  posture  must  be  understood.  How 
much visibility does your organization have 
into  your  vendors’  security  policies  and 

practices? Do they respond to your security 
questionnaires?  Do  you  have  the  right  to 
conduct on-site validations/audits?

Boards  also  should  require  IT  involve-
ment  early  in  the  development  of  new 
business  partner  relationships.  That  way, 
information  access  can  be  better  tuned  to 
the  business  requirements  of  the  partner-
ship.  An  HR  vendor,  for  example,  may 
need access to your employee data, but that 
access may not need to be around the clock. 
Perhaps it can be controlled and limited to 
certain times of the month and/or hours of 
the  day  to  limit  risk  exposure  and  enable 
fi nely tuned security monitoring.

6. Incident response policies and procedures
Armed with the knowledge that perfect secu-
rity  isn’t  achievable  and  breaches  are  there-
fore  inevitable,  boards  must  ensure  their 
organizations  have  well-honed  policies  for 
cyber incident response, and must test these 
plans with regular simulation exercises.

Good  incident  response  plans  defi ne  the 
roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  response 
team  (including  crisis  communications, 
human  resources,  legal,  IT,  etc.)  and  estab-
lish clear initial action items, including noti-
fi cations  to  internal  and  external  resources 
who  will  lead  an  investigation  or  manage 
communications.  Remember,  preparing  for 
the worst is not an admission of a weak or 
vulnerable  network.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
delayed,  bumbling  response  to  a  security 
breach is what often leads to increased data 
loss,  exposure  to  regulatory  action,  and 
reputational damage.

Assessments of third-party relationships, in sum:
Review all business partner relationships for potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Empower IT’s involvement earlier in the development of business relationships.

■  76 

  ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT  

Two key thoughts boards should keep in 
mind  when  reviewing  incident  response 
plans were noted previously, albeit in a dif-
ferent context. First, it is critical to engage the 
entire  enterprise  in  your  incident  response 
plan. IT security professionals can only do so 
much if an employee clicks on a spear phish-
er’s  link,  creating  a  hole  in  your  network. 
Employees  can  be  educated  to  avoid  those 
clicks and incented to be fi rst responders—or, 
at  least,  to  notice  these  attempts  to  breach 
your company’s defenses. Employees are on 
the front lines of cybersecurity; prompt notice 
of a breach from an alert employee can often 
signifi cantly mitigate damage. Second, your 
organization’s  cybersecurity  risk  environ-
ment is a dynamic, ever-changing thing. Your 
incident  response  plan  must  be  kept  up  to 
date and rehearsed continually, taking evolv-
ing threat intelligence into account.

Appropriate board-level review questions 

include the following:

What are the organization’s policies and pro-
cedures to rapidly identify breaches?

How are all employees empowered to monitor 
and report/respond?

How are we triaging/escalating once an inci-
dent is detected?

How  is  incident  response  integrated  into  IT 
operations?

What are we doing to align our cyber respons-
es to business requirements and to ensure that 
all parts of the business understand their roles 
in the response plan?

How  does  our  response  plan  match  up  with 
our threat intelligence? Are we characterizing 

our risk in a way that is consistent with most 
likely attacks?

■   Conclusion: No surprises!
No one likes unpleasant surprises, least of all 
corporate  boards.  The  goal  of  a  board’s 
cybersecurity review is to avoid being unpre-
pared  for  a  cyber  incident.  Unfortunately, 
experience so far suggests that the only com-
panies  with  truly  top-grade,  board-level 
cybersecurity plans are those that have expe-
rienced an unpleasant surprise in the form of 
a  bad  breach.  They  felt  the  pain  once  and 
don’t ever want to go through it again.

If  you  follow  the  board-level  cybersecu-
rity  review  thinking  and  principles  dis-
cussed  in  this  chapter,  and  partner  with 
external  experts  that  bring  domain-specifi c 
knowledge and skills you may not have in-
house, you can avoid surprises and be pre-
pared  to  meet  risk  head  on.  The  review 
approach  described  in  this  chapter  will 
enable you to lead your organization’s shift 
from  a  paradigm  of  discomfort  and  uncer-
tainty in the cybersecurity risk realm to one 
of  assurance  and  comprehensive  answers, 
facilitated by the board’s regular cyber risk 
discussions;  from  simple  perimeter  protec-
tion  to  around-the-clock  monitoring  and 
universally  understood  incident  response; 
from lack of cyber risk awareness to enter-
prise-wide  awareness  led  by  top-down 
C-suite  messaging  and 
incentivized 
employee behavior.

The  blueprint  presented  in  this  chapter 
can help ensure you truly have your eye on 
the cyber risk ball. Obviously, that doesn’t 
mean  your  company  won’t  be  breached. 
But if—or when—you are, you will be able 
to  handle  the  event  with  clear-eyed  confi -
dence  that  the  risks  have  been  properly 
managed.

Incident response, in sum:
 䊏 Because breaches will happen, board review must ensure fi rst-class incident response.
 䊏 All enterprise employees should be part of the incident response plan.
 䊏 Incident response must continually evolve—because threats do.

  77  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

S
’
D
R
A
O
B
 
E
H
T

CYBER REVIEW blueprint

Inclusive Board-Level Discussion

Proactive Cyber Risk Management

Risk-Oriented Prioritization

Investment in Human Defenses

Assessment of Third-Party
Relationships

Incident Response Policies
and Procedures

■  78 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Demystifying cybersecurity 
strategy and reporting: How 
boards can test assumptions
Dell SecureWorks – Mike Cote, CEO

Cybersecurity is one of those issues that justify the state-
ment,  “It’s  what  you  don’t  know  that  can  hurt  you.” 
Although  board  engagement  in  cybersecurity  risk  is  on 
the rise, corporate directors continue to struggle with the 
complexity of the subject matter, making it more diffi cult 
for  them  to  assess  whether  the  company’s  strategy  is 
effective. As one public company director recently stated, 
“I understand the magnitude of the risk, and I know we 
have  signifi cant  resources  decked  against  it,  but  as  a 
board  member  how  will  I  know  if  management  has  the 
right  measures  in  place  to  keep  us  from  being  the  next 
story in the news?”

This chapter does not explain how to eliminate the risk 
of a data breach. In fact, one requirement for being resil-
ient  against  cyberthreats  is  to  accept  that  breaches  will 
happen. Nor does this chapter strive to make an expert of 
the reader. After all, the board’s job is to provide reason-
able oversight of the risk, not manage it.

What  this  chapter  does  do  is  provide  boards  with  a 
framework  of  inquiry—elements  of  a  mature  security 
strategy in plain language—to help directors have discus-
sions  with  management  about  the  company’s  overall 
resilience  against  the  threats.  By  understanding  these 
concepts,  directors  will  have  a  better  context  for  testing 
assumptions when management reports on metrics such 
as the effectiveness of breach prevention, breach frequen-
cy, and response time.

■  Background: Who is behind hacking, and why do 

they do it?

Before delving into the right strategy for cybersecurity, it 
is helpful for boards to fi rst understand the nature of the 
threat. Hacking has become a burgeoning global industry 
that generates billions of dollars in illicit trade annually. 
It’s fueled by a strong reseller’s market in which hackers 
sell stolen data to others who possess the desire but not 

79  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

the  tools  to  harvest  valuable  intellectual 
property. It’s funded by organized crime and 
actors  within  nation-states  that  not  only 
operate  beyond  any  jurisdiction  but  also 
have access to billions of dollars of capital to 
invest in these criminal operations.

The robust cyber black market offers sto-
len  goods—from  credit  cards  to  personal 
identities—in  large  quantities  at  reasonable 
cost.  Sellers  also  offer  money-back  guaran-
tees on the quality of their goods. Buyers can 
obtain tutorials for hacking or for using sto-
len data, and they can even hire subcontrac-
tors to do the dirty work.

It’s  not  always  about  the  money.  From 
attacks  based  on  sectarian  hate  between 
nation-states to sabotage from a bitter, laid-
off  employee,  motivations  for  hacking  run 
deep and wide. Anger about environmental 
policies and resentment against the excesses 
of  Wall  Street  are  among  other  examples. 
Whatever their reasons, hackers are focused 
on  stealing,  disrupting,  or  destroying  data 
every moment of every day. There are thou-
sands  of  cyber  criminals  around  the  globe. 
They work around the clock, for free or for 
hire,  on  speculation  or  with  a  known  pur-
pose, trying to invent new ways to steal or 
harm a company. They have the funding and 
technology to be not only persistent but also 
highly adaptable, and the barrier to replicat-
ing their cyber weapons is low in contrast to 
the physical world. They have the luxury of 
always being anonymous, always on offense, 
and seldom prosecuted.

Companies, on the other hand, are highly 
visible, and by virtue of being connected to 
the Internet must operate in an environment 
where  being  attacked  by  hackers  is  the 
norm.  Companies  must  prevent,  detect, 
defend against, and take on the threat with-
out  the  luxury  of  knowing  when  they’ll  be 
attacked, by whom, or on what front.

A mature cybersecurity strategy prepares 
for  and  responds  to  this  challenging  envi-
ronment.  Breaking  that  strategy  down  into 
its core elements provides boards with a use-
ful  framework  for  discussing  risk  assump-
tions  with  the  chief  information  security 
offi cer.

■  80 

■  Elements of a mature security strategy . . . in 

plain language

 1.  Determine  what  needs  protecting  and  who 

holds the keys.

Companies begin their journey to resiliency 
by identifying and prioritizing the assets they 
must  protect.  What  do  cyber  criminals  want 
that  they  can  get  from  us  and  why?  Do 
employees handle intellectual property that 
could  make  or  break  us  competitively?  Do 
we  collect  personally  identifi able  informa-
tion that cyber criminals could sell to iden-
tity  thieves?  Do  we  store  customer  account 
information?  How  would  someone  take 
command  and  control  of  our  infrastructure 
or systems?

It  is  equally  important  to  know  where 
those  coveted  assets  are  located.  Many 
boards are surprised to learn that the infor-
mation security team is fending off hackers 
across the entire enterprise, even outside it: 
for  example,  in  a  supplier’s  network,  on  a 
home  computer,  or  on  an  employee’s  iPad, 
where he or she just reviewed a proprietary 
schematic.  Hackers  are  capable  of  scanning 
for  vulnerabilities  wherever  someone  con-
nects  to  the  Internet,  and  business  leaders 
must  operate  under  the  assumption  that 
even they are a target.

As  with  sensitive  fi nancial  information, 
only  those  who  need  access  to  the  assets 
should have it, and policies should be in place 
to  ensure  stringent  controls.  Administrator 
passwords  are  gold  to  cybercriminals,  and 
increasing the number of people with access 
to  them  effectively  multiplies  the  ways  that 
hackers can attack.

 2.  Prevention is not an endgame.

It’s tempting to think that we can eliminate 
breaches if we just put more effort into pre-
vention  at  the  front  end,  but  information 
security professionals know that eliminating 
the  possibility  of  a  breach  is  an  unrealistic 
goal  in  today’s  environment.  Preventative 
tools such as fi rewalls play an essential role 
because  they  provide  the  fi rst  layer  of 
defense: they ‘recognize’ and stop the threats 

  DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING: HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS 

we  already  know  about.  As  we  already 
established,  however,  hackers  are  highly 
adaptive.  No  one  piece  of  technology  can 
provide a complete defense. A good security 
program assumes that at some point preven-
tion  will  fail  and  the  business  will  have  to 
deal with threats in its network.

Detection  then  becomes  the  focus. 
Companies need the right technology, pro-
cesses,  programs,  and  staff  to  help  them 
detect what has happened so that they can 
fi nd  the  threat  and  respond  more  quickly 
to contain and eradicate it. The question is 
not  if  the  hackers  will  get  in  but  when. 
Board  members  may  test  this  assumption 
by  asking  their  security  team,  “Do  we 
know  if  hackers  are  inside  our  defenses 
right  now?  How  do  we  know  when  they 
get in?”

 3.  You can’t defend with your eyes closed.

No one wants to be blindsided. If a compa-
ny’s  security  team  can’t  “see”  what  is  hap-
pening on the network and across all of the 
endpoints  such  as  work  stations,  point-of-
sale terminals, and mobile devices, then the 
company will have little chance to detect or 
respond  quickly  to  an  attack  when  preven-
tion fails. Visibility across the enterprise is an 
essential attribute of the cybersecurity strat-
egy  because  it  helps  companies  respond  to 
unusual  activity  more  quickly,  reducing 
down time and related costs.

Business  leaders  should  know  that  hav-
ing visibility means collecting large amounts 
of data from all of those places. Unfortunately 
those  data  are  useless  if  the  security  team 
doesn’t have the bandwidth to analyze and 
act on it. The information security industry 
has responded to this problem, and services 
are  available  to  manage  the  data,  do  the 
heavy lifting, and sort out what is actionable. 
The actionable data can then be fed back to 
the  information  security  team  to  more  effi -
ciently zero in on the threats that need their 
immediate attention. Boards may ask if their 
security team is managing all the data itself, 
and, if so, does it still have the bandwidth to 
focus on the actual threats.

 4.  Stay a step ahead: The future won’t look like 

the past.

To stay one step ahead of the threat, an infor-
mation security program should also be able 
to  predict  what  the  adversary  will  do  next. 
To make fi nancial predictions, business lead-
ers  apply  internal  and  environmental  intel-
ligence  to  test  assumptions.  In  the  case  of 
cybersecurity,  security  teams  should  apply 
“threat  intelligence,”  which  tells  them  the 
intent and capabilities of current, real-world 
hackers  who  may  want  to  harm  them. 
Gathered  from  a  company’s  own  environ-
ment  and  often  supplemented  with  much 
broader  environmental  intelligence  from  a 
third party, threat intelligence can be applied 
to  cybersecurity  technologies  and  human 
procedures. As a result, the enterprise is able 
to  anticipate  the  nature  of  forthcoming 
attacks and more effectively allocate limited 
resources to stop them.

Companies with the ability to predict can 
also defend earlier with less effort and recov-
er faster when a breach occurs. When boards 
and management discuss metrics like breach 
frequency,  response  time,  and  potential 
impact,  it’s  helpful  to  know  if  the  security 
team  is  applying  threat  intelligence  to  help 
them make their assumptions.

 5.  Educate and train vigilant employees.

One of the most important defenses against 
cyberattack is an informed, vigilant employ-
ee population. Employees and executives are 
often  targeted  with  carefully  crafted  emails 
designed  to  be  relevant  to  the  employee’s 
personal or work life. In reality, these phish-
ing  emails  are  often  loaded  with  malicious 
code. One click by a less careful individual 
can deploy a cyber weapon into the compa-
ny’s  network  and  execute  various  actions 
that shut down critical business functions or 
steal information and accounts. Similar tac-
tics  may  be  used  over  the  phone  to  get 
employees  to  divulge  confi dential  informa-
tion  such  as  client  lists,  which  can  then  be 
paired with other stolen data to complete a 
set of stolen identities.

  81  ■

CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

The bottom line is that human behavior 
is  equally  as  important  as  security  tech-
nologies  in  defending  against  the  threat. 
Boards  should  know  whether  employee 
awareness  and  training  programs  are  in 
place and how effective they are. The best 
programs  will  simulate  how  hackers  may 
trick an employee and provide on-the-spot 
training  if  the  employee  falls  victim.  An 
open dialog in these cases helps employees 
and the organization as a whole learn from 
mistakes. It also builds a culture of security 
awareness.

 6.  Organize  information  security  teams  for 

success.

Defending  and  responding  effectively 
against cyber adversaries also depends on 
manpower  and  expertise.  Technologies 
cannot be used to full advantage without 
highly skilled people to correlate, analyze, 
prioritize,  and  turn  the  data  into  actiona-
ble intelligence that can be used to increase 
resilience.  A  properly  organized  and 
staffed  security  team  needs  people  with 
many  different  types  of  expertise  and 
skills.  It  requires  people  to  deploy  the 
technologies, understand what the threats 
are, determine what hackers are doing, fix 
system  and  software  vulnerabilities,  and 
counter  active  threats.  Although  these 
professional  capabilities  are  interdepend-
ent,  they  are  not  all  interchangeable, 
requiring  different  training  and  certifica-
tions.  Information  security  leaders  also 
need  the  management  skills  to  put  the 
right  governance  processes  and  proce-
dures  in  place,  advocate  for  security 
requirements,  and  communicate  risk  to 
senior management.

Boards  are  encouraged  to  inquire  as  to 
whether  the  security  team  has  the  band-
width and manpower to be able to respond 
and remediate a crisis, as well as to handle 
day-to-day  operations.  Security 
teams 
should be organized to focus on what mat-
ters  most—immediate  threats—and  other 
resources should be considered where there 
are gaps.

■  82 

 7.  Measure effectiveness, not compliance.

It is impossible for a company to know how 
effective its security program is against real-
world attackers unless it conducts real-world 
exercises  to  test  its  defenses.  Compliance 
frameworks  can  improve  rigor  in  many 
areas  of  cybersecurity,  but  it  is  folly  to 
assume  that  following  a  compliance  man-
date  (or  even  passing  a  compliance  inspec-
tion)  is  commensurate  with  resilience.  No 
matter how well architected a security pro-
gram is against recommended standards, no 
two companies’ environments are alike.

That’s why it is so important to battle-test 
one’s  own  environment.  Network  security 
testing  emulates  actual  hackers  using  real-
life tactics such as phishing to validate how 
well  defenses  work  against  simulated 
attacks.  By  learning  how  hackers  penetrate 
security defenses, companies can determine 
actual risk and resource cybersecurity opera-
tions accordingly. Testing also helps compa-
nies meet compliance mandates. Compliance 
should be a by-product of an effective secu-
rity program, not the other way around.

 8.  Emphasize process as much as technology.

Technology is only half the solution to mak-
ing a company resilient. Breaches can occur 
as  the  result  of  human  and  process  errors 
throughout the enterprise. Take the example 
of  recent  high-profi le  cases  in  which  weak-
nesses in a supply chain or a business part-
ner’s security allowed hackers to access the 
parent  company’s  network  and  do  signifi -
cant  damage.  Leading  practice  today  is  for 
companies  to  insist,  by  contract,  that  their 
business  partners  meet  the  same  security 
requirements.

However,  what  if  a  business  line  leader 
fails to insist on contract requirements in the 
interest  of  going  to  market  quickly?  What 
happens when business enablement trumps 
security  in  the  far  reaches  of  the  business, 
where  people  think,  “No  harm  done”? 
Adequate checks and balances should be in 
place to ensure that IT security and business 
procedures are being executed, and policies 

  DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING: HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS 

should  hold  relevant  business  leaders  and 
employees accountable for implementation. 
How do you know when procedure isn’t fol-
lowed? Real world testing confi rms not only 
the  effectiveness  of  your  defenses  but  also 
the  process,  policies,  and  procedures  that 
keep  those  defenses  in  place,  operational 
and optimized for resilience.

■  Summary: A framework for oversight
By  the  very  nature  of  being  connected  to 
the  Internet,  companies  are  targeted  24/7, 
365  days  a  year  by  anonymous,  sophisti-
cated  hackers  who  strive  to  steal  from  or 
harm the business and its employees. That 
ongoing  challenge  is  taking  place  across 
the  entire  enterprise,  not  just  on  the  net-
work,  so  it’s  important  to  remember  that 
we  all  play  a  role  in  managing  the  risk: 
employees,  business  partners,  and  even 
board  members.  There  is  no  silver  bullet 
piece  of  technology  that  will  eliminate  all 
danger,  and  being  resilient  is 
just  as 
dependent on people and process as it is on 
technology.  A  cybersecurity  ‘win’  in  this 
environment  is  defi ned  as  how  effectively 
and  effi ciently  the  company  fi nds  and 
removes threats from its environment and 
whether it remains fully operational in the 
process.

Cybersecurity  risk  is  an  enterprise  risk, 
not  a  function  of  IT.  For  boards  to  provide 
reasonable  oversight  they’ll  have  to  under-
stand  what  the  company  is  protecting, 
inquire  about  how  well  the  company  is 
organized to defend those assets, and explore 
whether it has the manpower and capabili-
ties  to  respond  and  remediate  in  the  event 
of  a  breach.  Compliance  is  an  important 

element of cybersecurity, but it is a by-product 
of a good program, not the measure of effec-
tiveness. Nor is it a guarantee of security, as 
illustrated  by  many  recent  high-profi le 
breaches  in  which  companies  had  already 
met  the  requirements  for  one  compliance 
mandate or another.

Diffi cult  decisions  about  funding  can  be 
made  more  easily  by  discussing  how  exist-
ing  resources  are  allocated.  Many  business 
leaders fear that “we’ll never spend enough,” 
but  experience  shows  that  a  pragmatic 
approach to funding the security program is 
to focus on effectiveness and prioritization:

 䊏 Determine  actual  vulnerabilities  by 

regularly testing defenses.

 䊏 Detect  the  perpetrators  more  quickly  by 

increasing visibility.

 䊏 Predict and mitigate risks more quickly and 

effi ciently by applying threat intelligence.

 䊏 Apply  time,  attention,  and  funding 

accordingly.

Companies may also want to consider third-
party  providers  to  monitor,  correlate,  and 
analyze the massive quantity of data that a 
mature  security  program  generates.  This 
allows  valuable,  and  sometimes  scarce, 
human  resources  to  focus  on  the  actual 
threats. A reputable third party can also pro-
vide the testing that determines effectiveness 
and be a helpful validator of the program.

Armed with an understanding of what a 
mature security program looks like and how 
it  plays  out  across  the  entire  enterprise, 
boards will be better equipped to discuss the 
company’s  current  strategy  and  inquire 
about assumptions in the metrics.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  83  ■

Cyber risk corporate 
structure

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

The CEO’s guide to driving better 
security by asking the right questions
Palo Alto Networks Inc. – Davis Hake, 
Director of Cybersecurity Strategy

I  recently  met  with  a  chief  information  offi cer  (CIO) 
whose chief executive offi cer (CEO) had just taken a strik-
ing and dramatic interest in cybersecurity. He had read an 
article in the paper about cyberthreats to major corpora-
tions  and  wanted  to  know  what  his  own  company  was 
doing to solve the specifi c problem described in the arti-
cle.  The  CIO  was  incensed,  because  the  question  would 
inevitably  force  him  to  shift  priorities  for  his  already 
overworked team to an issue that had little to no effect on 
their actual security efforts. There is an old saying in the 
disaster response community that you shouldn’t exchange 
business cards during an emergency. In essence, you need 
to familiarize yourself with the risks and relevant people 
before an emergency so security teams are not blown in 
different directions depending on the new security scare 
of the day.

Similarly,  CEOs  cannot  familiarize  themselves  with 
cybersecurity narrowly through the lens of a single inci-
dent  that  occurs  on  their  network  or  with  one  of  their 
competitors. The danger in responding to a singular event 
or threat in isolation—or daily incidents we read about in 
the press—is that this is a reactive approach rather than a 
holistic, risk-based approach. Cybersecurity is the poster 
child for this phenomenon. Executives know that there is 
a  newfound  focus  on  cybersecurity  at  the  boardroom 
level—incidents like Target’s 2013 data breach have been 
a wake-up call for many—but there is often still a severe 
lack  of  understanding  about  the  real  risks  behind  the 
headlines.  The  statistics  also  back  up  the  magnitude  of 
these anecdotes.

A  recent  New  York  Stock  Exchange  (NYSE)  and 
Veracode survey looking at boardroom attention to cyber-
security  found  80  percent  of  participants  said  it  is  dis-
cussed in most or every boardroom meeting. They noted 
specifi cally that “responsibility for attacks is being seen as 

87  ■

CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE

a  broader  business  issue,  signaling  a  shift 
AWAY  from  the  chief  information  security 
offi cer  (CISO)  and  the  IT  security  team.” 
Where  is  this  shift  moving  to?  “When  a 
breach  does  occur,  boards  are  increasingly 
looking  to  the  CEO  and  other  members  of 
the  executive  team  to  step  up  and  take 
responsibility,” said the authors.

Yet despite this shift in perceived respon-
sibility to the executive level, there does not 
appear to be the same drive to connect tech-
nical teams to the board-level focus on con-
cerns  about  cybersecurity  risk.  A  2015 
Raytheon  and  Ponemon  Institute  study  of 
those with the day-to-day technical respon-
sibility  for  cybersecurity,  CIOs,  CISOs,  and 
senior  IT  leaders,  found  that  66  percent  of 
respondents  believe  senior  leaders  don’t 
perceive  cybersecurity  as  a  priority.  What 
this  means  is  that  while  CEOs  are  increas-
ingly on the hook from their boards for being 
savvy  about  cyber  risks,  many  are  not  yet 
engaging  with  the  necessary  parts  of  their 
organization to address cybersecurity issues.
Our hope is that this guide can prime you 
to ask productive questions that drive better 
people, processes, and technological change 
to  reduce  the  risk  of  successful  breaches  of 
your organization. As the CEO, it is your job 
to balance risk and reward within your com-
pany.  Cyberthreats  are  not  magic,  hackers 
are  not  wizards,  and  the  risks  to  your  spe-
cifi c organization from a breach can be man-
aged just like any other risks that you make 
decisions about every day. In fact, these risks 
can  even  be  turned  into  opportunities  for 
new innovation.

But  where  to  begin?  You  want  to  avoid 
causing  unnecessary  work,  but  you  are 
required  to  participate,  and  often  lead,  the 
conversation around addressing cyber risks. 
When the U.S. Government began working 
with  members  of  the  IT  and  critical  infra-
structure 
industry  on  a  Cybersecurity 
Framework for improving critical infrastruc-
ture cybersecurity, a key point that arose was 
the need for nontechnical tools that could be 
used  at  an  executive  level.  Technical  best 
practices have existed in international stand-
ards and government agencies for years, but 

■  88 

common problems such as a lack of invest-
ment,  absence  of  high-level  strategy,  and 
failure to integrate into business operations 
still plagued many organizations struggling 
to  address  cyberthreats.  Seeing  this  tension 
in many of the organizations they were brief-
ing on cyberthreats, the U.S. Department of 
Homeland  Security  worked  with  current 
and  former  executives  to  help  capture  fi ve 
simple questions that a CEO could ask his or 
her technical team, which would also drive 
better security practices. They are:

 1.  What  is  the  current  level  and  business 
impact  of  cyber  risks  to  our  company? 
What  is  our  plan  to  address  identifi ed 
risks?

 2.  How is our executive leadership informed 
about  the  current  level  and  business 
impact of cyber risks to our company?

 3.  How  does  our  cybersecurity  program 
industry  standards  and  best 

apply 
practices?

 4.  How  many  and  what  types  of  cyber 
incidents do we detect in a normal week? 
What  is  the  threshold  for  notifying  our 
executive leadership?

 5.  How comprehensive is our cyber incident 
response  plan?  How  often  is  the  plan 
tested?

The team that coordinated the Cybersecurity 
Framework also provided key recommenda-
tions to leadership, to align their cyber risk 
policies with these questions. First and fore-
most,  it  is  critical  for  CEOs  to  lead  incor-
poration of their cyber risks into existing risk 
management  efforts.  Forget  the  checklist 
approach;  only  you  know  the  specifi c  risk-
reward  balance  for  your  business,  so  only 
you can understand what is most important 
to your company. It seems simple, but with 
cybersecurity,  the  default  practice  tends  to 
be  for  organizations  to  silo  considerations 
about  risks  into  a  separate  category  apart 
from  thinking  about  their  valuable  assets. 
You have to start by identifying what is most 
critical  to  protect  and  work  out  from  there. 
The process of aligning your core value with 
your top IT concerns is a journey and is not 

  THE CEO’S GUIDE TO DRIVING BETTER SECURITY BY ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS  

something  that  can  be  solved  in  one  lump 
investment  or  board  meeting.  Just  like  any 
risk  analysis,  it  requires  serious  considera-
tion and thought about what is most impor-
tant to your core business practices.

Which  brings  me  to  the  second  recom-
mendation to come out of the Cybersecurity 
Framework effort: don’t begin your journey 
alone! Bring your leadership team, especially 
your  CIO,  chief  security  offi cer  (CSO),  and 
CISO, into the conversation from the start, to 
help determine how your IT priorities match 
to  your  business  goals.  Building  a  diverse 
team  that  includes  other  leaders,  such  as 
your  head  of  human  resources,  will  help 
foster  a  culture  that  views  cyberthreats  not 
as  “someone  else’s  problem”  but  as  chal-
lenges  that  should  be  addressed  and  dealt 
with as an entire organization. For example, 
cyber criminals still continue to successfully 
use  fake  emails  as  a  primary  method  for 
gaining  access  to  a  company’s  network. 
Stopping  these  attacks  requires  not  just  a 
technical  solution  but  also  strong  training, 
which  is  often  the  responsibility  of  human 
resources and not your IT security team.

As more signifi cant challenges arise, and 
they will do so often and unexpectedly, lean 
on  your  leadership  team  to  evaluate  prob-
lems in relation to the impact to your other 
business  risks.  Then  let  your  team  address 
them based on your existing business goals. 
For  example,  if  you  experience  a  cyber 
breach  or  accidental  disclosure  of  sensitive 
information,  a  diverse  leadership  team  is 
incredibly helpful at not just responding to 
the  technical  problems  but  also  ensuring 
other  areas  such  as  public  image,  legal 
ramifi cations, and revenue impact are taken 
into  consideration  in  any  mitigation  and 
remediation  efforts.  It  is  your  job  to  help 
frame  the  problem  for  your  team  and  pro-
vide oversight and guidance, not microman-
age a crisis.

As with normal business operations, you 
should  also  be  asking  your  team  to  assist 
you  in  day-to-day  requirements  of  your 
cybersecurity, such as reviewing IT budgets 
and personnel security policies. None of this 
is surprising, and you will fi nd that despite 

not having a cybersecurity background, you 
will certainly be able to make valuable con-
tributions  about  which  cyber  risks  are 
acceptable.  You  will  fi nd  situations  where 
the  operational  priorities  that  you  are 
responsible for as CEO, outweigh cybersecu-
rity risks. Your perspective on these matters 
is what makes you core to leading cyberse-
curity efforts in your organization.

Finally,  as  with  any  risk  management 
effort, you must plan for the best but prepare 
for the worst. Cyberthreats are very real, and 
advanced hacking tools once available only 
to  nation-states  are  regularly  sold  on  the 
online  black  market.  There  are  technical 
architectures  that  can  prevent  and  limit 
damage done by cyberattacks (see Palo Alto 
Network’s  other  chapter,  “Designing  for 
breach prevention”), but no solution is ever 
100 percent. Developing an incident response 
plan  that  is  coordinated  across  your  enter-
prise  and  regularly  tested  is  vital  for  even 
the  most  well-defended  organizations.  Use 
your existing risk management practices and 
your leadership team to identify your most 
important assets; then plan for what would 
happen to your company if those assets were 
shut off or inaccessible for a sustained peri-
od of time. Similar to fi re drills, regular prac-
tice also helps you stay aware of cybersecu-
rity’s constantly changing environment and 
shows a personal interest that will signal the 
issue’s importance throughout your compa-
ny.  There  are  also  excellent  chapters  in  this 
book to get you started in setting up an inci-
dent  response  plan,  and  there  are  many 
good companies that specialize in the sticky 
problems of rebuilding your network when 
you need to call in the cavalry.

While  risk  management  is  a  strong 
approach  to  tackling  the  challenges  of 
cybersecurity, the bottom line is that it will 
often require some investment in new peo-
ple,  processes,  or  technology.  A  common 
myth is that security must be a cost center 
for every organization. This view has plagued 
IT security experts for years, as their efforts 
are viewed as drains on resources that would 
otherwise  be  bringing  in  revenue.  But  as 
you  start  to  lay  out  cybersecurity  from  a 

  89  ■

CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE

risk  management  perspective,  you  will 
be  forced  to  identify  your  most  valuable 
assets,  pressing  vulnerabilities,  and  core 
motivations.  This  introspective  approach 
can also drive new ideas applicable to your 
core  business  lines.  It  is  imperative  that 
you recognize these innovations and make 
the  right  investments  to  reap  both  the 
benefi ts of better security and new business 
opportunities.

For example, take a company that wants 
to enable its sales staff to securely meet with 
customers face to face away from the offi ce 
for consultations. Using mobile devices and 
phones  to  access  internal  company  data, 
such  as  customer  accounts,  from  the  fi eld 
can open serious cyber risks. In this case you 
could ensure that when purchasing a mobile 
platform, you also choose a security vendor 
that can provide mobile device management 
capabilities. This allows your IT department 
to  secure  lost  or  stolen  devices  and  limit 
malicious software that could be accidental-
ly downloaded by employees (or often their 
kids), limiting cyber risks and enabling fl ex-
ibility of your sales team.

Another great example is the use of soft-
ware as a service (SaaS) products. You may 

know  these  as  web-based  email  or  online 
storage services. They are incredibly popular 
for their low cost, fl exibility, and availability 
across multiple platforms, but they also exist 
on servers outside your control and can pre-
sent  a  huge  risk  from  users  accidentally 
making  company  resources  available  to 
external  parties.  There  are  now  innovative 
solutions  that  can  manage  these  programs 
just like any normal application that lives on 
your  network  and  even  block  their  use  for 
only malicious purposes.

True  leadership  in  any  issue  doesn’t 
involve simply throwing more money at the 
problem; you must always balance the risks 
and  rewards  of  your  decisions  and  invest-
ments into a coherent strategy. Cybersecurity 
is no different. Unfortunately, today’s reality 
is such that cyberthreats will remain an issue 
of  fear  for  boardrooms  in  the  foreseeable 
future, leading to default knee-jerk reactions 
as  new  threats  evolve.  Ultimately,  we  must 
get to a place where cybersecurity is a nor-
mal part of any business’s operational plan. 
With  cool-headed,  rational  leadership,  you 
have  the  unique  ability  to  help  transform 
this  issue  in  your  company  from  a  crisis  to 
an opportunity for real innovation.

■  90 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Establishing the structure, 
authority, and processes to 
create an effective program
Coalfi re – Larry Jones, CEO and Rick 
Dakin, CEO (2001-2015)

Cybersecurity program oversight is currently an unsettling 
process  for  many  C-suites  and  boardrooms.  Establishing 
structure,  authority,  and  program  oversight  should  be 
aligned to existing management processes and structure for 
other critical programs. However, cybersecurity programs 
remain unsettling. Why?

Simply put, cybersecurity programs address a different 
type  of  risk.  Typically,  the  risk  that  is  being  addressed 
includes sophisticated attacks that are intended to interrupt 
operations or steal sensitive data. In either case, organiza-
tions  fi nd  themselves  under  attack.  In  the  case  of  Sony,  a 
nation-state attacked the company for the sole purpose of 
disrupting  the  distribution  of  media.  In  the  case  of 
JP Morgan Chase, a highly sophisticated adversary launched 
a denial of service attack against the service delivery plat-
form to disrupt the fl ow of transactions. Both cases provide 
business justifi cation to manage cybersecurity initiatives as 
a bet-your-business type of risk management program.

The  connection  between  the  boardroom  and  those 
managing the technical infrastructure is critical. However, 
no  board  or  C-Suite  has  the  skills  or  knowledge  of  the 
threat  landscape  or  technologies  involved  in  cybersecu-
rity  programs  to  fl atten  the  management  structure  for 
top  to  bottom  direct  management.  Each  level  of  the 
organization  must  participate  in  an  integrated  and  col-
laborative  fashion.  The  structure  and  risk  management 
responsibilities  have  been  documented  many  times  by 
well-respected  cybersecurity  organizations  such  as  the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 
a  series  of  special  publications.  Coalfi re  has  specifi cally 
supported  the  local  adoption  and  application  of  these 
general principles for the electric utility, fi nancial servic-
es, health-care, and retail sectors. As a result, this chapter 
leverages the lessons learned from those previous engage-
ments to provide a condensed but effective approach to 

91  ■

CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE

cyber  risk  management  and  cybersecurity 
program creation and oversight.

First, the nature of the threat landscape is 
evolving,  while  the  underlying  technology 
platforms  that  hold  sensitive  data  are  also 
changing.  In  this  fl uid  environment,  man-
agement  must  create  a  nimble  program  of 
active cyber defenses informed by an itera-
tive risk management process. For the fore-
seeable future, cybersecurity program over-
sight will not be one that can be reduced to 
an  annual  review  process.  When  cyberat-
tacks  go  undetected  for  months  and  then 
bring a company to its knees overnight, the 
level  of  vigilance  and  communication  is 
heightened. To be effective, the structure has 
to  be  distributed  throughout  the  organiza-
tion, and risk thresholds have to be set that 
cause  unplanned  alerts  to  drive  manage-
ment action on a regularly scheduled review 
and ad hoc incident-response basis.

Often the primary risks to cyber assets is a 
cyberattack.  The  sophistication  and  determi-
nation of known threat actors drives the exec-
utive team to put on war paint and respond in 
kind. Unlike other enterprise risks that can be 
managed with traditional controls, cybersecu-
rity requires the mindset of a warrior. Think in 
terms  of  Sun  Tzu’s  guiding  principles  pub-
lished  in  473  BC,  The  Art  of  War:  “we  must 
know ourselves and our enemies and select a 
strategy to positively infl uence the outcome of 
battle. There is no reason to fear the attack but 
there  is  reason  to  be  concerned  about  our 
readiness to defend ourselves from the attack 
and respond appropriately.”

The most common approach for creating 
and maintaining an enterprise cybersecurity 
program  follows  a  fi ve-step  risk  manage-
ment  process.  The  process  is  iterative  and 
constantly  informed  by  new  information. 
I am often asked, “When will the cybersecu-
rity program be completed?” Unfortunately, 
the answer is never. Cybersecurity has to be 
viewed  as  a  process  and  not  an  end  point, 
the proverbial marathon versus sprint.

Each  of  the  steps  in  the  process  requires 
participation  at  multiple  levels  across  an 
organization.

■  92 

FIGURE

Cybersecurity Program 
Benchmarks

Adjust

Plan

Respond

Protect

Detect

 1.  Plan
 

i.  Cyber asset inventory and environment 

characterization

ii.  Risk assessment and risk management 

 

iii.  Governance and organization structure

i.  Program  control  design,  control 

selection, and implementation

strategy

 
 2.  Protect
 

ii.  Training
iii.  Maintenance

 
 
 3.  Detect
 

i.  Threat  and  program  effectiveness 

monitoring and reporting
ii.  Incident  alerting  and 

 

response 

planning

 4.  Respond
 
 
 5.  Adjust
 

i.  Event analysis and escalation
ii.  Containment, eradication, and recovery

i.  Lessons 

learned 

and  program 

adjustment

ii.  Communications

 

The rest of the chapter addresses each step of 
the  cybersecurity  program  development 
process  and  highlights  responsibilities  for 
stakeholders throughout the organization.

  ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM 

■  Plan
Cyber asset inventory and environment characterization
In accordance with the principles of Sun Tzu, 
“know  thyself.”  When  cybersecurity  pro-
grams are managed at only a technical level, 
the  focus  of  the  program  is  at  risk  of  being 
misdirected. Sensitive data hosted on an inex-
pensive platform may bely the true value to 
the organization. Only senior executives and 
business unit managers understand the rela-
tive importance of specifi c operations or data.
Simple  cybersecurity  program  designs 
often include some level of network and data 
segmentation,  encryption,  or  levels  of  access. 
As  a  senior  executive,  one  of  the  things  you 
should  be  asking  is  if  your  most  important 
systems and most sensitive data are properly 
deployed  in  the  protected  zones  within  your 
system architecture. However, the IT team will 
never  know  how  to  answer  that  question  if 
senior management (specifi cally business unit 
management)  does  not  specifi cally  provide 
guidance  on  the  relative  importance  of  busi-
ness functions and their associated systems.

The  new  generation  CIOs  and  CISOs 
understand  this  principle  completely,  and 
the best of them have structured the operat-
ing  environment  and  security  programs  to 
focus  on  the  most  important  cyber  assets. 
However,  to  assume  all  CIOs  or  CISOs 
understand  this  principle  of  critical  asset 
classifi cation and environment characteriza-
tion is dangerous, because many do not. The 
most  important  part  of  this  discussion  is, 
“Does  every  business  unit  manager  under-
stand  what  his  or  her  most  critical  cyber 
assets  are  and  where  they  are  deployed?” 
Even  if  the  CIO  and  CISO  understand  the 
relative  priorities,  senior  executives  cannot 
effectively  participate  in  either  cyber  risk 
management or cybersecurity program over-
sight without fi rst understanding the extent 
of the environment being protected.

As a quick warning, many of my clients 
have the false expectation that cybersecurity 
has become a critical part of the design for 
new  or  more  modern  platforms  being  pur-
chased from large vendors and hosting pro-
viders. This expectation has proven false so 

many times that it is more realistic to expect 
that  vendors  have  done  little  to  inherently 
protect systems or data in the native design 
of  their  systems.  In  many  cases,  unless 
deployed  appropriately,  new  cloud  and 
mobile  applications  can  actually  decrease 
the level of cybersecurity already deployed 
on legacy systems. It is the responsibility of 
each  executive  to  fully  defi ne  his  or  her 
operating  environment  and  include  critical 
third parties in the assessment.

Although lack of cybersecurity integration 
by vendors is not universal, we’re seeing some 
enlightenment  in  a  few  security-focused  ser-
vice providers. However, it remains a serious 
concern for the majority of new system acqui-
sition and support processes, and cybersecurity 
typically shifts to an add-on feature after pro-
curement  of  a  major  new  system  in  many 
cases. In short, the process of identifying criti-
cal cyber assets and the systems that support 
those assets will remain a key part of the cyber-
security  program  oversight  function  for  the 
long  term.  The  process  of  ‘knowing  thyself’ 
has been expanded to knowing your partners 
and  vendors  and  where  your  sensitive  data 
has been shared or managed by third parties.

The following is a quick test:

 䊏 What  are  your  top  3  most  important 
business  processes,  and  what  systems 
support those functions?

 䊏 Does 

the  way  your  CIO  answers 
the  previous  question  match  your 
understanding of critical systems?

Risk assessment and risk management strategy
After a solid understanding of the battlefi eld 
is  established  and  executives  appreciate  the 
critical  cyber  assets  being  protected,  an 
assessment  of  risk  to  those  cyber  assets  is 
critical to the design of the cybersecurity pro-
gram.  The  ability  to  adjust  the  program  to 
meet the evolving threat landscape and tech-
nology  architecture  shifts  is  an  important 
component of organizational security matu-
rity. Responsibilities for conducting an effec-
tive cyber risk assessment are distributed at 
three levels, as shown in Figure 2.

  93  ■

CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE

FIGURE

Cyber Risk Organizational Structure 
and Responsibilities

 TIER 1:
Executive
Leadership

(cid:129)  Corporate strategy
(cid:129)  Policy

(cid:129)  Results of 
   monitoring
(cid:129)  Feedback

 TIER 2:
Business

Management

(cid:129)  Actionable policy
  and procedures
(cid:129)  Guidance and
  constraints

(cid:129)  Results of 
  monitoring
(cid:129)  Feedback

 TIER 3:
Systems

Management

The  primary  objective  for  a  risk  assess-
ment  is  to  drive  selection  of  adequate  and 
rational  controls  and  then  assign  responsi-
bilities to manage those controls. During the 
process  the  environment  will  be  character-
ized to bring context and the existing system 
vulnerabilities,  and  weaknesses  will  be 
evaluated  to  select  controls  to  offset  the 
probability of compromise during an attack. 
A  comprehensive  cybersecurity  program 
addresses  administrative,  physical,  and 
technical controls as an integrated suite.

Once the inherent threats and vulnerabili-
ties are understood within the context of the 
impact they could have on the organization, 
its  clients,  and  partners,  senior  executives 
must approve the risk management strategy. 
Many  executives  want  to  see  all  risk  either 
mitigated or transferred. However, the bulk 
of companies in critical infrastructure indus-
tries end up accepting some level of risk in 
their strategy. Cost, continuity of operations, 
or other concerns may drive the formation of 
the cybersecurity program to mitigate what 
is  reasonable  and  accept  the  residual  risk. 
Cybersecurity  insurance  is  becoming  an 

■  94 

increasingly  popular  means  of  transferring 
risk  but  comes  with  the  requirement  that 
you  understand  risk  in  ways  that  may  not 
have been previously considered. It is impor-
tant that the business units and security staff 
are  able  to  communicate  the  constraints  as 
well  as  the  risk  mitigation  alternatives  for 
senior  executives  to  make  reasonable  deci-
sions on risk management strategies.

Governance and organization structure
The risk assessment management duties and 
responsibilities  are  typically  allocated  in 
accordance with Table 1.

■  Protect
Program design and implementation
The outcome for any cybersecurity program 
is  the  expectation  that  an  organization  can 
defend its critical cyber assets from irrepara-
ble  damage  resulting  from  a  cyberattack. 
The  impact  of  cyberattack  is  different  for 
every organization. As a result, the cyberse-
curity  strategy  and  associated  program 
must  be  considered  against  the  potential 
impact.

  ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM 

TABLE

Executive

 䊏 Prioritize critical assets
 䊏 Establish risk appetite
 䊏 Approve risk 

Management strategy
 䊏 Mitigate the risk
 䊏 Transfer the risk
 䊏 Accept the risk

 䊏 Approve the program 

and policies

 䊏 Assign responsibilities
 䊏 Provide oversight

Levels of Authority and Responsibility

Business Unit
 䊏 Defi ne boundaries
 䊏 Design use case 

scenarios to understand 
impact from system 
attack and compromise
 䊏 Identify constraints for 

mitigating all risk

 䊏 Develop a justifi ed risk 

management strategy
 䊏 Identify all required 
users of systems or 
delegates to receive data 
on a “need to know” 
basis

Systems Management
 䊏 Recommend technical 
and physical controls
 䊏 Identify threats and 

system vulnerabilities

 䊏 Evaluate the likelihood 

and probability of 
impact for each threat 
and vulnerability

 䊏 Estimate the impact on 
systems and operations 
from a fi nancial, 
legal, and regulatory 
perspective

Although security programs are different 
for every company, the principles for devel-
oping the program are fairly consistent. NIST 
Special  Publication  800-53  has  done  a  good 
job in describing the selection of controls for 
high-,  medium-,  and  low-level  impacts. 
Every organization needs access controls, but 
only  those  that  result  in  national  security 
impact are realistic candidates for deploying 
the high-level version of that control. Many 
executives  are  “sold”  a  package  of  controls 
because  they  are  used  by  the  NSA,  but  the 
question  to  ask  is,  “How  does  the  NSA 
mission relate to our operations?”

As  discussed  in  the  risk  assessment  seg-
ment,  executives  have  to  defi ne  their  risk 
appetite. This is hard during the early days 
of  cybersecurity  program  development 
because most of the C-suites have an inher-
ently low risk appetite and do not yet under-
stand  the  impact  of  lowering  the  threshold 
for control selection. As a result, cybersecu-
rity programs are often a work in process for 
several years.

the  security  solutions  selected.  Rather,  the 
magic is in the ability of the organization to 
manage  those  solutions  to  mitigate  risks. 
Because  the  security  skills  available  in  the 
industry today are low and growing increas-
ingly rare, companies should expect to spend 
a  disproportionate  amount  of  training  dol-
lars on cybersecurity.

Maintenance
Anyone working in forensic response will tell 
you that system compromise and data breach 
are  rarely  the  result  of  some  sophisticated 
attack that no one has ever been seen before. 
The bulk of effective attacks use vulnerabili-
ties  that  have  been  known  for  years.  Cross-
site  scripting,  shell  or  SQL  injection,  shared 
administrator accounts, lack of patching, and 
other  standard  security  hygiene  issues  are 
normally  the  culprits.  There  are  two  signifi -
cant  operations  that  go  dramatically  under-
funded  in  most  organizations:  maintenance 
of systems and security controls, which leaves 
organizations vulnerable to attack.

Training
The  best  cybersecurity  programs  are  the 
ones  that  staff  and  partners  will  actually 
execute.  Contrary  to  what  many  vendors 
and partners will tell you, the magic is not in 

■  Detect
Program monitoring and reporting
The days of ‘acquire, deploy, and forget’ are 
over.  For  years,  senior  executives  did  not 
have to participate in cybersecurity program 

  95  ■

CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE

oversight,  because  a  combination  of  fi re-
walls,  malware  protection,  and  light  access 
controls  were  adequate  to  defend  against 
previous  generations  of  relatively  static 
cyberattacks.  Today,  continuous  monitoring 
is critical to see the evolving threat and tech-
nology landscape.

Cybersecurity programs have moved from 
a period of static defenses to active defenses, 
and we must become more nimble to success-
fully  protect  critical  systems  and  sensitive 
data.  From  a  military  perspective,  think  of 
this  shift  as  moving  from  multiple  armored 
divisions with signifi cant force and fi repower 
protecting cities or regions to the more recent 
Special Forces mindset, in which quick detec-
tion and reaction are the key to success.

In  the  previous  section,  we  mentioned 
two areas for increased investment. The sec-
ond  area  is  to  develop  cybersecurity  pro-
grams  with  a  much  higher  focus  on  threat 
intelligence,  monitoring,  and  alerting.  This 
requires new security solutions and specially 
trained  security  professionals.  The  old  line 
of fi rewalls, malware protection, and access 
controls  are  still  required,  but  much  more 
active  system  patching,  vulnerability  man-
agement,  and  monitoring  are  driving  mod-
ern security programs.

To  avoid  the  perception  of  negligence, 
senior  executives  often  reinforce  old  line 
security controls that are audited for regula-
tory compliance. However, focusing only on 
compliance will not secure an organization. 
Cyberthreats are ongoing, while compliance 
is a point-in-time review. What is needed to 
address  increasing  cyberthreats  is  a  nimble 
program  that  can  suffer  an  intrusion  but 
repel  the  intruder  and  recover  operations 
quickly.  Just  like  a  good  boxer  needs  to  be 
able  to  take  a  punch  and  stay  in  the  ring, 
companies  today  must  be  able  to  absorb  a 
cyber punch and keep operating while at the 
same time mitigating and recovering.

Incident alerting and escalation
Identifying a potential attack is only half the 
solution. Cybersecurity programs must alert 
the  technology  teams  and  business  units 
to  respond  appropriately.  One  potential 

■  96 

response is to take systems off line. Without 
executive  and  business  unit  involvement,  a 
poor decision could be made.

■  Respond
Response capabilities vary after discovery of a 
cybersecurity incident, and organizations are 
typically faced with two unappealing options:

 1.  Pull  up  the  drawbridge  and  stop  the 

hoards from overrunning the castle.

 2.  Keep the drawbridge down while trying 

to fi gure out where the bad guy is.

The most immediate, and some say rational, 
response  is  to  “pull  up  the  drawbridge”  to 
eliminate  whatever  access  hackers  have. 
Unfortunately, this alerts the bad guy that you 
know  he’s  inside,  so  whatever  systems  and 
accounts he may have compromised or what-
ever backdoors he’s created will be unknown.
On the other hand, if a company decides to 
take option two, to play it low-key and con-
tinue with business as usual to determine the 
scope  of  the  problem,  the  organization  can 
determine what systems have been compro-
mised,  what  new  privileged  accounts  have 
been created, and what back doors may exist. 
This will give the company a better chance of 
long-term  success  in  eliminating  the  breach 
and repairing lost or damaged information.

One  response  is  not  necessarily  better 
than  the  other,  because  situations  vary. 
However,  these  critical  decisions  must  be 
made almost immediately.

■  Adjust
No  program  is  ever  perfect.  Continuous 
monitoring  and  reporting  will  enable  all 
three  tiers  of  responsibility  to  constantly 
adjust  the  program  and  inform  the  other 
tiers of actions.

■  Summary
Effective  cybersecurity  program  develop-
ment  and  oversight  requires  executives 
to  implement  and  manage  a  distributed 
process at three levels within an organiza-
tion:  executive  level;  business  unit  level; 
and operational level (Table 2).

  ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM 

Levels of Authority and Responsibility

Executive

Business Unit

Systems Management

TABLE

Plan

 䊏 Prioritize systems 
and functions for 
protection

 䊏 Establish risk 

appetite

 䊏 Inventory critical 

 䊏 Select justifi ed 

systems

 䊏 Risk assessment

 䊏 Train users
 䊏 Enforce controls
 䊏 Design and 

manage physical 
and logical 
controls

controls

 䊏 Develop an 

architecture to 
integrate controls
 䊏 Provide periodic 

updates to executives 
to help them 
understand context 
for the program

 䊏 Design, deploy, and 

manage technical 
controls

 䊏 Incident and 

event reporting 
form staff, 
partners and 
third parties

 䊏 Operate system and 

control monitoring

 䊏 Actively participate 
in threat intelligence 
functions

 䊏 Participate in the 
Incident Response 
Team

 䊏 Containment
 䊏 Recovery

Protect

 䊏 Approve 

cybersecurity 
program strategy

 䊏 Approve standards 

and metrics for 
control oversight
 䊏 Approve policies

 䊏 Receive periodic 
threat briefi ngs 
and controls 
effectiveness 
reports

 䊏 Receive periodic 

education on 
changes to the 
threat landscape 
and emerging 
controls

 䊏 Lead Incident 
Response Team

Detect

Respond

Adjust

 䊏 Allocate resources 

 䊏 Deploy enhanced 

 䊏 Provide advice 

for program 
enhancements

training

 䊏 Deploy updated 

administrative 
and physical 
controls

for control 
enhancements

If  Sun  Tzu  lived  today,  he  would  clearly 
see  the  nature  of  current  cybersecurity  pro-
grams and responsibilities and recognize that 
criticality of executive level management. We 

have to take a warrior’s attitude in develop-
ing strategies and programs to be successful 
in  combatting  the  cybersecurity  challenges 
we face today.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  97  ■

Cybersecurity legal and 
regulatory considerations

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Securing privacy and profi t in the era 
of hyperconnectivity and big data
Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice 
President; Dean Forbes, Senior Associate; Agatha 
O'Malley, Senior Associate; Jaqueline Cooney, 
Lead Associate; and Waiching Wong, Associate

Companies  increasingly  use  consumer  data,  including 
personal information, to stay competitive; this includes the 
capability to analyze their customers’ demographics and 
buying  habits,  predict  future  behaviors  and  business 
trends, and collect and sell data to third-parties. Consumers’ 
willingness to share their data centers on trust, however, 
and 91% of adults believe that they have lost control over 
how their personal information is collected and used (2014 
Pew  Research  Center).  So  how  do  companies  effectively 
manage  consumer  data  while  simultaneously  building 
trust? It has been said that you cannot have good privacy 
without good security. A fi rst step is to build an effective 
security  program  while  also  better  understanding  what 
privacy means and how it can be a strategic business ena-
bler in our era of hyper-connectivity and “big data”.

■   Why does this matter? The data economy
The  power  and  insights  driven  by  consumer  data  has 
changed  the  corporate  landscape.  This  has  created  the 

91%

of adults “agree” or “strongly agree” that
consumers have lost control over how their

personal information is collected and used by

companies

101  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

data  economy—the  exchange  of  digitized 
information  for  the  purpose  of  creating 
insights and value. Companies are building 
entire  businesses  around  consumer  infor-
mation,  including  building  data-driven 
products and monetizing data streams. This 
is  a  supply-driven  push  made  possible  by 
widespread  digitization,  ubiquitous  data 
storage, powerful analytics, mobile technol-
ogy  that  feeds  ever  more  information  into 
the system, and the Internet of Things. This 
also  has  a  demand-driven  effect  as  more 
consumers  expect  their  products  to  be 
“smart” and their experiences to be target-
ed to delight them on an individual basis.

The  data  economy  goes  beyond  the  tech 
industry.  For  example,  many  supermarkets 
now record what customers buy across their 
stores  and  track  the  purchasing  history  of 
loyalty-card members. The most competitive 
companies  will  sift  through  this  data  for 
trends and then, through a joint venture, sell 
the  information  to  the  vendors  who  stock 
their shelves. Consumer product makers are 
often willing to purchase this data in order to 
make  more  informed  decisions  about  prod-
uct placement, marketing, and branding.

The enabler of the data economy is data 
itself.  Individuals  generate  data.  They  do 
this every time they “check in” to a location 
through a mobile app, when they use a loy-
alty card, when they purchase items online, 
and  when  they  are  tracked  through  their 
Internet searches. Companies gain consum-
ers’  trust  and  confi dence  through  transpar-
ency  about  the  personal  information  that 
they  gather,  providing  consumers  control 
over  uses  and  sharing  of  such  information, 
and offer fair value in return.

■   Privacy defi nitions vary
“Privacy”  may  have  different  meanings  to 
stakeholders due to factors such as the con-
text,  prevailing  societal  norms,  and  geo-
graphical  location.  There  is  no  consensus 
defi nition  of  privacy,  which  makes  it  chal-
lenging to discuss, and act upon, a need for 
privacy.  However,  an  important  central 
concept regarding privacy recurs, which is, 
the appropriate collection, use, and sharing 
of personal information to accomplish busi-
ness  tasks.  Determining  what  appropriate 
and limited means for your customer is key 
to gaining trust and unlocking the potential 
of the data economy.

■   What is personal data?
Personal  information  comes  in  variations 
such as: (1) self-reported data, or information 
people  volunteer  about  themselves,  such  as 
their email addresses, work and educational 
history,  and  age  and  gender;  (2)  digital 
exhaust, such as location data and browsing 
history, which is created when using mobile 
devices,  web  services,  or  other  connected 
technologies;  and  (3)  profi ling  data,  or  per-
sonal profi les used to make predictions about 
individuals’  interests  and  behaviors,  which 
are derived by combining self-reported, digi-
tal  exhaust,  and  other  data.  According  to 
research, people value self-reported data the 
least  and  profi ling  data  the  most  (2015 
Harvard Business Review). For many compa-
nies, it is that third category of data, used to 
make predictions about consumer needs, that 
truly  provides  the  ability  to  create  exciting, 
thrilling products and experiences. However, 
that  same  information  is  what  consumers 
value the most and seek to protect.

Every minute

Facebook users share nearly 2.5 million pieces of content.

Twitter users tweet nearly 300,000 times.

YouTube users upload 72 hours of new video content.

Amazon generates over $80,000 in online sales.

■  102 

  SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY AND BIG DATA  

Privacy is very often confl ated with security. While privacy is about the appropriate collec-
tion, use, and sharing of personal information, security is about protecting such information 
from loss, or unintended or unauthorized access, use, or sharing.

■   Privacy and security intersect through 

breaches

Although privacy and security are two sepa-
rate  concepts,  the  importance  of  these  two 
ideas intersect for the consumer if personal 
information  is  not  safeguarded.  In  a  nut-
shell, consumers are more likely to buy from 
companies they believe protect their privacy. 
Large-scale  security  breaches,  such  as  the 
recent  theft  of  credit  card  information  of 
56  million  Home  Depot  consumers  (2015) 
and  40  million  Target  shoppers  (2013),  pro-
vide consumers with plenty to worry about. 
Breach-weary consumers need to know who 
to  trust  with  their  personal  information,  to 
ensure that only the company that they pro-
vided  the  information  to  can  use  it.  Risk 
management  for  data  privacy  and  security 
of  that  data  should  guard  against  external 
malicious breaches and inadvertent internal 
breaches and third-party partner breaches.

■   Privacy is linked to trust—differentiate 

with it

Trust, and the data that it allows companies 
to have access to, is a critical strategic asset. 
Privacy issues that erode trust can disman-
tle the goodwill that a brand has spent dec-
ades  building  with  consumers.  Forward-
leaning  companies  are  already  moving 
toward proactively gaining the trust of their 
customers and using that as a differentiator. 
Learning  from  its  issues  with  the  lack  of 
security  on  iCloud, Apple  now  markets  all 
of the privacy features of their products and 
apps. With an eye toward the desires of its 
customers,  the  iPhone’s  iOS  8  is  encrypted 
by  default.  This  makes  all  “private”  infor-
mation  such  as  photos,  messages,  contacts, 
reminders,  and  call  history  inaccessible 
without a four-digit PIN and numeric pass-
word. In 2012 Microsoft launched its “Don’t 
get  Scroogled”  campaign  as  a  direct  attack 
on its rival, Google, by highlighting that its 

Gmail service scans emails in order to target 
and  tailor  advertising  to  the  user.  In  2013 
Microsoft ran TV ads that claim that “your 
privacy is [Microsoft’s] priority.”

Companies are also competing to be pri-
vacy champions against government surveil-
lance.  For  the  last  few  years,  the  Electronic 
Frontier Foundation has published the “Who 
Has  Your  Back”  list—highlighting  compa-
nies with strong privacy best practices, par-
ticularly  regarding  disclosure  of  consumer 
information to the government.

■   Challenges and trends
Maintaining compliance
Beyond the moneymaker of the data econo-
my,  there  is  also  a  need  to  comply  with  a 
swirl  of  confl icting  regulations  on  privacy. 
For global companies, this task is made more 
diffi cult as privacy regulations vary by region 
and country. Although international accords 
often  serve  as  the  basis  of  national  laws 
and policy frameworks,1 the local variations 
complicate  compliance.  For  example,  the 
May  2014  ruling  of  the  European  Court  of 
Justice  on  the  “right  to  be  forgotten”  set  a 
precedent  for  removing  information  from 
search  results  that  are  deemed  to  be  no 
longer relevant or not in the public interest 
by  affi rming  a  ruling  by  the  Spanish  Data 
Protection Agency. Countries across Europe 
have  applied  the  ruling  at  a  national  level, 
which  means  that  they  are  not  exactly  the 
same.2 Compliance with this decision has yet 
to  be  fully  understood.  Google  has  fi elded 
about  120,000  requests  for  deletions  and 
granted  approximately  half  of 
them.3 
Compliance  is  costly  and  complicated. 
Beyond technical issues (which were  easier 
to solve), Google’s main issue with compli-
ance was administrative—forms needed to 
be created in many languages, and dozens 
of  lawyers,  paralegals,  and  staff  needed  to 
be assembled to review the requests. Issues 

  103  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

remain, such as the possibility of removing 
links  from  Google.com  as  well  as  from 
country-specifi c search engines.

Compliance with established laws in the 
U.S. is often topic- and industry-specifi c. For 
example, Congress has passed laws prohib-
iting  the  disclosure  of  medical  information 
(the  Health  Insurance  Portability  and 
Accountability  Act),  educational  records 
(the Buckley Amendment), and video-store 
rentals (a law passed in response to revela-
tions  about  Robert  Bork’s  rentals  when  he 
was nominated to the Supreme Court).4

Growing data = growing target for hackers
As  data  availability  increases,  the  attractive-
ness of datasets for hackers increases as well. 
Companies in all sectors—health care, retail, 
fi nance,  government—all  have  datasets  that 
are attractive to hackers. Just a few of the con-
fi rmed  cyberattacks  that  targeted  consumer 
information  in  2014  include:  eBay,  Montana 
Health  Department,  P.F.  Chang’s,  Evernote, 
Feedly, and Domino’s Pizza.5 

Beyond personal information 
Personal  information  (PI)  is  described  in 
privacy  and  information  security  circles  as 
information that can be used on its own or 
with other information to identify, contact or 
locate a single person, or to identify an indi-
vidual  in  context.  With  the  advent  of  rich 
geolocation  data,  and  powerful  associative 
analysis,  such  as  facial  recognition,  the 
extent of PI is greatly expanded. Regulations 
are struggling to keep up with the changes, 
and companies can maintain consumer con-
fi dence  by  collecting,  using,  and  sharing 
consumer data with privacy in mind. 

■   What to do? Build consumer trust
To unlock the data economy, companies will 
need  to  tune  in  to  their  customer’s  needs 
and  move  quickly  to  earn  and  retain  cus-
tomer  trust.  Privacy  can  be  a  competitive 
differentiator  for  your  business—and  this 
goes beyond lip service. Appropriate privacy 
policies  are  needed  internally,  this  means 
building  privacy  considerations  into  busi-
ness  operations  and  expected  employee 

■  104 

conduct, along with a clearly defi ned means 
of  enforcement.  Externally,  this  means 
building  privacy  considerations  into  the 
products and services offered to customers. 
Some  of  the  ways  to  do  this  include  the 
following.

Create easy-to-understand consumer-facing policies
The average website privacy policy averages 
more than 2,400 words, takes 10 minutes to 
read,  and  is  written  at  a  university-student 
reading  level.6  No  wonder  half  of  online 
Americans are not even sure what a privacy 
policy is.7 Writing clear, easy-to-understand 
consumer-facing  policies  can  help  you 
increase  the  number  of  people  who  will 
actually  read  them,  and  you  will  gain  the 
trust of your consumers. No company has a 
perfect  solution,  but  many  organizations 
have  come  closer.  Facebook  has  recently 
rewritten  its  privacy  policy  for  simplicity 
and  included  step-by-step  directions  for 
users.8  To  increase  trust,  privacy  policies 
should clearly state the following:

 1.  the  personal  information  that  you  will 

collect

 2.  why  data  is  collected  and  how  it  will 

be used and shared

 3.  how you will protect the data
 4.  explanation of consumer benefi t from the 
collection,  use,  sharing,  and  analysis  of 
their data.

Additionally, companies should give a clear 
and easy opt-out at every stage and only use 
data  in  the  ways  stated.  To  ensure  that  the 
data is used in the ways stated, develop clear 
internal  data  use  and  retention  guidelines 
across  the  entire  enterprise,  limit  internal 
access  to  databases,  create  a  procedure  for 
cyberattacks, and link it directly to the con-
sumer privacy policy.

Go “privacy by design”
The concept of “privacy by design” is inte-
grating  and  promoting  privacy  require-
ments  and/or  best  practices  into  systems, 
services,  products,  and  business  processes 
at  the  planning,  design,  development,  and 

  SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY AND BIG DATA  

implementation stages, to ensure that busi-
nesses  meets  their  customer  and  employee 
privacy expectations, and policy and regula-
tory requirements. The approach is a market 
differentiator  that  is  intended  to  reduce 
privacy  and  security  risks  and  cost  by 
embedding  relevant  company  policies  into 
such  designs. As  such,  privacy  settings  are 
automatically  applied  to  devices  and  ser-
vices.  Privacy  by  design  and  default  is 
recognized  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Trade 
Commission as a recommended practice for 
protecting online privacy, and is considered 
for inclusion in the European Union’s Data 
Protection  Regulation,  and  was  developed 
by  an  Ontario  Information  and  Privacy 
Commissioner.

Communicate your good work
Privacy policies and actions are more than 
legal  disclosure;  they  are  marketing  tools. 
All the actions you take to protect consum-
ers’  privacy  should  be  communicated  so 
they know you can be trusted. The Alliance 
of Automobile Manufacturers, representing 
companies such as Chrysler, Ford, General 
Motors, and Toyota, publicly pledged more 
transparency  about  how  they  will  safe-
guard data generated by autonomous vehi-
cle  technologies.  Many  groups  have  pub-
lished  data  principles  that  communicate 
how  data  is  gathered,  protected,  and 
shared.9

■   Conclusion
Our  current  data  economy  brings  exciting 
opportunities  for  companies  to  grow  by 
enhancing their products and services. These 
innovations rely on consumers to trust your 
organization with their personal information. 

Building  consumer  trust  includes  keeping 
information safe from hackers, creating easy-
to-understand  consumer-facing  policies, 
and  applying  the  principle  of  “privacy  by 
default”.  Companies  that  reframe  these 
actions as business enablers instead of busi-
ness  costs  will  thrive—and  fi nd  it  easier  to 
comply with an increasingly complex web of 
regulations.  Finally,  communicating  your 
good  work  to  consumers  will  elevate  the 
profi le of your organization as a trusted part-
ner, and pave the way for future gains.

References
1.  https://www.eff.org/issues/international-

privacy-standards.

2.  http://www.hitc.com/en-gb/2015/07/
07/facebook-questions-use-of-right-to-be-
forgotten-ruling/.

3.  http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/

2014/09/29/solace-oblivion.

4.  http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/

2014/09/29/solace-oblivion.

5.  h t t p : / / w w w. f o r b e s . c o m / s i t e s /
jaymcgregor/2014/07/28/the-top-5-most-
brutal-cyber-attacks-of-2014-so-far/.

6.  http://www.computerworld.com/
article/2491132/data-privacy/new-
software-targets-hard-to-understand-
privacy-policies.html.

7.  http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/
2014/12/04/half-of-americans-dont-
know-what-a-privacy-policy-is/.

8.  https://www.washingtonpost.com/
blogs/the-switch/wp/2014/11/13/
facebook-rewrites-its-privacy-policy-so-
that-humans-can-understand-it/.

9.  https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress
.com/2014/11/privacyandsecurity
principlesforfarmdata.pdf.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  105  ■

Oversight of compliance 
and control responsibilities
Data Risk Solutions: BuckleySandler LLP & 
Treliant Risk Advisors LLC – Elizabeth McGinn, 
Partner; Rena Mears, Managing Director; Stephen 
Ruckman, Senior Associate; Tihomir Yankov, 
Associate; and Daniel Goldstein, Senior Director

For too long, cybersecurity has been considered the realm 
of  the  Information  Technology  (IT)  Department,  with 
corporate executives assuming that the goal of cybersecu-
rity is simply to make sure IT is secure enough to allow 
the  company  to  use  data  reliably  to  do  its  business.  In 
today’s  economy,  however,  data  are  not  only  a  tool  for 
doing business but also a core asset of the business itself. 
The collection, analysis, and sale of rich data about one’s 
products  and  customers  inform  decision-making  and 
business  strategy  and  provide  a  key  revenue  generator 
for many companies. Because data are now so valuable, 
the  increasingly  pervasive  and  debilitating  nature  of 
cyberthreats poses an existential threat to the company’s 
success.  Data’s  value  to  cyber  criminals  also  has  the 
attention of federal and state regulators concerned with 
consumer privacy and safety, posing new legal and com-
pliance challenges.

This is why companies can no longer afford to approach 
the  oversight  of  cybersecurity  as  an  IT  issue.  Simply 
because  a  cyberthreat’s  mode  of  attack  usually  exploits 
vulnerabilities in a company’s IT infrastructure does not 
mean that oversight should rest purely with the team that 
maintains  and  repairs  that  infrastructure.  Certainly,  a 
secured IT infrastructure is crucial and an important fi rst 
line  of  defense.  However,  the  enterprise  risk  created  by 
cyberthreats  requires  a  holistic  approach  that  considers 
the management of an entire array of impacts—from rep-
utational to regulatory to fi nancial—that transcend core IT 
competencies  and  functions.  Because  securing  today’s 
data is central to securing the company’s future, effective 

107  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

oversight  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and 
controls requires leadership from the C-suite 
and the boardroom.

Critically, this leadership must be coordi-
nated.  For  a  company’s  cybersecurity  com-
pliance and control programs to be effective, 
efforts must be structured in ways that ensure 
the board and senior management, including 
the C-suite, work together to achieve its risk 
objectives.  Each  has  distinct  cybersecurity 
responsibilities:  senior  management 
is 
responsible  for  determining  relevant  cyber-
related risks and implementing a compliance 
program  that  incorporates  appropriate  pro-
cesses and controls to mitigate them, whereas 
the  board  is  responsible  for  overseeing  the 
risk identifi cation process and independently 
evaluating whether the program is designed, 
implemented,  and  operating  effectively  to 
meet the company’s cybersecurity risk miti-
gation objectives. Meeting these responsibili-
ties  well  requires  a  formalized  integrated 
approach  to  cybersecurity  risk  evaluation, 
defi ned roles and responsibilities, implemen-
tation of a program that is supported by the 
board, clearly articulated by the C-suite, and 
effectively 
implemented  by  operational 
resources.  Disconnect  between  the  board, 
C-suite,  and  operations  poses  as  much  of  a 
challenge  to  corporate  cybersecurity  as 
cyberthreats themselves.

■   Cybersecurity oversight is risk management 

oversight

To understand why coordinated C-suite and 
board oversight of cybersecurity is essential, 
one  must  understand  cybersecurity  as  a 
means of managing and responding to cor-
porate risk. The purpose of risk management 
in  general  is  to  identify  and  mitigate  the 
risks a company faces to a level acceptable to 
the enterprise as determined by the board, a 
level known as a company’s “risk appetite.” 
The  strategies  and  objectives  for  managing 
risks  and  responding  to  threats  are  articu-
lated  in  the  policies,  procedures,  and  con-
trols of the organization and are the respon-
sibility of senior management.

One signifi cant and growing area of risk 
for  most  companies  is  data  risk.  Data  risk 

■  108 

encompasses the risks of fi nancial loss; busi-
ness or operational disruption; loss or com-
promise of assets and information; failure to 
comply with legal, regulatory, or contractual 
requirements; or damage to the reputation of 
an organization because of the unauthorized 
access  to  or  exploitation  of  data  assets. 
Cybersecurity is the protection of data assets 
from  unauthorized  electronic  access  or 
exploitation 
through  processes 
designed to prevent, detect, and respond to 
these risks.1 Effective oversight of cybersecu-
rity  is  therefore  essential  to  a  company’s 
oversight of risk management.

risks 

Two  core  components  of  the  company’s 
cybersecurity  program  must  be  overseen  at 
the  highest  levels  of  management:  compli-
ance  and  controls.  Compliance  here  means 
the  company’s  program  for  ensuring  actual 
adherence  to  internal  cybersecurity  policies 
as well as external privacy and data protec-
tion laws and regulations in the jurisdictions 
where the company operates. Controls mean 
the  company’s  systems  and  processes  for 
protecting  its  data  infrastructure  and  carry-
ing out incident response. These components 
should  be  overseen  actively  to  confi rm  that 
compliance  and  controls  are  going  beyond 
mechanical application of generic cybersecu-
rity  rules  and  standards,  which  may  just 
establish  a  regulatory  fl oor  for  corporate 
practices, not a set of industry-leading prac-
tices,  and  which  may  not  be  appropriate  or 
relevant to the threat landscape and unique 
regulatory  requirements  for  the  company’s 
industry.  Moreover,  even  industry-leading 
practices quickly may become dated, because 
regulators’ views on “reasonable” cybersecu-
rity are changing all the time.2 The legal risks 
from  inattentive  oversight  are  limited  only 
by  plaintiffs’  imagination  and  regulators’ 
zeal, and the practical risks are limited only 
by hackers’ ambition and creativity.

From a risk management perspective, the 
key  inquiry  revolves  around  the  value  of 
each  data  asset.  For  example,  data  assets 
whose  business  usefulness  has  long  passed 
may still be rich in information that may be 
embarrassing to the organization if released 
publicly. So in a way, cybersecurity risks are 

partially  an  extension  of  data  retention 
risks,  for  what  the  organization  does  not 
have (and has no obligation to keep) cannot 
be hacked.

Thus, the board and senior management 
must approach the oversight of cybersecuri-
ty  compliance  and  control  from  a  broader 
risk  management  vantage  point:  one  that 
weighs the value of the data as an asset class 
to  the  organization,  the  value  that  may  be 
assigned by the threat actors who may seek 
the asset, and the broader impact and costs—
including but not limited to legal and com-
pliance costs—stemming from the potential 
compromise of data.

In  this  vein,  perhaps  the  board’s  most 
critical  inquiry  to  senior  management  is 
whether the organization has adopted suffi -
cient  processes  to  inventory  and  value  its 
various  data  assets.  From  a  cybersecurity 
perspective,  senior  management  should 
then  weigh  under  what  circumstances, 
through  what  channels,  and  on  what  plat-
forms the organization’s most critically val-
ued data assets should be made accessible.

■   Board of directors’ role in oversight 

of compliance and controls

Too  often,  boards  have  exercised  limited 
oversight  of  cybersecurity,  yet  monitoring 
the management of data risk associated with 
cybersecurity is part of the board’s fi duciary 
duty  to  the  corporation.  The  time  for  the 
board to begin to play an oversight role is not 
the  moment  when  data  actually  are  put  at 
risk, through a breach or corporate theft; the 
board  must  build  cybersecurity  oversight 
into  its  general  strategy  for  overseeing  risk 
management from day one.

Managing  the  risks  associated  with 
cybersecurity  compliance  and  control 
involves determining one’s risk appetite in a 
variety of areas and requires senior manage-
ment  to  make  fundamental  judgment  calls 
about the design of the control environment, 
the  scope  and  depth  of  the  compliance 
program,  and  the  resource  allocation  for 
each.  The  board  must  be  well  informed  of 
how  the  corporate  leadership  is  managing 
these risks and able to assess the adequacy 

  OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES   

of  the  organization’s  risk  management 
efforts.

The board also has to be sure to engage in 
oversight  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and 
controls at all phases of the company’s data 
risk management “lifecycle.” See Figure 1.

The lifecycle involves, fi rst, identifi cation—
looking  at  the  company’s  cybersecurity  risk 
profi le,  identifying  the  key  data  assets  that 
have  to  be  protected  (the  “crown  jewels”), 
and  determining  the  applicable  laws  and 
regulations  governing  their  protection;  next, 
implementation—creating  and 
design  and 
implementing operational controls and com-
pliance processes to manage the risks to those 
data  assets;  next,  monitoring—actively  over-
seeing the compliance processes and controls; 
next, evaluation—evaluating the effectiveness 
and management of the controls and compli-
ance  processes  implemented;  and  fi nally 
reporting and reassessment—documenting how 
the  controls  and  compliance  processes  are 
working,  and  reassessing  to  the  extent  that 
there are gaps. The last phase of the lifecycle 
involves internal reporting on capabilities to 
respond  to  threats,  external  reporting  on 
those capabilities to stakeholders (e.g., SOC 2 
reporting),  and  adjusting  management  to 
respond  to  internal  drivers  (e.g.,  business 
changes)  and  external  drivers  (e.g.,  con-
stantly  evolving  regulatory  requirements 
and  guidance).  Strong  C-suite  supervision 
and  board  oversight  are  needed  at  every 
phase.

The  oversight  and  compliance  need  not 
rest on the entire board—a standing commit-
tee comprising knowledgeable board mem-
bers,  armed  with  outside  expertise  where 
appropriate,  often  can  provide  a  more 
focused  and  better  informed  oversight. 
However,  whatever  oversight  activities  are 
undertaken must be documented so that the 
board  can  show  that  it  is  carrying  out  its 
fi duciary duties.

■   Building blocks of effective oversight 

of cybersecurity compliance

An organization’s cybersecurity compliance 
efforts  must  support  the  company’s  busi-
ness units and management in their efforts 

  109  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

FIGURE

Data risk management lifecycle

Report

&

Reassess

Identify

Evaluate

Design

&

Implement

Monitor

to  achieve  compliance  with  government 
rules and regulations as well as the organi-
zation’s internal policies and procedures by 
(1)  identifying  risks;  (2)  preventing  risks 
through  the  design  and  implementation  of 
controls; (3) monitoring and reporting on the 
effectiveness of those controls; (4) resolving 
compliance  diffi culties  as  they  occur;  and 
(5) advising and training.3

There  are  several  steps  the  board  and 
C-suite  should  take  to  provide  effective 
oversight  of  the  cybersecurity  compliance 
program’s execution of all of these functions. 
First and most important, the C-suite should 
implement  an  enterprise-wide  approach  to 
compliance risk management. As part of this 
approach,  the  organization  should  create  a 
formalized Cybersecurity Risk Management 
Plan  that  is  reviewed  by  the  board.  If  the 
Plan is developed internally by the corporate 
leadership,  the  board  should  consider 

obtaining outside review for defi ciencies or 
improvements.  A  mechanism  for  periodic 
updates  to  the  Plan  should  be  included  in 
the  Plan;  many  companies  get  into  trouble 
with  regulators  for  failing  to  update  their 
cybersecurity  approach  as  their  business 
model changes or as regulations or enforce-
ment strategies change.

If the company is operating in the United 
States, the Plan must be neither aspiration-
al  nor  hyper-specifi c.  An  aspirational 
plan—one that sets out where the organiza-
tion envisions its cybersecurity program to 
be at some point in the future—may end up 
causing the company to look like it is fall-
ing  short 
if  regulators  come  calling. 
Similarly, a hyper-specifi c Plan may put the 
company  at  risk  of  technical  noncompli-
ance.  In  short,  the  Cybersecurity  Risk 
Management  Plan  should  match  what  the 
company actually does.

■  110 

Second,  the  C-suite  should  extend  the 
enterprise-wide  approach  to  compliance 
risk  management  to  the  company’s  entire 
ecosystem—its vendors and other third-party 
partners (e.g., cloud services providers, out-
side  data  processors).  This  means  ensuring 
that oversight is robust for the corporate vet-
ting  of  cybersecurity  practices  at  third  par-
ties  and  that  the  contractual  relationships 
with third parties allow for monitoring and 
oversight.  Many  technological  innovations 
are leading companies to outsource aspects 
of  their  business  involving  data,  but  this 
comes with risks of the partners not securing 
data to the degree the company is.

Third,  the  C-suite  should  ensure—and 
the  board  should  monitor—the  independ-
ence  of  the  cybersecurity  compliance  team 
from  the  company’s  IT  and  business  units. 
Given silos that frequently develop around 
the compliance, IT, and business teams, the 
C-suite ought to ensure that the compliance 
team  has  the  resources  and  skills  to  inde-
pendently  evaluate  the  suffi ciency  of  the 
company’s  cybersecurity  program.  If  the 
compliance team is not equipped to under-
stand what technological steps the IT team is 
or should be taking to advance the organiza-
tion’s cybersecurity, and so defers entirely to 
their judgment, it may fail to apprehend the 
compliance  implications  of  the  steps  ulti-
mately taken.

Of  course,  independence  should  not 
mean isolation. It is critical that these teams 
can  and  do  speak  to  each  other  regularly: 
compliance  risks  arise  in  the  IT  and  busi-
ness  lines,  and  the  compliance  team  must 
be  involved  in  assessing  those  risks.  For 
example,  if  a  new  business  line  involves 
collection  of  new  pieces  of  customer  data, 
failure  to  ensure  that  data  are  properly 
secured and kept private from the start cre-
ates  compliance  risks.  Likewise,  the  IT 
Department’s failure to patch software in a 
timely  manner  creates  compliance  risks. 
The compliance team must be suffi ciently in 
the loop to ensure steps are being taken to 
prevent these failures, without being opera-
tionally  involved  in  the  actual  prevention 
efforts.  This  can  be  achieved  through 

  OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES   

well-developed monitoring and assessment 
processes  that  encourage  timely  internal 
communication  of  potential  risks  to  the 
compliance team.

Fourth, consistent with the risk manage-
ment lifecycle, the C-suite should make sure 
it has effective means to test compliance in 
practice and communicate the results to the 
board. It is critical for updates to cybersecu-
rity compliance policies to translate actually 
into updated implementation, and the board 
must  be  able  to  see—and  where  needed 
spur—this  implementation.  (See  the  next 
section).  The  C-suite  also  has  to  be  able  to 
test  to  see  that  cybersecurity  compliance  is 
taking root across the company’s operations 
and  prevent  ‘siloing’  within  business  lines 
or cost centers.

Fifth  and  fi nally,  the  board  should  make 
cybersecurity  compliance  a  priority,  plain 
and simple. None of the above measures will 
be  prioritized  at  the  senior  management 
level  and  below  unless  they  are  also  the 
board’s priority.

■   Building blocks of effective oversight 

of cybersecurity controls

Board and C-suite oversight of cybersecurity 
controls  relates  to  the  control  of  associated 
enterprise  risks:  legal,  fi nancial,  regulatory, 
and  reputational,  to  name  a  few.  None  of 
these risks can be fully avoided, but effective 
controls  can  reduce  their  impact  on  the 
organization,  and  effective  oversight  can 
ensure that these controls are thorough.

One  step  a  board  can  take  to  provide 
effective oversight of cybersecurity controls 
is  to  ensure  that  the  controls  implemented 
by the C-suite contain prevention, detection, 
and  rapid  remediation  components.  Many 
companies  focus  on  prevention  and  detec-
tion,  but  not  remediation,  and  then  are 
caught  off  guard  when  they  learn  of  an 
intrusion  requiring  immediate  remediation 
that  went  undetected.  Prevention  measures 
include data inventorying, data loss preven-
tion planning, strong perimeter and internal 
defenses, and processes for timely patching 
core software to plug security holes. Many of 
these are IT measures, but prevention is not 

  111  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

limited to IT and includes building a corpo-
rate culture that is mindful of data risk, as is 
discussed more below.

Detection  measures  include  analysis  of 
operational  data  and  anomaly  detection  as 
well as systems for logging, monitoring, and 
testing data moving into and out of the corpo-
rate IT environment and across various devic-
es  (e.g.,  from  computer  to  cloud  service  or 
external  storage  devices),  where  legally  per-
missible. Rapid remediation measures include 
incident  response  plans  that  are  rehearsed, 
implementation  of  forensic  recovery  tools, 
and  measures  to  quickly  restore  failed  sys-
tems  from  back-ups.  Boards  should  recom-
mend  appointment  of  a  permanent  incident 
response  team—comprising  senior  manage-
ment from IT, legal, compliance, vendor man-
agement, PR, investor relations, and business 
lines—to  lead  the  incident  response  efforts, 
report incidents and remediation plans to the 
C-suite  and  the  board,  and  notify  external 
regulators and customers when necessary.

In line with the previous point, a key step 
the C-suite should take is to oversee lines of 
communication  among  the  various  parts  of 
the company that either manage or make use 
of the company’s cybersecurity controls. If a 
business line is experiencing occasional bugs 
in  its  online  customer  order  processing,  for 
example, and IT is not informed of the issue 
in a timely manner, malware may go unde-
tected. If an employee with database access 
quits and HR does not timely inform IT, then 
user credentials may remain active long after 
they should.

Another key step the C-suite can take is to 
prioritize regular training of employees—at 
a  minimum  annually—on  cybersecurity 
threats and how to avoid them. A surprising 
number  of  threats  can  be  thwarted  by 
employee  education  about  suspicious 
emails, strong password practices, and cau-
tious  use  of  personal  devices.  The  more 
employees at every level learn to treat data 
as a valuable asset, the more careful they will 
be. Conversely, no matter how strong a com-
pany’s  cybersecurity  controls,  it  only  takes 
one  employee  mistake  to  expose  sensitive 
company data.

■  112 

As with cybersecurity compliance, for the 
above measures to be prioritized, they must 
be  a  board  priority.  In  this  vein,  the  board 
should  check  to  see  that  cybersecurity  con-
trols are appropriately funded; none of these 
controls can be prioritized without adequate 
funding.

■   Implementation challenges
Even the best designed data security initia-
tives are prone to failure if not implemented 
correctly. A common problem that can occur 
even  after  apparently  successful  program 
implementation  is  a  disconnect  between 
appropriately  drafted  policies  and  proce-
dures  on  the  one  hand,  and  operational 
practices  and  technology  infrastructure  on 
the  other  (in-house  and  third  party-man-
aged), and a failure of the board to notice.

Cybersecurity  policies  and  procedures 
are effective only if they are tailored to the 
company’s  unique  business  environment, 
applicable  regulatory  requirements,  and 
known  security  risks.  However,  too  often, 
boards  and  C-suite  leadership  oversee  the 
development  and  adoption  of  boilerplate 
policies and procedures that, although per-
haps built on generally appropriate founda-
tions, are either insuffi ciently customized or 
implemented inappropriately. The resulting 
disconnects may lead not only to damaging 
data breaches and unauthorized disclosure 
of personal information but also to scrutiny 
from regulators and actions from the plain-
tiffs’  bar.  For  example,  the  Federal  Trade 
Commission (FTC) currently views the dis-
connects  between  cybersecurity  policies 
and procedures and their actual implemen-
tation as unfair or deceptive trade practices 
under Section 5 of the FTC Act, and this is a 
trend  that  senior  executives  should  expect 
to continue.

It is critical to the success of a cybersecu-
rity  program  that  the  operational  uptake 
of—and  ongoing  adherence  to—program 
requirements  are  measured  effectively. 
Monitoring of the program not only enables 
effective reporting up to the board but also, 
more  importantly,  identifi es  vulnerabilities 
in  the  program  and  areas  for  improved 

security.  Although  evaluating  the  effective-
ness  of  a  cybersecurity  program  would 
appear  to  be  a  core  component  of  any  suc-
cessful implementation, many organizations 
fail  to  adequately  address  this  need,  often 
leading  to  exploited  weaknesses,  data 
breaches, and programmatic failure.

Effective  metrics  for  evaluation  can  be 
broken down into several categories to ena-
ble  more  targeted  application  across  the 
enterprise.  Programmatic  metrics  measure 
the progress of various organizational com-
ponents  of  the  information  protection  pro-
gram, such as overall program development, 
implementation,  and  maintenance  (e.g., 
cybersecurity  policies  are  updated  to  meet 
new  regulatory  requirements).  Operational 
metrics measure the performance of (as the 
name  implies)  various  operational  compo-
nents of the information protection program; 
the  number  of  cybersecurity  incidents  per 
reporting  period  is  an  excellent  example. 
And  compliance  metrics  measure  individu-
als’ compliance with program requirements. 
Such  metrics  may  measure,  for  example, 
whether  employees  are  observing  required 
data security protocols when sending sensi-
tive  customer  information  to  a  third  party 
for  processing.  In  general,  the  trend  for 
many  of  these  metrics  is  toward  the  meas-
urement  of  outcomes;  metrics  that  demon-
strate a company’s frequent intrusion detec-
tion scanning are not helpful if the outcome 
is still a high number of intrusions each year.
Regardless of whether your organization 
is seeking to measure programmatic, opera-
tional, or compliance aspects of your cyber-
security  program,  the  metrics  that  you 
design must be clearly defi ned and meaning-
ful  and  measure  progress  against  a  clearly 
stated  objective.  A  properly  implemented 
metrics  program  helps  leadership  ascertain 
initial  uptake  and  improve  the  compliance 
with—and performance of—a well-designed 
cybersecurity program.

Another  challenge  for  effective  imple-
mentation  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and 
controls—and one that must be closely mon-
itored  by  the  board—is  resource  allocation. 
The  recognition  of  data  as  a  highly  valued 

  OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES   

business asset is clearly established; its value 
is verifi ed on a daily basis by those who seek 
to  gain  access  to  business  networks  and 
view, remove, or otherwise exploit the data 
residing there. However, resources allocated 
to cybersecurity are still frequently an IT line 
item,  rather  than  an  enterprise-wide  issue. 
Businesses operating in this environment of 
perpetually  evolving  digital  risks  must  rec-
ognize that data security is no longer a cost 
of doing business; it is a core component of 
remaining  in  business.  As  such,  budgets 
must be allocated appropriately to meet the 
risks.  Budgets  vary  according  to  business 
type,  data  types  and  sensitivity,  volume  of 
data,  sharing  with  third  parties,  and  any 
number of other of risk factors that must be 
considered by the board and executives. The 
budgeting process has to enable the compa-
ny to do more than get the right people and 
processes  in  place  but  also  to  implement 
technology that truly addresses the security 
needs  of  the  organization.  This  process 
requires  commitment  from  the  C-suite  and 
oversight from a board that understands the 
importance of cybersecurity.

Cybersecurity  budgeting  also  must 
include  dedicated  resources  for  training  of 
personnel. As mentioned above, the human 
element is frequently the weakest link in an 
otherwise solid data security program. Staff 
must  have  the  resources  they  need  to  be 
trained  not  only  to  be  proactive  in  taking 
steps to safeguard data but also to recognize 
attempts  by  unauthorized  parties  trying  to 
gain network access. Phishing, for example, 
remains a remarkably effective tool for gain-
ing credentials that open a door to the net-
work  and  the  data  therein,  and  inadequate 
training may increase a company’s vulnera-
bility  to  phishing  attacks.  Regulators  know 
this  and  expect  board  members  providing 
cybersecurity oversight to know, too.

The  board  and  C-suite  also  must  bear  in 
mind that successful initial implementation of 
a cybersecurity program does not necessarily 
lead to a cybersecurity program that has lon-
gevity. Ongoing success is largely dependent 
on  top-down  involvement  by  the  board  and 
active management by the C-suite. The board 

  113  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

should be apprised regularly of data security 
incidents and emerging data risks, as well as 
changes  to  the  regulatory  environment.  An 
actively informed and involved board, work-
ing in harmony with the C-suite, enables agile 
enterprise-wide  response  to  evolving  threats 
and appropriate upkeep and improvement of 
a robust cybersecurity program.

■   Conclusion
Today’s  cybersecurity  risks  affect  organiza-
tions  of  all  sizes  and  across  industries 
and  lead  to  not  only  IT  headaches  but  also 
headaches for the entire business. Companies 
are  increasingly  put  into  the  unenviable 
position of needing to put up shields against 
a  variety  of  cyberthreats,  knowing  that  no 
defense  can  provide  perfect  protection. 
However,  the  C-suite  nevertheless  must 
strive  to  employ  strong  cybersecurity  com-
pliance and control measures that go beyond 
mechanical  satisfaction  of  applicable  legal 
rules,  and  the  board  has  an  obligation  to 

ensure that these measures are being adopt-
ed.  Only  with  consistent  C-suite  involve-
ment and strong board oversight—informed 
by an understanding of data risk as a central 
enterprise risk—can cybersecurity challeng-
es be handled effectively.

References
1.  See  NIST,  “Framework  for  Improving 
Critical  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity” 
(2014)  (defi ning  “cybersecurity”).  Of 
course  there  are  many  defi nitions  of 
“cybersecurity”;  the  NIST  defi nition 
adapted  here  is  just  a  recent  American 
example.

2.  For  example,  some  regulators  require 
certain data to be encrypted while many 
others  do  not.  See,  e.g.,  201  Mass.  Code 
Regs. § 1700 (2009).

3.  See  International  Compliance Association, 
“What is Compliance?,” available at http://
www.int-comp.org/faqs-compliance-
regulatory-environment.

■  114 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Risks of disputes and regulatory 
investigations related to 
cybersecurity matters
Baker & McKenzie — David Lashway, Partner; John 
Woods, Partner; Nadia Banno, Counsel, Dispute 
Resolution; and Brandon H. Graves, Associate

Disputes  and  regulatory  investigations  are  two  of  the 
more  important  risk  categories  related  to  cybersecurity 
matters. These risk categories can create signifi cant fi nan-
cial  exposure,  brand  risk,  and  distraction.  In  the  worst 
case, some of these risks could result in bankruptcy.

The risks related to disputes are traditional (e.g., litiga-
tion,  arbitration,  and  negotiation  of  contract  terms)  and 
novel (e.g., data ownership disputes). They arise not only 
in the context of data breaches but in everyday operations.
Regulatory  investigations  are  another  source  of  risk. 
This  risk  is  hard  to  quantify  because  there  is  not  clear 
statutory authority for all regulatory investigations begun 
or threatened. This creates uncertainty for regulated enti-
ties. The costs for non-compliance can be extensive, with 
fi nes in the millions of dollars and consent decrees author-
izing audits for 20 years.

These risks affect businesses even in the absence of a 
data breach incident. More businesses recognize this fact 
and  are  accounting  for  these  risks  in  all  aspects  of  their 
businesses.  Businesses  that  attempt  to  deal  with  risk 
related to cybersecurity matters as an afterthought may be 
left behind.

Many  businesses  are  international  in  scope  and  must 
comply with cybersecurity rules and regulations in a vari-
ety  of  countries.  This  can  create  a  highest-common-
denominator  situation:  businesses  end  up  attempting  to 
comply with the strictest regime in which they operate.

The dynamic nature of cybersecurity matters makes it 
impossible to completely enumerate every risk associated 
with such matters. This chapter provides a short survey of 
some of the most high-profi le risks that all businesses will 
face in our current economy.

115  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

■   Risks of disputes
Businesses  have  a  growing  awareness  of 
cybersecurity  matters.  As  a  result,  cyberse-
curity matters will increasingly impact tradi-
tional  business  activities,  such  as  contract 
negotiation.

Plaintiffs  also  have  an  increasing  aware-
ness  of  cybersecurity-related  causes  of 
action.  Courts  have  been  receptive  to  some 
of these causes of action and skeptical of oth-
ers, but plaintiffs continue to make threats in 
pursuit of a lucrative settlement.

Dispute risks in business activities
Cybersecurity matters will impact every tra-
ditional  business  activity,  if  they  do  not 
already.  Two  activities,  contract  negotiation 
and  data  processing,  are  already  subject  to 
dispute in many industries.

government 

cybersecurity  during 

 1.  Contract  negotiation.  Contractual  parties, 
agencies, 
especially 
are  becoming  more 
sophisticated 
about  requesting  provisions  related 
to 
contract 
negotiations. Frequently, these provisions 
will  place  additional  burdens  on  the 
counterparty,  leading  to  disputes  during 
negotiation.  Many  businesses  are  also 
attempting  to  apply  existing  contract 
provisions 
to  cybersecurity  matters. 
When this reinterpretation is put forward 
in  the  wake  of  a  security  breach,  the 
reinterpretation can lead to costly litigation.
a)  Flow-down provisions. Federal agencies, 
especially the Department of Defense, 
are 
flow-down 
provisions  related  to  cybersecurity  in 
their  contracts  with  suppliers.  Often, 
the  agency  requires  its  contractors 
to  include  these  provisions  in  their 
contracts  with  subcontractors  and 
other  contractual  counterparties.  As 
these  fl ow-down  provisions  expand 
through  the  supply  chain,  businesses 
with  no  direct  connection  with  the 
federal  agency  will  see  requests—or 
demands—that  they  comply  with 
provisions drafted without their input.

 

including  more 

■  116 

These  provisions  can  include  security 
standards and breach disclosure require-
ments.  For  instance,  Defense  Federal 
Acquisition  Regulation  Supplement 
(DFARS)  204.7300  requires  “adequate 
security” for all contractors and subcon-
tractors  with  systems  on  which  con-
trolled technical information is resident 
on  or  transits.  As  with  many  of  these 
provisions,  “adequate  security”  is  not 
defi ned with a checklist but as “protec-
tive  measures  that  are  commensurate 
with  the  consequences  and  probability 
of loss, misuse, or unauthorized access 
to, or modifi cation of information.”

These same provisions include report-
ing  requirements  for  both  actual  and 
potentially adverse effects on an infor-
mation system, which is a more strin-
gent  requirement  than  many  state 
data breach requirements.

Compliance with these provisions will 
be diffi cult, and the set language creat-
ed  by  such  provisions  prevents  busi-
nesses from negotiating more concrete 
terms,  forcing  businesses  to  accept 
uncertainty  as  a  cost  of  entering  into 
such a contract.

 

b)  Liability/indemnity. Cybersecurity creates 
risk, and more businesses are looking 
to  affi rmatively  allocate  that  risk 
through  contractual  terms.  Actuaries 
are  still  developing  tables  related 
to  cybersecurity  risk  (Congress  is 
discussing legislating on this issue), so 
the allocation of risk in a contract may 
not  be  based  on  methods  as  rigorous 
as those in other risk allocations. This 
will  create  tension  between  parties 
who value the risk differently.

Cybersecurity incidents and the atten-
dant response can be very expensive, 
with some sources placing the average 
fi nancial  cost  of  a  data  breach  in  the 
millions  of  dollars.  The  allocation  of 

  RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS 

such  cost,  combined  with  an  increas-
ing  chance  of  an  incident  triggering 
these  clauses,  is  an  area  likely  to  be 
subject  to  dispute  both  during  con-
tract  negotiation  and  in  the  wake  of 
a breach.

Many contracts already contain liabil-
ity  allocation  provisions,  but  those 
provisions  do  not  explicitly  address 
cybersecurity matters. In the wake of a 
cybersecurity  incident,  interpreting 
the liability allocation provisions will 
be a matter of some dispute.

 

and  political 

c)  Data  security  and  notifi cation.  Laws, 
regulations, 
and 
consumer  pressure  have  increased 
businesses’  focus  on  the  security  of 
consumer  data.  At  the  same  time, 
consumer  data  have  become  a  more 
valuable  commodity.  For  instance, 
AT&T and Apple both contested Radio 
Shack’s  ability  to  sell  consumer  data 
during Radio Shack’s bankruptcy.

Recognizing  these  trends,  businesses 
are placing more provisions in contracts 
that  dictate  security  requirements. 
Because the underlying consumer data 
are  valuable,  these  provisions  may  be 
subject  to  signifi cant  disputes  during 
negotiations.  Other  businesses  are 
attempting  to  read  existing  provisions 
as  covering  security  requirements  and 
privacy responsibility.

Many businesses that entrust sensitive 
data  to  counterparties  are  including 
breach  notifi cation  provisions  in  con-
tracts.  These  provisions  vary  greatly, 
even within a single industry, and cre-
ate various thresholds for notifi cation. 
For instance, some provisions require 
notifi cation  in  the  event  of  a  breach. 
Others  require  notifi cation  if  there  is 
an  indication  of  a  breach.  Many  vic-
tims of a security breach seek to keep 
the  existence  of  a  breach  out  of  the 

press,  which  can  create  tension  with 
notifi cation provisions.

 2.  Data ownership/data processing. Most state 
breach  notifi cation 
laws  differentiate 
between data owners and data processors, 
but  existing  contracts  do  not  always 
explicitly  define 
these  roles.  Some 
businesses have attempted to understand 
these issues and have asserted ownership 
(or,  in  some  cases,  denied  ownership)  of 
data in the absence of a specifi c ownership 
allocation.  This  can  lead  to  disputes  in 
long-standing business relationships. One 
business may seek to sell information it is 
collecting while a contractual counterparty 
is attempting to safeguard the same data. 
Not  all  businesses  seek  to  clarify  this 
relationship  prior  to  selling  data,  which 
can lead to signifi cant disputes when such 
sales come to light.

In the context of a data breach
Data  breaches  expose  businesses  to  many 
additional disputes. At times, these disputes 
can be more problematic than the intrusion 
itself. Contractual counterparties, customers, 
and other impacted businesses may all seek 
some  compensation  in  the  wake  of  a  data 
breach.  Insurance  companies  may  seek  to 
avoid payment under policies that arguably 
apply, leading to additional litigation.

 1.  Contractual  counterparties.  Most  contracts 
have  provisions  that  are  either  directly 
or indirectly implicated by a data breach. 
Some  of  these  provisions  are  triggered 
by  a  breach,  such  as  obligations  to 
notify  consumers  whose  information 
is  exposed.  A  counterparty  may  allege 
that  other  provisions  are  broken  by 
an  intrusion,  such  as  a  requirement  to 
have  adequate  or  reasonable  security. 
Businesses often struggle with whether a 
particular provision requires notifi cation, 
either  because  the  provision  itself  is  not 
clear  or  because  the  business  believes 
that  the  intrusion  does  not  rise  to  the 
level  contemplated 
the  contract. 

in 

  117  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

Counterparties  may  disagree  with  this 
interpretation,  leading  to  disputes  if  the 
intrusion does come to light.

press,  but  business  customers  have  also 
pressed  for  indemnifi cation  in  the  wake 
of an intrusion.

Notifi cation  provisions  often  have  an 
abbreviated  time  frame  for  notifi cation. 
Attempting to identify and comply with 
notifi cation provisions of impacted coun-
terparties  can  create  additional  stress 
beyond  the  already  signifi cant  stress 
related to a data breach. Reviewing and 
attempting  to  interpret  these  provisions 
after an intrusion also creates risk of con-
tractual  breach,  as  a  business  may  not 
discover  the  notifi cation  provision  until 
after the required time frame has passed.

In the wake of a breach, a victim’s securi-
ty  will  come  under  scrutiny,  and  a  con-
tractual counterparty may argue that the 
security  was  inadequate  under  the  con-
tract.  For  instance,  in  the  DFARS  provi-
sion  discussed  previously,  “adequate 
security”  is  ripe  for  protracted  litigation 
in the wake of a cybersecurity incident. It 
is diffi cult to defi ne such terms adequate-
ly and still provide fl exibility in the face 
of changing threats.

In some industries, such as those that deal 
with  payment  cards,  many  security 
requirements  are  codifi ed  and  subject  to 
audit. The victim of a data breach may be 
subject  to  a  more  intrusive  audit  to  con-
fi rm its security.

Many  contracts  that  involve  confi dential 
data  have  a  provision  for  certifying  that 
the confi dential data have been destroyed. 
A  counterparty  may  rightly  inquire  how 
such a certifi cation was made in the wake 
of a cybersecurity incident.

 2.  Customers.  Many 

intrusions 

lead  to 
lawsuits  by  customers,  whether  they  be 
individual consumers or large businesses. 
Recent  card  breaches  have  resulted  in 
signifi cant  class-action  litigation,  and 
these  cases  have  received  much  of  the 

■  118 

Disputes with business partners over data 
breaches  can  disrupt  normal  operations, 
above and beyond the disruption caused 
by  the  data  breach  itself.  The  need  to 
resume  normal  operations  can  pressure 
the victim to quickly agree to a settlement.

Customers will often fi le class actions in 
the wake of a data breach. Plaintiffs’ law-
yers  are  growing  more  sophisticated  in 
how  and  where  they  fi le  these  actions. 
Both individual consumers and fi nancial 
institutions  have  fi led  class  actions,  and, 
in some cases, these class actions are con-
solidated  into  complicated  multidistrict 
litigation with multiple tracks for the dif-
fering  plaintiffs.  This  creates  expensive 
and cumbersome litigation.

 3.  Other 

impacted  businesses.  Contractual 
counterparties  are  not  the  only  businesses 
that may sue in the wake of a data breach. 
Banks  that  issued  cards  implicated  in 
Target’s data breach are suing Target, even 
if  they  lack  any  traditional  relationship  to 
Target. Our more interconnected society has 
spread the effects of cybersecurity problems, 
and  affected  parties  are  developing  more 
creative  methods  to  fi le  suit  against  the 
original victim of the intrusion.

 4.  Insurance.  More  and  more  insurance 
companies  are  offering  cyber  policies, 
and  more  businesses  are  attempting  to 
make claims for intrusions under general 
policies.  Insurance  companies  are,  in 
turn,  attempting  to  limit  the  scope  of 
coverage. Some insurance companies are 
denying claims, while others are carefully 
reviewing invoices for services related to 
data  breaches.  The  cost  to  respond  to  a 
breach can be expensive, and insurers will 
continue  to  dispute  claims  and  charges. 
In some cases, this will lead to additional 
litigation after the data breach response is 
complete.

  RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS 

■   Risks of regulatory investigations
Certain  regulators  have  explicit  statutory 
jurisdiction  over  cybersecurity  matters. 
Other regulatory agencies do not, but they 
attempt  to  regulate  such  matters  under 
their existing, general jurisdiction. As pub-
lic and congressional scrutiny of cybersecu-
rity  measures  increases,  regulators  will  be 
more  aggressive  in  asserting  jurisdiction 
over their regulated entities’ cybersecurity 
matters.

to 

Federal regulators
 1.  Industry  regulators.  Traditional  regulators 
have  already  applied  or  are  planning  to 
apply  standards  related  to  cybersecurity 
matters 
their  regulated  entities. 
The  Federal  Financial 
Institutions 
Examination Council (FFIEC), the Federal 
Trade  Commission  (FTC),  the  Federal 
Communications  Commission  (FCC), 
the  Department  of  Health  and  Human 
Services  (HHS),  and  the  Department 
of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  are  some 
of  the  regulators  that  have  sought  to 
regulate  cybersecurity  matters  among 
their  regulated  entities.  In  addition, 
the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology  (NIST)  publishes  documents 
that  plaintiffs  and  regulators  apply  in 
analyzing a business’s cybersecurity.

The  FFIEC  has  been  one  of  the  leading 
regulators  with  regard  to  cybersecurity. 
The  FFIEC  has  had  an  IT  examination 
handbook for several years and is devel-
oping a tool to help fi nancial institutions 
assess risk. In addition, the FFIEC requires 
fi nancial  institutions  to  require  certain 
cybersecurity  measures  of  the  institu-
tions’ third-party service providers, effec-
tively expanding the FFIEC’s jurisdiction. 
The FFIEC has experience in investigating 
data breaches and imposing punishments 
based on insuffi cient security. Other regu-
lators  look  to  the  FFIEC’s  examination 
handbook  to  inform  their  own  regula-
tions and investigations.

The  FTC  has  been  aggressive  in  fi ling 
administrative  complaints  against  busi-
nesses that, in the eyes of the FTC, do not 
adequately  protect  sensitive  consumer 
information.  The  FTC  requires,  among 
other things, “reasonable security” but pro-
vides  no  formal  defi nition.  This  creates 
uncertainty  for  businesses  seeking  to 
understand  their  obligations.  The  FTC  is 
involved  in  litigation  in  federal  court 
concerning  both  its  jurisdiction  over  data 
security  and  the  standards  it  applies  to 
businesses. Congress is considering a bill to 
formalize FTC jurisdiction over data secu-
rity, which may further empower the FTC.

FCC’s 

Cybersecurity 

The 
and 
Communications  Reliability  Division 
works to maintain the reliability of commu-
nications infrastructure in the face of vari-
ous  cyberthreats.  In  2014  the  FCC  began 
imposing substantial fi nes on wireless carri-
ers  for  insuffi cient  secured  sensitive  con-
sumer information.

HHS  regulates  cybersecurity  matters 
under  the  Health  Insurance  Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). 
Under  this  authority,  HHS  has  imposed 
multimillion-dollar  fi nes  for  insuffi cient 
data security.

DHS is involved in coordinating informa-
tion  sharing,  securing  critical  infrastruc-
ture, and protecting federal cybersecurity 
assets.  Currently,  its  programs  for  most 
private  businesses  are  voluntary,  but  as 
Congress continues to focus on informa-
tion sharing as a key component of reduc-
ing cybersecurity incidents, plaintiffs and 
courts  will  see  these  programs  less  as 
voluntary  and  more  as  the  minimum 
standard of care.

NIST  publishes  an  array  of  standards 
related to cybersecurity. Although none of 
these  standards  are  binding  on  private 
entities  (at  least  as  of  publication),  they 

  119  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

are often cited as what is reasonable secu-
rity or as industry standard. In addition, 
plaintiffs  and  regulators  look  to  NIST 
standards  to  inform  allegations  made  in 
complaints and investigations.

 2.  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  The 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
(SEC), under pressure from Congress, has 
focused  on  public  statements  concerning 
data  breaches.  This  focus  encompasses 
both disclosures made after breaches and 
risk  factors  made  in  market  reports.  To 
date, the SEC has stated that the materiality 
analysis for data breaches is the same as for 
other risk factors, but there is little formal 
notice or adjudication on these statements, 
creating uncertainty and risk.

The SEC released guidance on cybersecu-
rity  risks  in  2011. According  to  the  SEC, 
registrants  “should  disclose  the  risk  of 
cyber incidents if these issues are among 
the  most  signifi cant  factors  that  make 
an  investment  in  the  company  specula-
tive or risky.”

The SEC, in conjunction with the Financial 
Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  has 
engaged  in  enforcement  actions  against 
the  entities  they  regulate  for  insuffi cient 
security  for  both  customer  data  and 
market data.

State regulators
State  regulators  and  attorneys  general  are 
also  involved  in  cybersecurity  matters; 
indeed,  state  attorneys  general  have  been 
active  in  investigating  data  breaches.  Each 
state has a different legal environment con-
cerning data breaches. These attorneys gen-
eral  typically  assert  jurisdiction  when  the 
state’s  citizens  are  impacted,  potentially 
exposing a business to an investigation even 
if the business does not typically operate in 
the state.

California  has  generally  been  the  fi rst 
state  to  impose  data  breach  notifi cation 
requirements.  California  passed  its  data 
breach  notifi cation  law  in  2003.  In  the  time 
since, California has expanded what data are 
covered  by  the  statute,  including  most 
recently  usernames  and  passwords.  Most 
other states have similar statutes.

Several other states, including Vermont, 
New  York,  and  Michigan,  have  been  par-
ticularly active in investigations. For certain 
larger  breaches,  some  state  attorneys  gen-
eral  will  work  together  in  a  coordinated 
investigation.

■  Conclusion
Cybersecurity matters create extensive risks 
for business. Foremost among these are risks 
related to disputes and regulatory investiga-
tions.  These  risks  are  not  fully  defi ned  and 
likely never will be.

■  120 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Legal considerations for 
cybersecurity insurance
K&L Gates LLP – Roberta D. Anderson, Partner

■  Legal, regulatory, and additional concerns driving 

the purchase of cybersecurity insurance

Legal liability, regulatory and other exposures surrounding cybersecurity 
and data privacy-related incidents
In addition to a seemingly endless stream of data breaches 
and  other  serious  cybersecurity  and  data  protection-
related incidents, the past several years have seen signifi -
cantly amplifi ed legal liability surrounding cybersecurity 
and  data  privacy,  a  remarkable  proliferation  and  expan-
sion  of  cybersecurity  and  privacy-related  laws,  and 
increasingly heightened regulatory scrutiny.

In  the  wake  of  a  data  breach  of  any  consequence,  an 
organization is likely to face myriad different forms of legal 
and regulatory exposure, including class action litigation, 
shareholder derivative litigation, regulatory investigation, 
the costs associated with forensic investigation, notifi cation 
to  persons  whose  information  may  have  been  compro-
mised, credit monitoring, call center services, public rela-
tions expenses, and other event management activities.

Beyond  third-party  liability  and  event  management 
activities,  organizations  face  substantial  fi rst-party  losses 
associated with reputational injury and damage to brand in 
the wake of a serious breach event. They also face substan-
tial business income loss if an event disrupts normal day-
to-day business operations. Even if an organization’s own 
system  is  not  compromised,  the  organization  may  suffer 
signifi cant losses if an incident affects a key vendor, cloud 
provider, or any key third party in the organization’s prod-
uct and service supply chain. Also at stake is the organiza-
tion’s digital assets, the value of which in some cases may 
eclipse the value of the organization’s other property.

Cybersecurity  insurance  can  play  a  vital  role  in  an 
organization’s  overall  strategy  to  address,  mitigate,  and 
maximize protection against the legal and other exposures 
fl owing from data breaches and other serious cybersecu-
rity, privacy, and data protection-related incidents.

121  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

SEC’s cybersecurity risk factor disclosure guidance and 
cybersecurity insurance
In  October  2011,  in  the  wake  of  what  it 
phrased  “more  frequent  and  severe  cyber 
incidents,”  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission’s (SEC’s) Division of Corporation 
Finance issued disclosure guidance on cyber-
security,  which  advises  that  companies 
“should  review,  on  an  ongoing  basis,  the 
adequacy  of  their  disclosure  relating  to 
cybersecurity risks and cyber incidents.” The 
guidance  advises  that  “appropriate  disclo-
sures  may  include,”  among  other  things,  a 
“[d]escription  of  relevant  insurance  cover-
age” that the company has in place to address 
cybersecurity risk.

SEC comments in this area have regularly 
requested  information  regarding  “whether 
[the company] ha[s] obtained relevant insur-
ance coverage,” as well as “the amount of [the 
company]’s  cyber  liability  insurance.”  More 
recently, the SEC is asking not only whether 
the company has cybersecurity insurance and 
how  much  the  company  has  but  also  how 
solid the company’s coverage is:

“We note that your network-security insur-
ance  coverage  is  subject  to  a  $10  million 
deductible.  Please  tell  us  whether  this 
coverage has any other signifi cant limita-
tions. In addition, please describe for us the 
‘certain  other  coverage’  that  may  reduce 
your  exposure  to  Data  Breach  losses.” 
(Emphasis added.)
“We  note  your  disclosure  that  an  unau-
thorized party was able to gain access to 
your computer network ‘in a prior fi scal 
year.’ So that an investor is better able to 
understand the materiality of this cyber-
security  incident,  please  revise  your  dis-
closure  to  identify  when  the  cyber  inci-
dent  occurred  and  describe  any  material 
costs or consequences to you as a result of 
the incident. Please also further describe 
your  cyber  security  insurance  policy, 
including  any  material  limits  on  cover-
age.” (Emphasis added.)

to carefully evaluate their current insurance 
program  and  consider  purchasing  cyberse-
curity insurance.

■  The exclusion of cybersecurity and data 
privacy-related coverage from traditional 
insurance policies

In response to decisions upholding coverage 
for  cybersecurity  and  data  privacy-related 
risks under traditional lines of insurance cov-
erage, such as Commercial General Liability 
(CGL)  coverage,  the  insurance  industry  has 
added various limitations and exclusions to 
traditional lines of coverage.

By  way  of  example,  Insurance  Services 
Offi ce  (ISO),  the  insurance  industry  organi-
zation that develops standard insurance pol-
icy  language,  recently  introduced  a  new 
series of cybersecurity and data breach exclu-
sionary  endorsements  to  its  standard-form 
CGL policies, which became effective in May 
2014.  One  of  the  endorsements,  entitled 
“Exclusion  -  Access  Or  Disclosure  Of 
Confi dential  Or  Personal  Information  And 
Data-Related Liability - Limited Bodily Injury 
Exception Not Included,” adds the following 
exclusion to the primary CGL policy:

This insurance does not apply to:

 p. Access Or Disclosure Of Confi dential Or 
Personal  Information  And  Data-related 
Liability

Damages arising out of:

  (1)  Any  access  to  or  disclosure  of  any 
person’s or organization’s confi dential 
or  personal  information,  including 
patents,  trade  secrets,  processing 
methods,  customer  lists,  fi nancial 
information,  credit  card  information, 
health  information  or  any  other  type 
of non public information; or

  (2)  The loss of, loss of use of, damage to, 
corruption  of,  inability  to  access,  or 
inability to manipulate electronic data.

The  SEC’s  guidance  provides  another  com-
pelling reason for publicly traded companies 

This  exclusion  applies  even  if  damages 
are claimed for notifi cation costs, credit 

■  122 

  LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE  

monitoring expenses, forensic expenses, 
public  relations  expenses  or  any  other 
loss, cost or expense incurred by you or 
others  arising  out  of  that  which  is 
described in Paragraph (1) or (2) above.

In connection with its fi ling of the endorse-
ments,  ISO  stated  that  “when  this  endorse-
ment is attached, it will result in a reduction 
of coverage. . . .”

Although there may be signifi cant poten-
tial  coverage  for  cybersecurity  and  data 
privacy-related incidents under an organiza-
tion’s traditional insurance policies, includ ing 
its  Directors’  and  Officers’  Liability, 
Professional  Liability,  Fiduciary  Liability, 
Crime, CGL, and Commercial Property poli-
cies,  the  new  exclusions  provide  another 
reason for organizations to carefully consider 
specialty cybersecurity insurance products.

■  Types of cybersecurity insurance
Established coverages
There  are  a  number  of  established  third-
party  coverages  (i.e.,  covering  an  organiza-
tion’s potential liability to third parties) and 
fi rst-party  coverages  (e.g.,  covering  the 
organization’s own digital assets and income 
loss) as summarized in Table 1:

Emerging markets
In  addition  to  the  established  coverages, 
three  signifi cant  emerging  markets  provide 
coverage for the following:

 䊏 fi rst-party  losses  involving  physical  asset 
damage  after  an  electronic  data-related 
incident

 䊏 third-party  bodily  injury  and  property 
damage that may result from an electronic 
data-related incident

TABLE

Type

Privacy liability

Network security 
liability

Regulatory liability 

PCI DSS liability

Media liability

THIRD-PARTY COVERAGES

Description

Generally covers third-party liability, including defense and 
judgments or settlements, arising from data breaches, such as 
the Target breach, and other failures to protect protected and 
confi dential information 
Generally covers third-party liability, including defense and 
judgments or settlements, arising from security threats to 
networks, e.g., inability to access the insured’s network 
because of a DDoS attack or transmission of malicious code 
to a third-party network 
Generally covers amounts payable in connection with 
administrative or regulatory investigations and proceedings, 
including regulatory fi nes and penalties
Generally covers amounts payable in connection with payment 
card industry demands for assessments, including contractual 
fi les and penalties, for alleged noncompliance with PCI Data 
Security Standards
Generally covers third-party liability arising from infringement 
of copyright or other intellectual property rights and torts such 
as libel, slander, and defamation, which arise from media-related 
activities, e.g., broadcasting and advertising 

Continued

  123  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

TABLE

Type

Crisis management

Network 
interruption

Contingent 
network 
interruption
Digital assets

Extortion

FIRST-PARTY COVERAGES

Description 

Generally covers “crisis management” expenses that typically 
follow in the wake of a breach incident, e.g., breach notifi cation 
costs, credit monitoring, call center services, forensic 
investigations, and public relations efforts
Generally covers the organization’s income loss associated 
with the interruption of the its business caused by the failure of 
computer systems/networks
Generally covers the organization’s income loss associated with 
the interruption of the its business caused by the failure of a 
third-party’s computer systems/networks
Generally covers the organization’s costs associated with 
replacing, recreating, restoring, and repairing damaged or 
destroyed computer programs, software, and electronic data 
Generally covers losses associated with cyber extortion, e.g., 
payment of an extortionist’s demand to prevent a cybersecurity 
or data privacy-related incident 

 䊏 reputational  injury  resulting  from  an 
incident that adversely affects the public 
perception of the insured organization or 
its brand.

Because  privacy  and  electronic  data-related 
exclusions  continue  to  make  their  way  into 
traditional  property  and  liability  insurance 
policies,  and  given  that  an  organization’s 
largest exposures may fl ow from reputational 
injury  and  brand  tarnishment,  these  emerg-
ing coverages will be increasingly valuable.

■  Strategic tips for purchasing cybersecurity 

insurance

Cybersecurity  insurance  coverage  can  be 
extremely  valuable,  but  choosing  the  right 
insurance product presents signifi cant chal-
lenges. A diverse and growing array of prod-
ucts is in the marketplace, each with its own 
insurer-drafted  terms  and  conditions  that 
vary dramatically from insurer to insurer—
and even between policies underwritten by 
the  same  insurer.  In  addition,  the  specifi c 
needs of different industry sectors, and dif-
ferent organizations within those sectors, are 
far-reaching and diverse.

■  124 

Although placing coverage in this dynam-
ic space presents a challenge, it also presents 
substantial opportunity. The cyber insurance 
market is extremely competitive, and cyber 
insurance  policies  are  highly  negotiable. 
This  means  that  the  terms  of  the  insurers’ 
off-the-shelf  policy  forms  often  can  be  sig-
nifi cantly  enhanced  and  customized  to 
respond  to  the  insured’s  particular  circum-
stances. Frequently, very signifi cant enhance-
ments  can  be  achieved  for  no  increase  in 
premium.

The  following  are  fi ve  strategic  tips  for 

purchasing cyber insurance:

Adopt a team approach.
Successful placement of cybersecurity insur-
ance  coverage  is  a  collaborative  undertak-
ing. Because of the nature of the product and 
the risks that it is intended to cover, success-
ful placement requires the involvement and 
input not only of a capable risk management 
department and a knowledgeable insurance 
broker but also of in-house legal counsel and 
IT  professionals,  resources,  and  compliance 
personnel—and experienced insurance cov-
erage counsel.

  LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE  

Understand risk profi le and tolerance.
A  successful  insurance  placement  is  facili-
tated  by  having  a  thorough  understanding 
of  an  organization’s  risk  profi le,  including 
the following:

 䊏 the scope and type of data maintained by 
the company and the location and manner 
in  which,  and  by  whom,  such  data  are 
used, transmitted, handled, and stored

 䊏 the organization’s network infrastructure
 䊏 the  organization’s  cybersecurity,  privacy, 

and data protection practices

 䊏 the  organization’s  state  of  compliance 

with regulatory and industry standards

 䊏 the use of unencrypted mobile and other 

portable devices.

Many other factors may warrant considera-
tion. When an organization has a grasp on its 
risk profi le, potential exposure, and risk tol-
erance,  it  is  well  positioned  to  consider  the 
type and amount of insurance coverage that 
it needs to adequately respond to identifi ed 
risks and exposure.

Ask the right questions.
It is important to carefully evaluate the cov-
erage under consideration. Table 2 shows ten 
of the important questions to ask when con-
sidering  third-party  and  fi rst-party  cyber 
insurance.

The list is not exhaustive, and many other 
questions  should  be  considered,  including, 
for example, the extent to which the policy 

TABLE

Third-Party 

First-Party 

Does the policy: 

Does the policy: 

cover the acts, errors, and omissions of 
third parties, e.g., vendors, for which 
the organization may be liable?

cover data in the care, custody, or 
control of third parties, e.g., cloud 
providers? 
cover new and expanding privacy laws 
and regulations?
cover personally identifi able information 
in any form, e.g., paper records?
cover confi dential corporate data, e.g., 
third-party trade secrets?

cover wrongful or unauthorized 
collection of data?
cover regulatory fi nes and penalties?
cover PCI DSS-related liability?

exclude the acts of “rogue” employees?

exclude unencrypted devices? 

cover business income loss resulting from 
system failures in addition to failures of 
network security, e.g., any unplanned 
outages?
cover business income loss resulting from 
cloud failure?

cover contingent business income loss resulting 
from the failure of a third-party network?
cover data restoration costs?

cover business income loss after a network 
is up and running, but before business 
returns to full pre-incident operation?
contain hourly sublimits?

contain an hourly “waiting period”?
contain a sublimit applicable to the 
contingent business income coverage?
exclude loss for power failure or blackout/
brownout? 
exclude software programs that are 
unsupported or in a testing stage?

  125  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

covers,  or  excludes,  cyberterrorism.  In  all 
cases, the organization should request a ret-
roactive  date  of  at  least  1  year  prior  to  the 
policy inception, given that advanced attacks 
go undetected for a median of 229 days.

Beware the fi ne print.
Like any other insurance policy, cybersecuri-
ty insurance policies contain exclusions that 
may signifi cantly curtail and undermine the 
purpose of the coverage. Some insurers, for 
example,  may  insert  exclusions  based  on 
purported  shortcomings  in  the  insured’s 
security measures. One case recently fi led in 
the California federal court on May 7, 2015, 
highlights  the  problems  with  these  types  of 
exclusions.  The  case  is  Columbia  Casualty 
Company  v.  Cottage  Health  System,  in  which 
Columbia  Casualty,  CNA’s  non-admitted 
insurer,  seeks  to  avoid  coverage  under  a 
cybersecurity insurance policy for the defense 
and settlement of a data breach class action 
lawsuit and related regulatory investigation. 
CNA  relies  principally  upon  an  exclusion, 
entitled  “Failure 
to  Follow  Minimum 
Required Practices,” which purports to void 
coverage if the insured fails to “continuously 
implement”  certain  aspects  of  computer 
security.  These  types  of  broadly  worded, 
open-ended exclusions can be acutely prob-
lematic  and  impracticable.  If  enforced  liter-
ally, they may vaporize the coverage that the 
policy is intended to provide. The good news 
is  that,  although  certain  types  of  exclusions 
are unrealistic given the nature of the risk an 
insured  is  attempting  to  insure  against, 
cybersecurity  insurance  policies  are  highly 
negotiable.  It  is  possible  to  cripple  inappro-
priate exclusions by appropriately curtailing 
them  or  to  entirely  eliminate  them—and 
often this does not cost additional premium.

Pay attention to the application.
CNA in the Columbia Casualty case also seeks 
to deny coverage based upon alleged misrep-
resentations contained in the insured’s insur-
ance application relating to the risk controls. 
The important takeaway is that cybersecurity 
insurance  applications  can,  and  usually 
do, contain a myriad of questions concerning 

■  126 

an  organization’s  cybersecurity  and  data 
protection practices, seeking detailed informa-
tion  surrounding  technical,  complex  subject 
matter. These questions are often answered by 
technical  specialists  who  may  not  appreciate 
the  nuances  and  idiosyncrasies  of  insurance 
coverage law. For these reasons, it is advisable 
to have insurance coverage counsel involved 
in the application process.

■  Tips for prevailing in cyber insurance 

coverage litigation

As CNA’s recently fi led coverage action in the 
Columbia  Casualty  case  illustrates,  cybersecu-
rity insurance coverage disputes and litigation 
are  coming.  In  the  wake  of  a  data  breach  or 
other privacy, cybersecurity, or data protection-
related incident, organizations should antici-
pate that their insurer may deny coverage for 
a resulting claim against the policy.

Before  a  claim  arises,  organizations  are 
encouraged  to  proactively  negotiate  and 
place the best possible coverage to decrease 
the  likelihood  of  a  coverage  denial.  In  con-
trast to many types of commercial insurance 
policies, cybersecurity policies are extremely 
negotiable,  and  the  insurer’s  off-the-shelf 
forms can usually be signifi cantly negotiated 
and improved for no increase in premium. A 
well-drafted  policy  will  reduce  the  likeli-
hood that an insurer will be able to success-
fully avoid or limit insurance coverage in the 
event of a claim.

Even where a solid form is in place, how-
ever, and there is a solid claim for coverage 
under  the  policy  language  and  applicable 
law, insurers can and do deny coverage.

When  facing  coverage  litigation,  organi-
zations are advised to consider the following 
fi ve strategies to prevail:

Tell a concise, compelling story.
In  complex  insurance  coverage  litigation, 
there are many moving parts and the issues 
are typically nuanced and complex. It is criti-
cal,  however,  that  these  nuanced,  complex 
issues come across to a judge, jury, or arbitra-
tor  as  simple  and  straightforward.  Getting 
overly caught up in the weeds of policy inter-
pretive  and  legal  issues,  particularly  at  the 

outset, risks losing the organization’s critical 
audience  and  obfuscating  a  winningly  con-
cise,  compelling  story  that  is  easy  to  under-
stand,  follow,  and  sympathize  with.  Boiled 
down to its essence, the story may be—and in 
this context often is—something as simple as 
the following:

“They promised to protect us from a cyber 
breach if we paid the insurance premium. We 
paid the premium. They broke their promise.”

Place the story in the right context.
It  is  critical  to  place  the  story  in  the  proper 
context  because,  unfortunately,  many  insur-
ers in this space, whether by negligent defi cit 
or deliberate design, are selling products that 
do not refl ect the reality of e-commerce and 
its  risks.  Many  off-the-shelf  cybersecurity 
insurance  policies,  for  example,  limit  the 
scope of coverage to only the insured’s own 
acts and omissions, or only to incidents that 
affect  the  insured’s  network.  Others  contain 
broadly worded, open-ended exclusions such 
as  the  one  at  issue  in  the  Columbia  Casualty 
case, which, if enforced literally, would large-
ly if not entirely vaporize the coverage osten-
sibly provided under the policy. These types 
of exclusions can be acutely problematic and 
impracticable.  A  myriad  of  other  traps  in 
cyber insurance policies—even more in those 
that are not carefully negotiated—may allow 
insurers  to  avoid  coverage  if  the  language 
were applied literally.

If  the  context  is  carefully  framed  and 
explained,  however,  judges,  juries,  and  arbi-
trators should be inhospitable to the various 
“gotcha”  traps  in  these  policies.  Taking  the 
Columbia  Casualty  case  as  an  example,  the 
insurer,  CNA,  relies  principally  upon  an 
exclusion,  entitled  “Failure 
to  Follow 
Minimum  Required  Practices,”  which  pur-
ports  to  void  coverage  if  the  insured  fails  to 
“continuously  implement”  certain  aspects  of 
computer  security.  In  this  context,  however, 
comprising  the  extremely  complex  areas  of 
cybersecurity and data protection, any insured 
can reasonably be expected to make mistakes 
in  implementing  security.  This  reality  is,  in 
fact,  a  principal  reason  for  purchasing  cyber 
liability coverage in the fi rst place. In addition, 

  LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE  

CNA  represented  in  its  marketing  materials 
that  the  policy  at  issue  in  Columbia  Casualty 
offers  “exceptional  fi rst-and  third-party  cyber 
liability coverage to address a broad range of 
exposures,”  including  “security  breaches” 
and “mistakes”:

Cyber  liability  and  CNA  NetProtect 
products

fills 

CNA  NetProtect 
the  gaps 
by  offering  exceptional  fi rst-  and  third-
party cyber liability coverage to address a 
broad 
range  of  exposures.  CNA 
NetProtect covers insureds for exposures 
that  include  security  breaches,  mistakes, 
and  unauthorized  employee  acts,  virus 
attacks, hacking, identity theft or private 
information  loss,  and  infringing  or  dis-
paraging content. CNA NetProtect cover-
age  is  worldwide,  claims-made  with 
limits up to $10 million.

It is important to use the discovery phase 
to  fully  fl esh  out  the  context  of  the  insur-
ance and the entire insurance transaction in 
addition  to  the  meaning,  intent,  and  inter-
pretation  of  the  policy  terms  and  condi-
tions,  claims  handling,  and  other  matters 
depending on the particular circumstances 
of the coverage action.

Secure the best potential venue and choice of law.
One  of  the  fi rst  and  most  critical  decisions 
that  an  organization  contemplating  insur-
ance  coverage  litigation  must  make  is  the 
appropriate  forum  for  the  litigation.  This 
decision, which may be affected by whether 
the policy contains a forum selection clause, 
can  be  critical  to  potential  success,  among 
other  reasons  because  the  choice  of  forum 
may have a signifi cant impact on the related 
choice-of-law  issue,  which  in  some  cases  is 
outcome-determinative. Insurance contracts 
are  interpreted  according  to  state  law  and 
the  various  state  courts  diverge  widely  on 
issues  surrounding  insurance  coverage. 
Until  the  governing  law  applicable  to  an 
insurance contract is established, the policy 
can  be,  in  a  fi gurative  and  yet  a  very  real 
sense,  a  blank  piece  of  paper.  The  different 

  127  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

interpretations  given  the  same  language 
from one state to the next can mean the dif-
ference  between  a  coverage  victory  and  a 
loss.  It  is  therefore  critical  to  undertake  a 
careful choice of law analysis before initiat-
ing  coverage  litigation  or  selecting  a  venue 
or, where the insurer fi les fi rst, before taking 
a choice of law position or deciding whether 
to challenge the insurer’s selected forum.

Consider bringing in other carriers.
Often when there is a cybersecurity, privacy, 
or  data  protection-related  issue,  more  than 
one  insurance  policy  may  be  triggered.  For 
example, a data breach like the Target breach 
may  implicate  an  organization’s  cybersecu-
rity insurance, CGL insurance, and Directors’ 
and  Offi cers’  Liability  insurance.  To  the 
extent that insurers on different lines of cov-
erage have denied coverage, it may be ben-
efi cial  for  the  organization  to  have  those 
insurance carriers pointing the fi nger at each 
other  throughout  the  insurance  coverage 
proceedings. Again considering the context, 
a judge, arbitrator, or jury may fi nd it offen-
sive if an organization’s CGL insurer is argu-
ing,  on  the  one  hand,  that  a  data  breach  is 
not covered because of a new exclusion, and 
the organization’s cybersecurity insurer also 
is  arguing  that  the  breach  is  not  covered 
under  the  cyber  policy  that  was  purchased 
to  fi ll  the  “gap”  in  coverage  created  by  the 
CGL policy exclusion. Relatedly, it is impor-
tant  to  carefully  consider  the  best  strategy 
for pursuing coverage in a manner that will 
most effectively and effi ciently maximize the 
potentially  available  coverage  across  the 
insured’s entire insurance portfolio.

Retain counsel with cybersecurity insurance expertise.
Cybersecurity  insurance  is  unlike  any  other 
line of coverage. There is no standardization. 
Each of the hundreds of products in the mar-
ketplace  has  its  own  insurer-drafted  terms 
and  conditions  that  vary  dramatically  from 
insurer  to  insurer—and  even  between  poli-
cies  underwritten  by  the  same  insurer. 
Obtaining  coverage  litigation  counsel  with 
substantial cybersecurity insurance expertise 
assists an organization on a number of fronts. 

Importantly,  it  will  give  the  organization 
unique access to compelling arguments based 
upon  the  context,  history,  evolution,  and 
intent  of  this  line  of  insurance  product. 
Likewise, during the discovery phase, cover-
age  counsel  with  unique  knowledge  and 
experience is positioned to ask for and obtain 
the particular information and evidence that 
can make or break the case—and will be able 
to do so in a relatively effi cient, streamlined 
manner. In addition to creating solid ammu-
nition for trial, effective discovery often leads 
to  successful  summary  judgment  rulings, 
thereby, at a minimum, streamlining the case 
in  a  cost-effective  manner  and  limiting  the 
issues that ultimately go to a jury. Likewise, 
counsel familiar with all of the many different 
insurer-drafted  forms  as  they  have  evolved 
over  time  will  give  the  organization  key 
access to arguments based upon obvious and 
subtle  differences  between  and  among  the 
many  different  policy  wordings,  including 
the particular language in the organization’s 
policy. Often in coverage disputes, the multi-
million  dollar  result  comes  down  to  a  few 
words, the sequence of a few words, or even 
the position of a comma or other punctuation.

■  Conclusion
Cyber insurance coverage can be extremely 
valuable. Although placing coverage in this 
dynamic  space  presents  challenges,  it  also 
presents  substantial  opportunities.  Before  a 
claim arises, organizations are encouraged to 
proactively negotiate and place the best pos-
sible coverage in order to decrease the likeli-
hood of a coverage denial and litigation. In 
contrast to many other types of commercial 
insurance  policies,  cyber  insurance  policies 
are  extremely  negotiable,  and  the  insurers’ 
off-the-shelf  forms  typically  can  be  signifi -
cantly  negotiated  and  improved  for  no 
increase  in  premium. A  well-drafted  policy 
will  reduce  the  likelihood  that  an  insurer 
will  be  able  to  successfully  avoid  or  limit 
insurance coverage in the event of a claim. If 
a  claim  arises,  following  sound  litigation 
strategies  and  refusing  to  take  “no”  for  an 
answer  will  greatly  increase  the  odds  of 
securing valuable coverage.

■  128 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Consumer protection: What is it?
Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker LLP – 
Melissa Ventrone, Partner and Lindsay Nickle, Partner

From  a  legal  perspective,  consumer  protection  is  the 
application  of  rules  and  regulations  to  agencies,  busi-
nesses,  and  organizations  that  require  them  to  protect 
their customers from intentional and unintentional harm. 
Instead  of  caveat  emptor,  or  buyer  beware,  the  business 
entity has a mandate to protect its customers from the bad 
things that may befall them. In essence, the government 
has  decided  it  is  the  business’s  responsibility  to  protect 
the  least  sophisticated  consumers  from  themselves  and 
what may happen to them.

The intersection of consumer protection and cyber-
security  imposes  a  responsibility  on  businesses  to 
protect  their  consumers’  information.  Unlike  many 
areas of business, when an organization is the victim 
of  a  criminal  attack,  such  as  being  hacked,  the  busi-
ness is not considered a victim. Instead, the customers 
are considered the victims, and the business becomes 
a potential scapegoat—the target of inquiries, investi-
gations,  irate  customers,  reputational  harm,  and  lost 
business,  even  though  it  was  the  business  that  suf-
fered the criminal activity. Leading experts agree that 
no organization is immune from cyberattacks and that 
impenetrable data security is not possible. Nevertheless 
the  media  and  the  public  continue  to  vilify  and  hold 
businesses  responsible  for  failing  to  do  what  experts 
agree cannot be done.

Consumers  demand  that  organizations  safeguard 
their  privacy  and  protect  their  information  from  data 
breaches; however, those same consumers are impatient 
and intolerant when security measures slow services or 
degrade  usability.  Some  may  terminate  their  relation-
ships as a result, jumping ship to underfunded start-ups 
simply  because  consumers  want  what  they  want,  and 
they want it now.

129  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

Adding to the diffi culty of trying to bal-
ance data privacy and security with innova-
tion and usability, organizations must con-
currently  maintain  compliance  with  the 
myriad  of  state  and  federal  data  privacy 
and  security  laws,  regulations,  and  guide-
lines. It would take several books to outline 
all  the  laws,  regulations,  and  guidelines 
that  affect  consumer  protection  and  cyber-
security.  This  chapter  is  designed  to  pro-
vide  organizations  with  an  understanding 
of those laws that have the most signifi cant 
impact on privacy and security from a con-
sumer  protection  perspective.  There  is  no 
better place to start this discussion than by 
examining  the  recent  activities  of  the 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC).

■  Cybersecurity, consumer protection, 

and the FTC

The  FTC  has  deemed  itself  the  enforcer  of 
data  privacy  and  security,  the  ultimate 
authority  responsible  for  protecting  con-
sumer privacy and promoting data security 
in  the  private  sector.  In  fact,  the  FTC  com-
monly is considered the most active agency 
in  the  world  in  this  area.  Although  the 
debate  continues  on  whether  the  FTC  has 
authority to police data privacy and security 
under section 5 of the FTC Act, organizations 
must be aware that the FTC and other regu-
lators  are  monitoring  practices  and  investi-
gating and enforcing various laws under the 
guise of privacy and cybersecurity as a con-
sumer protection issue.

The  FTC  regulates  this  space  under  sec-
tion 5 of the FTC Act, which prohibits unfair 
or deceptive practices. The FTC may choose 
to  investigate  an  organization  if  it  believes 
that  the  organization  has  made  materially 
misleading statements or omissions regard-
ing  the  security  provided  for  consumers’ 
personal  data.  Further,  according  to  a  pre-
pared  statement  by  the  FTC,  “a  company 
engages in unfair acts or practices if its data 
security practices cause or are likely to cause 
substantial  injury  to  consumers  that  is  nei-
ther  reasonably  avoidable  by  the  consumer 
nor  outweighed  by  countervailing  benefi ts 
to consumers or to competition.”

■  130 

What does this mean? Well, according to an 
FTC report, this means that an organization’s 
data  security  measures  must  be  “reasonable 
and appropriate in light of the sensitivity and 
volume of consumer information it holds, the 
size and complexity of its data operations, and 
the cost of available tools to improve security 
and  reduce  vulnerabilities.”  In  other  words, 
the FTC can choose to investigate an organiza-
tion  simply  because  the  FTC  believes  the 
organization  is  doing  a  poor  job  protecting 
consumers’  information.  Confused?  You  are 
not  alone.  Frankly,  it  appears  that  the  FTC 
views  poor  cybersecurity  practices  a  bit  like 
courts  view  pornography—they  know  it 
when they see it.

Organizations 

looking  for  guidance 
from  the  FTC  on  appropriate  security 
measures to protect consumer information 
may  fi nd  themselves  twisting  in  the  wind 
like the last leaf on a tree. The FTC has not 
issued  any  detailed  guidelines  on  what 
constitutes “reasonable security measures.” 
To be fair, the FTC most likely struggles, as 
do many agencies, with establishing guide-
lines that are fl exible enough to apply to a 
wide range of organizations in a variety of 
industries,  yet  structured  enough  to  set  a 
standard.

The  FTC  addressed  this  argument  by 
instructing companies to review its previous 
consent  decrees  to  identify  “reasonable”—
or more appropriately, what it considered to 
be unreasonable—security standards. Thus, 
in  the  midst  of  day-to-day  operations,  the 
FTC  apparently  expects  an  organization  to 
carefully  review  a  multitude  of  previous 
consent decrees to identify what it should be 
doing  to  reasonably  protect  consumers’ 
information.

Organizations can also review a 15-page 
guide the FTC published in 2011, Protecting 
Personal  Information:  A  Guide  for  Business. 
This  guide  informs  organizations  that  a 
“sound  business  plan”  is  based  on  fi ve 
principles:

 䊏 Know  what  information  you  have  and 

who has access to the information.

  CONSUMER PROTECTION: WHAT IS IT?   

 䊏 Keep  only  that  information  needed  to 

conduct business.

 䊏 Protect the information in your control.
 䊏 Properly dispose of information that is no 

longer needed.

 䊏 Prepare a plan for responding to security 

incidents.

Although this may have been an accurate list 
in 2011, any company that limits its cyberse-
curity  program  to  these  fi ve  principles  will 
quickly  discover  its  inadequacies.  The  FTC 
claims to recognize that there is no one-size-
fi ts-all data security program, no program is 
perfect,  and  the  mere  fact  that  a  breach 
occurs  does  not  mean  a  company  has  vio-
lated the law.

Organizations  must  be  aware  of  the 
FTC’s  heightened  activity  in  this  space. 
Right  now,  data  privacy  and  protection  of 
consumer  information  has  the  public’s 
attention and is sometimes used as a politi-
cal  platform.  Organizations  must  have  an 
in-depth  understanding  of  their  cybersecu-
rity  posture,  identify  key  vulnerabilities, 
and have a plan to either mitigate or remedi-
ate  problems.  Failure  to  place  consumer 
protection and cybersecurity at the top of its 
priority list may land an organization in the 
FTC’s crosshairs.

priority is the strengthening of cybersecurity 
in the marketplace, particularly as it pertains 
to the fi nancial industry and those businesses 
and organizations that provide services in the 
fi nancial sector. To that end, in the summer of 
2014,  the  FFIEC  completed  a  cybersecurity 
assessment involving more than 500 commu-
nity  fi nancial  institutions  with  the  goal  of 
determining how prepared those institutions 
were  to  mitigate  cyber  risks.  The  results  are 
instructive  as  potential  standards  for  the 
efforts an organization should take when its 
operations  interact  with  or  are  tangential  to 
the fi nancial industry, or simply when a busi-
ness  collects,  stores,  or  shares  consumers’ 
private information.

Cyber  preparedness—which  is  the  crux 
of  consumer  protection—encompasses  the 
following:

 䊏 Risk  management  and  oversight: 
Organizations  should  proactively  train 
employees, allocate resources, and exercise 
control  and  supervision  of  cybersecurity 
operations. This includes involving upper-
level management and boards.

 䊏 Threat  intelligence:  A  business  should 
undertake  processes  to  educate,  identify, 
and track cyber activities, vulnerabilities, 
and threats.

■  Cybersecurity, consumer protection, 

and the fi nancial industry

As  in  other  industries,  cybersecurity  and 
consumer  protection  in  the  fi nancial  sector 
are  a  patchwork  of  federal  statutes,  regula-
tions, agencies, and enforcers. There are fi ve 
federal  banking  regulatory  agencies:  the 
Offi ce  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency 
(OCC), the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve  System  (FRB),  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  the  National 
Credit  Union  Administration  (NCUA),  and 
the  Consumer  Financial  Protection  Bureau 
(CFPB). A representative from each of them 
sits  on  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions 
Examination  Council  (FFIEC),  which  is 
empowered to set out principles, standards, 
and forms for the uniformity of the supervi-
sion  of  fi nancial  institutions.  A  top  FFIEC 

 䊏 Cybersecurity 

controls:  Businesses 
should  implement  controls  to  prevent 
unauthorized  access  or  exposure  of 
information, to detect attacks or attempts 
to  compromise  systems,  and  to  correct 
known  and  identifi ed  vulnerabilities. 
As  the  industry  begins  to  more  fully 
recognize the futility of keeping malicious 
attackers  outside  the  network  perimeter, 
companies  also 
implement 
controls that more quickly identify when 
malicious  activity  takes  place  inside  the 
network.

should 

 䊏 External  dependency  management: 
Organizations  should  have  processes  in 
place to manage vendors and third-party 
service  providers  and  help  ensure  that 
connections to systems are secure, as well 
as  processes  to  audit  and  evaluate  the 
third-party’s cybersecurity protections.

  131  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

 䊏 Cyber 

incident  management 

and 
resilience:  Organizations  should  have 
procedures and processes to detect incidents, 
respond  to  those  incidents,  mitigate  the 
impact  of  the  incidents,  document  and 
report  on  the  incidents,  and  provide  for 
recovery and business continuity.

Within  the  fi nancial  sector,  and  regarding 
businesses  that  interact  with  the  fi nancial 
sector,  these  can  reasonably  be  considered 
the components of due diligence. Efforts to 
protect  consumers  from  the  dangers  of  the 
exposure of personal information entrusted 
to a business involve guiding the organiza-
tion through these steps on a scale appropri-
ate to the size of the business and the scope 
of the information involved.

Adding to the complexity of compliance, 
there  are  multiple  statutes  and  regulations 
that  expressly  require  businesses  to  under-
take security measures and notify consumers 
regarding privacy and information-sharing 
practices.  The  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act 
(GLBA) and the corresponding regulations 
adopted to implement its requirements are 
aimed  at  protecting  consumer  interests. 
Similar to other regulations, businesses are 
required  by  the  GLBA  Safeguard  Rule  to 
use “reasonable security measures” to pro-
tect consumer information that they collect 
and store. In the fi nancial services industry, 
this  often  includes  highly  sensitive  infor-
mation,  such  as  Social  Security  numbers, 
fi nancial account numbers, and income and 
credit histories.

Fortunately, the GLBA outlines, at least in 
some  fashion,  what  constitutes  “reasonable 
security measures.” For instance, the GLBA 
Safeguard  Rule  requires  the  development 
and  implementation  of  a  written  informa-
tion  security  plan.  In  addition,  the  Rule 
requires  companies  to  provide  an  annual 
written  privacy  notice  to  its  customers  that 
clearly,  conspicuously,  and  accurately 
explains  its  information-sharing  practices 
and provides customers the right to opt out 
of the organization’s sharing practices. Both 
of  these  consumer  protections  are  enforced 
by the FTC along with several other federal 

■  132 

regulatory  agencies  and  state  insurance 
authorities.

Those  entities  governed  by  the  SEC 
(Securities and Exchange Commission) and 
FINRA  (Financial  Industry  Regulatory 
Authority) are expressly required to devel-
op  written  identity  theft  prevention  pro-
grams  and,  in  the  face  of  a  breach,  will 
likely  face  questions  regarding  cybersecu-
rity policies and efforts. Further, the regula-
tions imposing these requirements mandate 
that  upper-level  management  signs  off  on 
any written program and participates in its 
administration. As the goal of these require-
ments  is  to  protect  customer  information, 
an  organization  should  be  mindful  to 
design programs that consider the nature of 
the organization’s operations, as well as its 
size and complexity, so that the plan can be 
effectively  implemented  to  achieve  its 
desired goals.

The  OCC  recommends  all  banks  and 
fi nancial  institutions  implement  incident 
response  and  business  continuity  plans 
and  test  those  plans  regularly.  It  also  sets 
supervisory expectations about how fi nan-
cial  institutions  and  third-party  service 
providers  in  the  fi nancial  sector  can  and 
should  safeguard  sensitive  information. 
The OCC conducts on-site audits of fi nan-
cial institutions and certain third-party ser-
vice providers to confi rm compliance. The 
OCC also gets involved in the aftermath of 
cyberattacks to assess the corrective actions 
that fi nancial institutions take in response. 
The  OCC  is  vested  with  the  authority  to 
require the banks subject to their regulation 
and  the  banks’  service  providers  to  take 
steps  to  protect  systems,  prevent  loss  or 
theft of sensitive information, and mitigate 
identity theft.

In 2007, under the terms of the Fair and 
Accurate Credit Transactions Act, the OCC, 
FRB, FDIC, NCUA, and FTC issued regula-
tions requiring creditors and fi nancial insti-
tutions  to  develop  and  implement  formal 
written programs aimed at identifying and 
preventing  identity  theft  (the  Red  Flags 
Rule).  Large  banks  have  resident  OCC 
investigators trained to assess cybersecurity 

issues.  Smaller  banks  face  on-site  visits 
every  12  to  18  months.  In  2013,  the  OCC 
updated  its  Third-Party  Relationship  Risk 
Management Guidance to set out expecta-
tions for risk assessment and management 
of  third-party  relationships.  The  senior 
management  and  boards  of  banks  retain 
responsibility for cybersecurity even when 
third  parties  are  involved. As  a  result,  the 
OCC  mandates  comprehensive  oversight 
and  management  of  third-party  relation-
ships  throughout  the  life  of  each  relation-
ship. This requires extensive due diligence 
prior to establishing a relationship, execu-
tion of written contracts that should include 
the  right  to  audit  the  third  party,  ongoing 
monitoring, documentation, and reporting 
regarding risk management processes, and 
independent  review  of  processes.  Further, 
the OCC requires that third-party contracts 
stipulate that the OCC has the authority to 
examine and regulate the services provided 
to the bank by the third party.

The  fi nancial  industry  is  highly  regulat-
ed, and its consumer protection and cyber-
security  aspects  are  no  exception.  Identity 
theft,  at  its  heart,  is  a  consumer  protection 
issue.  Enforceable  security  guidelines  set 
out  by  regulators  and  aimed  at  the  protec-
tion  of  consumer  information  trickle  down 
to service providers, as the fi nancial institu-
tions are affi rmatively charged with manag-
ing  risks  associated  with  vendors  and 
service  providers.  The  recommendations 
and requirements of the fi nancial regulators 
make  clear  that  extensive  due  diligence, 
monitoring, planning, and management are 
required  in  the  quest  to  take  reasonable 
security measures.

■  Health care, cybersecurity, and consumer 

protection

Any discussion of consumer protection and 
cybersecurity must include a discussion of 
the  health  care 
industry.  The  Health 
Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability 
Act  of  1996  (HIPAA)  governs  protected 
health  information  (PHI)  maintained  by 
various  organizations  that  fall  under  the 
jurisdiction of HIPAA (covered entities) and 

  CONSUMER PROTECTION: WHAT IS IT?   

other organizations that may receive health 
information  from  covered  entities  while 
performing  various  services.  HIPAA  is 
enforced primarily by the U.S. Department 
of  Health  and  Human  Services  Offi ce  of 
Civil Rights (OCR). State attorneys general 
also have the authority to enforce HIPAA.

OCR’s  authority 

to  enforce  HIPAA 
encompasses  covered  entities  regardless  of 
size  and  their  “business  associates,”  a  term 
that includes fi rst-tier vendors that contract 
directly with covered entities and all down-
stream entities that receive PHI in the course 
of  their  business.  Perhaps  the  most  helpful 
aspect  of  HIPAA  is  that  it  specifi es  privacy 
requirements that covered entities must fol-
low,  as  well  as  identifi es  security  elements 
for covered entities to consider.

The HIPAA Privacy Rule outlines stand-
ards for the use and disclosure of all forms 
of PHI and categorizes PHI into three major 
“usage”  categories:  treatment,  payment, 
and health care operations and sets up rules 
associated with each use. Uses that fall out-
side  of  these  categories  or  that  do  not 
qualify as any of the exceptions described in 
the  rule  require  an  authorization  from  the 
affected individual. Meanwhile, the HIPAA 
Security Rule establishes standards for pre-
serving  the  confi dentiality,  integrity,  and 
availability  of  electronic  PHI.  Specifi cally, 
the  Security  Rule  requires  covered  entities 
to  have  appropriate  administrative,  physi-
cal,  and  technical  safeguards  in  place  to 
protect  PHI  and  contains  detailed  security 
requirements 
for  protecting  PHI.  For 
instance,  covered  entities  must  conduct  an 
assessment  of  the  risks  to  and  vulnerabili-
ties  of  the  protected  health  information. 
These  guidelines  provide  organizations 
with  concrete  examples  of  steps  needed  to 
protect PHI and hence the consumer infor-
mation in their systems. However, organiza-
tions should be aware that compliance with 
HIPAA is a minimum standard. As technol-
ogy  continues  to  change  and  develop,  cir-
cumstances  may  require  organizations  to 
exceed  the  minimum  HIPAA  compliance 
requirements to effectively protect consumer 
information.

  133  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

This  is  an  important  point,  because  in 
addition  to  OCR,  the  FTC  considers  itself 
empowered  to  regulate  organizations  that 
are  covered  by  HIPAA.  According  to  the 
FTC,  HIPAA  does  not  preempt  the  FTC’s 
authority  to  also  regulate  covered  entities. 
Furthermore,  in  2010  the  FTC  issued  the 
Health Breach Notifi cation Rule, which man-
dates  that  entities  not  covered  by  HIPAA 
that  experience  a  breach  of  a  “personal 
health  record”  provide  notifi cation  to  the 
affected consumer.

Covered entities and their business asso-
ciates must do more than merely “check the 
box”  on  cybersecurity  compliance.  If  an 
organization  faces  an  OCR  investigation,  it 
will  be  required  to  provide  information 
related to its entire data privacy and security 
program, not just information related to the 
“incident”  that  triggered  the  investigation. 
Often, organizations are required to provide 
evidence  of  policies  and  procedures  going 
back several years.

As  part  of  its  efforts  to  enforce  compli-
ance with HIPAA, OCR conducted security 
audits of covered entities in 2011 and 2012, 
commonly referred to as Phase 1. Although 
Phase  2  was  delayed  until  OCR  imple-
ments  a  web  portal  that  enables  covered 
entities to submit information, in May 2015 
OCR  began  sending  the  fi rst  surveys  of 
Phase 2 audits, so covered entities and their 
business associates should be prepared for 
this  next  phase.  Similar  to  other  agencies, 
OCR  intends  to  audit  the  cybersecurity 
practices  of  the  organizations  that  fall 
under  its  jurisdiction.  OCR  previously 
announced  that  it  would  conduct  a  pre-
audit  survey  of  800  covered  entities  and 
400 business associates, and from that pool 
select 350 covered entities and 50 business 
associates for a full audit.

The audits will take place over three years 

and will focus on:

 䊏 Risk  analysis  and  risk  management  (the 

Security Rule)

 䊏 Notice  of  privacy  practices  and  access 

rights (the Privacy Rule)

■  134 

 䊏 Content  and 

timeliness  of  breach 
notifi cation (the Breach Notifi cation Rule).

Phase 2 audits will likely not be as compre-
hensive  as  the  audits  in  Phase  1  and  will 
focus on key high-risk areas OCR learned of 
in its Phase 1 audits.

Health care information is commonly con-
sidered  the  most  sensitive  and  personal 
information a consumer has, and it therefore 
deserves  increased  security  controls.  This  is 
perhaps  recognized  by  the  authority  of  the 
state  attorneys  general  to  enforce  HIPAA,  a 
provision  not  found  in  all  federal  statutes. 
Numerous  states  have  passed  laws  specifi -
cally  intended  to  protect  personal  health 
information,  regardless  of  whether  the 
organization  holding  such  information  is 
considered a “covered entity” under HIPAA. 
As health care breaches continue to increase 
in  number,  organizations  should  expect 
greater regulatory scrutiny and activity relat-
ed to their efforts to protect consumer health 
information.

■  State laws and regulations
In  addition  to  the  federal  landscape,  busi-
nesses should be aware that state laws and 
regulations affect consumer protection obli-
gations. Various states have laws that affect 
specifi c  industries  and  general  consumer 
protection  laws  that  may  be  implicated  in 
business practices. This is a growing concern 
with the increase in e-commerce. Businesses 
that  in  the  past  would  have  limited  their 
footprint to the jurisdiction of a single state 
now are more likely to encounter customers 
across  state  lines.  Because  the  applicability 
of  state  laws  affecting  consumers  and 
because  cybersecurity  is  often  triggered  by 
the  residence  of  the  consumer,  even  small 
businesses can fi nd that they face unexpect-
ed multijurisdictional questions.

■  Recommendations and conclusion
Given  the  wide  range  of  laws,  regulations, 
and guidelines—only a few of which could 
be  covered  here—how  do  organizations 
begin to navigate these treacherous waters? 

  CONSUMER PROTECTION: WHAT IS IT?   

Organizations must build privacy and secu-
rity  into  their  systems,  processes,  and  ser-
vices from the ground up and from the top 
down. Education and training for all employ-
ees should start on day one and be continu-
ous.  The  time  and  effort  required  to  assess 
cyber  risk  and  understand  data  is  minimal 
compared with the potential implications of 
failing  to  do  so.  Technology  is  constantly 
evolving,  which  means  cybersecurity  does 

as well, and an organization’s efforts to pro-
tect  consumer  information  must  similarly 
adapt. It is better to have considered a tool 
and  rejected  it  because  it  substantially 
degrades  the  service  offered  than  to  ignore 
the  vulnerability  entirely.  Organizations 
must  face  cybersecurity  risks  as  an  enter-
prise and leverage industry experts to guide 
them through this quagmire of laws, regula-
tions, and threats.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  135  ■

Protecting trade secrets in the 
age of cyberespionage
Fish & Richardson P.C. – Gus P. Coldebella, Principal

The cybertheft of intellectual property (IP) from U.S. com-
panies has, in the words of former NSA director and Cyber 
Command chief General Keith Alexander, resulted in the 
“greatest  transfer  of  wealth  in  human  history.”  And  the 
data bear that out: by some estimates, the value of IP stolen 
from U.S. businesses over the Internet alone is $300 billion 
per year—a whopping 6% of our $5 trillion total intellec-
tual property assets. For certain nations, cyber espionage is 
a central component of their growth strategies: for exam-
ple,  the  Report  of  the  Commission  on  the  Theft  of  U.S. 
Intellectual  Property  (the  IP  Commission  Report)  found 
that “national industrial policy goals in China encourage 
IP theft, and an extraordinary number of Chinese in busi-
ness and government entities are engaged in this practice.” 
Cyber espionage of IP assets allows companies and coun-
tries  to  circumvent  the  expense  and  hard  work  of  basic 
research  and  product  development—which  could  take 
years or even decades—and instead quickly pursue their 
economic agendas based on stolen IP, all to the detriment 
of U.S. businesses, jobs, and economic growth.

On May 1, 2014, a federal grand jury brought criminal 
charges of hacking, economic espionage, and trade secrets 
theft against fi ve offi cers of China’s military. The hackers 
are alleged to have penetrated the networks of important 
American companies to acquire proprietary and confi den-
tial  technical  and  design  specifi cations,  manufacturing 
metrics, attorney-client discussions about upcoming trade 
litigation, economic strategies, and other forms of sensi-
tive, nonpublic information. What was the object of this 
indictment?  Certainly  not  to  get  a  conviction:  the  likeli-
hood  of  China  extraditing  the  defendants  to  the  U.S.  is 
negligible. Instead, the U.S. used the indictment to trans-
mit two strong signals. First, it sent a message to China: 
that we are aware of this aberrant behavior—in which a 
nation-state aims its espionage apparatus not at another 
country, but at another country’s companies—and that the 

137  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

U.S.  will  expose  this  misconduct  to  the 
world.  Second,  the  indictment  sent  a  mes-
sage  to  U.S.  companies  that,  although  past 
breaches and legal and reputational risk may 
have convinced boards and management to 
shore  up  defenses  against  cyberattacks 
involving  ‘personally  identifi able  informa-
tion,’ or PII, the most sophisticated attackers 
are interested in other, more mission-critical 
data  on  companies’  networks—intellectual 
property.  The  loss  of  trade  secrets  could 
cause more harm to a company’s reputation, 
value, and future prospects than a PII breach 
ever could. The U.S. government is signaling 
that  companies  should  focus  on  taking 
immediate, reasonable steps to defend their 
intellectual property assets.

In  a  world  where  countries  persistently 
attack companies and compromise of a com-
pany’s  networks  seems  inevitable,  manage-
ment may be tempted to throw up their hands 
and  concede  defeat.  There  are,  however, 
important legal and practical reasons to fi ght. 
In  this  chapter,  we  explore  reasonable  steps 
companies can take to prevent the cybertheft 
of their IP assets, to mitigate the harm of such 
thefts if they occur, and to challenge competi-
tors that use stolen IP assets to unfairly gain 
an advantage in the marketplace.

■  Conducting a trade secrets risk analysis
So  what  types  of  IP  are  cyber  spies  after? 
Intellectual  property  has  four  broad  catego-
ries:  patents,  trademarks,  copyrights,  and 
trade secrets. A trade secret—according to the 
Uniform Trade Secrets Act, or UTSA, adopted 
in some form by 48 states and the District of 
Columbia—is information that gains its actual 
or  potential  economic  value  from  being  not 
generally  known  and  reasonably  protected 
from  disclosure.  Of  the  four  IP  types,  only 
trade  secrets  maintain  their  value,  and  their 
legal protection as trade secrets, through non-
disclosure. If a trade secret is not disclosed, the 
economic  benefi t  it  provides  and  the  legal 
protection  it  enjoys  can  theoretically  last 
forever. If it is disclosed, those advantages can 
be destroyed. Trade secrets stand apart from 
other IP, which gains and maintains its legal 
protection  through  disclosure:  the  fi ling  of  a 

■  138 

patent, the registration of a trademark, and the 
creation/publication of copyrighted material. 
Cyberthieves  generally  set  their  sights  on 
a  company’s  trade  secrets—the  one  type  of 
IP  that  is  not  readily  available  for  the  world 
to see.

Some  companies  keep  their  trade  secrets 
offl ine. Legend has it that one of the most sto-
ried trade secrets, the formula for Coca-Cola, 
is on a handwritten piece of paper in a safe in 
Coke’s Atlanta  headquarters.  But  air-gapped 
trade secrets are rare in the Internet age. Given 
this, it is crucial for a company to identify and 
locate  the  trade  secrets  on  its  networks,  and 
those  that  are  being  deposited  there  in  the 
ordinary course of business. Every company 
has such mission-critical secrets: design speci-
fi cations,  chemical  formulas,  computer  code, 
fi nancial algorithms, customer lists, and busi-
ness plans, to name a few. Finding them is a 
key, and sometimes overlooked, part of a top-
to-bottom  network  vulnerability  analysis. 
Unless a company knows what trade secrets it 
has  and  where  they  are  located,  it  cannot 
begin to secure them.

Once a company catalogs its online trade 
secrets, it should ask several high-level stra-
tegic questions: How are they currently safe-
guarded? Who may access them? What sys-
tems are in place to alert the company that 
the  trade  secrets  have  been  exfi ltrated  or 
altered? These questions and the protective 
measures developed in response are not only 
important  to  thwart  cyber  attackers—but 
also  help  to  prevent  all  types  of  attempted 
trade secret theft, whether conducted via the 
Internet or the old-fashioned way. They also 
help to best position the company if it brings 
litigation seeking damages, injunctive relief, 
or other recompense for the theft. Although 
the  cybertheft  of  trade  secrets  has  not  yet 
yielded  many  judicial  decisions,  law  books 
are  rife  with  cases  of  companies  seeking 
damages  resulting  from  current  or  former 
employees spiriting off trade secrets to their 
next  employer  or  to  a  competitor.  One  of 
the  central  questions  in  any  such  litigation 
is: did the company make reasonable efforts 
under  the  circumstances  to  protect  the 
secrecy  of  its  confi dential  information?  The 

reasonable measures identifi ed in these deci-
sions—such as training employees on trade 
secret protection, requiring employee confi -
dentiality  agreements  prior  to  granting 
access,  and  revoking  access  upon  termina-
tion  from  the  company—apply  with  equal 
force  in  the  cyber  context,  and  companies 
should  employ  them.  Below,  we  discuss 
additional  cyber-specifi c  protective  meas-
ures that companies can consider taking.

■  Planning for the worst
Certain  adversaries—especially  nation-
states and state-sponsored groups targeting 
U.S.  trade  secrets—are  highly  skilled,  tech-
nologically  savvy,  and  persistent.  They  are 
not trolling for just any IP, and they will not 
be  put  off  by  even  best-in-class  technical 
defenses  and  move  onto  the  next  target 
when  their  mission  is  to  steal  your  compa-
ny’s secrets. Even with reasonable defenses 
in  place,  companies  should  assume  that  an 
attack will eventually be successful, and that 
a  company’s  IP  and  trade  secrets  may  be 
compromised  as  a  result.  One  way  compa-
nies  can  protect  themselves  is  to  consider 
ways, such as the following suggestions, to 
reduce the likelihood that even a successful 
intrusion leads to IP theft. 

Access controls and segmentation
Companies  should  implement  access  con-
trols on crown jewel data. Although almost 
every  employee  requires  access  to  certain 
parts  of  the  company’s  network,  not  all  of 
them  need  access  to  fi les  containing  trade 
secrets. Not even all employees that require 
access to some trade secrets need access to all. 
A smart access control system makes it clear 
that secrets actually are treated as secrets—
i.e.,  only  those  with  a  need  to  know  (as 
opposed  to  everyone  with  a  network  pass-
word) are given access to the data.

Another  related  layer  of  protection  is 
‘trade  secret  segmentation,’  which,  accord-
ing to John Villasenor in his article Corporate 
Cybersecurity Realism (Aug. 28, 2014), is dis-
tributing  information  “so  that  no  single 
cybersecurity  breach  exposes  enough  of  a 
trade  secret  to  allow  the  attacker  to  obtain 

  PROTECTING TRADE SECRETS IN THE AGE OF CYBERESPIONAGE  

the full set of information needed to replicate 
a targeted invention, product, or service.” A 
company  can  achieve  segmentation  in  two 
ways detailed by Villasenor: fi rst, by divid-
ing a trade secret into modules, distributing 
the  modules  across  multiple  networks,  and 
ensuring that there is no easy path from one 
network  to  the  next;  and  second,  once  the 
trade  secrets  are  broken  up  into  modules, 
by  allowing  employees  access  only  to  the 
modules  that  are  relevant  to  them.  Some 
modules  can  be  separated  physically  and 
allow  nearly  no  user  access.  For  example, 
‘negative 
information’—valuable  secrets 
about  what  does  not  work  and  is  often  the 
result of meticulous collection of data through 
extensive,  costly  research—is  not  frequently 
accessed  in  a  company’s  day-to-day  opera-
tions  and  therefore  can  be  segmented  and 
stored in an extremely limited set of locations. 
Implementing robust access control alongside 
segmentation  makes  it  more  diffi cult  for  an 
adversary  to  steal  a  company’s  crown  jewel 
trade secrets in a single attack, and to ‘spear-
phish’ its way into accessing some or all of a 
company’s crown jewel data under the guise 
of an authorized user.

Monitor data fl ow, not just authorization
Instead of monitoring only for unauthorized 
access,  companies  should  fl ag  and  investi-
gate instances and activity of high-volume or 
suspicious data transfers, whether or not the 
transferor  is  ‘authorized.’  Systems  that  look 
only  for  suspicious  behavior  by  unauthor-
ized users can blind the company to critical 
and  common  cyberattacks.  History  shows 
that  trade  secret  theft  frequently  is  carried 
out by authorized users—think about a dis-
gruntled employee downloading the master 
customer list, or the trading algorithm, right 
before he or she quits to work for a competi-
tor.  In  another  common  scenario,  when 
hackers obtain privileged user credentials to 
infi ltrate a company’s network, activity that 
appears attributable to ‘Mike in Accounting’ 
may  actually  be  malicious.  Systems  should 
be designed to monitor the fl ow of key data, 
whether  or  not  it  is  being  accomplished  by 
someone with apparent trust.

  139  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

Mark and tag secrets
Even  in  the  bygone  days  of  trade  secrets 
on paper, companies knew to clearly mark 
their  secrets  with  a  legend.  This  accom-
plished  two  things:  employees  would 
know  to  handle  those  secrets  consistent 
with  the  company’s  trade  secrets  policies, 
and if they were stolen, they could be iden-
tifi ed  as  the  company’s  property.  Just  like 
cartographers of old intentionally included 
fake  shortcuts,  streets,  and  even  towns  to 
immediately  recognize  misappropriated 
copies of their maps, tagging digital assets 
provides  a  way  to  defi nitively  prove  that 
the IP was originally yours. Today, with an 
array of technological means at hand, com-
panies  can  do  more,  including  tagging 
digital IP with code that could, say, render 
stolen fi les inoperable. The IP Commission 
Report  correctly  recommended  that  “pro-
tection...be  undertaken  for  the  fi les  them-
selves  and  not  just  the  network,  which 
always has the ability to be compromised.” 
It suggested that:

Companies  should  consider  marking 
their  electronic  fi les  through  techniques 
such  as  “meta-tagging,”  “beaconing,” 
and “watermarking.” Such tools allow for 
awareness of whether protected informa-
tion  has  left  an  authorized  network  and 
can  potentially  identify  the  location  of 
fi les  in  the  event  that  they  are  stolen. 
Additionally, software can be written that 
will allow only authorized users to open 
fi les  containing  valuable  information.  If 
an  unauthorized  person  accesses  the 
information, a range of actions might then 
occur. For example, the fi le could be ren-
dered  inaccessible  and  the  unauthorized 
user’s  computer  could  be  locked  down, 
with  instructions  on  how  to  contact  law 
enforcement to get the password needed 
to  unlock  the  account.  (IP  Commission 
Report at 81.)

Collect forensic leads as part of incident response
Of  course,  executives  must  make  sure  that 
the  company  has  created  a  robust  incident 
response  plan  and  has  practiced  and 

■  140 

exercised it. Under such a plan, the fi rst call 
should  be  to  experienced  outside  counsel, 
who  can  hire  the  forensics  and  crisis  PR 
teams  to  investigate  and  respond  to  what 
happened,  and  who  give  the  results  of  the 
investigation  the  greatest  chance  of  being 
considered privileged, which is important as 
the  legal  and  regulatory  consequences  of 
breaches continue to grow. It is also impor-
tant—especially  with  potential  trade  secret 
theft—to preserve all information surround-
ing the incident in a forensically sound way. 
For  example,  collecting  and  analyzing  log 
information may allow a company to deter-
mine what data were lifted and where they 
were sent, which could be critical in investi-
gations  by  law  enforcement  and  in  post-
breach litigation.

■  Taking on the IP thieves and their 

benefi ciaries

Adversaries want to steal your trade secrets 
for a simple reason: to use, sell, and profi t 
from  them.  Every  IP  theft  contains  the 
seeds of unfair competition based upon the 
stolen  secrets. Assume  the  worst  has  hap-
pened, and you begin to see the company’s 
hard work or research emerge in the mar-
ketplace,  embedded  in  a  competitor’s 
product  or  across  the  negotiating  table. 
What  options  do  you  have?  We  discuss 
fi ve here:

Misappropriation of trade secrets. The victim 
of trade secret theft may bring an action 
under state law to enjoin the benefi ciary 
of the theft and recover damages. (There 
currently  is  no  federal  private  right  of 
action  for  misappropriation  of  trade 
secrets.) As already discussed, most states 
have  adopted  a  version  of  the  Uniform 
Trade  Secrets  Act,  or  UTSA.  UTSA  pre-
vents using a trade secret of another with-
out  consent  if  the  defendant  employed 
improper means to appropriate the secret, 
or  “knew  or  had  reason  to  know  that 
his  knowledge  of  the  trade  secret  was 
derived  from  or  through  a  person  who 
had  utilized  improper  means  to  acquire 
it.”  UTSA  §§  1(2)(ii)(A);  1(2)(i).  UTSA, 

therefore,  allows  an  action  against  the 
hacker and the company seeking to ben-
efi t  from  the  stolen  trade  secrets,  if  the 
plaintiff can show that the competitor had 
reason  to  believe  that  the  data  it  was 
using  were  stolen  from  someone  else’s 
network.  The  remedies  available  under 
UTSA are powerful and encompass dam-
ages  and  injunctive  relief.  UTSA  author-
izes a court to award damages for actual 
loss  and  unjust  enrichment,  including 
multiple damages if the misappropriation 
was  “willful  and  malicious.”  UTSA  §§ 
3(a); 3(b). A court also may enjoin actual 
or  threatened  misappropriation  or  may 
condition  the  competitor’s  future  use  of 
the trade secret on payment of a reasona-
ble royalty. UTSA §§ 2(a); 2(b).

Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930. To sty-
mie  competitors  that  import  their  prod-
ucts  into  the  U.S.,  a  potent  option  is  to 
initiate a process at the International Trade 
Commission  (ITC)  under  Section  337  of 
the  Tariff  Act  of  1930.  A  company  may 
petition  the  ITC  to  investigate  whether 
imported  goods  are  the  result  of  “unfair 
methods of competition”—which includes 
incorporating  stolen  trade  secrets—so 
long  as  the  unfairness  has  the  potential 
to  injure  or  destroy  a  domestic  industry. 
19  U.S.C.  §  337.  Because  §  337  investiga-
tions are brought against goods, not par-
ties,  there  is  no  need  to  prove  that  the 
specifi c company profi ting from the stolen 
data was actually behind the cyberattack, 
only that the product was made or devel-
oped using misappropriated trade secrets. 
Even though the ITC cannot award dam-
ages under § 337, the remedy it can issue 
is potent against any company seeking to 
import  misappropriated  products  in  the 
U.S.:  it  can  issue  an  order,  enforceable 
by  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  pre-
venting  goods  from  entering  the  country 
and  enjoining  sale  of  such  products 
already here.

Although  the  IP  Commission  has  criti-
cized the § 337 process as too lengthy and 

  PROTECTING TRADE SECRETS IN THE AGE OF CYBERESPIONAGE  

bureaucratic,  that  was  in  the  context  of 
arguing  for  a  quicker  method  for  U.S. 
companies to seek exclusion. Our experi-
ence is that § 337 actions tend to be much 
quicker  than  currently  available  alterna-
tives,  including  state  and  federal  court 
litigation.  The  ITC  process  offers  U.S. 
companies  a  powerful  weapon  against 
importation  of  goods  containing  stolen 
trade secrets.

Computer  Fraud  and  Abuse  Act  (CFAA). 
Under  certain  circumstances,  the  CFAA 
provides a private right of action for com-
panies  to  bring  suit  against  a  party  who 
knowingly  and  intentionally  accesses  a 
protected  computer  without  authoriza-
tion,  obtains  information,  and  causes 
harm. 18 U.S.C. § 1030(g). The victim may 
be able to seek damages from not only the 
individual  who  accessed  the  computer 
and  stole  the  information  but  also  the 
company  profi ting  from  the  stolen  trade 
secret so long as the victim can plead and 
prove that the competitor “conspire[d] to 
commit”  such  an  offense  (18  U.S.C.  § 
1030[b]).

Call  the  feds.  A  company  may  refer  the 
theft to federal criminal authorities, which 
can bring charges under 18 U.S.C. §§ 1831-
32 for theft of trade secrets and economic 
espionage.  The  economic  espionage  and 
trade  secret  theft  statutes  reach  not  only 
parties who steal the trade secret but also 
anyone who “receives, buys, or possesses 
a trade secret, knowing the same to have 
been  stolen  or  appropriated,  obtained, 
or  converted  without  authorization.” 
18 U.S.C. §§ 1831(a)(3); 1832(a)(3). In addi-
tion to imposing hefty fi nes ($5 million for 
organizations, unless the theft was intend-
ed  to  benefi t  a  foreign  government,  in 
which case it is $10 million), the law also 
allows  judges  to  force  the  criminals  to 
forfeit “any property, or proceeds derived 
from the stolen or misappropriated trade 
secrets,  as  well  as  any  property  used  or 
intended  to  be  used  to  help  steal  trade 
secrets.” 18 U.S.C. §§ 1834, 2323(b).

  141  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

involving  federal 

Of course, there are always pros and cons to 
be  weighed  before  bringing  civil  litigation 
or 
law  enforcement 
authorities.  For  example,  law  enforcement 
has a greater array of tools to compel pro-
duction of evidence quickly, unlike in a civil 
suit,  although  a  parallel  criminal  action 
may  affect  the  company’s  ability  to  seek 
civil discovery if the defendants seek a stay 
or exercise their Fifth Amendment right not 
to testify. There are also practical and busi-
ness  considerations  that  may  argue  for  or 
against such a suit, including its potential to 
affect  existing  or  future  commercial  rela-
tionships  and  continued  access  to  foreign 
markets.

Future  action:  Report  cyberspies  and  their 
benefi ciaries  under  Executive  Order  13694. 
In  response  to  high-profi le  cyberattacks, 
the President and the federal government 
recognized that cyber espionage is a seri-
ous  threat  to  the  nation’s  economy  and 
national  security  but  acknowledged  that 
it is not always possible to take criminal 
or  civil  action  against  perpetrators 
because  they  are  often  outside  the  juris-
dictional  reach  of  U.S.  courts.  For  that 
reason,  the  U.S.  has  devised  another 
method  for  reaching  these  malefactors, 
punishing  them  for  their  actions,  and 
deterring future attacks. On April 1, 2015, 
the  President  signed  Executive  Order 
13694,  authorizing  the  Offi ce  of  Foreign 
Assets  Control,  or  OFAC,  within  the 
Treasury  Department,  to  (i)  identify  for-
eign  hackers,  the  parties  who  aid  them, 
and  the  parties  who  benefi t  from  their 
activity by using their stolen information 
to profi t and (ii) respond by freezing their 

U.S. assets and imposing sanctions. OFAC 
will add foreign individuals identifi ed as 
being  responsible  for,  contributing  to, 
complicit in, or profi ting from signifi cant 
malicious  cyber-enabled  activities  to  its 
list  of  Specially  Designated  Nationals 
(SDNs). To earn a spot on the SDN list, the 
associated  attack  has  to  be  “reasonably 
likely to result in, or have materially con-
tributed  to,  a  signifi cant  threat  to  the 
national  security,  foreign  policy,  or  eco-
nomic  health  or  fi nancial  stability  of  the 
United  States.”  Although  OFAC  cannot 
assist  a  company  with  recovering  lost 
information  or  barring  products  from 
entering the market, reporting the perpe-
trators  of  particularly  serious  cyberat-
tacks  to  OFAC  can  serve  as  a  powerful 
deterrent. It is important to note that E.O. 
13694 is, at the writing of this chapter, so 
new  that  OFAC  has  yet  to  promulgate 
fi nal  regulations  governing  the  SDN-
designation process, so companies should 
consult with counsel to understand their 
options once fi nal rules are in place.

■  Conclusion
Trade  secrets  are  high  on  the  list  of  assets 
that  cyber  spies  are  interested  in  stealing. 
Careful planning will help your company do 
its best to prevent the theft of these valuable 
assets and to thwart a competitor’s attempt 
to  profi t  from  its  crimes  if  an  attack  is  suc-
cessful.  If  the  worst-case  scenario  material-
izes and you discover that your company’s 
IP has been stolen, take immediate steps to 
engage experienced outside counsel to assess 
your best options to investigate the breach, 
recover damages, enjoin unfair competition, 
and seek justice.

■  142 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Cybersecurity due diligence in M&A 
transactions: Tips for conducting 
a robust and meaningful process
Latham & Watkins LLP – Jennifer Archie, Partner

To begin with a tautology, when you buy a company, you 
buy  their  data—and  the  attendant  risks  to  that  data. 
Cybersecurity  risks  are  not  limited  to  consumer-facing 
businesses,  whose  recent  losses  of  cardholder  or  patient 
data grab news headlines. Indeed, few businesses today 
have assets and liabilities that are not in some sense data 
driven. For most business combinations—whether M&A, 
joint venture, or leveraged buyout—cybersecurity should 
be a risk category in its own right. Buyers should review 
not just historic breaches but also cybersecurity risk man-
agement. Even though these risks are hard to quantify, the 
analysis will inform deal terms, deal value, and post-deal 
indemnity claims.

■   First step: Get an early read on cyber readiness 

at the engagement stage

Buyers  should  begin  all  cybersecurity  risk  assessments 
early in the engagement process, with the goal of clearly 
articulating  as  early  as  possible  the  target  company’s 
most  important  information  assets,  systems,  and  busi-
ness  processes.  Every  target  business  should  be  able  to 
readily  identify  which  information  technology  (IT)  sys-
tems and data sets are most valuable to the business and 
explain  at  a  high  level  how  the  company  protects  and 
exploits  them.  Even  at  the  earliest  stages,  the  seller 
should be prepared to identify and discuss the following 
at a high level:

 䊏 What  types  of  information  or  computer  systems  and 
operations are most important to your business? What 
sensitive types of data do you handle or hold relating 
to natural persons (which data elements in particular)?

 䊏 Where is sensitive information stored?
 䊏 How is it protected in transit, at rest, and in motion?
 䊏 What are the most concerning threats to information, 

networks, or systems?

143  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

 䊏 Have there been prior incidents?
 䊏 What is the cybersecurity budget?
 䊏 What  are  your  recovery  plans 

if 
critical  information  or  systems  become 
unavailable?

If  the  front  line  deal-facing  personnel 
respond, “I don’t know, I’d have to ask,” this 
is a telling and interesting sign that the target 
company’s security management program is 
likely  not  well  integrated  into  the  senior 
leadership ranks. Sellers thus should be pre-
pared  in  early  discussions  to  showcase  a 
sophisticated understanding of data security 
risks  and  how  those  risks  may  materially 
affect the company’s operations, reputation, 
and  legal  risks  (or  not). A  buyer’s  key  dili-
gence objective should be to probe and test 
whether  the  target  company  has  imple-
mented a mature risk management organiza-
tion to evaluate the accuracy of management 
assurances about lack of historical breaches, 
payment  card  industry  (PCI)  compliance, 
protections  against  competitor  or  insider 
theft,  and  business  continuity.  Too  often  in 
hindsight, a target’s statements made in dili-
gence  turn  out  to  have  been  good  faith 
impressions,  or  even  merely  aspirational  or 
refl ective of paper policy, but not operational 
reality.

■   Tailor diligence to what types of information 

are handled and how important is 
information security to the bottom line

Beyond  these  general  questions,  the  buyer 
should  directly  probe  whether  the  target 
management  has  a  sophisticated  under-
standing of potential cyber-related liabilities 
and  the  regulatory  environment.  Unlike 
environmental  or  traditional  fi re  or  natural 
disaster scenarios, cyberattack-related liabil-
ities  are  multi-faceted  and  unique.  In  some 
industries—such  as  energy,  transportation, 
fi nancial  institutions,  health  care,  defense 
contracting, education, and telecommunica-
tions—government  oversight  can  be  active 
and intrusive, and the target’s subject matter 
expertise will likely reside within the legal, 
compliance,  and/or  IT  functions.  In  other 
industries,  however,  exposure  to  costly 

■  144 

government investigations from the Federal 
Trade  Commission  (FTC)  or  other  agencies 
may be poorly understood. Federal investi-
gations tarnish brands, especially if enforce-
ment  results.  Investigations  are  expensive 
and distracting, and may lead to a sweeping 
10-  or  20-year  permanent  injunction  dictat-
ing how future information security will be 
managed  and  monitored.  Compliance  with 
such a decree is expensive and limits a com-
pany’s  independence  and  fl exibility  in  sig-
nifi cant ways. After a breach, management is 
often surprised to learn how persistent and 
aggressive the FTC or state attorneys general 
can be, even if the company sees itself as a 
victim  of  harm,  not  a  perpetrator  of  con-
sumer injury. If the target’s legal or business 
representatives are not knowledgeable about 
the  regulatory  and  enforcement  environ-
ments, buyers should not place much weight 
on a seller’s lulling statements or assurances 
that there have been no incidents or that risk 
of a cyber event is low.

■   Check for integrated cyber risk awareness 

and mitigation and a comprehensive security 
management program

Another sign of a mature security program 
is a management team with cross-function-
al  awareness  on  these  points  at  the  CEO 
and board levels, as refl ected in board min-
utes  or  other  documentation.  A  security 
program  will  not  be  effective  if  it  is  a  silo 
inside  the  IT  or  information  security  func-
tions.  All  substantial  stakeholder  depart-
ments should be involved in cybersecurity 
risk  management,  including  business  unit 
leaders,  legal,  internal  audit  and  compli-
ance, fi nance, human resources, IT, and risk 
management.

Diligence  questionnaires  should  ask  the 
target company to generally summarize the 
administrative, technical, and physical infor-
mation security controls currently in place to 
safeguard the most critical business data sets. 
Such  controls  include  technical  measures 
(such  as  boundary  and  malware  defense, 
data encryption, intrusion detection systems, 
anomalous  event  monitoring,  and  access 
controls),  administrative  measures,  and 

  CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS  

physical security. The company should have 
a  current  documented  crisis  management/
incident  response  plan  in  place,  including 
pre-staging of legal and forensic experts and 
a  public  relations  strategy,  all  approved  by 
senior management. A seller should specifi -
cally inquire about and assess what fi nancial 
resources are applied to data security, in the 
context  of  the  target’s  overall  approach  to 
risk containment and specifi c to its industry. 
Also,  sellers  should  ask  the  following  to 
gather  detailed  information  about  how  the 
company has organized the management of 
cybersecurity and risk:

 䊏 Is  there  a  single  designated  person  with 
overall responsibility? To whom does he 
or  she  report?  (Risk  Offi cer?  CTO?  CIO? 
CEO?)

 䊏 Describe board oversight. Have directors 
and senior managers participated in data 
security  training/been  involved  in  the 
development of data security protocols?

 䊏 Does  the  company  have  legal  counsel 
regularly  advising  on  data  security 
compliance? 
internal  or 
external, and if external, who?

Is  counsel 

 䊏 How does the company educate and train 
employees  and  vendors  about  company 
policies,  information  security  risks,  and 
necessary measures to mitigate risk?

 䊏 How  can  employees  or  members  of  the 
public  (such  as  independent  security 
researchers) report potential vulnerabilities/
breaches,  including  irregular  activity  or 
transactions?

 䊏 What is the plan to recover should critical 
or  other  necessary  systems  become 
unavailable? What are the recovery point 
and recovery time objectives? How have 
these and other elements of the plan been 
correlated to business needs?

If  the  company  has  in  the  last  year  or  two 
completed  an  internal  or  external  audit  or 
assessment  to  determine  compliance  with 
company  security  policies  and/or  external 
security standards, this should be requested, 
or at a minimum the target company should 
report  whether  all  recommendations  have 

been  adopted,  budgeted  and  scheduled,  or 
already implemented.

For companies whose vendors hold com-
pany-sensitive  data  or  access  systems,  the 
company should have implemented—prior 
to  engaging  in  a  business  relationship—a 
formal  vendor  management  program  that 
specifi cally  assesses  risk  and  identifi es 
potential security or data privacy concerns 
and  appropriate  remediation  next  steps. 
After  a  decision  to  engage,  the  company 
should mitigate data security risks through 
written agreements and supervision. These 
third  parties  should  have  data  security 
insurance coverage and/or the agreements 
should require such a party to defend and 
indemnify the target company for legal lia-
bility arising from any release or disclosure 
of the information resulting from the negli-
gence  of  the  vendor  or  other  third  party. 
Third-party  agreements  involving  data 
exchange  or  access  also  should  articulate 
breach notifi cation procedures, cooperation 
levels,  information  sharing,  and  expressly 
assign 
incident  control  and  reporting 
responsibilities.

Cloud-based  or  other  software-as-a-
solution (SAAS) solutions as well as mobile 
devices present their own cybersecurity risks 
and  should  not  be  overlooked  in  diligence. 
Does the company permit employees to use 
cloud-based  fi le-sharing  services?  Does  it 
rely  on  SAAS  solutions  for  critical  or  other 
business  needs  such  as  contact  relationship 
management  or  HR?  Email?  How  are  the 
security  and  compliance  risks  presented 
being  managed?  Companies  that  issue  or 
support mobile devices should have policies 
and procedures in place designed to protect 
sensitive information in those environments.

■   Use subject matter experts to assess cyber 

readiness and liabilities

Given  the  importance  of  the  above  ques-
tions,  the  buyer  should  pay  careful  atten-
tion to who asks these questions on behalf 
of  the  buyer  or  underwriters,  in  what  set-
tings,  and  with  what  time  allowances.  Put 
simply,  deal  teams  ideally  should  embed 
subject matter experts on the business side, 

  145  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

the  technical  side,  and  even  the  legal  side 
early on—to do the following:

 䊏 Pose questions orally
 䊏 Follow up with document requests
 䊏 Assess the documentation
 䊏 Conduct  on-site  testing  and  analysis 

where appropriate

 䊏 Assess  and  advise  on  the  maturity 
and  suitability  of  the  program  to  the 
underlying data risks

 䊏 Review and advise on deal terms or costs 
to  remediate  gaps  in  compliance  or  risk 
management.

Very importantly, the deal team also must be 
nimble and focused upon the specifi c indus-
try,  because  cybersecurity  risks  are  highly 
variable  across  industry  sectors;  threats, 
liabilities,  and  government  expectations  for 
adequate  security  are  evolving  constantly. 
For example, if hackers acquire and then re-
sell  large  databases  of  cardholder  data  to 
identity thieves—as happened to Target and 
Home  Depot—the  types  of  expenses  and 
liabilities a buyer could expect are well doc-
umented 
in  SEC  fi lings.  Expenditures 
include the following:

 䊏 Costs to investigate, contain, and remediate 
damaged networks and payment systems 
and to upgrade security

 䊏 Liability  to  banks,  card  associations,  or 
payment  processors  for  fi nes,  penalties,  
or fraudulent charges

 䊏 Card reissuance expenses
 䊏 Expense  of  outside  legal,  technical,  and 

communications advisors.

■   For retail sector, diligence surrounding 
PCI compliance should seek more than 
a “yes” or “no” response

Buyers  of  companies  who  accept,  process, 
store,  or  handle  cardholder  payment  data 
streams of course will want to pay particular 
attention  to  compliance  with  current  PCI 
standards. At Home Depot, for example, an 
attacker  used  a  vendor’s  username  and 
password  to  gain  access  to  Home  Depot’s 

■  146 

network. The attacker then acquired elevat-
ed rights that allowed it to navigate portions 
of  the  company’s  systems  and  to  deploy 
unique, custom-built malware on self-check-
out  systems  to  access  the  payment  card 
information  of  up  to  56  million  customers 
who  shopped  at  U.S.  and  Canadian  stores 
between April 2014 and September 2014. In 
fi scal 2014, alone, Home Depot recorded $63 
million in pretax expenses related to the data 
breach,  partially  offset  by  $30  million  of 
expected 
insurance  proceeds  for  costs 
believed to be reimbursable and probable of 
recovery  under  insurance  coverage,  result-
ing in pretax net expenses of $33 million.

What  this  sort  of  fi nancial  and  reputa-
tional  exposure  means  for  M&A  diligence 
within the retail sector is that buyers should 
devote expert and highly substantive atten-
tion  to  how  cardholder  data  are  collected, 
stored, handled, and secured. Payment pro-
cessing  services  are  material  to  all  retail 
businesses,  and  all  payment  processing 
agreements have PCI compliance as a mate-
rial term. So just as the SEC always wants to 
know about where that relationship stands 
in its review of risk factors, buyers too want 
to  pay  special  attention  in  this  area.  If  PCI 
compliance  is  lacking,  the  seller  should  at 
least be able to disclose a specifi c remedia-
tion  timeline  and  a  budgeted  plan  that  is 
hopefully  supervised  and  accepted  by  the 
payment processor.

PCI compliance handled correctly is costly 
and  involves  constant  adaptation  and  opti-
mization to new threats and new standards. 
It  is  not  an  annual  “check-a-box”  process. 
Within the data security space—as was true 
for Home Depot, Target, and many others—
good business practice assumes that a com-
promised  merchant  will  have  a  recent, 
valid,  self-certifi cation  or  even  third-party 
certifi cation  of  PCI  compliance.  However,  a 
buyer should not rely simply on the inclusion 
of such a report or certifi cate in a virtual data 
room.  Many  a  breached  retailer  has  held  a 
current  PCI  certifi cation.  Accordingly,  the 
buyer  should  always  test  the  security  of 
cardholder  data  independently,  at  a  process 

  CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS  

level if necessary. The same security consult-
ants  who  arrive  post-breach  to  assess  root 
cause and damage can examine card-related 
data security very meaningfully in the M&A 
setting, even with only a few days of on-site 
interviews  and  document  collection.  If  PCI 
compliance concerns arise in diligence, deal 
terms  can  be  arranged  that  mandate  and 
appropriate  funding  for  third-party  inde-
pendent assessments and implementation of 
recommendations. Moreover, many retailers 
now are migrating to new payment systems, 
and this is a unique technology risk because 
of the likelihood of delay, interruptions, and 
budgetary over-runs.

■   Understand and assess awareness 

and mitigation of risks of trade secret 
theft, nation-state espionage, and denial 
of service attacks

Beyond payment card security risks, theft of 
trade  secrets  by  competitors  and  insiders, 
state-sponsored espionage that is exploited 
for  economic  advantage,  and  cyberattacks 
that  disable  or  cripple  corporate  networks 
are less publicized but can be equally dam-
aging to a target business. For example, the 
high-profi le,  studio-wide  cyberattack  at 
Sony  Pictures  in  November  2014  at  the 
hands  of  a  group  calling  itself  #GOP,  aka 
the  Guardians  of  Peace,  starkly  illustrates 
the  potential  to  cripple  a  business.  The 
attack,  which  the  FBI  attributed  to  North 
Korea,  resulted  in  the  theft  of  terabytes  of 
company  internal  email  and  documents, 
release of unreleased movies to fi le-sharing 
networks, deletion of documents from Sony 
computers,  threatening  messages  to  the 
company  and  individual  employees,  theft 
and  apparent  exploitation  of  sensitive 
human resources data, and a near complete 
and prolonged disruption of the company’s 
ability  to  transact  business  and  communi-
cate  electronically  over  its  networks  and 
systems.  In  an  interview  with  CBS  News, 
Sony’s  outside  cyber  investigator,  Kevin 
Mandia, disclosed that 3,000 computers and 
800 servers were wiped, and 6,000 employ-
ees were “given a taste of living offl ine”—no 

email  and  no  way  to  process  employee 
benefi ts or time cards (Source: http://www.
cbsnews.com/news/north-korean-cyberat-
tack-on-sony-60-minutes/). To add insult to 
injury,  much  of  the  exfi ltrated  material  is 
now readily available (and free text search-
able) on WikiLeaks.

The potential for outright theft of intellectu-
al property by competitors should not be over-
looked.  In  DuPont  v.  Kolon  (United  States  v. 
Kolon  Industries,  Inc.  et  al.),  for  example,  the 
manufacturer of Heracron, a competitor prod-
uct  to  DuPont’s  Kevlar,  misappropriated 
DuPont’s  confi dential  information  by  hiring 
former DuPont employees as consultants and 
pressuring them to reveal Kevlar-related trade 
secrets. DuPont sued the competitor, Kolon, in 
2009,  and  in  2012  the  Department  of  Justice 
brought criminal trade secret misappropriation 
charges against Kolon and fi ve of its executives 
pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  §  1832.  In  light  of  the 
parallel  charges,  Kolon  settled,  paying  $360 
million  in  damages—$85  million  in  fi nes  and 
$275 million in restitution. (Source: Department 
of Justice Offi ce of Public Affairs, http://www.
justice.gov/opa/pr/top-executives-kolon-
industries-indicted-stealing-dupont-s-kevlar-
trade-secrets).  To  assess  these  sorts  of  risks, 
acquirers should ask:

䊏  Are  there  former  employees  who  had 
access  to  critical  intellectual  property  or 
other  company  confi dential  information 
who have recently left for competitors? 

䊏  What  agreements  are  in  place  to  protect 

the proprietary information they have?

U.S.-based businesses, academic institutions, 
cleared defense contractors, and government 
agencies  increasingly  are  targeted  for  eco-
nomic espionage and theft of trade secrets by 
foreign  competitors  with  state  sponsorship 
and  backing.  In  the  last  fi scal  year  alone, 
economic  espionage  and  theft  of  trade 
secrets  cost  the  American  economy  more 
than  $19  billion.  According  to  the  FBI, 
between  2009  and  2013,  the  number  of 
arrests  related  to  economic  espionage  and 
theft  of  trade  secrets—which  the  FBI’s 

  147  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

Economic Espionage Unit oversees—at least 
doubled, indictments more than tripled, and 
convictions  increased  sixfold.  These  num-
bers  grossly  understate  the  frequency  of 
such attacks or losses. Last year, the United 
States  Department  of  Justice  indicted  fi ve 
Chinese military hackers on charges includ-
ing  computer  hacking,  identity  theft,  eco-
nomic  espionage,  and  trade  secret  theft 
from  2006  to  2014.  The  alleged  actions 
affected  six  U.S.-based  nuclear  power, 
metal,  and  solar  product  companies.  The 
indictment,  fi led  May  1,  2014,  alleges  that 
the  defendants  obtained  unauthorized 
access to trade secrets and internal commu-
nications of the affected companies for the 
benefi t  of  Chinese  companies,  including 
state-owned  enterprises.  Some  defendants 
allegedly  hacked  directly—stealing  sensi-
tive,  nonpublic,  and  deliberative  emails 
belonging  to  senior  decision  makers,  as 
well  as  technical  specifi cations,  fi nancial 
information, network credentials, and stra-
tegic  information  in  corporate  documents 
and  emails—while  others  offered  support 
through infrastructure management. Charges 
were  brought  under  18  U.S.C.  §§1028,  1030, 
1831, and 1832. (Source: Department of Justice 
Offi ce  of  Public Affairs,  http://www.justice.
gov/opa/pr/us-charges-five-chinese-
military-hackers-cyber-espionage-against-us-
corporations-and-labor).

Many  companies  choose  not  to  publicly 
disclose  or  discuss  these  sorts  of  attacks  or 
disruptions, which may go undiscovered for 
many  months  and  often  years.  Even  when 
attacks are discovered, breaches may not be 
reported  to  law  enforcement  or  even  to 
affected  commercial  partners.  Questions 
about  historical  incidents  during  due  dili-
gence  therefore  should  be  open-ended  but 
also very direct:

 䊏 What  is  known  about  the  attackers  and 

the attack vector?

 䊏 What data do you suspect or know were 

taken?

 䊏 How  long  between  the  fi rst  known 

intrusion and discovery of the incident?

 䊏 Do you suspect or know whether the thief 
or intruder attempted or made fraudulent 
or competitive use of exfi ltrated data?

 䊏 During  the  past  three  years,  have  you 
experienced an interruption or suspension 
of  your  computer  system  for  any  reason 
(not  including  downtime  for  planned 
maintenance) that exceeded four hours?

A buyer should assess a target’s measures to 
prevent and detect insider threats, including 
whether  basic  protections  are  in  place  to 
identify and mitigate insider threats, such as 
the following:

 䊏 Pre-employment  screening  via  dynamic 
interviews,  background  checks,  and 
reference checking

 䊏 Workforce education on warning signs
 䊏 Internal network security measures such 
as  website  monitoring,  blocking  access 
to free (unauthorized) cloud-storage sites 
such as Dropbox, turning off USB drives

 䊏 Automated  monitoring  of  Web,  deep 
Web,  or  peer-to-peer  network  searching 
for leaked data.

Private  and  state  actors  have  made  use  of 
denial  of  service  attacks  to  disrupt  the  busi-
ness of a company that meets with their disap-
proval  (or  as  an  extortion  scheme).  Material 
impact on ecommerce, on-line entertainment, 
email, and other critical systems are the result. 
An acquirer might reasonably ask:

 䊏 Has  the  target  company  evaluated  its 

exposure to such attacks?

 䊏 Have  you  suffered  thefts  of  confi dential 

 䊏 What  measures  does  it  have  in  place  to 

data (wherever stored)?

 䊏 Has your network suffered an intrusion?
 䊏 Did  you  retain  outside  experts 
to 

investigate?

defend itself?

 䊏 How would it know if such an attack was 

occurring?

 䊏 Have any such attacks occurred?

■  148 

  CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS  

■   Assessing cyber insurance
Finally,  buyers  should  evaluate  the  extent 
to  which  cyber  risks  are  mitigated  by 
insurance  coverage,  including  whether 
enhancements to the cyber program may be 
available  post-closing.  Most  cyber  insur-
ance  policies  today  cover  the  data  breach 
and  privacy  crisis  management  expenses 
associated with complying with data breach 
notifi cation  laws.  Those  costs  include  the 
costs of expert legal, communications, and 
forensic  advisors,  benefi ts  such  as  credit 
repair  or  monitoring  to  affected  individu-
als, and even costs of responding to govern-
ment investigations or paying fi nes. Cyber 
coverage is also widely available for extor-
tion events, defacement of website, infringe-
ment,  and  network  security  events,  even 
arising  from  theft  of  data  on  third-party 
systems  or  malicious  acts  by  employees. 
Because  of  the  volatility  and  variability  of 
the  cyber  insurance  market  at  this  time, 

buyers  should  closely  examine  policies  for 
what is covered, deductibles, coverage peri-
ods,  and  limits.  Diligence  experts  should 
also  evaluate  post-closing  opportunities  to 
enhance  the  insurance  program  if  signifi -
cant unmitigated risks of third-party liabili-
ties  or  direct  expense  from  an  attack  have 
been identifi ed.

■   Conclusion
If  there  was  ever  an  era  when  minimizing 
or commoditizing assessment of cybersecu-
rity  risks  in  the  M&A  space  was  sensible, 
that  time  has  surely  passed.  Expertise  in 
assessing  data-driven  risks  should  be 
embedded on the front end of every transac-
tion  and  tracked  throughout  the  deal,  so 
that deal terms, deal value, and post-closing 
opportunities  to  strengthen  security  can 
be  considered  against  a  fully  developed 
factual  picture  of  the  target  company’s 
cyber readiness and exposure.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  149  ■

International infl ection point—
companies, governments, 
and rules of the road
Kaye Scholer LLP – Adam Golodner, Partner

In  the  attorney  general’s  conference  room  at  the  United 
States Department of Justice is a mural on the ceiling—on 
one end a heavenly depiction of justice granted, and on 
the  other  a  depressing  tableau  of  justice  denied.  These 
images  help  remind  us  that  principles  matter,  choices 
matter,  and  in  many  situations  divergent  outcomes  are 
possible. We are at this kind of infl ection point in global 
cyber. Technology, software, hardware, and physical and 
social networks are embedded everywhere today. Into the 
future  the  Internet  of  Things  and  the  Industrial  Internet 
will  bring  the  next  wave  of  global  hyper  connectedness 
and  drive  business  innovation,  new  markets,  effi ciency, 
and consumer benefi ts globally. Every business today is a 
technology  business,  and  every  society  increasingly  a 
technology society. We all benefi t from it. It is good. The 
world has changed, but it has also stayed the same.

In some sense, cyber issues are not new. They are the 
same  issues  countries  and  societies  have  been  dealing 
with  for  centuries—theft,  fraud,  vandalism,  espionage, 
and  war.  Over  time,  societies  have  created  rules  to  deal 
with these domestically and globally. But cyber presents 
new  facts.  Activities  and  incidents  happen  at  machine 
speed, and distance hardly matters. Masking who you are 
is  easier.  Some  seemingly  anonymous  person  can  reach 
out  and  touch  you  instantaneously  from  anywhere.  The 
kind of information we collect is quantitatively and quali-
tatively  different  than  the  past.  We  must  appreciate  and 
understand these facts and what they mean.

With a future of embedded everything and hyper con-
nectivity, we have to create acceptable ‘rules of the road’ 
that ensure we get the promise of the future, not a world 
where governments or individuals turn that promise on 
its head and abuse the very same connectedness. Countries 
and  companies  have  to  defi ne  acceptable  ‘rules  of  the 
road’  for  behavior  in  cyberspace—what’s  okay  and  not 
okay for governments to do to each other, companies, and 

151  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

individuals  in  cyberspace.  Analogies  can 
and should be made to longstanding princi-
ples relating to theft, fraud, vandalism, espi-
onage,  and  war—and  how  countries  deal 
with  each  other  on  these  issues.  After  all, 
technology is a tool; we have had tools in the 
past, and we have applied age-old principles 
to  new  tools  throughout  history.  However, 
the  pace  of  change  is  accelerating.  That 
means  we  need  to  move  fast  to  apply  new 
facts  to  old  principles  now  and  help  shape 
the future. Like the mural on the ceiling on 
the attorney general’s conference room, dif-
ferent  future  outcomes  are  possible.  What 
principles  and  rules  will  secure  goodness 
into the global technology future? What are 
the  roles  of  companies,  boards  of  directors, 
and CEOs in shaping that future? We discuss 
these questions in this chapter.

There are three areas in which companies 
and their leaders can help: rules of the road, 
cyber laws globally, and security and privacy.

■  Rules of the road
Cyber is a top issue for the U.S., E.U. Member 
States, China, India, Russia, Brazil, Australia, 
and Japan, and the heads of state in each of 
these countries spend signifi cant time on the 
issue.  For  the  last  three  years  the  U.S.  has 
said  that  cyber  is  the  number  one  national 
security threat to the U.S.—not nuclear, bio-
logic, or chemical, but cyberthreat. All these 
countries  view  cyber  as  a  national  security 
and economic security issue. In national secu-
rity, cyber is both an offensive and a defensive 
issue. On the offensive side, cyber tools and 
techniques can be a means of espionage, war, 
or  deterring  a  threat.  On  the  defensive  side, 
conversely,  countries  are  concerned  that 
companies  in  critical  infrastructure  sectors 
(fi nancial, communications, defense, electric, 
energy, transportation, health care, chemical, 
public  services)  can  have  their  operations 
affected,  data  compromised  or  destroyed, 
or public safety threatened—in effect, bring-
ing  important  segments  of  the  economy 
to a halt.

U.S.  policy  leaders  also  are  highly  con-
cerned  about  other  nation-states  stealing 
core intellectual property, business and deal 

■  152 

strategies,  and  next  generation  innovation 
from  U.S.  companies,  with  that  very  same 
stolen  intellectual  property  being  given  by 
the  governments  that  stole  it  to  favored 
domestic champions for the purpose of com-
peting against that very same victim of the 
theft.  Companies  share  these  concerns.  No 
company  wants  to  have  its  operations, 
brand,  or  competitive  advantage  under-
mined or destroyed. Despite these concerns, 
nation-state,  non-nation-state,  hacktivist, 
and criminal activity continues. In fact by all 
accounts  it’s  increasing  in  all  categories 
across  the  governmental  and  commercial 
sectors.

Although some policy makers have begun 
to  talk  about  cyber  ‘norms,’  there  has  not 
been sustained multi-lateral head-of-state to 
head-of-state  work  to  set  rules  of  the  road. 
However, it has to begin. The issues are big 
enough and complex and signifi cant enough 
that  we  have  to  set  the  right  path  now.  We 
can build rules that the majority of the fam-
ily of nations can agree to and then bring the 
outliers along. Most commentators are of the 
view that a formal treaty is premature, if it 
ever makes sense. This sounds right to me. 
However,  the  time  is  right  to  up-lever  the 
conversation  to  the  head  of  state  level  and 
convene  the  heads  of  state  of  some  core 
countries (such as U.S., U.K., Germany, France, 
Sweden, Estonia, India, Brazil, Japan, Korea, 
Australia,  Canada)  to  start  to  build  out 
offensive,  defensive,  law  enforcement,  and 
commercial rules of acceptable behavior. Of 
course, other countries, such as China, could 
join in short order if it turns out they are in 
fast agreement, but the work of building out 
the core should move ahead without waiting 
for everyone to be on board. An additional 
benefi t  of  doing  this  is  that  it  reduces  the 
impulse of countries to complain about the 
activities of other countries when the activity 
at  issue  is  one  that  all  countries  fi nd  to  be 
acceptable, and in the converse, gives weight 
to complaints about activities outside of the 
acceptable.

Why should companies care? Why should 
they  be  integral  to  these  discussions?  First, 
companies own the enterprise networks and 

  INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS, AND RULES OF THE ROAD 

databases  in  which  cyber  activity  takes 
place—domestic companies and global com-
panies. Companies own the software, hard-
ware, the information, and the upstream and 
downstream relationships where this contest 
takes place. Think of the Internet—every lit-
tle bit of it is owned by somebody, and the 
vast majority is owned by public companies 
globally. Although cyber is the fi fth fi ghting 
domain (along with land, sea, air, and space), 
it is the only one owned essentially by pri-
vate  companies.  Second,  information  tech-
nology  and  communications  services  and 
products are created and sold by the private 
sector. If a government acts on those services 
or products, it acts on services and products 
with a private sector brand. The same brand 
used  by  other  companies.  Third,  the  future 
of  the  global  interoperable,  open,  secure, 
network is at stake. Will companies be able 
to  continue  to  drive  innovative  business 
models,  or  will  they  be  stifl ed  by  the  rules 
and  activities  of  governments,  hacktivists, 
and criminals playing in their playing fi eld?
Here  are  some  ‘rules  of  the  road’  that 
should be in play. What cyber activity is an 
act of war? What cyber activity is acceptable 
espionage?  What  is  cyber  vandalism,  and 
what  is  the  appropriate  response?  What 
activity  by  a  nation-state  is  acceptable  on  a 
bank,  stock  exchange,  energy,  transporta-
tion, electric, or life sciences company? What 
if it’s a non-nation-state activity? What action 
is  acceptable  to  proactively  stop  a  planned 
cyber  activity?  What  principles  should  ani-
mate the decision to use a cyber tool of war 
on  a  target  connected  to  the  Internet?  Is  it 
OK to deliver cyber means through private 
networks or technologies? What is an accept-
able response to another country’s cyber or 
kinetic act? What are the principles for dis-
closing  or  stockpiling  zero-day  vulnerabili-
ties or interdicting a supply chain? How can 
we  make  global  assurance  methodologies 
such as the Common Criteria for Information 
Technology  Security  Evaluation  (Common 
Criteria)  for  products  even  more  useful? 
Should  there  be  requirements  for  govern-
ments to share cyberthreat information with 
other  countries  and  companies  to  improve 

security?  What  tools  in  the  toolbox  are 
acceptable  to  curb  behavior—prosecution, 
sanctions,  trade,  covert  action?  Is  it  OK  for 
national security services to steal intellectual 
property  of  companies?  Is  it  OK  for  intelli-
gence  services  to  give  it  to  competitors? 
What  collection  of  information  of  or  about 
individual  citizens  of  another  country  is 
acceptable  or  unacceptable?  What  is  the 
standard? What collection on other govern-
ments and their leaders is acceptable?

Most  of  these  questions  have  some 
grounding in existing principles and laws, 
but  the  cyber  facts  have  to  be  understood 
and  applied  to  start  to  enunciate  these 
rules  of  the  road. Although  work  has  cer-
tainly begun on cyber ‘norms,’ the time is 
right for taking the work to the next level. 
Furthermore,  because  the  playing  fi eld  is 
made up of private networks and elements 
of  technology  services  and  products,  the 
outcomes should by defi nition be of inter-
est  to  companies,  CEOs,  and  boards  of 
directors.  Good  rules  of  the  road  should 
help build trust in networks and technolo-
gy  globally.  So,  companies  should  engage 
in  helping  set  the  global  rules  of  the  road 
today. It affects their future.

■  Cyber laws globally
Given  that  cyber  runs  the  gamut  from 
national security concerns to consumer pro-
tection,  and  countries  around  the  world 
have  different  values  and  interpretation  of 
what laws protect their country and citizens, 
it should come as no surprise that companies 
doing business globally will face a myriad of 
sometimes  divergent  laws  on  a  range  of 
cyber topics.

An  in-depth  review  of  these  laws  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  this  chapter,  but  it  is 
important to note the categories in which a 
company,  CEO,  general  counsel,  and  per-
haps  even  the  board  must  understand  that 
their activity may trigger a compliance issue 
or affect their ability to provide a product or 
service.

With  regard  to  compliance  and  security, 
there  is  a  saying  that  ‘compliance  does  not 
equal security.’ There is no doubt that driving 

  153  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

to ‘real security’ is the goal, and one that will 
likely get you where you need to be for com-
pliance as well.

Here  is  a  list  of  categories  of  laws  to  be 
concerned  about  and  a  few  specifi c-use 
cases:

 䊏 infrastructure security: voluntary public-
private partnerships (U.S., U.K.), regulation 
of  critical  infrastructure  (China,  pending 
in  E.U.,  pending  in  Germany),  sector-
specifi c  regulation  (India  telecoms,  U.S. 
chemical, Russia strategic industries)

 䊏 incident  notifi cation:  data  breach  (U.S. 
in 47 states, E.U. telecoms, pending new 
E.U.  Privacy  Directive),  SEC  disclose 
material adverse events (U.S. SEC)

 䊏 tort,  contract,  product  liability:  in  the 
absence of specifi c regulation, a company 
must  use  ‘reasonable  care’  to  secure 
their  and  third-party  data,  continue  to 
provide  service,  build  secure  products, 
and  protect  IP  (U.S.,  E.U.,  India  and  for 
contract, globally)

 䊏 board  of  directors  corporate:  the  board 
must use its ‘business judgment’ to secure 
the  assets  of  the  company  and  provide 
reasonable security (U.S.)

 䊏 acquisition  of  information  by  nation-
states:  lawful  intercept  telecoms  (most 
countries), requests from non-telecoms by 
judicial  or  administrative  process  (most 
countries),  collection  outside  of  home 
country (most countries)

 䊏 technology  controls,  national  security 
reviews,  and 
certifications:  export 
control  commercial  technologies  (U.S.), 
export  control  of  military  technologies 
ITAR  (U.S.),  certifi cation  of  IT  product 
(26 countries Common Criteria evaluation, 
China  own  requirements,  Russia  own 
requirements,  Korea  pending),  import 
restriction on encryption (China, Russia), 
in-country  use  of  encryption  (China, 
Russia),  national  security  reviews  for 
M&A (U.S. CFIUS & FCC, China).

 䊏 privacy: 

economy-wide 

limits  on 
collection  and  transfer  of  information 
about  individuals  (E.U.),  sector  specifi c 
(U.S.  health  care  HIPAA,  fi nancial  GLB), 

■  154 

data  localization  (Russia),  U.S.-E.U.  Safe 
Harbor  (allowing  for  transfer  of  E.U. 
privacy information to U.S.)

 䊏 speech  and  content:  protection  (U.S. 
Constitution),  limits  (France,  Germany, 
Russia, China)

 䊏 consumer protection: unfair or deceptive 

security practices (U.S. FTC)

 䊏 criminal 

law: 

laws  against  hacking 
(U.S.  CFAA,  Budapest  Convention  on 
Cyber  Crime,  many  countries),  mutual 
legal assistance (MLATs) (U.S. and many 
countries  for  cross-border  investigation 
and extradition)

technologies, 

 䊏 multilateral  agreements:  Wassenaar 
arrangement  (obligation  to  limit  export 
of  dual-use 
including 
security),  mutual  defense  treaties  (e.g., 
NATO  and  Article  5  cyber  obligations), 
WTO  and  technical  barriers  to  trade 
agreement  (obligation  of  WTO  members 
to  use  international  standards,  including 
technology), WTO government procurement 
agreements (many countries, rules opening 
government  procurement  markets  for 
foreign tech products).

Over the past decade there have been many 
skirmishes to try to limit the impact of pro-
posed  laws  that  would  splinter  the  global 
market for technology products and servic-
es  and  protect  the  ability  of  companies  to 
continue  to  drive  innovation  in  products 
and  services.  Particularly  in  the  post-
Snowden  world,  where  trust  of  countries 
and technologies has been strained, compa-
nies must pay particular attention to legis-
lative and regulatory proposals that would 
undermine  the  global  interoperability  or 
security of the network, or use security as a 
stalking horse to protect or promote domes-
tic manufacturers.

■  Security and privacy
As  technology  and  economics  continues  to 
drive connectivity, cloud, mobility, data ana-
lytics,  the  Internet  of  Things,  and  the 
Industrial Internet, we must deal effectively 
with  security  and  privacy.  It’s  not  just  the 
Snowden  effect.  People  are  still  working 

  INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS, AND RULES OF THE ROAD 

through what they think about security and 
privacy. Most want both. Some regions have 
differing views. In the U.S., we limit what the 
government  can  do  through  Constitutional 
Fourth  Amendment  restrictions  on  unrea-
sonable searches and seizures, but we freely 
give  personal  information  to  commercial 
companies in exchange for free content and 
other  services  we  like.  In  Europe,  it’s  the 
opposite.  The  E.U.  presumptively  limits 
what information relating to individuals the 
private sector can collect and share but often 
has  minimal  legal  procedures  regulating 
government activities to collect information 
about its citizens. China has its own view on 
national  security  and  information,  as  does 
Russia.  In  any  event,  companies  have  an 
important  role  to  play  in  the  future  of  the 
intersection of security and privacy.

Most  people  talk  in  terms  of  balancing 
security  and  privacy.  This  may  be  a  false 
dichotomy. I think the better approach is to 
drive to security and privacy. Try to get both 
right. Do what you need to secure a system 
or  crown  jewels  or  an  enterprise,  and  use 
techniques  and  technologies  that  help 
ensure privacy. I think this is the challenge 
for  the  future  and  likely  an  area  that  will 
spur  great  innovation.  How  can  we  work 
effectively with anonymized data? How can 
we implement machine-to-machine anoma-
ly  detection  without  identifying  the  indi-
vidual or that a device belongs to a particu-
lar  individual?  How  can  we  manipulate 
encrypted  data  at  scale?  Can  we  know 
enough from encrypted data streams across 
the enterprise or network to understand and 
stop  an  exfi ltration  or  an  attack?  How  can 
we  share  cyberthreat  information  that  is 
anonymous  and  actionable?  These  are  the 

questions  companies  can  and  should  ask 
when  providing  service,  domestically,  but 
particularly globally. There no doubt is com-
petitive  advantage  in  providing  solutions 
that don’t raise privacy concerns.

■  Conclusion
Cyber is by defi nition a global issue for any 
company,  CEO,  and  board.  The  company’s 
networks  are  global,  products  are  global, 
and adversaries are global. Furthermore, the 
company must have relationships with gov-
ernments  globally.  Many  companies  are 
‘global citizens’ and have a majority of their 
sales outside their home country. Where the 
cyber issue is in the top of the mind in each 
of the major markets these companies serve 
and where governments have not yet sorted 
out acceptable global ‘rules of the road,’ it is 
incumbent  on  company  leadership  to  help 
fi gure  out  what  the  future  is  going  to  look 
like. Without common ground about what’s 
OK and not OK for governments to do with 
regard  to  each  other,  companies,  and  citi-
zens,  we  will  face  an  uncertain  technology 
future. I am optimistic about the future and 
about  the  ability  to  master  the  cyber  issue. 
However,  it  will  take  moving  through  the 
problem set. We are at an infl ection point—
as we continue to embed devices, software, 
and  hardware  into  everything,  we  need  to 
have a view, a path, a structure that gives us 
confi dence. Therefore, when we sit down in 
an offi ce such as the attorney general’s or a 
board of directors and ponder the better and 
lesser  proclivities  of  mankind,  we  must  be 
confi dent  we  are  driving  rules-based  deci-
sions to the happier side of the ledger—one 
that  ensures  we  reap  the  benefi ts  of  this 
terrifi c, accelerating, age of technology.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  155  ■

Managing third-party liability 
using the SAFETY Act
Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP – Brian Finch, Partner

One of the most pressing questions directors and offi cers 
of publicly listed companies is how to manage third-party 
liability in the post 9/11 era. In particular, directors and 
offi cers  continually  struggle  with  the  issue  of  whether 
‘enough’ security measures have been deployed to protect 
not only corporate assets and employees but also innocent 
bystanders.

Before 9/11, courts typically would not hold makers of 
items  such  as  ammonium  nitrate  fertilizer  liable  for  the 
misuse  of  their  product  by  terrorists  (fi nding  that  such 
terrorist  acts  were  ‘unforeseeable’  and  that  the  fertilizer 
manufacturers did not have a duty to protect the unfortu-
nate victims of the attacks).

Unfortunately, a series of decisions completely changed 
the legal landscape post 9/11. In one case stemming from 
the 1993 World Trade Center attack, New York state courts 
initially  held  the  Port Authority  of  New  York  and  New 
Jersey partially liable for the losses suffered by the victims 
of  the  9/11  attacks.  In  that  particular  case,  the  Port 
Authority was held to a standard in which if it knew or 
should  have  been  aware  of  the  possibility  of  a  terrorist 
attack, then it was obligated to take all reasonable meas-
ures necessary to mitigate the possibility of said attacks.

Even  considering  that  the  decision  was  ultimately 
overturned  on  a  technicality  (the  Port  Authority  was 
found  to  have  a  unique  form  of  ‘sovereign  immunity’ 
and therefore could not be held liable under any circum-
stances),  the  initial  decision  set  forth  a  blueprint  that 
other courts are sure to follow in future cases involving 
terrorist or cyberattacks.

Similarly,  claims  fi led  against  the  manufacturers  of 
airplanes used in the 9/11 attacks were also allowed to 
proceed, leading to signifi cant costs for those companies. 
In  that  instance,  a  federal  court  in  New  York  allowed 
claims alleging that the cockpit doors on planes made by 
Boeing  were  negligently  designed—thereby  allowing 

157  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

terrorists  to  gain  control  of  the  planes—
were allowed to proceed. The court’s ration-
ale  in  that  case  was  that  a  jury  could  fi nd 
that Boeing should have foreseen that a ter-
rorist would want to breach the cockpit and 
hijack the plane, and thus its cockpit doors 
should have been more strongly designed.

Because  those  claims  were  allowed  to 
proceed, Boeing on average paid 21⁄2 times in 
settlement fees what the plaintiffs (here the 
families of persons killed in the 9/11 attacks) 
would  have  received  if  they  had  elected  to 
participate in the 9/11 Victims Compensation 
Fund.

In  light  of  the  above,  it  is  obvious  that 
directors and offi cers of publicly listed com-
panies must be very concerned about post-
attack litigation. Even if a court or jury ulti-
mately  fi nds  that  there  is  no  culpability  on 
the part of a director, offi cer, or the company 
itself, the stark reality is that the legal fi ght to 
reach  that  decision  will  be  expensive  and 
protracted.

So,  the  key  question  that  directors  and 
offi cers  of  publicly  listed  companies  must 
ask  themselves  is,  ‘How  do  we  manage/
minimize third-party liability in a post 9/11 
world?’ Insurance is certainly an option, but 
obtaining  a  comprehensive  policy  can  be 
very  expensive,  and  further  coverage  is 
uncertain. Again using 9/11 as an example, 
many companies paid immense amounts in 
legal fees to force their insurance carriers to 
honor  terrorism-related  claims  under  the 
policies they issued.

Understanding  the  limits  of  insurance, 
the  question  then  becomes  what  other  risk 
mitigation tools exist that could limit by stat-
ute or eliminate third-party claims? Based on 
a  review  of  existing  statutes,  regulations, 
and  alternative  options  such  as  insurance 
coverage,  the  best  opportunity  for  limiting 
liability  is  the  Support  Anti-Terrorism  By 
Fostering  Effective  Technologies  Act 
(‘SAFETY  Act’).  Under  the  SAFETY  Act, 
‘sellers’  of  security  products  or  services 
(a  term  that  also  includes  companies  that 
develop their own physical or cybersecurity 
plans  and  procedures  and  then  uses  them 
only  for  internal  purposes)  are  eligible  to 

■  158 

receive 
SAFETY Act.

liability  protections  under  the 

In  addition,  entities  that  purchase  or 
deploy SAFETY Act approved security prod-
ucts and/or services also will have the ben-
efi t  of  immediate  dismissal  of  third-party 
liability  claims  arising  out  of,  related  to,  or 
resulting  from  a  declared  ‘act  of  terrorism’ 
(a term that encompasses physical or cyber-
attacks,  regardless  of  whether  there  is  any 
motive or intent that could be deemed ‘polit-
ical’ in nature).

The  reader  should  remember  that  at  the 
time of the drafting of this article, no litiga-
tion  specifi cally  involving  the  SAFETY  Act 
has occurred, and so there is no established 
legal precedent interpreting the statute itself. 
However, the fundamental principles of the 
SAFETY Act are based on the “government 
contractor defense,” a well-established com-
mon  law  affi rmative  defense  to  third-party 
litigation that has been reviewed and upheld 
by the U.S. Supreme Court.

Accordingly, this article is based on inter-
pretations of the SAFETY Act, the Final Rule 
implementing  the  SAFETY  Act,  and  the 
underlying  theory  of  the  government  con-
tractor defense.

■   Background of the SAFETY Act
The SAFETY Act provides extensive liability 
protections to entities that are awarded either 
a  ‘Designation’  or  a  ‘Certifi cation’  as  a 
Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology (QATT). 
Under  a  ‘Designation’  award,  successful 
SAFETY Act  QATT  applications  are  entitled 
to a variety of liability protections, including 
the following:

 䊏 All terrorism-related liability claims must 

be litigated in federal court.

 䊏 Punitive  damages  and  pre-judgment 

interest awards are barred.

 䊏 Compensatory  damages  are  capped  at 
an amount agreed to by the Department 
of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  and  the 
applicant.

 䊏 That  damage  cap  will  be  equal  to  a  set 
amount  of  insurance  the  applicant  must 
carry,  and  once  that  insurance  cap  is 

reached  no  further  damages  may  be 
awarded in a given year. 

 䊏 A bar on joint and several liability
 䊏 Damages  awarded  to  plaintiffs  will  be 
offset  by  any  collateral  recoveries  they 
receive (e.g., victims compensation funds, 
life insurance).

Should 
the  applicant  be  awarded  a 
‘Certifi cation’ under the SAFETY Act for their 
QATT, all of the liability protections awarded 
under a ‘Designation’ are available. In addi-
tion, the seller of a QATT will be entitled to an 
immediate  presumption  of  dismissal  of  all 
third-party  liability  claims  arising  out  of,  or 
related to, the act of terrorism.

This  presumption  of  immunity  can  be 
overcome in two ways: (1) by demonstrat-
ing that the application was submitted with 
incorrect information and that that informa-
tion  was  provided  though  fraud  or  willful 
misconduct  or  (2)  by  showing  that  the 
claims asserted by the plaintiff related to a 
product or service are not encompassed by 
the  QATT  defi nition  as  written  by  the 
Department  of  Homeland  Security. Absent 
a  showing  of  element,  the  attack-related 
claims against the defendant will be imme-
diately dismissed.

For the SAFETY Act protections to be trig-
gered,  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security 
must  declare  that  an  “act  of  terrorism”  has 
occurred. The defi nition of an “act of terror-
ism”  is  extremely  broad,  and  includes  any 
act that:

(i) is unlawful;

(ii)  causes  harm  to  a  person,  property,  or 
entity, in the United States, or in the case of a 
domestic United States air carrier or a United 
States-fl ag vessel (or a vessel based principally 
in the United States on which United States 
income tax is paid and whose insurance cover-
age  is  subject  to  regulation  in  the  United 
States), in or outside the United States; and

(iii) uses or attempts to use instrumentalities, 
weapons or other methods designed or intend-
ed to cause mass destruction, injury or other 

  MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT  

loss  to  citizens  or  institutions  of  the  United 
States.

The Secretary has broad discretion to declare 
that  an  event  is  an  “act  of  terrorism,”  and 
once that has been declared, the SAFETY Act 
statutory protections will be available to the 
seller of the QATT and others.

A cursory review of this defi nition reveals 
that there is no need to divine a motivation 
for the attack and that the language used can 
be interpreted to include physical attacks as 
well  as  cyberattacks.  The  only  ‘intent’  that 
must  be  demonstrated  under  the  SAFETY 
Act  then  is  that  the  attack  is  intended  to 
cause destruction, injury, or other loss to the 
U.S.  or  its  interests.  This  is  important  to 
remember  because  it  means  that  cyberat-
tacks  also  trigger  the  protections  of  the 
SAFETY Act.

■   SAFETY Act protections available 

to customers and other entities

One of the most signifi cant additional bene-
fi ts  of  the  SAFETY  Act  is  that  the  liability 
protections  awarded  to  the  seller  of  the 
QATT  fl ow  down  to  customers,  suppliers, 
subcontractors,  vendors,  and  others  who 
were involved in the development or deploy-
ment  of  the  QATT.  In  other  words,  when  a 
company  buys  or  otherwise  uses  a  QATT 
that has been either SAFETY Act ‘Designated’ 
or  ‘Certifi ed,’  that  customer  is  entitled  to 
immediate  dismissal  of  claims  associated 
with the use of the approved technology or 
service  and  arising  out  of,  related  to,  or 
resulting from a declared act of terrorism.

The bases for these expanded protections 
are clearly set forth in the SAFETY Act stat-
ute and in the Final Rule implementing the 
SAFETY Act. Both are detailed below:

With respect to the protections offered to 
entities other than the Seller of the QATT, 
the SAFETY Act statute states as follows:

IN  GENERAL.—There  shall  exist  a 
Federal cause of action for claims arising 
out of, relating to, or resulting from an act 
of terrorism when qualifi ed anti-terrorism 

  159  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

technologies  have  been  deployed  in 
defense  against  or  response  or  recovery 
from  such  act  and  such  claims  result  or 
may result in loss to the Seller. The sub-
stantive  law  for  decision  in  any  such 
action  shall  be  derived  from  the  law, 
including choice of law principles, of the 
State  in  which  such  acts  of  terrorism 
occurred, unless such law is inconsistent 
with  or  preempted  by  Federal  law.  Such 
Federal cause of action shall be brought only 
for  claims  for  injuries  that  are  proximately 
caused  by  sellers  that  provide  qualifi ed  anti-
terrorism  technology  to  Federal  and  non-
Federal government customers.

The SAFETY Act statute also reads:

JURISDICTION.—Such appropriate district 
court of the United States shall have original 
and exclusive jurisdiction over all actions for 
any claim for loss of property, personal injury, 
or death arising out of, relating to, or result-
ing  from  an  act  of  terrorism  when  qualifi ed 
anti-terrorism technologies have been deployed 
in  defense  against  or  response  or  recovery 
from such act and such claims result or may 
result in loss to the Seller.

The  key  language,  which  comes  from  6 
U.S.C. Section 442(a)(1), states that the claims 
arising out of, relating to, or resulting from 
an act of terrorism “shall be brought only for 
claims  for  injuries  that  are  proximately 
caused by sellers that provide qualifi ed anti-
terrorism  technology  to  Federal  and  non-
Federal government customers.”

Furthermore,  in  Section  442(a)(2),  the 
SAFETY  Act  states  that  U.S.  district  courts 
shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction 
for claims that “result or may result in loss to 
the seller.”

The language in 6 U.S.C. Section 442(a)(1) 
and (a)(2) reads such that terrorism-related 
claims that have or could have resulted in a 
loss to the seller may only be brought in U.S. 
district courts against the seller. Nothing in 
the statute would give rise to claims against 
other parties who use or otherwise partici-
pate in the delivery and use of the QATT.

■  160 

DHS,  as  set  forth  in  the  preamble  to  the 
SAFETY  Act  Final  Rule,  agrees  with  this 
interpretation, stating:

Further, it is clear that the Seller is the only 
appropriate  defendant 
in  this  exclusive 
Federal cause of action. First and foremost, the 
Act  unequivocally  states  that  a  “cause  of 
action  shall  be  brought  only  for  claims  for 
injuries that are proximately caused by sellers 
that provide qualifi ed anti-terrorism technol-
ogy.”  Second,  if  the  Seller  of  the  Qualifi ed 
Anti-Terrorism Technology at issue were not 
the only defendant, would-be plaintiffs could, 
in  an  effort  to  circumvent  the  statute,  bring 
claims (arising out of or relating to the perfor-
mance  or  non-performance  of  the  Seller’s 
Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology) against 
arguably  less  culpable  persons  or  entities, 
including but not limited to contractors, sub-
contractors,  suppliers,  vendors,  and  custom-
ers of the Seller of the technology.

Because  the  claims  in  the  cause  of  action 
would  be  predicated  on  the  performance  or 
non-performance  of  the  Seller’s  Qualifi ed 
Anti-Terrorism  Technology,  those  persons  or 
entities,  in  turn,  would  fi le  a  third-party 
action  against  the  Seller.  In  such  situations, 
the  claims  against  non-Sellers  thus  “may 
result in loss to the Seller” under 863(a)(2). 
The  Department  believes  Congress  did  not 
intend through the Act to increase rather than 
decrease the amount of litigation arising out 
of  or  related  to  the  deployment  of  Qualifi ed 
Anti-Terrorism Technology. Rather, Congress 
balanced the need to provide recovery to plain-
tiffs  against  the  need  to  ensure  adequate 
deployment of anti-terrorism technologies by 
creating a cause of action that provides a cer-
tain level of recovery against Sellers, while at 
the same time protecting others in the supply 
chain.

Within the Final Rule itself, the Department 
also stated:

There shall exist only one cause of action for 
loss of property, personal injury, or death for 
performance  or  non-performance  of  the 

Seller’s Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology 
in  relation  to  an  Act  of  Terrorism.  Such 
cause of action may be brought only against 
the  Seller  of  the  Qualifi ed  Anti-Terrorism 
Technology and may not be brought against 
the buyers, the buyers’ contractors, or down-
stream  users  of  the  Technology,  the  Seller’s 
suppliers or contractors, or any other person 
or entity.

Thus, the SAFETY Act statute and the Final 
Rule implementing the law make it clear that 
when there is litigation involving a SAFETY 
Act QATT (whether Designated or Certifi ed) 
alleging that the QATT was the cause, direct-
ly  or  indirectly,  of  any  alleged  losses,  the 
only  proper  defendant  in  such  litigation  is 
the Seller of the QATT. Customers and oth-
ers are not proper defendants and are enti-
tled to immediate dismissal, because allow-
ing  litigation  to  proceed  against  customers 
would be contrary to the SAFETY Act statute 
and Congressional intent.

■   Practical application of SAFETY Act 

protections to limit third-party claims

Considering  the  above,  companies  that  sell 
or  deploy  security  QATTs,  as  well  as  their 
customers, are entitled to extensive benefi ts. 
Sellers of cybersecurity QATTs are entitled to 
the broad protections from third-party liabil-
ity claims offered under a ‘Designation’ and 
a ‘Certifi cation.’

As explicitly set forth in the SAFETY Act 
statute and the SAFETY Act Final Rule, the 
only proper defendant in litigation following 
an  act  of  terrorism  allegedly  involving  a 
SAFETY  Act  Designated  and/or  Certifi ed 
QATT  is  the  seller  itself.  In  this  case,  the 
‘Seller’  would  be  the  security  vendor  or 
company  that  deploys  its  own  internally 
developed  security  policies,  procedures,  or 
technologies  with  the  QATT  being  said 
Certifi ed  or  Designated  security  policies, 
procedures, or even technologies.

The basis for this analysis rests upon the 
fact that sellers of security QATTs will have 
received 
the  QATT  Designation  or 
Certifi cation,  thus  conferring  upon  them 
specific  statutory 
liability  protections. 

  MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT  

Further, based on the extensive analysis con-
ducted above regarding the applicability of 
the SAFETY Act statute and Final Rule, buy-
ers  of  security  QATTs  will  be  considered 
‘customers’  for  SAFETY  Act  purposes,  and 
therefore entitled to immediate dismissal of 
claims related to an approved security tech-
nology or service. Thus, the SAFETY Act can 
and should serve as an excellent tool to miti-
gate or eliminate said liability.

Accordingly,  sellers  and  customers  of 
‘QATTs’  are  entitled  to  all  appropriate  pro-
tections offered by the SAFETY Act, whether 
those offered by Designation, the presump-
tion of dismissal offered by Certifi cation, or 
the  fl ow-down  protections  offered  to  cus-
tomers  and  others.  QATT  customers  and 
sellers could still face security-related litiga-
tion should the Homeland Security Secretary 
not declare the attack to be an “act of terror-
ism”  or  if  the  claims  do  not  relate  to  the 
QATT as defi ned by DHS.

■   Conclusion
Entities that are potentially at risk for third-
party  liability  claims  after  an  attack  can  be 
materially  protected  through  the  SAFETY 
Act. Users of SAFETY Act-approved security 
products or services will also receive direct 
and tangible benefi ts.

The SAFETY Act provides strong liability 
protections that will fl ow down to such cus-
tomers per the language of the SAFETY Act 
statute  and  Final  Rule.  A  wide  variety  of 
attacks,  products,  and  services,  including 
cyberattacks and cybersecurity products and 
services, are covered by the language of the 
SAFETY  Act,  and  thus,  such  products  and 
services are also eligible to provide dramati-
cally limited litigation and for such litigation 
to be limited to ‘sellers,’ not ‘customers.’

Certainly  not  every  attack  will  result  in 
liability for security vendors or their custom-
ers,  particularly  with  respect  to  third-party 
liability. Should such liability occur, howev-
er,  it  can  be  mitigated  or  eliminated  using 
the SAFETY Act.

Perhaps  most  importantly  for  directors 
and offi cers of publicly listed companies, the 
SAFETY  Act  should  always  be  considered 

  161  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

when  examining  risk  mitigation  strategies 
associated with the company’s internal secu-
rity  programs  (physical  and/or  cyber)  as 
well  as  security  goods  and  services  pur-
chased  from  outside  vendors.  The  SAFETY 
Act offers powerful liability protections and 
can doubly serve as evidence that the com-
pany  exercised  ‘due  diligence’  and  ‘reason-
able  care’  when  designing  and  implement-
ing its security programs.

Given  the  relative  paucity  of  case  law 
defi ning what constitutes ‘adequate’ or ‘rea-
sonable’  security,  directors  and  offi cers 
should look to the SAFETY Act as a way to 
help  determine  whether  their  company’s 
security  plans  and  programs  could  be  con-
sidered to have achieved those benchmarks. 
Doing so will not only help improve security 
but also almost assuredly decrease the com-
pany’s risk exposure.

■  162 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Combating the insider threat: 
Reducing security risks from 
malicious and negligent employees
Littler Mendelson P.C. – Philip L. Gordon, Esq., Co-Chair, 
Privacy and Background Checks Practice Group

“Edward Snowden,” the affair that bears his name dem-
onstrates the extreme damage that a privileged insider 
can cause, even to an organization with the most sophis-
ticated security technology and one of the largest cyber-
security budgets. Although Snowden may have been a 
contractor,  survey  after  survey  demonstrates  that 
employees,  whether  through  negligence  or  malice,  are 
the most common cause of security incidents. According 
to  the  Vormetric  Insider  Threat  Report  2015,  89%  of 
respondents globally stated that their organization was 
more at risk than ever from the insider threat, and 55% 
identifi ed  employees  as  the  #1  internal  threat.  PwC’s 
Global  State  of  Information  Security  2015  found  that 
current employees are the most frequently cited cause of 
security  incidents,  well  ahead  of  contractors,  hackers, 
organized crime, and nation-states. 

These studies confi rm that there has been no abatement 
in the insider threat in recent years. Just as PwC’s study 
found  in  2015,  a  2013  Ponemon  Institute  study,  entitled 
the “Post-Breach Boom,” also reported that negligent and 
malicious  insiders  were  the  cause  of  61%  of  security 
breaches  experienced  by  respondents,  substantially 
exceeding other causes, such as external attacks and sys-
tem error or malfunctions.

Employers can take a wide range of relatively low-cost, 
low-tech steps to reduce the risk of insider threats. These 
steps track the stages of the employment lifecycle, ranging 
from  pre-employment  screening  at  the  outset  of  the 
employment relationship to exit interviews when that rela-
tionship  ends.  Between  those  endpoints,  employers  can 
reduce the insider threat by implementing and managing 
access controls, securing mobile devices (whether employ-
er-owned or personal) used for work, carefully managing 
remote work, providing effective training, and following a 
myriad other steps discussed in more detail below.

163  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

■   Pre-employment screening and post-hire 

risk alerts

Effective background screening can eliminate 
the  insider  threat  before  it  ever  occurs  by 
identifying  job  applicants  who  pose  a 
threat  to the employer’s information assets. 
Employees  responsible  for  evaluating  back-
ground  reports  should  be  looking  not  only 
for  prior  convictions  for  identity  theft  but 
also  for  other  crimes  involving  dishonesty, 
such as fraud and forgery, which indicate an 
applicant’s  propensity  to  misuse  informa-
tion. Employers that rely on staffi ng compa-
nies  should  consider  not  hiring  temporary 
workers  for  positions  involving  access  to 
sensitive  employee,  customer,  or  business 
data, such as positions in the human resourc-
es or R&D departments or those responsible 
for processing credit card payments. If such 
hiring  is  imperative,  the  employer  should 
impose on the staffi ng company, by contract, 
background  check  criteria  for  temporary 
placements that are at least as stringent as the 
employer’s own background check criteria.

Employers  should  beware  that  pre-
employment  screening  can  itself  expose  an 
employer to signifi cant risks. In the past few 
years,  the  plaintiffs’  class  action  bar  has 
aggressively pursued employers for alleged 
violations of the federal Fair Credit Reporting 
Act  (FCRA),  which  regulates  the  procure-
ment of background checks from third-party 
consumer  reporting  agencies.  As  of  mid-
2015,  nearly  20  jurisdictions—states,  coun-
ties, and municipalities—have enacted “ban-
the-box” 
legislation  to  restrict  private 
employers’ inquiries into criminal history. At 
the  same  time,  the  U.S.  Equal  Employment 
Opportunity  Commission  (EEOC)  has  fi led 
several  lawsuits  against  large  employers, 
alleging  that  their  pre-employment  screen-
ing  practices  have  a  disparate  impact  on 
African  American  and  Hispanic  job  appli-
cants.  Consequently,  organizations  should 
carefully  review 
their  pre-employment 
screening practices for compliance with the 
many federal, state, and local laws aimed at 
helping ex-offenders secure employment.

Employers also should consider whether 
a  one-time,  pre-employment  background 

■  164 

check  adequately  protects  their  organiza-
tion. Currently, the vast majority of employ-
ers do not conduct background checks after 
the  job  application  process  has  been  com-
pleted.  However,  several  service  providers 
now  offer  “risk  alerts,”  either  directly  to 
employers or indirectly through the employ-
er’s  background  check  vendor.  These  risk 
alerts notify the employer and/or the back-
ground  check  vendor  of  post-hire  risk  fac-
tors  available  through  public  records 
sources, such as pending criminal charges, 
criminal  convictions,  and  bankruptcies. 
Employers may consider using such “con-
tinuous monitoring” services to help iden-
tify  employees  who  become  security  risks 
over time.

■   Employee-oriented safeguards for sensitive 

corporate data

Even employees who have been thoroughly 
screened and have proven their trustworthi-
ness  can  expose  an  organization’s  sensitive 
data  to  loss  or  theft.  Organizations  and  the 
employees  themselves  can  take  the  basic 
precautions  described  below  to  mitigate 
these risks.

 A.  Safeguarding electronic data

information. 

1.  Access control lists: Restricting access 
to  information,  particularly  sensitive 
customer,  employee,  and  business 
information, on a need-to-know basis is 
a fundamental principle of information 
security.  Employees  in  the  accounts 
payable  department,  for  example, 
should  be  barred  from  accessing 
human  resources 
In 
addition,  access  to  information  by 
employees with a need to know should 
be  limited  to  the  minimum  necessary 
to  perform  their  job  responsibilities. 
Organizations 
implement 
a  process  for  establishing  the  access 
rights  of  new  hires  based  on  their 
job  responsibilities,  for  modifying 
access rights when job responsibilities 
change, and for promptly terminating 
access  rights  when  the  employment 
relationship ends.

should 

  COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES 

the 

to  originate  with 

log-in 
should  be 

2.  Protecting 
credentials: 
regularly 
Employees 
reminded  of 
importance  of 
protecting  their  log-in  credentials. 
They should be instructed not to share 
their  log-in  credentials  with  anyone. 
Hackers  may  pose  as  IT  professionals 
on  the  phone  or  send  phishing  emails 
purporting 
the 
employer’s  IT  Department,  to  trick 
(“social  engineer”)  employees 
into 
revealing log-in credentials. Employees 
also  should  be  instructed  not  to  write 
log-in  credentials  and 
down  their 
to 
log-
in  credentials  when  they  suspect  the 
credentials  have  been  compromised. 
Finally,  each  employee  should  be 
required  to  acknowledge  that  only  he 
or she is the authorized person to access 
and view the organization’s information 
through his or her log-in credentials and 
is personally responsible for all activity 
using those log-in credentials.

immediately  change 

their 

3.  Screen security: Employees can reveal 
sensitive  data  to  “shoulder  surfers” 
in  airplanes,  at  coffee  shops,  and 
even at work by failing to adequately 
protect  their  computer  monitor  or 
screen. Employees should be reminded 
to  position  their  monitor  or  screen 
to  reduce  the  risk  of  viewing  by 
unauthorized individuals. In locations, 
such  as  airplanes,  where  that  may 
not  be  possible,  employees  should 
use  a  privacy  screen  to  prevent 
unauthorized  viewing.  Regardless  of 
location,  employees  should  activate  a 
password-protected screen saver when 
they leave their screen unattended.

4.  Mobile  device  security:  One  of  the 
most  common  causes  of  security 
breaches  is  the  exposure  of  sensitive 
data  through  the  loss  or  theft  of 
employees’  mobile  devices.  To  reduce 
this  risk,  organizations  should  push 
security controls to all mobile devices—
whether employer-issued or personally 
owned—that are used for work. These 
controls  should  include  encryption, 

should  be 

password  protection,  automatic  log-
out  after  a  short  period  of  inactivity, 
automatic log-out after a small number 
of  unsuccessful  log-in  attempts,  and 
remote  wipe  capability.  In  addition, 
employees 
routinely 
reminded  of  the  need  to  physically 
safeguard  their  mobile  device,  for 
example,  by  not  sharing  the  device 
with others and by securing the device 
(for example, in a hotel safe) when the 
device is left unattended. In addition, 
employees  should  be  instructed  to 
immediately  report  the  loss  or  theft 
of  the  device  to  a  person  or  group 
designated to respond to such reports.
5.  Remote work security: Corporate spies 
can tap into unsecured WiFi connections 
to  steal  sensitive  data.  To  reduce  this 
risk,  employees  should  be  required  to 
use  a  secure/encrypted  connection, 
such  as  a  virtual  private  network 
(VPN), to access the corporate network 
when  working  remotely.  In  addition, 
employees should generally be required 
to use that secure remote connection to 
conduct  business  involving  sensitive 
data  rather  than  storing  the  sensitive 
data  on  a  portable  storage  medium, 
such  as  a  thumb  drive  or  a  laptop’s 
hard  drive.  Where  local  storage  is  a 
business  imperative  (e.g.,  when  work 
must  get  done  during  a  long  fl ight), 
employees should be required to use an 
encrypted portable storage medium to 
store sensitive data.

6.  No  storage 

the 

in  personal  online 
accounts:  Once  an  organization’s 
sensitive  data  move  to  an  employee’s 
personal  email  or  cloud  storage 
account,  the  organization  effectively 
loses  control  of 
information. 
Absent  the  employee’s  prior  written 
authorization,  the  email  or  cloud 
service  provider  generally  cannot 
lawfully  disclose  the  organization’s 
data  to  the  organization. At  the  same 
time,  employees  often  will  hesitate 
to  sign  such  an  authorization  out  of 
concern  that  the  employer  will  gain 

  165  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

access  to  private  information  stored 
in the account, and employees almost 
always  will  fl atly  refuse  to  sign  if 
they are disgruntled or after they have 
left  the  organization.  Consequently, 
employers  should  unambiguously 
communicate  to  their  workforce  that 
storage  of  the  organization’s  sensitive 
data  in  a  personal  online  account  is 
prohibited.

 B.  Safeguarding sensitive data in paper and 

oral form
1.  Clean  desk  policy/secure  storage: 
Whether employees are working at the 
employer’s offi ce or their home offi ce, 
paper  documents  containing  sensitive 
data  can  easily  be  viewed  or  stolen 
by  those  not  authorized  to  access  the 
information,  such  as  maintenance 
personnel at the offi ce or those making 
repairs  at 
the  home.  Employees 
should  be  reminded  to  secure  paper 
documents  containing  sensitive  data 
in  locked  offi ces,  desk  drawers,  fi ling 
cabinets,  or  storage  areas  and  to 
remove  papers  containing  sensitive 
data from their physical desktop when 
it is unattended.

2.  Beware  of  printers,  scanners,  and 
fax  machines:  Office  equipment 
located  in  unrestricted  areas  poses  a 
risk  to  sensitive  data  in  paper  form. 
Employees  should  be  instructed  to 
promptly  remove  print  jobs,  scans, 
and faxes from these machines so that 
sensitive  data  cannot  be  viewed  by 
unauthorized individuals.

3.  Avoid off-site use of paper documents: 
Massachusetts General Hospital agreed 
to  pay  $1  million  to  settle  alleged 
HIPAA  violations  after  one  of  its 
employees  left  the  medical  records  of 
192 HIV patients on the Boston subway. 
Organizations can avoid incidents like 
this  by  prohibiting  employees  from 
taking paper documents with sensitive 
data  off-site  unless  there  is  a  strong 
and legitimate business need to do so. 
Typically,  employees  will  be  able  to 
access the same information through a 

■  166 

secure remote connection. When there 
is a business need, employees should be 
required to keep the paper documents 
with them at all times or to secure the 
documents  when  unattended,  just  as 
employees  should  do  with  a  mobile 
device.

after 

4.  Require  secure  disposal  of  paper 
documents:  Pharmacies  and  other 
health  care  providers  around  the 
country  have  been  the  subject  of 
scathing  publicity  and  government 
investigations 
journalists-
cum-dumpster-divers  discovered 
unshredded patient records discarded 
in  bulk  behind  the  facility.  Whether 
working  from  the  offi ce  or  from 
home,  employees  should  be  required 
to shred paper documents containing 
sensitive  data  or  to  discard  them  in 
secure disposal bins.

5.  Private  conversations  are  meant  for 
private  places:  In  today’s  world  of 
mobile  telephony,  employees  often 
can  end  up  discussing  sensitive 
information  while  walking  down  the 
street, riding in public transportation, 
or sitting in a crowded restaurant. Even 
when  working  at  the  corporate  offi ce 
or  the  home  offi ce,  employees  must 
be aware that they are not discussing 
sensitive  data  over  the  phone  where 
unauthorized 
can 
overhear them.

individuals 

■   Employee monitoring
Monitoring  technology  has  become  increas-
ingly sophisticated and can now help employ-
ers  root  out  the  insider  threat.  For  example, 
recently developed email and Internet moni-
toring software uses “Big Data” techniques to 
identify patterns of conduct for the workforce 
as a whole, for particular groups, or for par-
ticular  individuals  to  establish  a  norm  for 
expected online conduct. When an employee 
deviates  from  the  norm—for  example,  by 
downloading  an  unusually  large  number  of 
fi les to an external storage device or by send-
ing  an  unusual  number  of  emails  to  a  per-
sonal e-mail account—the software alerts the 

  COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES 

investigate 

employer of the deviation from the norm, so 
the  employer  can 
further. 
Employers concerned about the insider threat 
should consider investing in monitoring soft-
ware  that  can  perform  this  type  of  “user-
based analytics.”

Employers also should consider installing 
data loss prevention (DLP) software on their 
networks.  This  software  fl ags  communica-
tions,  such  as  outbound  emails  containing 
sensitive data, for further action. For exam-
ple,  DLP  software  may  identify  strings  of 
digits resembling Social Security numbers in 
an  outbound  email,  quarantine  the  email 
before  it  leaves  the  organization’s  network, 
and alert the employer’s IT department of a 
potential data theft.

Although network surveillance software 
can substantially enhance other information 
security measures, implementation can pose 
risks  for  the  organization.  Although  case 
law  applying  the  Federal  Wiretap  Act  to 
real-time  email  interception  is  somewhat 
sparse,  the  cases  suggest  that  employers 
who capture email content in real time with-
out  robust,  prior  notice  to  employees  may 
be exposed to civil lawsuits and even crimi-
nal  prosecution.  Multinational  employers 
face  broader,  potential  exposure  for  violat-
ing  local  data  protection  laws,  particularly 
in  the  European  Union.  Consequently, 
employers should conduct a thorough legal 
review  before  implementing  new  monitor-
ing technology.

■   Confi dentiality agreements, employee 

training, and exit interviews

Although many of the safeguards described 
above  may  appear  to  be  common  sense, 
they likely will appear to be inconveniences 
to many employees, especially to the Gen-Y 
members  and  Millennials  in  the  workforce 
for whom the broad disclosure of sensitive 
information  through  social  media  has 
become  natural.  Cisco’s  2012  Annual 
Security  Report  bears  this  out,  reporting 
that 71% of Gen-Y respondents “do not obey 
policies”  set  by  corporate  IT.  Similarly, 
Absolute  Software’s  2015  U.S.  Mobile 
Device  Security  Report  found  that  25%  of 

Millennials admitted to compromising their 
organization’s  IT  security  as  compared  to 
5% of Baby Boomers. Given this “culture of 
noncompliance,” employers should consid-
er  three  methods  for  reminding  employees 
of  their  responsibilities  as  stewards  of  the 
employer’s sensitive data.

First,  employers  should  consider  requir-
ing that all new hires whose responsibilities 
will involve access to sensitive data execute 
a  confi dentiality  agreement.  In  addition  to 
identifying  those  categories  of  information 
that  employees  must  keep  confi dential,  the 
agreement  should  summarize  some  of  the 
key steps employees are required to take to 
preserve confi dentiality, require return of the 
employer’s sensitive data upon termination 
of the employment relationship, and confer 
on  the  employer  enforcement  rights  in  the 
event the employee breaches the agreement. 
Employers  should  note  that  several  federal 
regulators, 
the  Securities  & 
Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the  National 
Labor  Relations  Board  (NLRB),  and  the 
EEOC,  have  been  fi nding  unlawful  overly 
broad confi dentiality agreements that effec-
tively restrict employees’ rights to engage in 
legally  protected  conduct,  such  as  whistle-
blowing or discussing the terms and condi-
tions  of  employment  with  co-workers. 
Consequently, any confi dentiality agreement 
should be scrutinized by legal counsel before 
it is distributed to new hires for signature.

including 

Second, educating employees on informa-
tion  security  is  critical.  Training  should 
address  a  range  of  topics,  including  (a)  the 
employer’s  legal  obligations  to  safeguard 
sensitive  data,  (b)  the  types  of  information 
falling  within  the  scope  of  this  legal  duty, 
(c) the consequences for the employer’s bot-
tom line of failing to fulfi ll those legal obliga-
tions,  (d)  the  steps  employees  can  take  to 
help the employer fulfi ll its legal obligations, 
and  critically  (e)  the  situations  that  consti-
tute  a  security  incident  and  to  whom  the 
incident should be reported. Training should 
be  recurring  and  supplemented  with  peri-
odic  security  awareness  reminders.  These 
reminders  could  take  the  form  of  email, 
posts  on  an  internal  blog,  or  text  messages 

  167  ■

CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS

and can include critical alerts, such as notifi -
cation  of  a  recent  phishing  email  sent  to 
members  of  the  employer’s  workforce  or 
warnings against clicking on links or open-
ing  attachments  that  could  result  in  the 
downloading of malicious code.

Third,  employers  should  consider  modi-
fying their exit interview process to specifi -
cally  address  information  security.  At  the 
exit interview, the employer can accomplish 
the following:

 䊏 provide the employee with a copy of his 
or her executed confi dentiality agreement 
and  remind  the  employee  of  his  or  her 
ongoing  obligation  not  to  disclose  the 
employer’s sensitive data to unauthorized 
third parties;

 䊏 obtain  the  return  of  all  employer-owned 
computers,  mobile  devices,  and  portable 
storage  media  on  which  sensitive  data 
may be stored;

 䊏 arrange  for  the  remote  wiping,  or  other 
removal, of the employer’s sensitive data 
from  any  of  the  employee’s  personal 
mobile devices allowed to access corporate 
information systems;

 䊏 confi rm that the employee has not stored 
any  of  the  employer’s  sensitive  data  in 
personal  email  accounts,  personal  cloud 
storage  accounts,  personal  external 
storage media, or anywhere else.

■   HR and in-house employment counsel need 
a seat at the “information security table”

In many, if not most, organizations, there is a 
chasm between the Human Resources depart-
ment and in-house employment counsel, on 

the one hand, and the groups responsible for 
information security—the IT Department, the 
Chief  Information  Security  Offi cer,  and/or 
the Chief Privacy Offi cer—on the other. The 
former  group  views  information  security  as 
the  sole  responsibility  of  the  latter,  and  the 
latter group views employees (and employee 
data) as the sole responsibility of the former.
However,  HR  professionals  and  in-
house employment counsel can play a criti-
cal  role  in  enhancing  an  organization’s 
information  security.  They  typically  are 
responsible for evaluating whether to reject 
applicants  based  on  information  reported 
by the employer’s pre-employment screen-
ing vendor. They routinely train new hires 
and current employees on a wide range of 
topics and could easily partner with infor-
mation  security  professionals  to  conduct 
information  security  training.  They  often 
negotiate  contracts  with  service  providers 
who  receive  substantial  quantities  of 
employees’  sensitive  data.  They  regularly 
receive  and  investigate  complaints  of  sus-
pected  employee  misconduct,  which  may 
include reports generated by DLP software 
or  other  online  surveillance  software  or 
about  employees’  otherwise  mishandling 
sensitive  data.  They  also  typically  are 
involved  in  disciplinary  decisions,  includ-
ing  those  based  on  employees’  mishan-
dling of sensitive data.

In sum, by making human resources pro-
fessionals and in-house employment counsel 
valued members of the organization’s infor-
mation security team, organizations can sig-
nifi cantly  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  their 
overall information security program.

■  168 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Comprehensive approach 
to cybersecurity

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Developing a cybersecurity 
strategy: Thrive in an evolving 
threat environment
Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice 
President; Sedar LaBarre, Vice President; Matt Doan, 
Senior Associate; and Denis Cosgrove, Senior Associate

The Internet and ‘always on’ connectivity is transforming 
how  we  live,  work,  and  do  business.  Game-changing 
technology, powered by our increasingly connected soci-
ety, offers more effi cient workers, new revenue streams, 
and  stronger  customer  relationships.  Technology  is  not 
optional; it is a core business enabler. That means it must 
be protected.

Cybersecurity was once widely considered just another 
item  in  a  long  list  of  back-offi ce  functions.  Vulnerability 
patching? Device confi guration? These were IT problems 
for  the  IT  team  to  worry  about.  However,  that  has 
changed. A series of high-profi le cybersecurity attacks—
from  Stuxnet  to  Target—demonstrate  that  cybersecurity 
represents a business risk of the highest order. The C-suite 
and board are taking notice.

However,  as  cybersecurity  makes  its  way  onto  the 
executive  agenda,  it  is  simultaneously  time  to  rethink 
our  strategies.  The  ‘Internet  of  Things’  is  more  than  a 
fad. Suddenly, and increasingly, everything is connected. 
Business  leaders  get  it:  to  fend  off  emerging  players 
and  ensure  market  competitiveness,  companies  are  re-
architecting their business models around this concept. 
It will drive success. It also requires new cybersecurity 
strategies  that  take  a  broader  view  of  risk.  Developing 
strategies  that  recognize  risk  beyond  back-end  IT  sys-
tems is critical, to include products, customer interfaces, 
and third-party vendors. Above all, the new challenges 
in  cybersecurity  demand  an  organizational-wide 
approach  to  protecting,  and  ultimately  enabling,  the 
business. It is time to cast the net wider, and more effec-
tively, than ever before.

171  ■

COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY

■   The value of getting cybersecurity right
An  effective  cybersecurity  strategy  must 
start  with  placing  it  in  the  context  of  the 
business—what  your  company  uniquely 
provides as products or services really deter-
mines  how  to  approach  the  challenge.  For 
old-school IT security hands, this is a differ-
ent way of thinking. It means getting out of 
the IT back offi ce and learning the nuances 
of  what  makes  the  business  go.  Take  the 
view of the CEO and board. It isn’t just that 
it is the right thing to do or because compli-
ance  matters.  There  are  more  meaningful 
answers to uncover.

The right cybersecurity strategy is guided 
by two related considerations: (1) ‘How does 
cybersecurity  enable  the  business?’  and 
(2) ‘How does cyber risk affect the business?’ 
From  this  perspective,  cybersecurity  breaks 
out  of  its  technical  box  and  IT  jargon.  It 
focuses  on  competitive  advantage,  and  it 
positions  cybersecurity  as  an  enabler  and 
guarantor  of  the  core  business,  whatever 
business you’re in. If done right, cybersecu-
rity  helps  drive  a  consistent,  high-quality 
customer experience.

■   It takes an enterprise
A  cybersecurity  strategy  grounded  in  your 
unique  business  ecosystem  will  quickly 
reveal what must be protected. Enterprise IT 
still  matters;  it  moves,  analyzes,  and  stores 
so  much  of  your  business-critical  data. 
However, a cybersecurity strategy must now 
go  further.  Your  industry  should  shape  the 
fi ne-tuning of the scope here, but we can boil 
the  components  of  your  ecosystem  ‘map’ 
down into several key features:

 1.  Enterprise  IT:  the  back-end  technology 
infrastructure  that  facilitates  company-
wide  communications;  processes,  stores 
corporate, and transfers data; and enables 
workforce mobility

 2.  Supply  chain:  the  fl ow  of  materials 
and 
and 
components 
inbound  channels 
software)  through 
to 
they  are 
then  operationalized  or  used  in  the 
development of products and services

the  enterprise,  where 

(hardware 

■  172 

 3.  Product/service development: the research, 
design, 
testing,  and  manufacturing 
environments  for  your  products  and 
services

 4.  Customer  experience:  the  operational 
realms where customers use and interact 
with your products or services

 5.  External  infl uencers:  all  external  entities 
that affect how you guide your business 
to  include  regulators,  law  enforcement, 
media, competitors, and customers.

A cybersecurity strategy at this scale requires 
enterprise-wide  collaboration.  It  will  take 
the  whole  organization  to  manage  cyber 
risk,  so  it  is  imperative  to  cast  a  wide  net 
and  include  representatives  from  across 
business  units  in  strategy  formulation  dis-
cussions.  It  requires  a  multidisciplinary 
team  effort  to  develop  a  security  strategy 
that refl ects the scale and complexity of the 
business challenge.

■   Elements of cyber strategy at scale
Building  a  cybersecurity  strategy  can  seem 
overwhelming,  but  it  doesn’t  have  to  be. 
Start  with  a  vision,  understand  the  risk, 
identify  controls,  and  build  organizational 
capacity. Every element builds on each other.

 1.  Set  a  vision:  It  all  starts  with  a  creative 
vision.  It’s  critical  to  paint  a  high-level 
landscape  of  the  future  that  portrays 
how  cybersecurity  is  intertwined  with 
the  most  critical  parts  of  your  business. 
Think  about  the  how  value  is  created 
within your company. Is it a cutting-edge 
product?  Is  it  by  delivering  world-class 
customer  service?  Craft  a  short  story  on 
how cyber protects and enables that.

 2.  Sharpen  your  priorities:  You  have 
limited  resources,  just  like  every  other 
company. You can’t protect everything, so 
you  better  be  certain  you’re  focusing  on 
the most critical business assets. The fi rst 
step is to fi gure out what your company 
determines to be its ‘crown jewels.’ Once 
you’ve  defi ned  what  truly  matters,  it’s 
time  you  evaluate  how  exposed—or 
at-risk—these  assets  are.  That  will  give 

  DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING THREAT ENVIRONMENT 

you a basis for right-sizing your security 
program around these assets.

 3.  Build  the  right  team:  Once  you  defi ne 
what  matters  and  how  much  security 
makes sense, think about the people. What 
does  your  direct  and  extended  workforce 
have to look like to be uniquely successfully 
at your company? These days, you can’t 
get by with your security program being 
fi lled with technologist majority. Time to 
weave  in  an  accompanying  set  of  skill 
sets  that  will  help  you  propel  you  to 
success, to include organizational change 
management,  crisis  management,  third-
party  risk  management,  and  strategic 
communications.

 4.  Enhance  your  controls:  This  is  largely 
about  scope.  With  your  company’s 
quickly  expanding  ‘map,’  you’ll  need  to 
adopt  new  methods  for  treating  risk. 
For example, if you deliver a ‘connected’ 
product  to  consumers,  you’ll  have  to 
ensure strong embedded device security, 
as well as protections over the airwaves. 
Without  this,  your  brand  could  be  at 
stake.  Fortunately  there’s  a  great  deal 
of  momentum  in  the  world  today,  with 
new  methodologies,  technologies,  and 
skill sets continuously being developed to 
meet the challenge of today’s expanding 
cyberattack surface.

 6.  Plan  for  contingencies:  No  one  can  ever 
be  100%  secure,  so  it’s  vital  to  have  a 
strong  incident  response  capability  in 
place to manage the ensuing events when 
something  happens,  because  something 

 5.  Monitor 

the 

threat:  Unfortunately, 
cybersecurity  isn’t  only  about  reducing 
risk  behind  your  fi rewalls.  It  must  also 
include  maintaining  awareness  of  the 
threat  landscape—external  and  internal. 
Because  the  threat  is  always  changing 
and always determined, you have to take 
on that same adaptive mindset. Whether 
that’s  employing  strong  monitoring  and 
detection  capabilities,  consuming  threat 
intelligence  feeds,  or  participating  in 
an  industry-level  information  sharing 
forum,  there  many  avenues  that  you 
should strongly consider using.

 7.  Transform 

undesirable  will  most  certainly  happen. 
Incident response is more than just having 
the  right  technology  capabilities  in  place, 
such as forensics and malware analysis. In 
fact, real success in cyber incident response 
usually comes down to the people aspect. 
How  plugged  in  are  you  with  your 
company’s legal, privacy, communications, 
and  customer  sales  units?  They  are  all 
critical to success; and with this expanded 
scope of players, you can imagine how a 
cyber matter can quickly rise to become a 
top-line business matter.

the 

culture:  The  best 
organizations  out  there  today  do  this 
well. Because people are the core of your 
business, it comes down to them ‘buying 
in’ to cybersecurity as something that they 
care  about.  From  your  dedicated  cyber 
workforce,  to  business  unit  leaders,  to 
those that manage your company’s supply 
chain, you’ll need all hands on deck, each 
doing  their  part  in  advocating  for  and 
implementing  cybersecurity  measures.  A 
security organization can make this easier 
by  fi nding  ways  to  make  cyber  relevant 
for  each  part  of  the  business  by  sharing 
innovations  that  excite  and  enable  the 
business.

■   Bringing the strategy to life
Perhaps  the  best  measure  of  an  effective 
cybersecurity  strategy  is  its  ability  to  be 
implemented  and  make  a  visible  change  in 
how the business is operated. With a strate-
gy in hand, the next move is to build momen-
tum  with  ‘quick  wins’  while  investing  in 
long-term capability development.

The fi rst step is to use your strategy’s risk 
framework to assess where you must apply 
new or enhanced controls. Look broadly. The 
biggest cybersecurity challenges may not be 
where your organization usually expects to 
see them. There are multiple ways to assess 
how  well  the  organization  is  performing, 
including workshops, external assessments, 
tabletop exercises, or war games.

To appropriately assess the organization, 
you  need  to  know  what  ‘good’  looks  like. 

  173  ■

COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY

This  is  different  for  each  organization  and 
industry,  but  relying  on  industry  bench-
marks  and  existing  standards/frameworks 
(e.g.,  NIST  Cyber  Framework)  is  a  good 
place to get a quick read on your maturity. 
However,  don’t  adopt  these  standards 
blindly;  fi gure  out  what’s  applicable  to 
your  needs  and  what’s  relevant  for  your 
organization.

Once you’ve assessed your priorities and 
set  a  maturity  target,  the  next  move  is  to 
build a roadmap that pairs ‘quick wins’ with 
more  strategic  and  enduring  capabilities. 
Right  away,  you’ll  want  to  ensure  that  you 
are doing the basic blocking and tackling of 
cybersecurity. Many call this instilling prop-
er ‘cyber hygiene,’ or putting a foundational 
layer of protections and capabilities in place. 
Once you’ve gained a solid foothold, time to 
take the next step, such as establishing pre-
dictive  intelligence  mechanisms  that  help 
you  anticipate  the  next  threat,  instead  of 
reacting to it when it hits.

Perhaps  the  best  way—and  the  biggest 
challenge—to  bringing  your  strategy  to  life 
is to remember it isn’t policy or technology 
that matters most, but people. Once you’ve 
embraced this idea and put the person at the 
center of all of your decisions, you can really 
start to envision what it’ll take for cybersecu-
rity ‘change’ to happen in your organization.

■   What getting it right looks like
It  is  easier  to  write  about  the  concepts  of  a 
good cyber strategy than it is to deliver one 
for  your  organization.  However,  getting 
cybersecurity  right  for  the  organization  has 
benefi ts far beyond IT. A strong cyber strategy 
drives  security  capability  development  and 
ultimately  has  the  power  to  transform  the 
business into a more successful one. An effec-
tive cyber strategy looks different depending 
on the industry and individual business, but 
they all share some key features.

It’s driven from the top. First, a strong cyber 
strategy won’t be locked away in a fi le cabinet, 
buried  in  a  hard  drive,  or  lost  in  the  cloud. 
Instead, it will be part of your organization’s 

■  174 

core message, and it will feel alive. That tone 
will be set from the top, with senior executives 
explaining how cyber will drive the future suc-
cess of the business.

It’s  at  the  beginning  of  every  new  story. 
Whether  you’re  designing  a  new  product  or 
launching  into  a  fresh  multinational  joint 
venture,  cyber  is  a  conversation  that  will 
always  take  place.  Requirements  are  built  in 
from the beginning and brought to life as the 
venture evolves. Remember, it’s always easier 
and cheaper to implement cyber earlier rather 
than later in the lifecycle.

Cyber  is  communicated  in  simple  busi-
ness language. Don’t be paralyzed by those 
who only want to ‘speak geek.’ Simple, easy-
to-understand logic should prevail when com-
municating  how  cybersecurity  is  enabling 
your business.

You’ve  established  a  predictive  edge.  If 
you’ve evolved your strategy in a disciplined 
manner, some really amazing things start to 
come  to  life.  One  powerful  aspect  is  that 
you’re  using  multiple  sources  of  intelligence 
to understand the world around you, and you 
are  able  to  anticipate  the  adversary’s  next 
move.  Sometimes  this  can  feel  like  playing  a 
fun video game, but it could really mean sav-
ing the lifeblood of your business.

The puzzle pieces come together. With all 
that you’ve invested in cybersecurity, the real 
payoff comes when you see the component ele-
ments work in harmony as a system. A unifi ed 
construct that links constituent technologies, 
processes,  and  people  together  will  prove 
highly effective in monitoring and responding 
to  events  and  engaging  the  broader  business 
ecosystem to get things done.

You  play  a  role  in  the  community. 
Cybersecurity  is  not  something  you  should 
attempt  alone  as  an  organization.  The  com-
plexity  of  vulnerability  and  the  highly 
resourced  threats  today  are  simply  over-
whelming  for  any  one  entity.  Cybersecurity 

  DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING THREAT ENVIRONMENT 

requires the power of community, new ideas, 
and security capabilities coming to life. When 
successful, your organization is an active part 
of  key  dialogues  with  industry  and  govern-
ment.  Threat  intelligence  and  best  practices 
are  shared  two  ways,  but  more  importantly, 
you integrate into the fabric of a very impor-
tant and very valuable community.

‘Change agents’ are swarming. You’ll need 
these  thought  leaders  to  move  across  all  ele-
ments  of  the  business  to  shift  mindsets  and 
anchor  new  behaviors.  These  advocates  help 
spread  the  cybersecurity  vision  broadly  and 
provide ‘on the ground’ feedback to make your 
security strategy stronger.

Security  is  now  embedded  across  your 
ecosystem. You’ve taken a long, hard look at 

the  ‘map’  of  your  business,  and  you  now 
understand all the points where cybersecuri-
ty  must  play  a  part.  Success  at  this  point 
means that you’ve carefully and deliberately 
initiated dialogue and worked with different 
elements of the business to embed security in 
places beyond Enterprise IT and extended it 
into broader touchpoints across the external 
world.

Your  enterprise  embraces  it.  From  senior 
leadership  to  customer-facing  sales  teams, 
cybersecurity  is  integrated  as  part  of  your 
cultural DNA. You hear about it all the time, 
and  you  see  how  it’s  factored  into  all  major 
business  decisions.  Your  organization  has 
evolved to the point where your organization 
is now living the principles of good cybersecu-
rity without even thinking about it.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  175  ■

Designing a Cyber Fusion 
Center: A unifi ed approach 
with diverse capabilities
Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice 
President; Jason Escaravage, Vice President; Ernie 
Anderson, Principal; and Christian Paredes, Associate

Since the early 2000s, organizations have focused cyberse-
curity  efforts  around  a  preventative,  “defense-in-depth” 
approach. The multiple layers of security are intended to 
thwart  attackers;  this  trend  has  become  known  as  the 
“moat-and-castle”  defense:  higher  walls,  a  deeper  moat, 
and  other  fortifi cations  to  deter  or  prevent  the  enemy 
from breaching the castle grounds.

Within  the  past  several  years,  high-profi le  breaches 
across  the  fi nancial,  government,  retail,  health-care, 
defense, and technology sectors have spotlighted the need 
for  a  better  incident  response  (IR)  capability  to  detect, 
contain,  and  remediate  threats.  These  breaches  are  evi-
dence  that  prevention  alone  is  no  longer  a  suffi cient 
approach. However, many organizations lack a mature IR 
capability and end up spending millions of dollars to out-
source  IR  services.  Furthermore,  once  the  incident  is 
remediated, organizations are still left wondering how to 
effectively  secure  themselves  for  the  highest  return  on 
investment (ROI).

Prevention remains a critical component of an effective 
security  program.  And  organizations  are  increasingly 
investing in native detection and response capabilities, or 
a Security Operations Center (SOC). But the people, pro-
cesses,  and  technologies  that  are  the  backbone  of  SOC 
must be integrated within one Cyber Fusion Center (CFC) 
that  also  combines  functions  such  as  Cyber  Threat 
Intelligence  (CTI),  Red  Teaming,  and  Attack  Surface 
Reduction (ASR).

The Cyber Fusion Center. The CFC is a comprehensive, 
integrated approach to security. The CFC mission is to 
protect  the  business—its  assets,  people,  clients,  and 
reputation—so  that  it  can  thrive  and  operate  without 
costly disruptions.

177  ■

COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY

The  CFC  approach  does  not  guarantee 
that there will be no security incidents; this is 
an impossible feat. Rather, it ensures that all 
security efforts are coordinated effi ciently by 
leveraging  the  benefi ts  of  proximity  (either 
physical or logical) and easy communication 
between security teams.

The  CFC  is  designed  to  integrate  key 
security functions into a single unit without 
stovepipes or prohibitive bureaucracy:

 䊏 Security  Operations  Center  (SOC):  the 
heart  of  the  CFC  and  the  fi rst  line  of 
an organization’s defense responsible for 
detecting, responding to, containing, and 
remediating threats, as well as proactively 
identifying malicious activity. The SOC is 
also  home  to  Threat  Defense  Operations 
(TDO),  the  dedicated  “hunting”  arm 
of  security  and  intelligence  operations 
responsible  for  actioning  intelligence, 
conducting  in-depth  malware  analysis, 
and  continually  building  and  improving 
prevention and detection methods.

 䊏 Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  (CTI):  the 
“forward  observers”  responsible  for 
identifying  threats  to  the  organization 
and  disseminating  timely,  relevant,  and 
actionable reporting to the SOC, C-Suite, 
and other stakeholders.

threats  relevant 

 䊏 Red  Team:  the  “attackers”  who  simulate 
the  tactics,  techniques,  and  procedures 
(TTP)  of 
to  your 
organization.  The  Red  Team  will 
continually “stress test” your SOC, driving 
improvements in detection, response, and 
SOC analyst threat understanding.

identifying 

 䊏 Attack  Surface  Reduction  (ASR):  the 
proactive  defense  group  responsible 
for 
and  mitigating 
vulnerabilities,  unnecessary  assets,  and 
nonessential  services.  More  than  just 
patch  management,  optimized  ASR 
teams focus on continually improving an 
organization’s hardening and deployment 
procedures  to  eliminate  vulnerabilities 
before systems go live.

By integrating these functions, the CFC aims 
to  break  down  communication  barriers, 

■  178 

centralize  threat  knowledge  and  analysis, 
unify  the  organization’s  security  strategy, 
and ultimately maximize the value of invest-
ments in cybersecurity.

Although  the  security  functions  that 
make  up  the  CFC  are  not  new,  the  CFC 
approach  represents  a  complex  interaction 
between  the  security  teams  with  multiple 
“touch points,” parallel workfl ows, and con-
stant  feedback  mechanisms.  With  the  right 
design  and  implementation  considerations 
organizations can:

 䊏 increase  operational  effectiveness  by 
orchestrating  the  security  functions  and 
information fl ow from threat intelligence, 
through security and IT operations

 䊏 improve  security  readiness  by  enabling 
stronger  detection  mechanisms  and 
awareness of threats

security  maturation  by 
 䊏 accelerate 
the  costs  associated  with 
reducing 
coordinating  complex  security  functions 
across multiple teams.

The CFC is distinguished not by its individ-
ual parts but by the integration and interde-
pendencies  across  its  functions.  More  than 
just a security approach, the CFC is a secu-
rity  mind-set  that  organizations  can  imple-
ment  to  better  secure  themselves,  protect 
their customers, and reduce costly business 
disruptions.

■  Building a robust SOC to detect and respond 

to threats

threats 

Organizations  are  quickly  recognizing  the 
need  to  detect  and  respond  to  a  variety  of 
threats;  simply  blocking 
isn’t 
enough.  The  Security  Operations  Center 
(SOC)  is  the  organization’s  fi rst  line  of 
defense  against  all  forms  of  threats  and  is 
the heart of the CFC. The SOC will handle 
any  suspected  malicious  activity  and  work 
closely with the other teams in the CFC. A 
well-designed  and  maintained  SOC  will 
focus on gaining effi ciencies though contin-
uous  analyst  training  and  mentoring,  and 
constant  evaluation  of  the  organization’s 
security technologies.

  DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES 

A  tiered  SOC  structure.  The  SOC  can  be 
designed  around  a  simple  detect,  identify, 
and mitigate model. Analysts at various tiers 
investigate  malicious  activity  (aka  alerts  or 
events) with these three stages in mind: Tier 
1  analysts  are  charged  with  classifying  the 
severity  of  the  event  and  correlating  the 
event  with  any  historical  activity.  If  neces-
sary, Tier 1 analysts will escalate incidents to 
Tier  2  and  3  analysts,  who  will  conduct  in-
depth investigations and perform root-cause 
analysis to determine what happened.

Threat  Defense  Operations 

(TDO). 
Additionally, specialized analysts within the 
SOC—Threat  Defense  Operations  (TDO) 
analysts—are responsible for creating detec-
tion  logic  in  the  form  of  signatures,  rules, 
and custom queries based on CTI-provided 
threat  intelligence.  TDO  engineers  deploy 
the  detection  logic  to  a  range  of  devices, 
appliances, tools, and sensors that make up 
an  organization’s  security  stack.  The  rules, 
signatures, and queries create a threat-based 
preventative  sensor  network  that  generates 
network and host-based alerts that Tier 1–3 
analysts in the SOC respond to.

TDO  analysts  will  then  fi ne-tune  their 
detection logic based on SOC feedback, cre-
ating an effi cient CFC that won’t waste time 
investigating false alarms. The TDO team is 
also  responsible  for  providing  in-depth 

malware analysis that yields valuable techni-
cal intelligence (TECHINT) that can be used in 
detection logic and further enriched by CTI.

Managing  all  the  security  alerts  (aka  “alert 
fatigue”).  This  process—building  detection 
solutions  and  then  identifying  and  mitigat-
ing  threats—is  where  many  organizations 
struggle. Oftentimes, implementation of effi -
cient and effective SOC processes are stifl ed 
by  an  overwhelming  number  of  consoles, 
alerts,  threat  feeds,  and  tools  that  prohibit 
seamless  workfl ows  for  analysts.  While 
security managers should continually iden-
tify  potential  feeds  and  technologies  to 
invest  in,  their  impact  on  the  SOC  analyst 
should always be a primary consideration:

 䊏 How many new alerts will this technology 

or new data feed produce?

 䊏 Who will tune the technology to limit the 

number of false positives it produces?

 䊏 Is the technology fi lling a gap in detection 
capabilities  or  adding  on  to  existing 
capabilities?

 䊏 How  does  the  introduction  of  this  new 

technology affect the SOC workfl ow?

The  main  point  to  remember  is  that  more 
technology,  tools,  and  threat  feeds  do  not 
necessarily enable your SOC to operate more 
effi ciently.  Designs  that  emphasize  smooth 

Capabilities

Enable Detection

Identify Threats

Mitigate Threats

SOC 24/7 Organizational Framework

Description

“Operationlize” threat intelligence to enable automated detection and
manual analysis within and across prevention and detection technology

First-level responder responsible for detecting and assessing cybersecurity
threats and incidents across the environment

Conducts in-depth analyses of security incidents with speciﬁc ability to 
identify Indicators of Compromise, perform root-cause analysis, and execute
containment strategies

Manage

• Shift Leader Oversight
• Case Mgt. Tracking Tool
• 24/7 Structure

Case Management Approach

Standardize

• Formal Shift Change Process
• Process and Procedures
   Documentation
• Business Process Reengineering

Measure

• Case Mgt. Dashboard
• Monitor, Detect, and
   Contain Metrics
• Real-Time Improvements

  179  ■

COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY

workfl ows  and  “painless”  methods  of  data 
collection (e.g., analysts do not need to con-
tact  other  teams  to  access  certain  data)  are 
more likely to succeed than those that prior-
itize technology. Organizations should focus 
on  technology  that  enables  SOC  investiga-
tors  to  spend  less  time  collecting  data  and 
more time investigating the root cause of the 
activity they’ve been alerted to.

Implementing 24/7 operations and managing 
investigations.  Design  and  implementation 
should  focus  on  standardizing  daily  opera-
tions,  case  management,  and  methods  of 
“measuring  success.”  Modern-day  threats 
necessitate that SOCs operate 24/7, 365 days 
a  year,  requiring  well-thought-out  shift 
schedules  and  defi ned  roles.  Leaders  with 
managerial and technical experience can aid 
in workfl ow management and provide ana-
lyst training.

Having  a  well-integrated,  easy-to-use 
case-management  system  that  doesn’t  get 
in the way of investigations and seamlessly 
interacts  with  other  SOC  tools  is  key.  This 
tool ideally provides metrics on how effec-
tively  your  SOC  monitors,  detects,  and 
contains  cases  and  will  allow  an  organiza-
tion  to  identify  gaps  in  people,  processes, 
and technologies.

Standardizing your standard operating pro-
cedures.  Successful  implementation  also 
demands  accurate  and  up-to-date  docu-
mentation. This includes documentation on 
network  architecture,  standardized  operat-
ing procedures (SOPs), and point-of-contact 
lists.  If  the  SOC  is  considered  the  “heart” 
of the CFC, then SOPs act as its beat, guid-
ing analysts in situations ranging from col-
lecting  forensic  evidence  to  stopping  data 
exfi ltration.

These procedures change as new technol-
ogy and organizational structures are imple-
mented. Many organizations fail to update, 
train,  and  test  their  staff  and  leaders  on 
SOPs, hurting their response times and con-
tainment metrics.

The  bottom  line.  The  SOC  provides  core 
security  functions  within  the  CFC  and  can 
achieve effi ciencies through close integration 
with  other  teams  such  as  CTI  and  TDO. 

■  180 

Instead  of  looking  to  new  technology  fi rst, 
successful  organizations  will  constantly 
evaluate their security posture and frequent-
ly train their analysts on how to react to new 
threats.  Organizations  must  carefully  con-
sider  how  new  technology  and  tools  will 
impact the analysts’ workfl ow and their abil-
ity  to  detect  and  respond  to  threats  while 
focusing on processes and procedures.

■  Using Cyber Threat Intelligence to anticipate 

threats

Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) has become 
the security buzzword of 2015. Many prod-
ucts  and  services  claim  to  provide  threat 
intelligence and promise to prevent a major 
incident. As this term has saturated the mar-
ket  and  security  circles,  the  true  meaning 
and value of threat intelligence has become 
clouded. As a result, the usefulness of threat 
intelligence is, in some cases, dismissed.

However, true threat intelligence is incred-
ibly  powerful—it  can  serve  as  a  force-multi-
plier for your CFC, helping to improve aware-
ness  of  threats  and  offering  the  means  by 
which  these  threats  could  be  prevented  or 
detected.

So  what  is  threat  intelligence?  First,  and 
most  important,  only  humans  can  produce 
threat intelligence through focused research, 
a  synthesis  of  multiple  sources  (aka  “all-
source analysis”), and clear, concise commu-
nication that explains the relevance of threats 
to your organization. Generally, threat intelli-
gence  feeds  will  not  provide  much  intelli-
gence value unless they are thoroughly vetted 
by human analysts fi rst; feeds are more likely 
to generate false alarms than to indicate mali-
cious activity. Additionally, good threat intel-
ligence  will  be  implemented  in  a  way  that 
demonstrates the following characteristics:

Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  timely.  Cyber 
intelligence  addresses  an  impending  threat 
to the business environment. Receiving that 
intelligence  before  the  threat  is  realized  is 
crucial to the organization. Dissemination of 
strategic  and  tactical  intelligence,  including 
indicators  of  compromise  (IOCs),  can  take 
the form of indications and warning (warn-
ing of an imminent threat), daily or weekly 

  DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES 

reports (highlights on relevant threats), and 
executive  briefs  (assessments  on  major  and 
specifi c  cyber  issues  for  C-suite  stakehold-
ers). Depending on the audience, other tech-
nical  or  nontechnical  reports  can  also  be 
produced.

Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  relevant.  For 
many organizations thresholds for relevan-
cy  are  tricky  to  defi ne,  especially  when 
media  reports  constantly  warn  about  a 
range of threats. A cyber breach in a distant 
industry—even a major one—may not con-
cern  you  as  much  as  a  breach  within  your 
own sector; a vulnerability in a technology 
platform  you  don’t  use  is  obviously  less 
important than a potential zero-day vulner-
ability  in  your  enterprise-enabling  plat-
form. Relevant threat intelligence produces 
valuable insights on not only issues occur-
ring in the global business environment but 
also on specifi c issues within your industry 
and  related  to  your  IT  environment.  Even 
further, it strives to give you unique insight 
into  specifi c  adversaries  targeting  your 
organization  or  peers,  by  assessing  their 
intentions and capabilities.

Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  actionable. 
Actionable  threat  intelligence  is  created 
when  analysts  fi lter  through  large  volumes 
of data and information (from human sourc-
es,  technical  feeds,  criminal  forums,  etc.), 
analyze  why  specifi c  pieces  of  information 
are relevant to your organization, and com-
municate how that information can be used 
by  various  stakeholders.  C-suite  executives 
need  strategic  “big  picture”  intelligence  to 
inform business decisions such as risks asso-
ciated  with  an  increasingly  global  IT  foot-
print.  On  the  other  hand,  your  SOC,  TDO, 
and  ASR  teams  need  tactical  and  technical 
intelligence  to  support  current  investiga-
tions, create detection logic, and prepare for 
potential  attacks.  Technical  intelligence  will 
also  be  used  to  determine  if  certain  mali-
cious actions or indicators have already been 
present on your network.

Strategic  and  tactical  threat  intelligence. 
Today’s  corporate  leaders  face  a  serious 
challenge in that it is not always possible to 
accurately predict a cyberattack or its effects. 

Oftentimes,  business  decisions  have  to  be 
made without all the information. An under-
standing of the threat landscape can help to 
make these business decisions, however. For 
example, attacks on organizations in related 
industries  can  serve  as  an  indication  that 
your business might soon be targeted (or has 
already been targeted).

Although the SOC team is your organiza-
tion’s fi rst line of defense, it can operate more 
effectively and effi ciently with the support of 
CTI.  Your  security  team  will  handle  a  wide 
array of potential threats and must be able to 
quickly  triage  events,  determine  the  threat 
level,  and  mitigate  incidents.  CTI  can  help 
SOC analysts to prioritize these alerts, can aid 
in investigations, and can help SOC analysts 
attribute malicious activity to specifi c threats 
or  threat  groups.  Over  time,  by  leveraging 
technical intelligence the SOC will develop a 
stronger  understanding  of  the  threats  they 
face, enabling them to act more quickly. The 
TDO  component  of  SOC  will  also  closely 
coordinate with CTI to conduct analysis and 
develop creative detection mechanisms.

The  bottom  line.  Real,  human-developed 
Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  will  enable  your 
organization  to  pre-empt  threats,  assess 
risk, and take appropriate defensive actions. 
Benefi ts such as avoiding the cost of poste-
vent  recovery  and  remediation,  and  pre-
venting  the  theft,  destruction,  and  public 
release  of  critical  data,  make  Cyber  Threat 
Intelligence critical to your organization.

■  Conducting Red Team exercises to “stress-

test” and strengthen your Cyber Fusion 
Center

A fundamental question for every business 
is:  Will  your  cybersecurity  organization  be 
ready when an attack comes? An important 
means of assessing and “stress-testing” your 
CFC is to actively attack it. Through coordi-
nated  Red  Team  exercises,  your  CFC  per-
sonnel can learn to detect and respond to a 
variety of threats.

Simulate threat actors’ TTP. Red Team oper-
ations  will  ideally  be  designed  to  simulate 
the  tactics,  techniques,  and  procedures  of 
threats that your CTI team has assessed to be 

  181  ■

COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY

a risk to your organization. Your SOC could 
also  be  a  valuable  source  of  input  as  you 
determine how to implement your Red Team 
operations. What types of threats does your 
SOC  regularly  observe?  More  important, 
what  types  of  threats  does  your  SOC  typi-
cally not see? Does your SOC fi nd that there 
are gaps in detection? What does your SOC 
think they detect/mitigate well and is worth 
testing? Where does your SOC have limited 
detect/mitigate capabilities?

It is the Red Team’s responsibility to test 
these questions and the limits of your SOC 
and broader CFC. For example, if it is known 
that the SOC rarely encounters web shells—
a type of malware installed on web servers—
your Red Team may choose to directly attack 
a web server.

An  important  aspect  of  a  Red  Team 
operation  is  that  only  select  leaders  are 
aware  of  operations  (often  referred  to  as 
the “white team”), adding to the realism of 
the  event.  This  implementation  allows 
those  who  are  aware  to  observe  the  event 
as it unfolds, particularly how teams inter-
act  with  each  other,  how  information  is 
passed  along,  how  stakeholders  are 
engaged, and how the teams handle a vari-
ety  of  attack  scenarios.  These  leaders  can 
also  help  to  scope  Red  Team  activities  to 
ensure  no  critical  data  or  operations  are 
actually 
exposed. 
(Remember to loop in the legal department 
prior to the exercise as well.)

compromised  or 

After-action  improvements.  The  end  result 
of  a  Red  Team  activity  should  be  valuable 
insight  your  security  team  can  use  to 
improve its capabilities. For example, during 
a  web  server  attack  exercise,  the  CFC  will 
need  to  evaluate  how  it  handled  the  inci-
dent. At what point did the SOC detect the 
attack?  Are  there  changes  that  could  be 
made in how security tools are confi gured to 
improve  future  detection  of  this  type  of 
attack?  These  sample  questions  frame  the 
improvements  that  can  be  implemented 
within the cybersecurity organization.

The nature of the Red Team’s operations 
means  that  communication  between  the 
SOC  and  Red  Team  can  sometimes  be 

■  182 

strained—no  SOC  likes  to  lose,  and  often-
times the Red Team has the advantage. This 
can make after-action review of an incident 
stressful for both teams. However, a healthy, 
competitive  relationship  between  the  SOC 
and  Red  Team  can  foster  improvements  in 
the  CFC,  particularly  in  detection  and 
response capabilities. Although the SOC and 
Red Team functions contrast, their missions 
are the same: to protect the organization and 
improve its security capabilities.

Implementation  of  Red  Team  operations 
should  therefore  emphasize  the  interde-
pendency  between  the  SOC  and  Red  Team 
mission.  The  Red  Team  should  assist  the 
SOC  during  remediation  efforts  to  ensure 
any uncovered vulnerabilities are no longer 
susceptible to exploitation.

The bottom line. Fundamentally, Red Team 
design  and  implementation  takes  a  human-
centric approach. The benefi ts of placing your 
“attackers” in close (physical or logical) prox-
imity to your SOC analysts cannot be under-
stated.  SOC  analysts  learn  to  develop  an 
appreciation for the fact that they are fi ghting 
people  who  make  decisions  to  achieve  an 
objective—it’s not just about the malware.

■  Reducing your organization’s attack surface
Efforts  to  protect  your  organization  will  be 
signifi cantly  diminished  if  your  IT  systems 
have easily exploitable vulnerabilities, unnec-
essary  services,  and  nonessential  assets.  On 
the other hand, shutting down all protocols, 
services,  and  data  resources  is  not  a  viable 
option.  Thus,  the  goal  of  Attack  Surface 
Reduction (ASR) is to close all but the required 
doors  to  your  technical  infrastructure  and 
limit access to those doors through monitor-
ing,  vulnerability  assessment/mitigation, 
and access control.

The ASR team is dedicated to identifying, 
reducing, and managing critical vulnerabili-
ties, services, and assets, while also focusing 
on  preventing  the  introduction  of  vulnera-
bilities via improved hardening procedures.
Understanding  and  prioritizing  your  “attack 
surface.” Implementing ASR is all about iden-
tifying and understanding your most critical 
business  applications  and  services—the 

  DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES 

“crown  jewels”—including  their  functions, 
supporting infrastructure, scope, and inherent 
vulnerabilities. This process entails a series of 
vulnerability  scans,  security  documentation 
review, architecture assessments, host discov-
ery scans, nonintrusive penetration tests, and 
targeted interviews with IT personnel.

Next, the ASR team should prioritize each 
asset, considering their critical value to oper-
ations  and  the  ability  for  the  most  relevant 
threat  actors—as  assessed  by  your  CTI 
team—to  leverage  these  assets  in  an  intru-
sion. In addition, the impact of these attacks 
must be considered. The assets that are most 
likely to be the victim of a high-impact attack 
or leveraged in a high-impact attack (such as 
Adobe Flash) should receive the highest pri-
ority,  most  robust  security  controls,  and 
attention from the CFC.

is  not  a 

More  than  just  patch  management.  While 
vulnerability and patch management is a core 
ASR  function,  achieving  a  vulnerability-free 
organization 
realistic  goal. 
Vulnerabilities  must  be  identifi ed  and  man-
aged appropriately—keeping a focus on pre-
venting and quickly responding to the most 
critical.  Continually  improving  deployment 
and  hardening  procedures,  especially  for 
publicly facing services and services that may 
permit attackers to access high-trust zones, is 
a critical ASR process for facilitating preven-
tive measure and effective mitigation timing.
As  such,  the  ASR  function  should  be 
ongoing. ASR closely collaborates with other 
CFC  functions,  especially  CTI  and  TDO, 
which  can  develop  rules  to  detect  exploita-
tion of new vulnerabilities. For example, CTI 
may  become  aware  of  new  vulnerabilities 
that  threat  actors  are  leveraging.  ASR  will 
work with CTI to prioritize the most relevant 
vulnerabilities  based  on  reports  of  their 
exploitation “in the wild.”

A  highly  technical  function  that  demands 
strong human analysis. Maintaining complete 
asset  awareness  is  increasingly  diffi cult  in 
today’s  dynamic  business  environment. 

Organizations require continuous scans and 
costly-to-maintain  confi guration  manage-
ment databases (CMDB) to track and ensure 
the  attack  surface  hasn’t  expanded  beyond 
the organization’s acceptable risk level. And, 
new exposures often emerge throughout the 
course of normal business as new IT systems 
are introduced or upgraded.

While there are many technologies avail-
able  to  aid  organizations  in  managing  vul-
nerabilities  and  assets,  human  analysts  can 
leverage  contextual  understanding  of  vul-
nerabilities  and  the  attack  surface  in  ways 
that scanning software cannot provide.

Experienced  ASR  security  professionals—
who possess a deep understanding of network 
engineering,  IT  concepts,  and  security—are 
able to synthesize disparate pieces of informa-
tion that can point to a previously undetected 
or contextually important attack vector.

The bottom line. Attack Surface Reduction 
enables  organizations  to  proactively  reduce 
security  vulnerability-related  risk  prior  to 
implementation and to mitigate existing and 
other  inevitable  risks.  Importantly,  the ASR 
function is designed so that humans comple-
ment the technology to minimize the attack 
surface  to  an  optimized  level  that  balances 
security  risks  and  day-to-day  realities  of 
enterprise business operations.

■  Cyber Fusion Center attention
The  seemingly  endless  string  of  breaches 
across  major  U.S.  sectors—fi nance,  technol-
ogy,  manufacturing,  and  others—leaves 
C-suite  executives  wondering,  “Will  we  be 
next?”  or  even,  “Have  we  already  been 
breached?”  New  tools,  technologies,  and 
data  sources  may  help  in  preventing  an 
attack, but threat actors are clearly capable of 
scaling the castle walls, or forging the castle 
moat.  Yet  by  developing  a  Cyber  Fusion 
Center, organizations develop the speed, col-
laboration, coordination, information fl ows, 
and C-suite awareness necessary to not only 
survive but thrive.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  183  ■

Design best practices

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

What are they after? 
A threat-based approach to 
cybersecurity risk management
Intercontinental Exchange & New York 
Stock Exchange – Jerry Perullo, CISO

Given fi nite resources and the ongoing threat of the “next 
big hack,” cybersecurity is not the place to let a thousand 
fl owers bloom. How does a governance body that is bal-
ancing  this  complex  topic  with  so  many  other  complex 
risks  pick  the  right  questions  to  ask?  The  spectrum  of 
popular  guidance  ranges  from  an  end-to-end  program 
that generates hundreds of inspection points to a kneejerk 
reaction to the latest headlines. Distilling the truly critical 
areas  of  focus  requires  a  balanced  approach  that  is  well 
served  by  beginning  with  the  end  in  mind  and  asking, 
“What are they really after?”

Traditional  guidance  has  centered  security  program 
construction and audit on comprehensive standards-based 
frameworks. Although the popularity of specifi c standards 
has  waxed  and  waned,  general  principles  have  revolved 
around identifying assets, establishing a risk management 
program  around  those  assets,  and  establishing  preventa-
tive,  detective,  and  corrective  controls  to  protect  those 
assets. There is nothing wrong with this recipe at the tacti-
cal level. In fact, boards should expect a continuous pro-
gram cadence around this type of strategy and expect to 
see third-party auditors, customers, vendors, and regula-
tors use this approach in examination. Controls should be 
mapped  to  an  established  framework  and  any  gaps  or 
vulnerabilities  identifi ed.  The  challenge,  however,  is  that 
this produces a massive corpus of focus areas and controls 
that  cannot  be  digested  in  a  single  targeted  governance 
session. And fi nally, it does not produce a ready answer to 
the top board concern: “How could we be hacked?”

Likewise, reacting to headlines and rushing to establish 
the controls and technology cited in the latest news story 
will  divert  all  resources  to  someone  else’s  vulnerability, 
whereas  yours  may  be  very  different.  Simply  asking, 
“Could what happened last week happen to us?” may at 
best result in a false sense of confi dence or a mad dash to 

187  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

address  a  gap  that  isn’t  relevant  to  your 
organization. Vendors cannot be faulted for 
preying on this tendency, and the result is a 
barrage  of  solutions  to  the  last  headline’s 
problems:  “You  desperately  need  encryp-
tion.”  “You  need  behavioral  technology  to 
baseline  administrator  activity  and  to  alert 
unusual  access  times  or  locations.“  “You 
need to give up on securing everything and 
only focus on the critical assets.” “You need 
stronger  passwords.” All  of  these  solutions 
have their place, but if they are not respon-
sive to the threats facing your business, they 
may cause more distraction than protection 
based on your unique requirements.

Identifying  a  relevant  and  reasonable 
agenda  for  a  governance  session  requires  a 
targeted  and  balanced  approach.  Let  us 
group the major cyber headlines of the last 
decade into several large categories. With a 
fi nite  grouping  of  threats,  we  can  begin  to 
model  what  each  threat  would  look  like  to 
your organization, which leads to an assess-
ment  of  likelihood  and  impact.  With  this 
picture of viable threats, the board can hone 
in on specifi c questions that will produce the 
most  value.  By  all  means,  all  of  the  threats 
listed  below  should  receive  treatment  in 
some capacity in any cybersecurity plan, but 
prioritizing which are most relevant to your 
organization  will  expose  the  most  valuable 
areas  to  explore  with  limited  time.  Further, 
identifying  business  practices  that  expose 
you to a particular threat category may lead 
you to reconsider them in light of new costs 
that  were  not  included  in  previous  assess-
ments.  The  calculus  around  maintaining  a 
lower  profi le  or  outsourcing  targeted  data 
may  change  when  you  factor  in  cybersecu-
rity risk.

■  Threat category 1: Data theft
Do you manage assets that can be easily mon-
etized?  Credit  numbers  and  social  security 
numbers—in  bulk—are  the  drivers  behind 
many newsworthy breaches. Criminals have 
established the proper fencing operations and 
can  justify  enormous  risk  and  effort  to  cap-
ture  millions  of  card  numbers  or  pieces  of 
personally identifi able information (PII) that 

■  188 

allow identity theft. Capturing 100 or 1000 is 
not, however, alluring enough. Do you have 
bulk card or PII data? Card processors, retail 
institutions,  and  health-care  providers  are 
clear  targets  for  this  type  of  penetration.  If 
this is your world, the major breaches of the 
day serve as case studies. Lessons learned in 
these areas lead to an emphasis on the follow-
ing questions:

 䊏 Do  we  know  all  the  places  where  these 
sensitive  data  live,  and  have  we  limited 
it  to  the  smallest  set  of  systems  possible 
(ring-fencing)?

 䊏 Is access to the systems housing this data 
tightly controlled, audited, and alarmed, 
including via asset-based controls?

 䊏 Is  this  data  encrypted  in  a  manner  that 
would thwart some of the specifi c tactics 
observed in major breaches?

If  you  do  not  hold  easily  monetized  data, 
these questions may not be the right place to 
start.  Again,  this  does  not  mean  that  data 
theft  is  acceptable  in  any  organization. 
Confi dential  email,  intellectual  property, 
customer login credentials, and trade secrets 
are some of the many examples of data we 
must protect. Close examination often shows 
that  ring-fencing,  asset-focused  controls, 
encryption, and other concentrations born of 
the rash of recent card and PII breaches may 
not  be  appropriate  for  more  common  and 
less  frequently  targeted  data,  however.  If 
the  data  you  are  protecting  are  much  more 
valuable  to  you  than  to  an  assailant,  tradi-
tional controls such as company-wide access 
control,  permission  reviews,  and  identity 
management are probably the right empha-
sis and should not be neglected in pursuit of 
stopping a phantom menace.

■  Threat category 2: Activism
Is  your  organization  the  target  of  frequent 
protest or activism? Perhaps the issue is cli-
mate  change.  Perhaps  it  is  labor  relations. 
Perhaps  you  are  caught  up  in  the  storm  of 
anti-capitalism,  anti-pharma,  anti-farming, 
or simply high profi le. You may or may not 
know if there are groups with an ideological 

  WHAT ARE THEY AFTER? A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT  

motivation to put a black eye on your busi-
ness. Cyber opens up a whole new realm of 
ways  for  people  to  accomplish  this,  and 
often with anonymity. When attacks fall into 
this  category,  the  most  likely  impact  is  an 
action that can be touted in public. This usu-
ally  means  one  of  two  things:  Denial  of 
Service  (DoS)  or  defacement.  The  former 
category  will  attempt  to  demonstrate  your 
powerlessness by rendering a component of 
your business unavailable to your customers 
or  the  general  public.  Although  attacking 
customer  access  or  more  internalized  sys-
tems  may  be  more  damaging  in  reality, 
remember that the goal is to make a splash 
on a big stage with minimal effort or expo-
sure. More often than not, that means attack-
ing  your  public  website.  The  same  target 
(plus  social  media  accounts)  is  most  com-
mon for defacement attacks. The only thing 
more satisfying to an activist than rendering 
your service unavailable is replacing it with 
a  pointed  message.  High-profi le  attacks  in 
this  category  include  the  near-incessant 
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks 
against major banks, particularly those with 
names evoking western countries. Targets of 
defacement  include  Twitter  and  Facebook 
profi les  of  targeted  companies  and  govern-
ment entities. If this type of threat is likely to 
be pointed at your organization, good ques-
tions to ask include the following:

 䊏 Can  we  sustain  a  DDoS  attack  on  the 
order of magnitude recently observed in 
the wild?

 䊏 If we have a DDoS mitigation plan, how 
long  would  it  take  to  activate  during  an 
attack?  Is  an  outage  for  this  duration 
acceptable,  or  would  it  be  considered  a 
failure in the public eye?

 䊏 Are we continuously scanning our primary 
website(s)  for  common  vulnerabilities 
that may allow unauthorized changes?

 䊏 If  our  website  were  defaced,  how  long 

would it take to restore? 

 䊏 Are credentials to offi cial company social 
media  accounts  tightly  controlled  by  a 
group  outside  marketing  that  is  more 
security conscious?

If this type of threat is not applicable to your 
organization,  focusing  controls  and  review 
on  mitigating  such  attacks  may  not  be  the 
best allocation of resources.

■  Threat category 3: Sabotage
Are you a provider of critical infrastructure? 
Do you or your key executives issue politi-
cally  charged  statements  publicly?  Would 
the interruption of your business further an 
extremist  objective? Although  these  threats 
require more sophisticated tactics and more 
time  to  perpetrate,  they  often  bring  highly 
motivated  and  coordinated  threat  actors. 
Adversary objectives in this area usually go 
well  beyond  website  attacks.  Physical  con-
trol systems, data integrity, or even the func-
tionality  of  employee  workstations  may  be 
the  target  in  this  type  of  attack.  Although 
there are many vectors for this type of attack 
and several are often used in conjunction, a 
common  theme  quickly  becomes  targeting 
employees  individually.  Social  engineering 
and phishing preys on common habits and 
assumptions to dupe people into disclosing 
a  password,  clicking  a  malicious  web  link, 
or opening an attachment. These attacks can 
be the most diffi cult to defend against, but 
their  reliance  on  persistent  access  and  a 
longer  lifecycle  to  build  towards  the  fi nal 
goal makes detective and corrective controls 
more  valuable  and  decreases  reliance  on 
absolute prevention. Additionally, the actors 
involved  and  potential  impact  to  national 
interests  likely  make  mitigation  assistance 
available  to  you  if  you  focus  on  detection 
and  have  the  right  contacts  in  place.  Good 
questions  to  ask  if  you  are  at  risk  of  this 
category  of  attack  include  the  following 
(and  employees  includes  contractors  and 
vendors):

 䊏 Do  individual  employees  recognize  the 
importance  of  their  role  in  securing  the 
organization  and  what  an  attack  may 
look like?

 䊏 Are  employees 

routinely 

reporting 

suspicious activity? 

 䊏 Are employees educated and incentivized 

to act responsibly with regard to cyber?

  189  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

 䊏 Are systems detecting suspicious employee 
behavior  that  may  indicate  credentials 
under the control of an outsider?

 䊏 Has contact been established with incident 
response fi rms and law enforcement, and 
could  they  quickly  be  mobilized  if  a 
compromise is detected?

■  Threat category 4: Fraud
Do you operate a system that makes or pro-
cesses  payments?  Although  any  pay-for-
service you offer may be the target of some-
one looking for a free ride, nothing attracts 
the sophisticated criminal element like cash. 
If you offer the ability to move money, you 
should have a focus here. Although fraud is 
certainly not a new challenge, Internet con-
nectivity  has  certainly  brought  it  to  new 
levels.  If  this  is  relevant  to  your  organiza-
tion, you have likely been dealing with the 
ramifi cations  long  before  cyber  considera-
tions were added. The following questions, 
however, may be helpful to ensure cyberse-
curity  efforts  are  aligned  with  traditional 
fraud protections:

 䊏 Have  we  deployed  and  enforced  two-
factor  authentication  such  as 
text 
messages, mobile phone apps, or physical 
tokens  to  require  our  customers  to  have 
more  than  a  username  or  password  to 
authenticate?

 䊏 Are  we  using  adaptive  authentication 
to  identify  suspicious  locations,  access 
times, or transaction patterns in addition 
to classic credentials?

 䊏 Are we tracking and trending the sources, 

frequency, and value of losses?

 䊏 Are  we  working  closely  with  peer 
institutions  and  competitors  to  share 
threat  intelligence  and  identify  common 
patterns we should detect and/or block?

advanced threats. At a minimum, automated 
attacks look to procure access to your IT envi-
ronment  so  that  your  computing  resources 
can  be  made  available  for  more  nefarious 
aims.  Even  if  you  do  not  host  critical  infra-
structure or easily monetized data, commod-
ity threats look to compromise your comput-
ers so that they can be used as agents of more 
sophisticated attacks. Malware looks to enlist 
your computing, storage, and bandwidth to 
help  criminals  blast  out  junk  email,  store 
pirated  media,  or  contribute  to  a  Denial  of 
Service attack. Attackers in this category do 
not  care  (or  often  know)  if  your  computers 
belong to a fi nancial services fi rm, manufac-
turer, university, home network, or hospital. 
Protecting  your  organization  from  these 
common attacks requires being less exposed 
than the next target. Ask yourself:

 䊏 Have  we 

organization  that 
cybersecurity?

identifi ed  a  role 

in  our 
is  responsible  for 

 䊏 Are  only  absolutely  required  services 

exposed to the Internet?

 䊏 Are  PCs  and  email  servers  protected 
from common viruses and malware in an 
automated fashion? 

 䊏 Does our corporate email employ controls 
to fi lter out the most common virus and 
spam campaigns?

 䊏 Does  our  corporate  Internet  access 
incorporate  controls  to  block  access  to 
malicious websites?

One  special  form  of  opportunistic  attack 
involves  ransom.  Some  malware  encrypts 
the content of infected computers so that it 
becomes  unavailable  until  a  payment  is 
made. This type of attack can be crippling. In 
addition  to  the  preventative  controls  out-
lined above, you should ask the following:

■  Threat category 5: Commoditized hacking 
Although  specialized  threats  are  associated 
with  specifi c  targets,  all  organizations  have 
exposure to the most common family of com-
moditized  threats.  These  threats  are  oppor-
tunistic  and  warrant  different  controls  than 

 䊏 Are our fi le servers backed up and tested 
regularly, and could we recover quickly if 
all current data were unavailable?

 䊏 Have  we,  via  policy  and  practice, 
established  the  principle  that  PCs  and 
laptops are disposable, that data on these 

■  190 

  WHAT ARE THEY AFTER? A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT  

devices  should  not  be  relied  upon,  and 
that  network  storage  should  be  used  to 
house any critical data?

■  Conclusion
Although  cybersecurity  is  a  relatively  new 
fi eld, it has already grown into an expansive 
area  requiring  monitoring  and  controls 

around  mission  critical  infrastructure  and 
data. Attention to governance has ramped up 
dramatically in a short period, and it can be 
diffi cult to sift through the advice of experts. 
Investing time in analyzing threats and iden-
tifying what assets adversaries are truly after 
is a critical fi rst step in establishing an effec-
tive governance policy around cybersecurity.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  191  ■

Breaking the status quo: Designing 
for breach prevention
Palo Alto Networks Inc.

■  Today’s reality and commoditization of threats
The  statistics  regarding  the  success  of  advanced 
cyberthreats  paint  a  very  grim  picture.  The  increasing 
speed  at  which  new  security  threats  appear,  and  the 
growing  sophistication  of  criminal  hackers’  techniques, 
make fi ghting cybercrime a constant challenge. A recent 
study by Cyber Edge found that 71 percent of the secu-
rity professionals polled said their networks had experi-
enced  a  breach,  up  signifi cantly  from  the  previous  year 
(62  percent).  And  half  of  those  respondents  felt  that  a 
successful cyberattack against their network was likely in 
the next 12 months, compared to just 39 percent in 2013.
Unfortunately,  there  isn’t  a  week  that  goes  by  these 
days  when  we  aren’t  learning  about  some  new  data 
breach.  To  say  that  keeping  up  with  attackers’  evolving 
techniques and advanced threats is diffi cult is an under-
statement.  These  attacks  come  from  multiple  angles, 
through the edge of the network and directly at the users 
of our digital infrastructure. Not only are they more tar-
geted in nature, the mechanisms that attackers use increas-
ingly  utilize  a  growing  pool  of  software  vulnerabilities. 
Some  vulnerabilities  are  known  only  to  the  attacker, 
referred to as zero-days. Others are known to the general 
public but have yet to be fi xed by the software vendor. A 
fact attackers are very much aware of.

Additionally,  new  attack  methods  and  malware  are 
shared readily on the black market, each more sophisticat-
ed than the last. The cat-and-mouse game between attack-
ers and defending organizations is no longer a competition. 
Attackers  have  not  only  pulled  ahead,  they’ve  gained  so 
much distance that most security teams have given up on 
the notion that they can prevent an attack and are instead 
pouring  investment  into  trying  to  quickly  detect  attacks, 
and defi ning incident response plans rather than trying to 
stop them. Why? Because legacy security offerings consist 

193  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

of a set of highly disjointed technologies that 
only allow detection of attacks once they are 
already on the network or endpoint.

Organizations cannot hire their way out 
of this problem by throwing more people at 
navigating a legacy architecture or making 
up for the inherent gaps between the siloed 
technologies. Instead, organizations should 
be considering next-generation technology 
that  natively  integrates  security  to  deliver 
automated  results,  preventing  attackers 
from  achieving  their  ultimate  objectives. 
Given the sheer volume and complexity of 
threats, it’s important to use automation to 
accelerate  detection  and  prevention  with-
out the reliance on a security middleman.
Despite  the  growing  cybersecurity  chal-
lenge we are all facing, we cannot give up on 
our  digital  infrastructure.  Customers  are 
becoming  more  and  more  reliant  on  the 
Internet  and  our  networks  to  do  business 
and  access  commercial  services.  They  use 
these systems because of the trust they place 
in  them.  This  trust  underpins  everything 
they do online and extends to an organiza-
tion’s brand and place in the market. Legacy 
security approaches that focus only on detec-
tion  and  remediation,  or  rely  on  a  series 
of  disjointed  tools,  abandon  this  trust  and 
can  introduce  signifi cant  risk  by  failing  to 
consider how to prevent cyberattacks in the 
fi rst place.

A  new  approach  is  needed  in  order  to 
prevent  modern  cyberattacks.  This  new 
approach  must  account  for  the  realities  that 
today’s attacks are not only multidimensional 
in nature but also use an increasingly sophis-
ticated set of techniques that are constantly in 
a state of change. As these techniques evolve, 
the  risk  of  breach  increases,  and,  as  we  all 
know, an organization is only as strong as its 
weakest  entry  point.  Therefore,  an  effective 
strategy  must  work  to  disrupt  an  attack  at 
multiple points, including:

 䊏 developing a Zero Trust security posture 
that  focuses  on  only  allowing  legitimate 
users  and  applications,  as  opposed  to 
trying  to  block  everyone  and  everything 
that is bad

■  194 

 䊏 blocking the different techniques attackers 
might use to evade detection and establish 
command-and-control channels

 䊏 preventing  installation  of  malware—
including  unknown  and  polymorphic 
malware

 䊏 blocking  the  different  techniques  that 
attackers must follow in order to exploit 
a software vulnerability

 䊏 closely  monitoring  and  controlling  data 
traffi c  within  the  organization  to  protect 
against  the  unabated  lateral  movement 
when legitimate identities are hijacked.

■  Cyberattack lifecycle
Despite  the  headlines,  successful  cyberat-
tacks are not inevitable, nor do they happen 
by magic. Often it is a ‘window’ that is left 
open or a ‘bag’ that is not screened that lets 
an attacker slip into a network undetected. 
After  they  are  inside  a  network,  attackers 
will  sit  and  wait,  patiently  planning  their 
next  move,  until  they  are  sure  they  can 
reach  their  objective.  Much  like  a  game  of 
chess,  it  is  only  at  the  end  of  a  long  and 
logical  series  of  steps  that  they  will  try  to 
act. Knowing the playbook of a cyberattack 
can  help  us  disrupt  and  prevent  not  just 
well-understood  attacks  but  also  highly 
sophisticated new attacks used by advanced 
actors.

Despite different tools, tactics, and proce-
dures used by an attacker, there are certain 
high-level  steps  in  the  attack  lifecycle 
that  most  cyberattacks  have  in  common. 
Traditional  approaches  to  security  focus  on 
installing a feature to disrupt only one point 
along  this  lifecycle.  This  approach  often 
comes from the fact that different parts of an 
IT  security  team  have  different  objectives: 
network  administrators  care  about  connec-
tivity and the fi rewall, info security analysts 
care  about  analytics,  and  so  forth.  They 
seldom  have  to  really  work  together  in  a 
coordinated  manner  because  this  approach 
was previously useful at stopping low-level 
threats  that  involved  opportunistic  target-
ing, such as the infamous email scam from a 
foreign prince needing to transfer $1 million 
to the U.S.

  BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  

However,  today’s  attacks  have  become 
more  and  more  sophisticated  as  advanced 
tools have proliferated and as effective attack 
strategies  have  been  developed  and  shared 
among criminal and nation-state adversaries. 
These attacks are often called advanced per-
sistent threats (APTs), so named because they 
use advanced tools and persistently target an 
organization  again  and  again  until  they  get 
in.  They  are  patient  and  stealthy,  preferring 
to forego a quick boom and bust for a longer 
payoff of high-value information.

While  APTs  used  to  be  the  domain  of 
nation-state espionage, today organizations 
large and small face these high-level threats 
from  actors  seeking  to  steal  sensitive 

intellectual  property  and  fi nancial  informa-
tion, disrupt digital systems, or cause embar-
rassment.  It  is  against  these  patient  and 
persistent  advanced  adversaries  that  tradi-
tional single-point approaches fail. However, 
by targeting every step of an attacker’s play-
book, it is possible to architect a solution that 
offers  much  greater  odds  at  stopping  the 
attacks before they can reach their objective. 
At the very least, putting preventative meas-
ures in place that take the complete lifecycle 
into consideration will raise the cost for the 
attacker, potentially forcing him to look else-
where for an easier victim. Let’s take a look 
at the steps an attacker goes through to get 
into and out of a network.

Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle
Reconnaissance. Just like burglars and thieves, advanced attackers carefully plan their attacks. 
They research, identify, and select targets, oftentimes using phishing tactics or extracting 
public information from an employee’s public online profi le or from corporate websites. 
These criminals also scan for network vulnerabilities and services or applications they can 
exploit.
 䊏 Even job websites can be a gold mine of information. If you are looking to hire a new 
engineer who is familiar with a certain security product, an attacker can deduce what 
you are using to protect your network and will know where common gaps are in your 
security.

 䊏 You can’t stop all reconnaissance activity, but you certainly shouldn’t make it any 

easier for the attacker! People and processes are just as important to security as 
technology. Good training and strong security practices will help limit reconnaissance 
and harden your security profi le. You should be aware of what your adversary can 
learn from your corporate website and ensure that members of your organization with 
high-level access receive training to be security conscious.

 䊏 Finally, there are many services that offer advanced ‘red-team’ exercises to help you 

identify weaknesses in your security posture. These simple steps can also put in place 
policy ‘trip wires’ that can alert you to unusual activity that may indicate an advanced 
actor is interested in you.

Weaponization and delivery. As we move to the next stage of the cyberattack lifecycle, tech-
nology becomes even more critical to preventing advanced threats. The hacker must choose 
his method for gaining access onto your network. This access can be digital, or even physical, 
but is primarily intended to gain a foothold from which to plan the assault and achieve the 
attacker’s objectives.
Spear phishing
 䊏 With the information gained from their reconnaissance, the attackers have to determine 
which methods they must use to penetrate your network. They often choose to embed 
intruder code within seemingly innocuous fi les like a PDF document or email message. 
They may also seek to use highly targeted attacks to catch specifi c interests of an 
individual.

Continued

  195  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle—cont'd
 䊏 Spear phishing is by far the most commonly used tactic because it’s simple and 

effective. An attacker will use information gathered during the reconnaissance phase 
to craft an email with a malicious attachment for a specifi c user he believes has access 
to sensitive credentials or information.

 䊏 Many organizations have begun training their employees to spot these attacks by 
sending test emails that can track who opens them. Over time they can see which 
departments continually fall for these attacks and target training there.

 䊏 However, we are all conditioned to read emails and open attachments if they seem 
relevant to our positions. Even with the best training, a well-crafted spear phishing 
email that appears to come from a family member, friend, or boss can trick the 
most seasoned security veteran. It’s vital to ensure that you have technical security 
measures as well to mitigate any malicious malware that might ride email into your 
networks.
Watering hole
 䊏 Another approach to gaining access is known as watering hole attacks. In this 

method the attacker will set up a fake website that downloads malicious code to 
any visitor, then direct their victims to it. When a user visits the website, a software 
exploitation kit installs malware on the victim’s computer, which then reports 
back to the attacker so he knows who he’s infected and can access their system to 
steal data.

 䊏 Watering hole attacks are harder to pull off because they require compromising a 

separate web server, but they can be very effective if a company is watching for 
malicious fi les in email. Traditional security products do not always prevent their 
users from visiting malicious websites. However, advanced approaches will fi lter 
known malicious addresses to keep users from becoming a victims of a ‘drive-by 
download.’

Exploitation. Once attackers gain access ‘inside’ an organization, they can activate attack 
code on the victim’s computer (also known as a ‘host’) and ultimately take full control.
 䊏 To gain full control over a victim, specialized programs exploit vulnerabilities in 

existing software to install themselves as legitimate users. Vulnerabilities are usually 
old bugs that were not caught during the original writing of the code. Sometimes they 
are known bugs that have not been repaired, or ‘patched’; sometimes they are as of 
yet unknown to anyone except the attacker. These unknown vulnerabilities are called 
zero-days because they are not found by the victim until the fi rst day he realizes he has 
been penetrated by an attacker.

 䊏 As noted earlier, zero-days are the most nefarious of threats. Luckily, true zero-

days are also the most rare. When they are used, however, it generally means that 
no one else is protected from them. Because no one is patched for it, if an attacker 
moves quickly, he can take advantage of the same vulnerability on many, many 
systems.

 䊏 If you can’t catch an unknown threat, you can at least prevent an attacker from 

using that vulnerability to cause damage. Because attackers have similar goals, such 
as stealing or damaging important fi les, there are only so many techniques they 
can use after they have penetrated a system to achieve their end goals. Advanced 
security software will hunt for malware that uses zero-days by searching for and 
stopping common techniques attackers use after they have gained access to your 
network.

■  196 

  BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  

Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle—cont'd
 䊏 Common vulnerabilities are being found and fi xed every day. Your organization 

should also have a process in place to regularly update and patch all your software 
and hardware. However, sometimes these new versions and updates can cause 
existing systems to malfunction. This will often leave IT teams hesitant to update 
systems until a new patch can be tested and can cause delays that leave you with 
vulnerabilities known to the entire world. While you should always lean toward 
patching and updating as soon as possible, the balance of security and operability 
must be viewed through your own business risk management practices.

Installation. As a fi rst order of business, advanced attackers will seek to establish themselves 
as securely and quietly as possible across your network.
 䊏 They do this by taking advantage of the trust of the digital systems they are working 
in. Often an attacker will make himself an administrator on a computer and then try 
to infect other users in order to steal their digital identities. He will play this game 
of laterally escalating access privileges to gain a higher and higher level of control of 
your systems. Along the way the attacker will also open backdoors that allow him to 
connect back into your network even if he is eventually caught and shut out. This is 
why it can be especially diffi cult to fully remove an advanced actor from a network.

 䊏 It seems strange, but many of the tools attackers use can be found freely online or for sale 

on the Internet. Tools are viewed just like a hammer and nails, where on the one hand 
security professionals use them to test systems and build stronger security, but on the 
other hand they can be used as weapons. These ‘off-the-shelf’ security tools, while highly 
capable, can often be found by traditional security methods such as antivirus software.
 䊏 However, more advanced actors will build their own custom tools, such as remote 
access tools (RATs), that are undetectable by antivirus software. In fact, some tools 
commonly shut off antivirus software as one of the fi rst steps of installation. These 
tools require a larger investment from the attacker and will primarily be designed to 
gain a foothold as a seemingly legitimate user on the network. From there the attacker 
can act like a normal employee and use authorized applications such as fi le-sharing 
software or internal email to cause mischief.

Command and control. Gaining a foothold in a network is of no use to attackers if they can’t 
control their attack.
 䊏 An advanced actor knows that he is likely to be discovered at some point and must be 
ready to improvise by hiding and running from security teams or software. To do this, 
an attacker establishes a command-and-control channel back through the Internet to a 
specifi c server so he can communicate and pass data back and forth between infected 
devices and his server.

 䊏 The most commonly used channel for attackers to communicate to their tools is 

through regular Internet traffi c (using hypertext transfer protocol, or HTTP). Usually 
their communications will pass through defenses of traditional security tools as they 
blend in with the large volume of traffi c from legitimate users.

 䊏 The attacker’s tools will periodically phone home, typically referred to as beaconing, 

to obtain the next set of commands. Beacons can also contain reconnaissance 
information from the compromised target, such as the operating system confi guration, 
software versions, and the identity of users who are logged on to the network. In 
very complicated networks, this information can allow an attacker to quietly burrow 
deeper and deeper. Clever malware also moves beyond simple requests for command 
and control and tries to emulate human behavior by using email or social networking 
applications to receive its attacker commands.

Continued

  197  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle—cont'd
 䊏 If you treat your network with zero trust, as though it might already be breached, you 
can start to lock down unnecessary pathways for attackers to communicate and move 
around. Segmenting networks and building internal controls on applications can act 
like a fi rebreak, keeping an attacker from spreading to other parts of your network.

Actions on the objective. Attackers may have many different motivations for breaching your 
network, and it’s not always for profi t. Their reasons could be data exfi ltration, defacement 
of web property, or even destruction of critical infrastructure.
 䊏 The most common goals of attackers often involve fi nding and exfi ltrating your data 
without getting caught. During this late stage, the work is usually done by an active 
person issuing commands to his tools on your network. He has a goal and a script that 
is followed in a complex process that may last days, weeks, or months, but ends with 
all your sensitive data slipping through a backdoor in your network.

 䊏 This is one of the most diffi cult steps to stop, as an active person can improvise and 

adapt to your security response efforts. While it may seem counterintuitive, it’s 
important to respond with patience when trying to stop an active intruder. A common 
tactic of advanced attackers when they are caught is to ‘smash and grab’; this means 
they will forget about remaining quiet and do whatever they can to achieve their 
objectives, potentially damaging your systems in the process. They can also choose 
to slip deeper into your systems, burrowing in and waiting to reuse one of their 
backdoors to gain entry after you believe you have patched all your vulnerabilities. 
For these reasons, it is critical to have a response plan in place ahead of time so that 
the adversary doesn’t detect signs of panic and get tipped off. If you can discover 
the attacker before he realizes he is caught, you can work to clean up his tools, while 
closing doors and windows he may have used to get in.

 䊏 A strong response plan will also help you prepare in advance for any mitigation efforts 
needed, including the vital step of external relations if it becomes public that you have 
had an incident. Depending on the data that was accessed or stolen, you may have 
regulatory or legal reporting requirements that you will need to be prepared to deal 
with. Even if the attacker is not successful at actually taking data, these requirements 
may still be in place as in many cases you may not be able to determine if data was 
stolen, exposed, or remained untouched.

Trying to stop an advanced adversary at 
only one point in this lifecycle is an exercise 
in futility. Just like a network has vulnerabil-
ities and weaknesses, so too does the attacker. 
He will reuse tactics, techniques, and proce-
dures on multiple victims, establishing pat-
terns  that  can  be  recognized,  studied,  and 
exploited.  But  to  gain  this  leverage,  a  new 
approach to security is needed.

■  Why legacy approaches fail
Most security architectures today resemble a 
set  of  siloed  organizations,  processes,  and 
technical  infrastructure.  They  have  largely 

been  assembled  like  a  manufacturing  pro-
duction line, where a series of security events 
roll  down  a  conveyor  belt  of  individual 
point  products,  while  different  staff  mem-
bers  perform  their  individual  duties.  This 
has been the traditional approach to security, 
and historically we’ve been able to use it to 
fend  off  low-level  threats.  However,  these 
architectures  are  beginning  to  show  their 
weaknesses as attackers have learned to slip 
between silos. Today we see how costly leg-
acy systems can be both in their inability to 
prevent targeted attacks and in their unnec-
essary expense to the organization.

■  198 

  BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  

One  of  the  primary  strategic  failures  of 
traditional  security  architectures  is  their 
reactive  approach.  Following  the  assembly-
line model, security teams work to read data 
logs  about  events  that  happened  to  their 
network  in  the  past.  Since  most  of  these 
teams operate in a siloed manner, these log 
fi les are routinely examined in isolation from 
other critical teams and thus lack important 
context  that  can  be  used  to  quickly  detect 
and prevent an attack. Relying on a human 
in the middle of a network’s defenses is too 
slow to be effective against advanced, auto-
mated hacking tools and creative attackers.

A  secondary  strategic  failure  is  a  lack  of 
attention  toward  ‘proactive  prevention.’ 
Organizations  often  don’t  do  enough  to 
reduce their attack surface, allowing certain 
classes  of  applications  that  are  unnecessary 
for their business and leaving doors open on 
their  network  by  using  port-based  policies. 

This essentially allows adversaries to distrib-
ute  malware  and  steal  intellectual  property 
through  basic  applications  into  which  they 
have  little  or  no  visibility.  We  must  break 
away from the traditional approach to secu-
rity  that  has  proven  ineffective  at  stopping 
advanced attacks time and time again.

Over  the  last  several  years  in  particular, 
there has been a dramatic evolution in both 
the attackers and the techniques they use. By 
many estimates cybercrime is now a nearly 
half-trillion-dollar  industry,  and  like  any 
industry, opportunity fuels more investment 
and  innovation.  The  best  way  to  get  an 
industry  to  collapse  in  on  itself  is  to  take 
away that potential for profi t. Therefore, we 
must make it so unbelievably hard for cyber 
criminals  to  achieve  their  objectives  that 
their only option is to invest more and more 
resources to stage a successful attack, to the 
point that it becomes unprofi table.

Tenets of a traditional security architecture
Limited visibility. You can’t secure what you can’t see. Traditional sensors only seek out what 
they know to be bad, rather than inspect all traffi c to only allow what is good. Your security 
architecture must eliminate blind spots by having the ability to see all applications, users, 
and content across all ports and protocols (the doors and windows of your network) even 
if they are encrypted. It must also have the ability to see and prevent new, targeted attacks 
that are utilizing threats that have never been seen before, such as malware and zero-day 
vulnerability exploits.
Lacking correlation. If attacks are multidimensional, your defense must be as well. Today’s 
attackers shift techniques while they are working their way into a network in order to step 
over traps laid by them for traditional defenses. In order to fi nd the clues they leave behind, 
your architecture must act like a system of systems where individual technologies work in 
concert to identify and then automatically prevent attacks. Correlating sensors and protec-
tion makes each element within the system smarter. For example, if a thief has hit multiple 
houses using the same techniques, you will need to adjust your burglar alarm for those 
techniques. In cyberspace, however, this process can be automated to increase the speed of 
detection and prevention.
Manual response. With attacks evolving at a rapid pace, it’s critical that we wean ourselves 
from relying on the ‘man in the middle.’ Systems focused on detection often throw up 
mountains of alerts and warnings for low-threat items, overwhelming your IT security team. 
An advanced security architecture must employ a system of automation that’s constantly 
learning and applying new defenses without a requirement for any manual intervention. It 
must weed out the congestion automatically, handling 99 percent of low-level threats so you 
can focus your team’s attention on the 1 percent of the highest priority incidents.

  199  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

Stopping today’s advanced threats lies in 
turning  the  economics  of  our  reality  on  its 
head by preventing threats in multiple places 
at each step of the cyberattack lifecycle. This 
requires  creating  an  architecture  that  can 
detect  attacks  at  every  point  around  and 
within a network, closing any gaps and pre-
venting them from successfully launching in 
the fi rst place.

■  Prevention architecture
No organization today is immune to cyber-
attacks.  Cyber  criminals  are  ramping  up 
activity  across  the  globe  and  utilizing  new 
methods to evade traditional security meas-
ures. An effective security architecture must 
not only prevent threats from entering and 
damaging  the  network  but  also  take  full 
advantage  of  knowledge  about  threats  in 
other  security  communities.  Traditional 
solutions  typically  focus  on  a  single  threat 
vector across a specifi c section of the organi-
zation.  This  lack  of  visibility  is  leaving 
multiple areas vulnerable to attack. In addi-
tion, these legacy solutions are made up of a 
‘patchwork’  of  point  products  that  make  it 
very diffi cult to coordinate and share intel-
ligence among the various devices.

As  a  result,  security  teams  are  forced  to 
invest  more  and  more  time  and  money  in 
detection and remediation efforts, under the 
assumption  that  prevention  is  a  lost  battle. 
These  efforts  require  a  time-consuming 
process  of  piecing  together  evidence  from 
different devices, combing through them to 
discover unknown threats, and then manu-
ally creating and deploying protections. By 
the time this happens—often days or weeks 
later—it’s too late because minutes or hours 
are all an attacker needs to accomplish his or 
her  end  goal.  This  Band-Aid  approach 
doesn’t  fi x  the  fundamental  problem  of 
accounting for the new threat landscape.

While  nothing  will  stop  every  attack, 
designing a security architecture with a pre-
vention mindset (and following some of the 
risk  management  best  practices  outlined  in 
our  chapter,  “The  CEO’s  guide  to  driving 
better  security  by  asking  the  right  ques-
tions”)  can  make  cybersecurity  a  business 

■  200 

enabler. By preventing damage to networks 
and  theft  of  sensitive  information,  vital  IT 
resources,  people,  and  time  are  freed  up  to 
tackle  core  business  functions.  In  order  to 
shift  from  a  ‘detect  and  remediate’  stature 
to preventing attacks, business leaders need 
to consider three cybersecurity imperatives:

 1.  Process:  organize  to  reduce  your  attack 

surface.
 䊏 Modern  networks  can  be  a  rat’s  nest 
of systems and users cobbled together 
from  mergers,  legacy  architectures, 
and prior acquisitions. This confusion 
leaves  many  points  of  entry  for 
attackers  to  slip  in  unnoticed  and 
reside  on  your  network  for  months 
or  even  years.  A  critical  step  to 
preventing  advanced  cyberattacks  is 
to know your network better than the 
attacker  does.  To  do  this  you  must 
work  at  simplifying  your  architecture 
down  to  manageable  pieces  that  can 
be controlled, watched, and defended.
 䊏 A  key  step  in  reducing  your  attack 
surface  is  to  only  allow  network 
traffi c  and  communications  that  are 
required  to  operate  your  business  by 
utilizing  technology  that  understands 
the  applications,  users,  and  content 
transiting your network. This seems to 
be  common  sense  that  any  unknown 
traffi c  could  also  be  hiding  malicious 
activity,  but  often  when  organizations 
take  a  deep  look  at  their  traffi c,  they 
fi nd  high-risk  applications  that  they 
had  no  idea  were  running  on  their 
network. Legacy approaches often only 
search  to  block  what  is  bad,  rather 
than  allowing  only  what  is  good.  This 
approach  is  also  known  as  ‘white 
listing’  and  will  immediately  reduce 
the scope of your security challenge by 
eliminating  opportunities  for  malware 
to get into your network.

is 

to  segment 

 䊏 Another  step  to  reducing  your  attack 
surface 
important 
components  of  your  networks,  such 
as  data  centers.  As  described  earlier, 
advanced  actors  often  seek  to  break 

  BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  

into  a  less  secure  part  of  the  network 
and  then  move  laterally  into  more 
sensitive  areas.  By  segmenting  the 
most  vital  parts  of  a  network  from 
email or customer-facing systems, you 
will be building in fi rebreaks that can 
prevent the spread of a breach.

 䊏 You  also  can’t  neglect  to  secure  the 
endpoint  or  individual  user.  This  is 
the  fi nal  battlefi eld.  Originally,  anti-
virus software contained signatures for 
malicious software and could, thus, catch 
most  major  infections  from  common 
threats because it knew what to look for. 
However, as we learned earlier, today’s 
attacks  can  include  unknown  malware 
or exploits that are essentially invisible 
to antivirus software. This has led to a 
massive  decline  in  the  effectiveness  of 
traditional antivirus products and a rise 
in a new way of thinking about endpoint 
protection.  Rather  than  looking  for 
something  that  can’t  be  seen,  you  can 
reduce  the  endpoint  attack  surface  by 
preventing the type of actions taken by 
exploits and malware. Stopping the type 
of  malicious  activity  associated  with 
an  attack  is  much  more  effective  than 
hunting for an attack that, by nature, is 
stealthy and hidden.

 䊏 Finally,  it  seems  simplistic,  but  as  you 
make  investments  to  re-architect  your 
network and reduce your attack surface, 
you have to use all those investments to 
their fullest. Purchasing next-generation 
technology  is  useless  if  you  don’t 
turn  it  on  and  confi gure  it  properly. 
Establishing a process for staying up to 
date on your security investments is one 
of the most critical habits to form.

 2.  Technology: 

integrate  and  automate 
controls to disrupt the cyberattack lifecycle.
 䊏 Don’t  use  yesterday’s 
technology 
to  address  today’s  and  tomorrow’s 
security  challenges.  As  noted  earlier, 
legacy  security  approaches  offer 
individual  products  to  be  bolted  on 
for single-feature solutions. This leaves 
gaps that can be broken by new methods 
of attack, leaving your organization at 

risk.  However,  by  using  an  integrated 
cybersecurity  platform  that  protects 
across  your  entire  enterprise,  your 
defenses can work together to identify 
and close gaps that would be exploited 
by  an  attacker.  Communication  is  key 
to any strong defense. If your products 
can’t  share  information  on  what  they 
are  seeing,  there  is  no  chance  to  pick 
up  clues  that  might  aid  in  preventing 
an advanced attack.

 䊏 The next step is automating prevention 
measures.  Humans  have  proven  time 
and again that we are the weakest link 
in security. Advanced actors are faster, 
more  persistent,  and  stealthier  than 
manual  response  efforts.  It  just  takes 
one  overlooked  log  fi le  or  one  missed 
security  alert  to  bring  down  an  entire 
organization. However, if you have an 
integrated platform that communicates 
visibility  across  your  defenses,  it  can 
also  automatically  act  on  new  threats, 
preventing  what  is  malicious  and 
Indeterminate what is unknown.

 䊏 Integration  should  also  enable  your 
organization’s  agility  and  innovation. 
Business  doesn’t  stop  at  the  elevator, 
as  employees  take  laptops  to  work 
from home or use their personal mobile 
devices  to  access  your  corporate  cloud 
on  the  road.  As  your  data  moves  to 
enable your workforce, security should 
go with it. Choose a platform compatible 
with newer technologies such as mobile, 
cloud, and network virtualization.

 3.  People:  participate  in  a  community  that 

shares cyberthreat information.
 䊏 End  users  cannot  be  relied  upon  to 
identify every malicious URL or phishing 
attack. Organizations must educate their 
constituents about what they can do on 
their part to stop cyberattacks. However, 
beyond  education,  to  protect  against 
today’s  truly  advanced  cyberthreats, 
we  must  utilize  the  global  community 
to  combine  threat  intelligence  from  a 
variety  of  sources  to  help  ‘connect  the 
dots.’ Real-time, global intelligence feeds 
help  security  teams  keep  pace  with 

  201  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

threat  actors  and  easily  identify  new 
security events.

 䊏 As attackers move from target to target, 
they  leave  digital  fi ngerprints  in  the 
form  of  their  tactics,  techniques,  and 
procedures. By analyzing this evidence 
and then sharing it, threat intelligence 
from  other  organizations  can  quickly 
inoculate  you  from  new  attacks  as 
bad  guys  seek  to  move  between 
organizations  and  even  industries. 
Combined with an integrated platform 
that  can  act  automatically  on  this 
intelligence, you can rapidly distribute 
warnings  and  make  it  impossible  for 
attackers  to  strike  twice.  The  network 
effect 
large 
customer  bases  is  extremely  powerful 
as it builds a security ecosystem, which 
can organically respond to new threats.
 䊏 Many  organizations  are  even  coming 
together  to  share  threats  as  an  entire 
sector.  Recent  policy  from  the  U.S. 
Government  has  made  it  easier  to 
collaborate  and  share  cyberthreat 
information  between  companies  and 
work  together  to  identify  and  stop 
advanced cyber actors.

from  vendors  with 

The  most  signifi cant  way  to  fi ll  in  all  the 
gaps and truly protect an organization from 
advanced  and  targeted  threats  is  to  imple-
ment  an  integrated  and  extensible  security 
platform  that  can  prevent  even  the  most 
challenging  unknown  threats  across  the 
entire  attack  lifecycle.  An  IT  architecture 
must  remain  secure  while  also  providing 
business  fl exibility  and  enabling  applica-
tions  needed  to  run  day-to-day  operations. 
Stopping even the most advanced attacks is 
possible,  but  we  have  to  begin  with  a  pre-
vention mindset.

■  Conclusion: Cybersecurity as a business 

enabler

Traditionally,  IT  security  has  been  seen  by 
most organizations as a cost center, requiring 
continued  expenses  but  not  bringing  in  any 
revenue. The attention and resources devoted 
to  it  are  often  the  bare  minimum  to  meet 

■  202 

regulatory requirements or mandatory certifi -
cations. IT security personnel are often drafted 
from projects that support core business opera-
tions to work in the ‘dark corners’ of network 
security  with  a  gloomy  future  of  scanning 
thousands of false alarms, updating old soft-
ware,  and,  of  course,  getting  blamed  for  the 
inevitable  cyber  incidents  that  are  usually 
caused by larger organizational problems. This 
sad tale is a reality for a shocking number of 
organizations; it not only guarantees failure, it 
ensures  lost  opportunity  for  innovation  that 
comes from having a strong security posture.

Adopting a prevention philosophy helps 
create  strategies  for  better  security  and 
maximizes  the  value  of  an  organization’s 
actions  and  resources.  Viewing  cybersecu-
rity as a business enabler helps drive appro-
priate  resource  allocation  by  returning 
value to the business based on new oppor-
tunities that would not have been available 
without  the  level  of  trust  afforded  by  a 
prevention architecture.

Take  the  case  of  the  IT  security  team. 
When  an  organization  decides  to  take  their 
security more seriously, usually after a cyber 
incident,  one  of  the  fi rst  things  they  do  is 
dump more people into IT security positions. 
While trained security experts are a boon for 
any  organization,  the  architecture  they  are 
working in can have them needlessly chasing 
cycles  of  work,  wasting  budget  by  hunting 
for  cyber  needles  in  digital  haystacks  of 
alarms, and manually remediating countless 
vulnerabilities.  Employing  a  prevention 
architecture that automates protection capa-
bilities and shares threat intelligence using an 
integrated  platform  means  that  security 
teams can operate much more effi ciently and 
effectively.  Their  time  is  an  organization’s 
money,  and  it’s  imperative  to  ensure  that 
personnel working on core IT functions that 
keep  business  operations  running  are  not 
being wasted on outdated security practices.
Strong  cybersecurity  can  also  open  new 
opportunities  by  making  organizations 
more  fl exible  and  resilient.  Today’s  work-
force is constantly connected to the Internet 
at  home,  on  the  road,  and  at  their  desk. 
Users  move  between  applications  and 

  BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  

devices  seamlessly  and  expect  that  their 
actions  will  translate  between  these  differ-
ent  environments.  However,  this  tradition-
ally  has  not  been  the  case.  Threats  from 
third-party  applications,  unsecured  cloud 
environments, and infected personal mobile 
devices have become so prevalent that many 
traditional  security  products  will  either 
block  them  completely  or  just  assume  that 
they  cannot  be  protected.  This  old  way  of 
doing business doesn’t match the reality of 
today’s  workers,  who  are  expected  to  be 
more  agile  and  mobile  than  ever  before. 
Architecting a network to wrap these devic-
es and third-party services into an existing 
security  platform  ensures  that  data  will 
remain  secure  as  workers  go  out  to  meet 
with customers in the fi eld and expand busi-
ness beyond its offi ce walls.

The security fi eld is stuck today with few 
answers to increasingly challenging problems. 

If organizations continue to view investments 
in cybersecurity simply as cost centers to be 
solved  by  bolting  on  legacy  technology,  we 
will  all  continue  to  suffer  the  consequences. 
Our most valuable data and the keys to vital 
pieces of infrastructure will walk out the door 
in  the  hands  of  cyber  criminals,  while  the 
trust  we  have  built  between  our  customers 
and  our  systems  continues  to  degrade.  This 
will happen time and time again until we are 
forced to change and narrow the way we use 
digital  systems  in  our  everyday  lives.  This 
must  not  become  the  reality  for  the  entire 
community  that  receives  such  unimaginable 
benefi ts from the Internet. By adopting a pre-
vention  mindset  it  is  possible  to  change  the 
status quo and take back the control and trust 
in systems that enable critical business opera-
tions. Planning for disaster is always a smart 
move,  but  preparing  for  failure  will  accom-
plish just that.

Cybersecurity glossary
Advanced persistent threat (APT): An adversary that possesses sophisticated levels of expertise and 
signifi cant resources that allow it to create opportunities to achieve its objectives by using mul-
tiple attack vectors (e.g., cyber, physical, and deception). http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary
Attack surface: An information system’s characteristics that permit an adversary to probe, 

attack, or maintain presence in the information system. http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary

Antivirus software: A program that monitors a computer or network to detect or identify 

major types of malicious code and to prevent or contain malware incidents, sometimes 
by removing or neutralizing the malicious code. http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary

Command-and-control channel: Data link for an attacker to communicate with his malicious 

software installed on a victim’s system.

Data exfi ltration: After an attacker has found sensitive data that he is targeting, he will attempt 

to package this data and remove it silently from a victim’s system.

Endpoint: Specifi c parts of an IT infrastructure that users interact with directly, such as work-

stations or mobile devices.

Exploit: A technique to breach the security of a network or information system in violation 

of security policy. http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary

Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP): Technical rules for transferring data over the Internet. Web 
browsers use HTTP, and the encrypted variant HTTPS, to allow users to interact directly 
with websites in a secure manner.

Malware: Software that compromises the operation of a system by performing an unauthorized 

function or process. http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary

Network: Joined pieces of an IT infrastructure that transfer and route data to and from endpoints 

and other networks.

Polymorphic malware: Malicious software that is designed to continuously change its appear-
ance, allowing it to evade legacy security detection technology such as antivirus software.

Continued

  203  ■

DESIGN BEST PRACTICES

Cybersecurity glossary—cont'd
Port-based security: Stateful inspection fi rewalls block any Internet traffi c coming into or out 

of a network on a specifi c line of communication, called a port. However, modern applica-
tions use different ports, and malicious software can change the port it uses.

Remote access tools (RATs): Malicious software that allows an attacker to control a system 

where he is not physically present. These functions in IT systems also exist for legitimate 
uses, such as support functions.

Zero-day: A software vulnerability that is unknown to the public but is used by an attacker to 

gain access and control of a network or system.

■  204 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Cybersecurity beyond 
your network

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Supply chain as an attack chain
Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive 
Vice President; Tony Gaidhane, Senior 
Associate; and Laura Eise, Lead Associate

The supply chain ecosystem reaches farther and wider than 
ever before. The growing range of suppliers provides sig-
nifi cant competitive advantages for companies that strate-
gically  and  securely  source  from  this  global  network. Yet 
this  complex  footprint  comes  with  an  equally  complex 
range of cyberthreats, and the majority of organizations do 
not  realize  the  breadth  and  depth  of  these  challenges. 
However, hackers are well aware of existing supply chain 
vulnerabilities and are moving aggressively to take advan-
tage of these exposures.

Threat  actors  typically  target  organizations’  supply 
chains  through  two  vectors:  the  fi rst  type  of  attack  is 
known  as  “adversarial  supply  chain  operations  to,”  or 
“ASCO To,” and the second is known “adversarial sup-
ply  chain  operations  through,”  or  “ASCO  Through” 
(Figure  1).  In  an ASCO  To  attack,  your  organization  is 
the  direct  target.  In  the  latter,  the  adversary  uses  your 
supply chain as a means to target one of your customers. 
Although the intent is different, both have the potential 
for devastating impact to your revenue, reputation, and 
end consumer.

To  compound  this  issue,  today’s  attackers  are  often 
well  funded  and  extremely  organized.  These  attackers 
have  the  resources,  skills,  and  patience  to  conduct 
sophisticated  attacks  on  your  supply  chain.  For  exam-
ple, a supply chain cyber adversary may clandestinely 
intercept  delivery  of  your  products  and  switch  cyber 
sensitive components with a malware-infused copycat. 
These  attacks  are  often  so  sophisticated  that  the  end 
users may not realize that they did not receive the origi-
nal version.

Nation-states,  hacktivists,  organized  criminal  groups, 
and  lone  wolves  are  constantly  scanning  supply  chains 

207  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

FIGURE 

Adversaries

• Nation–State
  Actors
• Competitors (esp.
  Nation–State-
  owned)
• Criminals
• Hacktivists

ASCO Through

Attack methods on the supply chain

Lifecycle Process

Design

Source

Build

Fulﬁllment Distribution

Sustainment

&

Operations

Disposal

ASCO To

Example Methods:
• Interdiction/Compromise
• Theft/Re-route
• Break/Fix subversion

Potential Effects:
• Halt or slow prodution
• Prevent sustainment operations
• Loss of intellectual property

Customer Operations

Example Methods:
• Malware shotgun infection
• Malicious component insertion
• Repair part compromise
• Trojan insertion/Design to fail
• Fraud

Potential Effects:
• National security risk
• Customer compromise
• Impaired customer operations
• Brand/Legal/Market impact
• Loss of customer intellectual property

for weak points, and the impact of this atten-
tion  has  the  potential  to  reverberate  well 
beyond  your  supply  chain.  You  inherit  the 
risks of your suppliers. If one of your suppli-
ers  lacks  security  controls,  you  may  absorb 
their vulnerabilities. This is particularly true 
if  you  do  not  comprehensively  test  their 
components  during  your  acceptance  pro-
cess;  once  you  accept  their  product,  you 
accept the risks of being attacked or passing 
along  an  attack  to  your  customers.  In  the 
event that a cyberattack occurs, you own the 
impacts  as  well.  This  includes  brand  dam-
age,  operational  stoppage,  legal  exposure, 
canceled sales, and government sanctions.

■  Dangerous combination of hidden risks and 

higher expectations

Tackling  cybersecurity  risk  in  supply  chain 
may feel like you are trapped between a vir-
tual  rock  and  a  hard  place.  As  companies 
drive  to  increase  supply  chain  fl exibility  at 
the  lowest  overall  cost,  sourcing  decisions 
expose them to the vulnerabilities of suppli-
ers  and  all  of  their  successive  networks  of 
suppliers.  This  ever-evolving  cybersecurity 
threat in the multi-layered supply chain pre-
sents a number of challenges when manag-
ing cybersecurity. See Figure 2.

■  208 

Supply chain traditionally has been seen 
as  part  of  internal  operations;  it  is  some-
thing  that  happens  behind  the  scenes  for 
your customers. In the past, customers did 
not care where you made your products or 
how you sourced them as long as you deliv-
ered them on time, at the appropriate cost, 
and in good condition. However, this is all 
changing.  Companies  and  governments 
around the world are realizing that the sup-
ply  chain  is  an  ideal  way  for  attackers  to 
quietly infi ltrate their networks and infect a 
system well before customers place an order. 
Companies,  large  and  small,  have  to  begin 
looking  at  supply  chain  security  as  part  of 
their overall supply chain risk management 
process.

By prioritizing supply chain cybersecurity, 
you  are  well  on  your  way  to  tackling  this 
complex  issue.  You  have  an  opportunity  to 
mitigate cyber risk and transform your sup-
ply  chain  risk  management  capability  into 
a  competitive  advantage  to  inform  your 
broader business.

■  Increasing expectations
The U.S. government has been a force for driv-
ing higher-level visibility and controls across 
the  supply  chain.  As  the  future  progresses, 

  SUPPLY CHAIN AS AN ATTACK CHAIN   

FIGURE 

Cybersecurity challenges in the supply chain

Lack of Visibility

Limited visibility across the supply chain regarding exposure and controls

Dynamic Threat

The evolving capabilities of well-resourced and determined adversaries means

that “point in time” solutions are insufﬁcient.

External Dependencies

Companies cannot ensure part integrity on their own—they will need participation

from suppliers and other business partners.

Cross-Functional Challenge

Requires change and collaboration from various internal business functions

to collectively manage cyber risk throughout the supply chain

Decision Making

Increased information requires new strategic and tactical decision-

making processes.

insurance  companies  will  be  an  even  larger 
driver for increasing supply chain standards. 
Business  continuity  policies  are  in  place  to 
address threats that disrupt the supply chain. 
Companies  with  weak  supply  chain  cyber 
security  policies  and  procedures  could  fi nd 
their  insurers  raising  their  premiums  or 
excluding claims in case of a breach. The next 
wave  of  standards  could  take  shape  with 
requiring  you  to  maintain  a  list  of  all  cyber 
sensitive supply chain components as well as 
develop  comprehensive  risk  frameworks  to 
classify,  prioritize,  and  proactively  manage 
the  sourcing  of  each  of  those  components. 
You  need  to  proactively  get  ahead  of  these 
standards. Prove to the government, insurers, 

and  your  customers  that  you  have  a  strong 
supply chain cyber cybersecurity capability.

It is not just the U.S. federal government 
that is raising the stakes. Many clients also 
are  demanding  to  know  more  about  the 
supply chain. Private sector clients are real-
izing  that  securing  high  assurance  services 
on  an  untrusted  hardware  platform  is  the 
same  as  building  a  fort  on  a  foundation  of 
shifting sand. They want to know the depth 
of  visibility  into  the  components  and  ser-
vices of products, and they want to be reas-
sured  that  there  are  controls  in  place  to 
manage a robust supply chain cybersecurity 
program. As with the government, many of 
these  requests  and  requirements  are  at  an 

  209  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

all-time high and will become more sophis-
ticated  and  comprehensive only during the 
next several years. If you are their supplier, 
they know that you are only as trustworthy 
as your supply chain.

■   How to create both a secure and compliant 

capability

Complying with standards and guidelines is 
not enough for securing all of the factors you 
need to comprehensively increase your secu-
rity  posture.  Although  standards  strive  to 
create consistency among cybersecurity pro-
grams, the fundamental truth is that there is 
no  formula  for  security.  Standards  and 
frameworks can help identify the landscape 
of potential areas to address and may let you 
set  a  minimum  level  of  performance,  but 
that’s  it.  You  must  move  beyond  merely 
striving to be compliant rather than noncom-
pliant.  Supply  chain  cybersecurity  is  more 
than an IT problem.  If not used in the appro-
priate  context,  standards  can  be  a  generic 
solution to a highly individualized problem 
set.  Supply  chain  risk  is  tied  intimately  to 
your business strategy and operations, and it 
must be tailored to your organization.

Rather  than  focusing  on  a  standard,  look  at 
your program with a maturity lens. Understand 
the  various  degrees  of  risk  you  face.  Then, 
within  a  well-established  structure,  decide 
where you need to invest and develop. It is 
up  to  you  to  prioritize  the  control  areas  to 
address.  Focus  on  your  current  maturity  in 
those areas and what you must do to increase 
your  maturity.  Focusing  on  your  maturity 
provides you with an opportunity to identify 
where  your  program  stands  today,  where  it 
must be in the future, and how to get there. A 
maturity  approach  is  not  “one  size  fi ts  all.” 
Special considerations for your organization 

could necessitate that your approach be dif-
ferent  than  that  of  a  competitor.  Using  a 
maturity  model  also  allows  you  to  answer 
the questions that are not yet asked by com-
pliance while aligning your supply chain to 
your business strategy. It allows you to focus 
on  increasing  your  overall  security  and  to 
stay ahead of the curve.

■   Where do I start?
Developing a robust supply  chain  cyberse-
curity  program  is  complex,  but  that  doesn’t 
mean  your  approach  has  to  be.  It  requires  a 
risk-based prioritization approach to changes 
in  policy,  supplier  contracts,  resource  alloca-
tion, and investment. Most companies do not 
have the appetite or the budget for wholesale, 
drastic changes. If you are like most organiza-
tions,  you  face  the  dilemma  of  not  knowing 
where to begin.

So  the  best  place  to  start  is  to  get  your 

arms around what has to be done.

 1.  Conduct a maturity assessment and build 

a roadmap.
Your  organization  needs  a  plan  for  the  path 
forward in securing your supply chain. Before 
you transition to developing a roadmap, you 
must  begin  with  a  maturity  assessment. 
Supply chain cybersecurity program maturity 
assessments are simply gap analyses between 
how  well  your  program  operates  today  com-
pared with how it should operate in a target 
state. To evaluate this, you must identify the 
key  controls  that  apply  to  supply  chain  risk 
management—either controls you already use 
as  part  of  your  corporate  cybersecurity  pro-
gram or controls that may be more unique to 
supply  chain.  Even  if  you  use  existing  con-
trols, you should modify them to apply to your 
supply chain operations.

Maturity Assessment Tip
The set of controls you select for your maturity assessment should incorporate the compli-
ance standards that customers might use as part of their Request for Proposal requirements 
(e.g., NIST SP 800-161). You likely will cover more controls than these standards, but map-
ping them will allow you to kill two birds with one stone.

■  210 

  SUPPLY CHAIN AS AN ATTACK CHAIN   

Five Common Early Wins
Below are fi ve common ways you can gain early traction with your supply chain cybersecurity program:
 䊏 Integrate/enhance component tracking
 䊏 Include cyber in your supply chain risk management framework
 䊏 Enhance acceptance testing
 䊏 Conduct supply chain vulnerability penetration testing
 䊏 Enhance monitoring of supplier network access points

Next,  identify  key  objectives  for  each  control 
you  plan  to  evaluate.  Threat  intelligence,  for 
example,  may  have  data  collection,  analysis, 
and  distribution  as  key  control  objectives.  For 
each objective, defi ne a scale as well as the key 
characteristics for each step in that scale. Taking 
the threat intelligence example, a low maturity 
rating  for  data  collection  could  be  the  ad  hoc 
collection of threat data via unstructured sources, 
such as email. A higher maturity implementa-
tion of data collection would be a comprehensive 
ingestion of multiple formal data feeds that can 
be analyzed automatically and effi ciently.

Next,  conduct  a  baseline  assessment  of  your 
current state—an honest assessment, backed by 
examples. This will help you surface risks asso-
ciated  with  each  control.  After  the  baseline, 
defi ne the target state for each control. The tar-
get  state  should  be  a  balance  between  high 
effectiveness  and  practical  costs,  keeping  in 
mind that not all controls need the highest level 
of maturity. Comparing the target state with the 
baseline  provides  you  the  gap  you  need  to 
address.

The outcome of your maturity assessment will 
be a robust roadmap designed to transform your 
supply  chain  cybersecurity  program.  This 
equates to quick wins and key priorities for your 
organization. It should also help address the key 
requirements your customers demand.

 2.  Identify key risks throughout your supply 

chain lifecycle.
Breaking down your supply chain lifecycle into 
discrete phases can help you identify key risks for 
each phase. Each phase presents its own vulner-
abilities and risks. For example, during the dis-
tribution  phase,  threat  actors  can  intercept 

physical deliveries of products, place malware in 
cyber sensitive components, and allow the ship-
ments  to  continue  to  end  customers.  As  you 
identify risks for each phase, you have to assess 
the likelihood and impact of each risk. This prior-
itized  list  becomes  your  risk  agenda  and  helps 
determine what to address fi rst to enhance your 
supply chain cybersecurity program.

Supply chain

Lifecycle

Design

Source

Build

Fulﬁll

Distribute

Sustain & Operate

Dispose

 3. Decompose your key product lines.

To assess the visibility, control, and risks in your 
supply chain, select a few key product lines and 
decompose them into their cyber sensitive com-
ponents.  Then  see  how  much  information  you 
can  collect  on  their  manufacturing  sources, 
acceptance testing, suppliers, and intended cus-
tomers.  You  will  likely  fi nd  that  your  internal 
systems  and  policies  are  prohibiting  you  from 
this level of visibility; however, it is this level of 
visibility that customers will be demanding in 

  211  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

the future, if not already. Once you can obtain 
this kind of visibility, you can then assess the 
processes,  controls,  and  risks  associated  with 
those cyber sensitive components.

■   Supply chain cybersecurity as a differentiator
The  risks  and  expectations  of  your  supply 
chain cybersecurity are increasing as threats 
become  more  sophisticated  and  customers’ 
expectations rise. As you inherit the vulner-
abilities from your suppliers and the risks of 
your customers, you have to be more aware 
of  how  your  supply  chain  can  become  an 
attack chain. Compliance is not enough; you 
must  develop  a  robust  maturity  model  to 
help identify your vulnerabilities and devel-
op a roadmap to reduce your risks.

Companies  that  are  able  to  effectively 
manage their supply chain risks will have the 

advantage in the market. Understanding how 
to  identify  risk  and  then  effectively  manage 
those  risks  will  allow  you  to  be  in  greater 
control of your supply chain. A robust supply 
chain  cyber  risk  management  program  will 
allow  you  to  close  vulnerabilities,  making 
you less of a target for attackers while helping 
you  meet  and  even  shape  your  customer 
expectations. The trust in your brand and the 
quality  of  your  product  depend  on  the 
strength of your supply chain cybersecurity.

Creating  the  right  balance  of  security 
and  resilience  in  your  supply  chain  will 
allow you to build a foundationally strong-
er  supply  chain  cybersecurity  program. 
This  not  only  will  differentiate  you  from 
your competitors but also will allow you to 
better  understand  the  opportunities  and 
advantages that are key to your success.

■  212 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Managing risk associated 
with third-party outsourcing
Covington & Burling LLP – David N. Fagan, Partner; 
Nigel L. Howard, Partner; Kurt Wimmer, Partner; Elizabeth H. 
Canter, Associate; and Patrick Redmon, Summer Associate

■   Third-party outsourcing and cybersecurity risk
Businesses  increasingly  work  with  third  parties  in  ways 
that  can  render  otherwise  well-guarded  data  vulnerable 
to attack or accidental disclosure. These third parties can 
include  technology  service  providers;  other  major  busi-
ness  function  vendors,  such  as  payroll,  insurance,  and 
benefi ts companies; and accounting and fi nance, advertis-
ing,  delivery  and  lettershop,  legal,  and  other  consulting 
services.

Many of these commercial relationships require sensi-
tive information—whether the business’ own confi dential 
business  information  or  the  personal  information  of  its 
employees or customers—to be shared with, or stored by, 
the third parties. Such relationships also may entail third-
party access to a company’s networks. There is, in turn, an 
inherent  risk  in  the  third-party  services:  they  can  create 
new  avenues  of  attack  against  a  company’s  data  or  its 
systems and networks—and those avenues require appro-
priate mitigation.

Perhaps  no  data  security  breach  highlighted  this  risk 
more than the incident incurred by Target. That incident 
began not with a direct attack on the Target network but 
with a phishing attack on a Pennsylvania HVAC contrac-
tor that had access to Target’s external billing and project 
management portals. The HVAC contractor depended on 
a  free  version  of  consumer  anti-malware  software  that 
allegedly failed to provide real-time protection. Once the 
phishing  campaign  succeeded  in  installing  key-logging 
malware,  the  hackers  obtained  the  HVAC  contractor’s 
credentials  to  Target’s  external  billing  and  project  man-
agement systems and from there infi ltrated Target’s inter-
nal network, eventually reaching Target’s customer data-
bases and point-of-sale systems.

213  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

The  results  of  the  Target  breach  are  well 
known:  the  personal  information  of  up  to 
70 million customers was compromised, and 
about  40  million  customers  had  their  credit 
or debit card information stolen. By the end 
of  2014,  the  costs  to  Target  from  the  breach 
had  exceeded  $150  million.  These  costs 
include the litigation and settlement expens-
es  resulting  from  lawsuits  brought  by  con-
sumers and credit card issuers. Further, in the 
quarter  in  which  the  data  breach  occurred, 
Target’s year-over-year earnings plummeted 
46 percent. Ultimately, in the aftermath of the 
breach, Target’s CEO resigned.

The  Target  breach  was  not  an  isolated 
incident.  In  2014,  a  Ponemon  Institute  sur-
vey found that in 20 percent of data breach-
es,  a  failure  to  properly  vet  a  third  party 
contributed to the breach. Even more trou-
bling,  40  percent  of  the  respondents  to 
another Ponemon survey named third-party 
access to or management of sensitive data as 
one  of  the  top  two  barriers  to  improving 
cybersecurity.  Further, 
the  Ponemon 
Institute’s  2015  U.S.  Cost  of  Data  Breach 
Study  reports  that  third-party  involvement 
in a data breach increased the per capita cost 
of data breaches more than any other factor. 
However,  despite  the  cybersecurity  risks 
posed  by  third-party  service  providers, 
many  companies  fail  to  systematically 
address such risks. Only 52 percent of com-
panies surveyed in a 2014 Ponemon Institute 
report have a program in place to systemati-
cally manage third-party cybersecurity risk.

■   Legal risks
Although  there  are  many  commercial  and 
other reasons to adopt strong third-party risk 
management  processes,  a  variety  of  legal 
frameworks require the management of third-
party risk. Examples of such statutory or regu-
latory requirements include the following:

 䊏 the  Interagency  Guidelines  Establishing 
Information  Security  Standards 
that 
implement  Section  501  of  the  Gramm-
Leach-Bliley  Act  and  require  fi nancial 
institutions to engage in due diligence in 
the  selection  of  service  providers,  to  use 

■  214 

contractual  provisions  to  manage  third-
party risk, and, in some cases, to monitor 
service  providers  on  an  ongoing  basis 
(e.g.,  12  C.F.R.  Pt.  225,  App.  F  at  III.D. 
[2012])

 䊏 the  HIPAA  Privacy  Rule,  requiring 
specifi c contractual provisions in dealing 
with  business  associates  who  handle 
protected  health  information,  45  C.F.R. 
§164.502(e) (2014)

 䊏 state 

regulations, 

as 
for 

such 
Standards 

the 
the 
Massachusetts 
Information, 
Protection  of  Personal 
requiring  reasonable  steps  in  selecting 
third  parties  and  the  use  of  contractual 
provisions  to  require  their  compliance 
with  Massachusetts  law,  201  Mass  Code 
Regs. 17.03(2)(f).

In  addition,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission 
has applied its authority under Section 5 of 
the FTC Act, 15 U.S.C. §45 (governing unfair 
acts and deceptive trade practices) to apply 
to  cybersecurity  and  data  security,  and  has 
taken  action  against  companies  that  fail  to 
take  “reasonable  steps  to  select  and  retain 
service  providers  capable  of  appropriately 
safeguarding  personal  information”  a  de 
facto regulatory requirement. See, for exam-
ple,  GMR  Transcription  Servs.,  Inc.,  F.T.C. 
Docket No. C–4482, File No. 122–3095, 2014 
WL 4252393 (Aug. 14, 2014).

■   Sources of third-party cybersecurity risk
The  cybersecurity  and  privacy  risks  gener-
ated by third-party engagements include the 
following:

 䊏 breaches  of  personal  data—whether  the 
personal data of customers or employees—
and  the  attendant  regulatory  obligations 
(e.g., notifi cation requirements), as well as 
legal liability, as in the Target breach

 䊏 breaches of a business’s proprietary data, 

including the following:
 䊏 competitively sensitive data, privileged 
information,  attorney  work  product, 
and trade secrets

 䊏 business  partner  data  resulting  in 
obligations to notify business partners 

as well as potential contractual liability 
to them

 䊏 data  that  result  in  fi nancial  harm  to 
the  company,  such  as  bank  account 
information

information 

 䊏 other  confi dential,  market  moving 
insider 
in  the  hands 
of  third  parties  such  as  investment 
bankers, consultants, and lawyers, such 
as  information  regarding  nonpublic 
M&A  activity,  clinical  trial  results,  or 
regulatory approvals

 䊏 the introduction into internal networks 
of  viruses  or  other  malicious  code,  as 
in  the  Dairy  Queen  attack,  in  which 
vendor  credentials  were  used 
to 
gain  access  to  internal  networks  and 
eventually  install  malware  targeting 
point-of-sale systems

 䊏 the introduction of other vulnerabilities 
to  IT  systems,  for  instance,  by  the  use 
of  vulnerable  third-party  applications 
or  code,  as  occurred  in  the  Heartbleed 
OpenSSL 
that  potentially 
exposed  the  data  transmitted  to  and 
from secure web servers

exploit 

 䊏 misuse  and  secondary  use  of  company 
data such as for direct marketing or data 
mining for the benefi t of the vendor

 䊏 “fourth-party”  risk,  that  is,  the  third-
party  cybersecurity  risks  introduced 
by  a  vendor’s  relationships  with  its 
own  third-party  service  providers  and 
vendors

 䊏 potential director or management liability 
for breach of fi duciary duty in the exercise 
of cybersecurity oversight.

To help manage this array of risks effectively, 
companies may consider whether they have 
appropriate procedures in place to evaluate 
and monitor individual vendors, as well as a 
program to manage and monitor third-party 
relationships.

■   Engagement-level management of third-party 

cybersecurity risk

The appropriate measures needed to scruti-
nize  and  monitor  third-party  service  pro-
viders  will  depend  to  a  large  extent  upon 

  MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING   

the  sophistication  of  the  vendor  and  the 
nature  of  the  IT  systems  and  data  at  issue. 
Nonetheless, three elements are common to 
all third-party risk management:

 1.  due  diligence  prior  to  entering  an 

engagement

 2.  contractual  commitments  and  legal  risk 

management

 3.  ongoing monitoring and oversight.

■   Pre-engagement due diligence
A  critical  element  of  managing  third-party 
risk  is  the  assessment  of  the  third  party’s 
own  security  practices  and  posture  before 
any contract is signed. Such diligence is cru-
cial for the identifi cation and evaluation of 
risks, and, in turn, can ensure that such risks 
are  mitigated  before  the  engagement, 
including  through  the  use  of  contractual 
provisions.  The  actual  evaluation  may  be 
more  ad  hoc  (i.e.,  conversations  with  key 
business or technology stakeholders) or for-
mal  (i.e.,  through  a  questionnaire  or  even 
on-site  assessment),  and  the  extent  of  an 
evaluation  may  depend  on  various  factors 
in  the  prospective  relationship,  including, 
for  example,  whether  the  service  provider 
will  have  access  to  the  company’s  IT  sys-
tems,  the  nature  of  the  information  that  it 
may  access,  and  whether  it  will  store  such 
information.

Depending  on  the  extent  of  the  relation-
ship  and  information  that  may  be  accessed 
by the vendor, the following areas of inquiry 
may be necessary to inform a cybersecurity 
diligence assessment:

experienced 

 䊏 whether  and  how  often  the  vendor 
cybersecurity 
has 
incidents  in  the  past,  the  severity  of 
those incidents, and the quality of the 
vendor’s response

 䊏 whether 

the 

vendor  maintains 
cybersecurity  policies,  such  as  whether 
the vendor has a written security policy 
or plan

 䊏 organizational  considerations,  such  as 
whether  the  vendor  maintains  suffi cient 
and  appropriately  trained  personnel  to 

  215  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

protect  the  data  and/or  service  at  issue 
and respond to incidents

 䊏 human  resources  practices,  particularly 
background  screening  of  employees, 
cybersecurity  training,  and  the  handling 
of terminations

 䊏 access  controls,  particularly  whether 
controls  are  in  place  that  restrict  access 
to  information  and  uniquely  identify 
users  such  that  access  attempts  can  be 
monitored and reviewed

 䊏 encryption  practices,  including  whether 
information is encrypted at rest, whether 
information  transmitted  to  or  from 
the  vendor  is  properly  encrypted,  and 
whether cryptographic keys are properly 
managed

 䊏 evaluation  of  in  what  country  any  data 

will be stored

 䊏 the  vendor’s  policies  regarding  the 
secondary  use  of  customer  data,  and 
whether  IT  systems  are  created  in 
such  a  way  as  to  respect  limitations  on 
secondary use

 䊏 physical  security,  including  resilience 
and  disaster  recovery  functions  and 
the  use  of  personnel  and  technology  to 
prevent unauthorized physical access to 
facilities

 䊏 back-up and recovery practices
 䊏 change  control  management,  including 
protocols  on  the  installation  of  and 
execution of software

 䊏 system  acquisition,  development,  and 
maintenance to manage risk from software 
development  or  the  deployment  of  new 
software or hardware

 䊏 risk  management  of  the  vendor’s  own 

third-party vendors

 䊏 incident 

response  plans, 

including 
whether  evidence  of  an 
incident 
is  collected  and  retained  so  as  to  be 
presentable  to  a  court  and  whether  the 
vendor  periodically  tests  its  response 
capabilities

 䊏 whether  the  vendor  conducts  regular, 
independent  audits  of  its  privacy  and 
information security practices

■  216 

■   Contractual risk and negotiation
In addition to evaluating third parties on the 
basis of their cybersecurity practices, anoth-
er important risk mitigation tool is the actual 
contractual  language.  As  with  other  areas, 
contractual requirements can be an effective 
way  to  allocate  risk  and  responsibility  for 
potential  breaches  of  cybersecurity,  includ-
ing  the  investigation  and  remediation  of 
such incidents. Commonly negotiated terms 
include the following:

 䊏 a  requirement  that  the  vendor  have  a 
written  information  security  program 
that  complies  with  applicable  law  or 
other regulatory or industry standards

 䊏 limits  and  conditions  on  the  use  of 
subcontractors  and  other  third-party 
service providers

 䊏 restrictions  on  secondary  use  of  data, 
including making clear that the customer 
remains the owner of any data transmitted 
to the vendor and any derivatives of that 
data

 䊏 mandatory and timely notifi cation in case 

of a security incident

 䊏 rights  to  audit  or  otherwise  monitor  the 
vendor’s  compliance  with  the  terms  of 
the contract

 䊏 in case of a breach, a requirement that the 
vendor  take  on  reasonable  measures  to 
correct its security processes and take any 
necessary remediation steps

 䊏 provisions ensuring an orderly transition 
to  in-house  systems  or  another  third 
party  in  case  of  the  termination  of  the 
relationship.

In  addition  to  such  terms,  indemnifi cation 
clauses can be used to shift the risk of data 
breach onto the third party and to incentiv-
ize healthy security practices. To accompany 
an indemnifi cation clause, it sometimes can 
be  desirable  to  draft  clauses  that  defi ne 
when the entity is or is not liable, on which 
party  the  burden  of  proof  falls,  and  how 
root-cause analysis should be conducted. To 
ensure capacity to take on the fi nancial costs 

of  a  breach,  third  parties  are  frequently 
required to obtain a cybersecurity insurance 
policy.

From  the  business’s  perspective  a  third-
party vendor should be fully responsible for 
any  liability  for  data  breaches  that  occur 
while  the  data  are  under  the  vendor’s  con-
trol.  However,  vendors  often  push  for  caps 
on  their  cybersecurity  liability.  To  guide 
negotiations as to appropriate caps on liabil-
ity,  consider  the  type  of  data  processed  or 
accessed by the third party (e.g., how sensi-
tive  is  it,  does  it  relate  to  employees,  con-
sumers,  or  is  it  not  personally  identifying 
information),  the  volume  of  records  to  be 
handled by the third party, the ability for the 
customer  to  implement  security  controls 
such as encryption, the nature and extent of 
the  third-party  promises  on  cybersecurity, 
and  the  brand  and  reputation  of  the  third 
party with respect to data security. Based on 
those  inputs,  a  company  can  then  consider 
the  potential  losses  and  sources  of  third-
party  liability  to  evaluate  what  constitutes 
an acceptable level of risk in terms of exclu-
sions for indemnifi cations and caps on liabil-
ity. A  business  also  may  consider  offsetting 
any  contractual  concessions  with  corre-
sponding  increases  in  their  own  cybersecu-
rity insurance coverage.

■   Ongoing monitoring and oversight
Ongoing monitoring and oversight of third-
party service providers is essential given the 
rapidly changing landscape of cybersecurity 
threats.  Whereas  due  diligence  provides  a 
snapshot  of  a  third  party’s  cybersecurity 
stance  at  a  specifi c  point  in  time,  continual 
monitoring and the right to such monitoring 
are  necessary  to  help  ensure  that  the  third 
party responds and adapts to secure its sys-
tems against new threats. Over the life of the 
relationship,  periodic  checks,  including  on-
site  reviews  of  vendor,  can  be  important 
oversight  mechanisms.  Other  monitoring 
requirements  include  access  to  timely  and 
accurate  records  and  reports  of  the  third-
party provider’s cybersecurity posture.

  MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING   

Although relatively uncommon outside 
of certain regulated industries, such as the 
fi nancial and health-care industries, provi-
sions in vendor contracts for regular secu-
rity  audits  by  an  independent  third  party 
provide  a  robust  but  intrusive  form  of 
periodic  monitoring.  However,  it  is  not 
always possible to obtain audit rights from 
a  vendor.  Alternatively,  the  vendor  could 
be required to provide up-to-date certifi ca-
tions  of  compliance  with  industry  stand-
ards  or  regular,  third-party  audit  reports. 
In  addition,  to  manage  fourth-party  risk, 
vendors could be required to perform ini-
tial and periodic assessments of their own 
service providers and vendors if they will 
be  handling  sensitive  information.  If,  in 
the  course  of  an  audit,  vulnerabilities  are 
identifi ed  or  practices  are  found  that  are 
not  in  compliance  with  industry  practices 
or  regulatory  requirements,  the  vendor 
may  be  required  to  notify  the  customer 
and  correct  any  outstanding  issues  in  a 
timely fashion.

As part of ongoing monitoring of vendor 
cybersecurity, it is useful if the contract with 
a  third-party  service  provider  also  includes 
notifi cation  and  remediation  provisions  if 
the vendor becomes aware of defi ciencies in 
its cybersecurity posture. In addition, as part 
of the remedies, the outsourcing party may 
seek  the  right  to  terminate  the  agreement 
immediately and to receive a pro rata refund 
of  any  fees  paid  or  payable.  In  addition  to 
contractual provisions dealing with the ter-
mination,  contingency  plans  to  facilitate  an 
orderly  end  to  the  third-party  relationship 
and a smooth transition to an in-house solu-
tion  or  another  a  third-party  provider  may 
prove useful.

■   Conclusion
The  measures  described  above—diligence, 
contractual  terms,  and  continued  monitor-
ing and oversight—are critical elements of a 
comprehensive  cybersecurity  program  that 
includes managing third-party relationships. 
To effectuate these elements, in turn, it often 

  217  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

is  helpful  to  have  standardized  processes 
and documentation.

Examples include standardized diligence 
checklists and questionnaires, template con-
tract  addendums  addressing  cybersecurity 
issues,  and  standardized  schedules  for 
audits  and  other  forms  of  monitoring. 
Because there is no one-size-fi ts-all approach 
that  is  appropriate  for  every  vendor,  it  is 
appropriate to implement a tiered approach 

that scales due diligence, contractual obliga-
tions,  and  oversight  processes  according  to 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  cybersecurity 
risks  presented  by  the  vendor  relationship. 
In  all  events,  it  is  important  that  organiza-
tions periodically review their processes for 
evaluating  and  overseeing  third-party  rela-
tionships  to  ensure  that  such  processes  are 
periodically updated and appropriately tai-
lored to address new and emerging threats.

■  218 

SecurityRoundtable.org

A new look at an old threat 
in cyberspace: The insider
Delta Risk LLC – Thomas Fuhrman, President

insider threat is to take it seriously.“

“The fi rst thing that business leaders should do about the 

People  are,  without  doubt,  the  most  consequential  part 
of  cybersecurity.  They  design  the  hardware,  write  the 
software,  build  the  systems,  confi gure  and  manage  the 
boxes,  install  the  software  patches,  and,  obviously,  use 
the computers. At every point in cyberspace, people create 
vulnerabilities. Whether they realize it, people are a major 
security  risk.  The  insider  threat,  however,  is  not  just  a 
product of conscientious but fallible humans: the dark side 
of  human  nature  is  also  in  play.  The  idea  of  the  ‘enemy 
within’ is as old as the hills, and its cyber equivalent is too.
The insider threat to computer systems and networks 
has been a recognized reality for decades. It was a topic in 
1970 in the landmark report by the RAND Corporation, 
Security  Controls  for  Computer  Systems,  and  its  roots  go 
back  even  further.  However,  since  2013  when  defense 
computer  systems  contractor  Edward  Snowden—an 
insider—carried  out  one  of  the  largest  and  most  signifi -
cant  unauthorized  disclosures  of  classifi ed  government 
information in U.S. history, the issue was brought home to 
business executives. They realized, “If that can happen to 
the National Security Agency, it can happen to me.”

■   What’s new with the insider threat?
In this, the post-Snowden era, the potential impact of the 
insider has become a much more tangible issue to compa-
nies and organizations of every kind. However, although 
this  heightened  awareness  is  new,  there  are  also  other 
recent developments that make the current insider threat 
challenge more diffi cult than ever. Key among such devel-
opments are the following:

 䊏 the  vast  amount  of  vital  business  and  personal  data 

that is online

219  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

 䊏 the migration of data outside the security 
perimeter  of  the  enterprise  through 
the  widespread  adoption  of  cloud-
based  services,  increased  outsourcing, 
increasingly 
Internet-enabled  supply 
chain  operations,  and  the  ubiquity  of 
mobile  communications  and  computing 
devices  in  the  ‘bring  your  own  device’ 
(BYOD) environment

 䊏 the  increase  in  the  marketability  of 
sensitive,  personal,  proprietary,  or 
confi dential  data  through  global  cyber 
crime syndicates and hacker networks.

These  developments  in  combination  invest 
more  power—and  risk—in  the  individual 
insider and make ‘keeping a secret while selec-
tively sharing it’ a harder problem than ever.

From  a  cyber  perspective,  the  insider  is 
the person who the enterprise has entrusted 
to  access  and  operate  with  the  company’s 
data  and  information  resources  in  the  rou-
tine  course  of  business.  Anyone  who  has 
legitimate  (or  ‘authorized’)  access  to  the 
information and the business systems, data-
bases, email, or other information resources 
of the enterprise is an insider.

In many companies today, a large number 
of  legitimate  insiders  are  not  actually 
employees.  This  group  includes  former 
employees,  contractors,  business  partners, 
vendors, suppliers, and others such as cloud 
service  providers  and  business  application 
hosting  services  that  have  been  granted 
access  to  corporate  enterprise  networks. 
Evidence indicates that the access privileges 
of  such  non-employee  insiders  are  diffi cult 
to manage and thus more easily exploited. In 
the large data breach at The Home Depot in 
2014,  for  example,  the  hackers  entered  the 
corporate network through a vendor’s legiti-
mate access credentials.

Can  employees  and  other  insiders  be 
trusted? The answer, of course, is mostly yes. 
It has to be. Business runs on human capital. 
Without trustworthy insiders, the organiza-
tion cannot function. However, the residual 
‘no’  is  a  cause  for  serious  concern.  Seen  in 
this light the question is more about setting 
the limits of trust at the right level. Better ways 

■  220 

to effi ciently screen potential employees, man-
age access rights, enforce obligations, detect 
malicious  tendencies  and  behaviors,  and 
implement security controls are needed.

The insider threat is usually thought of as 
having two types: the malicious insider and 
the  unwitting  insider.  Although  these  two 
types of insider are very different in motiva-
tions  and  objectives,  they  can  have  similar 
ruinous effects on the organization.

 䊏 The malicious insider. The malicious insider 
is  the  ‘spy’  or  ‘traitor’  who  represents 
the  insider  cyberthreat  at  its  most  basic. 
This  rogue  employee,  at  most  a  small 
percentage  of  the  workforce  (Spectorsoft 
reports  that  an  estimated  10  percent  of 
employees  account  for  95  percent  of 
incidents), uses her or his legitimate access 
to  a  company’s  information  resources  to 
deliberately harm the organization.

Malicious insiders know about the organi-
zation’s information, its systems, its struc-
ture  and  people,  and  its  internal  opera-
tions.  They  have  access  to  the  enterprise 
network from inside the perimeter defens-
es. They can do damage such as stealing 
data,  disabling  systems,  and  installing 
viruses or malware. Those with privileged 
access can do even more, such as disabling 
accounts,  destroying  backups,  changing 
confi guration fi les, and more. Those with-
out  privileged  access  can  sometimes  get 
it  through  insider  trickery,  bypassing 
authentication processes or gaining access 
through the credentials of others. Snowden 
himself  reportedly  persuaded  colleagues 
to share passwords with him to get access 
beyond what he was already allowed.

A  fundamental  and  important  point  to 
recognize is that the insider as a malicious 
threat is not limited to the cyber and infor-
mation  systems  realm.  Other  targets  and 
methods  are  possible,  including  physical 
theft,  destruction,  or  violence,  coercion 
and extortion, or other non-cyber actions. 
This  fact  has  a  direct  bearing  on  the 
approaches  available  to  prevent,  detect, 

and  act  against  malicious  or  potentially 
malicious insiders.

The psychology of the malicious insider is 
a defi ned fi eld of study. In short, an insider 
can  become  a  threat  for  many  reasons— 
including for example, anger as a result of 
workplace  confl icts  or  disputes,  fear  of 
termination,  dissatisfaction  with  work-
place policies, ideology, or fi nancial need.

 䊏 The unwitting insider. Almost anyone can 
fall into the category of unwitting insider 
threat agent, including senior executives. 
As  a  threat  actor,  the  unwitting  insider 
unintentionally 
unknowingly 
makes  security  blunders  that  expose  the 
enterprise to serious cyber risks.

and 

  Because  the  pool  of  potential  unwitting 
actors  is  so  large  and  their  behaviors  are 
unintentional  and  hard  to  predict,  the 
unwitting  insider  is  one  of  the  most  dan-
gerous weak points in the entire enterprise.

One  group  of  insiders  who  can  pose  a 
major threat are those who have a lax atti-
tude about security. These attitudes are not 
always  obvious.  Security  awareness  cam-
paigns are so commonplace now that just 
about everyone exercises at least some cau-
tion in online activities. At the same time, 
though, we can also observe that a certain 
insouciance  about  the  risks  in  cyberspace 
has crept into the behavior of many people. 
The same person who would refrain from 
using the word ‘password’ as a password 
or from writing it on a sticky note to place 
on the computer monitor may think noth-
ing of other poor security practices.

Today’s  culture,  for  example,  seems  to 
encourage  the  melding  of  personal  and 
professional pursuits. People have become 
so accustomed to online life—being always 
connected, using multiple computing plat-
forms,  putting  their  ‘whole  life’  (as  they 
say) on their smartphones, or posting pho-
tos  and  personal  information  on  social 
websites—that  it  appears  many  have 

  A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER  

become  unconcerned  about  the  associated 
security and privacy risks. Users sometimes 
bring such personal Internet habits into the 
workplace,  often  paradoxically  because  of 
their zeal to do their jobs. They may insert a 
thumb  drive  into  a  corporate  machine  to 
transfer  a  fi le.  (“I  needed  to  work  on  the 
fi le—what  was  I  supposed  to  do?”)  They 
could sync a personal smartphone to a cor-
porate  computer.  (“What’s  wrong  with 
that?”) They may drop a proprietary docu-
ment into a public cloud. (“I need to work 
on it while I travel.”) The list continues. All 
of these actions and many others like them 
by  the  unwitting  insider  create  serious 
enterprise security risks.

The  single  most  common  security  weak-
ness  of  most  people  is  a  susceptibility  to 
phishing  attacks.  Phishing  is  a  form  of 
‘social  engineering’  that  has  the  goal  of 
getting  information  such  as  usernames, 
passwords,  or  credit  card  numbers. 
Phishing usually starts with a fraudulent 
email  message  (although  other  mecha-
nisms  are  also  used)  that  appears  to  be 
from  a  legitimate  or  known  source.  The 
message may contain an attachment that, 
if opened, installs malware on the victim’s 
computer, or the message may direct the 
user to a website that is also designed to 
look legitimate, even familiar, to the target 
victim.  This  bogus  website  prompts  the 
user  to  enter  information  such  as  log-in 
credentials  or  account  numbers.  If  the 
user’s suspicions have not been aroused, 
she or he may enter the requested data—
and gotcha!—the hacker has succeeded in 
capturing information that can be used for 
access  later.  Alternatively  or  in  addition, 
the bogus website may push out a virus, 
remote access software, key-logging soft-
ware, or other malware. Very often phish-
ing is the start of a chain of exploits that 
leads to a very serious breach. The Verizon 
2015  Data  Breach  Investigations  Report 
(DBIR) states that more than 75% of mal-
ware installs were the result of unwitting 
users clicking on attachments or web links 
contained in emails.

  221  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

that 

Phishing  also  is  used  in  a  more  focused 
way 
targets  specific  people—
frequently senior executives or people in 
the  organization  who  have  privileged 
access  to  information  resources.  The 
hacker will mine the Internet for personal 
information  on  the  target,  information 
that  only  the  target  would  know,  names 
and  contact  information  of  colleagues, 
web  browsing  and  purchase  history, 
non-business  activities  and  community 
involvement, even writing styles to zoom 
in  on  that  specifi c  person.  When  such 
information  is  used  in  a  phishing  email, 
the look and feel, the text, and the context 
of the message can appear unexceptional 
and entirely authentic. If this were a game 
it would be unfair. The target frequently 
falls for the scheme.

Like the poor soul who sends money to the 
Nigerian prince or the person who invests 

in  shares  of  the  Brooklyn  Bridge,  the 
unwitting person can easily be taken in by 
a  well-designed  phishing  ploy.  However, 
whether the result of inadvertent or delib-
erate  acts,  the  impact  to  the  organization 
can  be  the  same—fi nancial  loss,  compro-
mise of intellectual property, theft of cus-
tomer  personal  information  and  credit 
card data, and reputational harm or loss of 
competitive position.

This highlights a third and more sinister 
type  of  ‘insider’  that  must  also  be 
considered—the  malicious  outsider 
posing as an insider. Such actors explic-
itly seek to exploit insiders by appropri-
ating  their  credentials  and  moving 
unnoticed within the network.

Figure  1  illustrates  the  categories  of  the 
insider threat, along with typical motiva-
tions and potential impacts.

FIGURE

Insider threat actors and their effects

Threat Actors

Motivations

Methods

Unwitting insider

• Efﬁciency and
   convenience
• Customer service
• `Getting the job done´

• Move sensitive internal data to a
   public cloud
• Lose a laptop
• Use a memory stick to import or
   export data
• Mix company data with personal
   data on moblie devices

Malicious insider

• Financial gain
• Do harm to the company
• Advance an ideology or
   other personal agenda

• Use legitimate access for
   illegitimate purposes

Malicious outsider 

posing as an

insider

• Financial gain—obtain
   sensistive data that can
   be monetized
• Fraud or theft of money
• Do harm to the company
• Advance an ideology or
   other personal agenda

• Exploit the access of a
   legitimate user
• Bypass security controls on
   privilege escalation and lateral
   movement throughout the
   network to get to key systems
   for exﬁltration and/or
   insertion of malware

Results

Cyber
Incident

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
 
e
m
a
s
 
e
h
t
 
e
v
a
h
 
n
a
c
 
s
t
a
e
r
h
t
 
r
e
d
i
s
n
i
 
l
l

A

Examples
• Theft of sensitive
   information (e.g.,
   personally identiﬁable
   information, intellectual
   property, proprietary
   information)
• Financial fraud or theft
• Insertion of malware
   and/or establishing a
   long-term presence in
   the network for repeat
   action
• Damaged or destroyed
   information resources
• Sabotaged product (the
   merchandise produced
   by the enterprise)
• Reputation harm and
   customer alienation; loss
   of revenue

■  222 

 䊏 The  outsider  posing  as  an  insider.  This 
type  of  insider  is  not  an  insider  in  the 
true  sense,  but  rather  an  imposter  who 
uses  the  legitimate  credentials  of  others 
to  access  the  network  in  ways  the  real 
user  would  not.  This  actor  seeks  to  get 
legitimate  credentials  using  a  variety  of 
tactics and techniques. He then uses these 
acquired  credentials  to  access  password 
fi les,  directories  and  access  control  lists, 
and  other  network  resources—which  is 
made easier if the credentials are already 
those  of  a  system  administrator  or  other 
privileged user.

As described above, the unwitting insider 
is  very  commonly  exploited  by  sophisti-
cated hackers as a soft point of entry for 
advanced  attacks.  Elaborate  penetration 
techniques are hardly needed when a rel-
atively simple phishing email is likely to 
serve the purpose. Upon achieving initial 
access, the hacker may try to move later-
ally  within  the  network  or  to  escalate 
access  privileges  to  implant  advanced 
malware  deeply  in  the  network  fabric. 
Phishing  is  the  dominant  mechanism 
used today to penetrate networks by even 
the most sophisticated hackers because it 
has a high success rate for very low cost.

Other  social  engineering  tactics  include 
in-person  deceit,  such  as  impersonating 
someone in authority, pretending to rep-
resent the Help Desk, asking someone for 
assistance,  or  claiming  to  have  left  an 
access badge inside the restricted area of a 
facility.  It  can  be  a  particularly  effective 
tactic  because  people  usually  try  to  be 
courteous and helpful.

Hackers have tricks other than social engi-
neering  to  obtain  the  access  they  desire. 
Most of the time, though, social engineer-
ing  can  be  found  somewhere  along  the 
attack chain because it is a powerful and 
effi cient  way  of  getting  past  perimeter 
defenses.  The  sophistication  we  hear 
about in reports of state-sponsored espio-
nage,  hacker  networks,  and  organized 

  A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER  

cybercrime  is  exhibited  in  the  tradecraft 
that  is  applied  once  the  initial  breach  is 
achieved.

The  outsider-posing-as-insider  is  not 
interested  in  impersonating  a  particular 
person other than to use the person’s net-
work  or  system  credentials.  Through 
password cracking and other techniques, 
a  hacker  can  exploit  the  credentials  of 
more than one authorized user or admin-
istrator in the course of an attack. Unlike 
the true insider, the only observables that 
the  outsider  leaves  are  those  network 
footprints and fi ngerprints that may show 
up in system logs or the actual malware 
code  or  other  digital  fragments  they 
leave behind.

■   The dimensions of the insider threat
The  insider  threat  is  easy  to  understand  in 
concept  but  very  hard  to  quantify  in  prac-
tice. How big of a threat is it? Hard data and 
statistics on the frequency of occurrence and 
the  impact  of  insider  threats  have  histori-
cally  been  elusive  and  remain  so.  Lack  of 
detection  and  discovery  of  insider  events, 
and  an  unwillingness  to  share  or  report 
them, are two of the primary reasons for the 
paucity of data. Nevertheless, recent insider 
threat surveys and breach data analyses are 
consistent in their main fi ndings, including 
the following:

 䊏 There  has  been  an  increase  in  insider 

threat events in the last few years.

 䊏 Most organizations do not have adequate 
controls  in  place  to  prevent  or  thwart 
insider attacks.

 䊏 Insider  attacks  are  believed  to  be  more 

diffi cult to detect than external attacks.

is  devoted 

 䊏 Third  parties  and  other  non-employee 
insiders  represent  a  major  risk,  and 
insuffi cient  attention 
to 
managing  them.  Most  contracts  and 
service  level  agreements  with  external 
vendors, suppliers, and business partners 
do not include robust security provisions.
 䊏 Insider policy violations and inappropriate 
activity are often discovered only during 

  223  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

examination  of  user  devices  after 
individuals have left the organization.

 䊏 Most  incidents  are  handled  internally 
with no legal nor law enforcement action.

■   What to do
The fi rst thing that business leaders should 
do about the insider threat is to take it seri-
ously. Although there is widespread recogni-
tion  that  the  threat  is  very  serious,  in  most 
sectors there is insuffi cient follow-through to 
build the threat-specifi c plans, organization-
al  structures,  and  controls  to  deal  with  it. 
What is needed is a comprehensive approach 
that  addresses  and  leverages  the  unique 
aspects of the insider threat. Technology by 
itself  is  not  the  answer;  the  critical  human 
dimension of the insider threat must also be 
addressed.

A  comprehensive  approach  would 

include the following:

 䊏 Establishing  a 

threat-aware  culture  of 
institutional integrity and personal reliability. 
Company  culture  is  a  product  of  many 
factors,  but  one  of  the  most  decisive 
is  the  behavior  of  senior  leadership 
and  the  values  they  model.  A  culture 
of  institutional  integrity  and  personal 
reliability is conducive to success in almost 
any enterprise. Factors for achieving this 
include the following:
 䊏 Create  an  environment  in  which  self-
directed  employee  actions  refl ect  a 
high  degree  of  institutional  integrity 
and personal reliability.

 䊏 Articulate  clear  expectations  in  an 
enterprise  Acceptable  Use  Policy 
governing  IT  resources.  This  should 
be a formal signed agreement between 
the  company  and  each  employee  and 
external  party  who  has  access  to  the 
enterprise IT resources or facilities.

 䊏 Create  a  safe  environment  in  which 
to 
self-report  accidental  actions 
that  jeopardize  security.  Removing 
the  stigma  of  having  inadvertently 
committed a security violation can help 
minimize  impact  and  help  everyone 
learn.

■  224 

 䊏 Provide regular insider threat awareness 
training  as  well  as  realistic  phishing 
training  exercises.  An  organized 
phishing  awareness  exercise  program 
can  raise  the  company’s  standard  of 
performance in this critical area.

 䊏 Establish  a  set  of  institutional  values 
refl ecting  the  desired  culture,  select 
leaders  based  on  their  adherence 
to 
include 
demonstration  of  these  values  as 
an  item  on  employee  performance 
assessments.

these  values, 

and 

 䊏 Building  a  multi-disciplinary  program. 
Establish  an  executive  committee  to 
manage  an  integrated  multidisciplinary 
program  designed  to  deter,  prevent, 
detect,  and  respond  to  insider  threats 
and  to  limit  their  impact.  The  program 
should  have  the  active  participation  of 
the  functional  organizations  across  the 
business such as Risk, IT, Cybersecurity, 
Physical  Security,  Human  Resources, 
Fraud,  and  General  Counsel,  as 
well  as  company-specific  verticals 
(manufacturing, operations, etc.).

The program should include the following:
 䊏 creation  and  oversight  of  policies 
related  to  the  management  of  insider 
risk

 䊏 regularized  workfl ow,  processes,  and 
meetings  to  actively  and  collectively 
review  threat  intelligence,  the  internal 
threat  landscape,  internal  indicators  of 
risk, insider events, sponsored activities, 
and trends from each subdiscipline

 䊏 implementation  and  oversight  of 
personnel  reliability  processes  from 
pre-employment  background  checks 
to  off-boarding  procedures  to  assess 
and  act  upon  personnel  security 
indicators, 
risks,  behavioral  risk 
and 
to 
compromise

individual  vulnerability 

 䊏 decision-making  authority  pertaining 
to  the  integration  of  programs  within 
each vertical, the aggregation of insider 
risk  data  across  the  verticals,  and  the 
corporate response to insider events

 䊏 defi nition of requirements for employee 
training  and  awareness  of  insider 
threats and prevention measures.

 䊏 Building  and  operating  security  controls. 
Many of the security controls that already 
exist (or should exist) within the enterprise 
can be effective in detecting, preventing, 
or mitigating the results of insider threat 
activity. Key technical controls include the 
following:
 䊏 access 

controls,  particularly 

privileged 
administrative authority)

users 

for 
(those  with 

 䊏 data  protection,  including  encryption, 
data  loss  prevention  technology,  data 
backups, and exfi ltration monitoring

 䊏 confi guration management and secure 

confi gurations

 䊏 vulnerability and patch management
 䊏 internal network segmentation.

 䊏 Monitoring  and  detecting  insider  behavior. 
The  program  should  seek  to  prevent 
insider  attacks  by  capturing  observable 
indicators  of  potential  activity  before 
insiders  act.  Intelligence  on  the  insider 
threat  generally  comes  from  within  the 
enterprise  through  either  technical  data 
or behavioral indicators:
 䊏 Technical. The most signifi cant sources 
of  cyber-related  technical  intelligence 
are  the  real-time  alerts  and  outputs 
of  security  appliances,  network- 
and  host-based  sensors,  and  data 
loss  prevention  tools,  as  well  as  the 
network-  and  system-level  logs  that 
are  generated  automatically  (if  so 
confi gured) throughout the enterprise. 
In  most  enterprises  these  sources 
provide  so  much  data  that  managing 
and  effectively  integrating  it  with 
operations become serious challenges. 
In addition, the volume of data drives 
a  need  for  storage  that  can  become 
acute  depending  on  policy  decisions 
regarding  what  logs  are  maintained 
and for how long.
Insider  threat-tracking  tools  in  use 
today,  such  as  data  loss  prevention, 
threat 
security 
information  and  event  management 

intelligence,  and 

 

  A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER  

(SIEM)  systems,  pinpoint  potentially 
illicit 
identifying 
anomalies  in  a  person’s  IT  resource 
and data access patterns.

activities 

by 

 䊏 Non-technical.  Unique  to  the  insider 
threat  is  the  availability  of  a  large 
amount  of  relevant  non-technical 
behavioral  observables.  Integrating 
operational intelligence information at 
the intersection of cybersecurity, fraud 
detection,  and  physical  security  can 
yield  critical  insights  about  potential 
insider threats.

 䊏 Examples  of  non-technical  cyber  data 

include the following:
 䊏 email  behavior:  volume,  content, 
and  addressees;  presence  and  type 
of attachments

 䊏 workday activities: patterns of on/
off duty time, including weekdays, 
weekends, and holidays; location

 䊏 job  performance:  performance 
reviews,  productivity,  and  time 
accountability

 䊏 indicators  of  affi liation:  degree 
of  participation 
company-
sponsored  activities;  indications  of 
discontent through online behavior 
and social media usage.

in 

Analysis of this type of data through auto-
mated and manual processes can identify 
patterns  of  behavior  that  indicate  at-risk 
employees  or  imminent  insider  attacks. 
There  may  also  be  value  in  integrating 
external threat intelligence for factors that 
could infl uence at-risk insiders.

It is important that the company’s legal 
counsel advise the executive committee 
on  informing  employees  of  ongoing 
monitoring  and  how  the  data  will  be 
used.  Oversight  by  the  executive  com-
mittee is essential to ensure it is operat-
ed within the bounds of policy.

 䊏 Having  a  plan.  The  executive  committee 
should  develop  a  detailed 
(though 
confi dential)  action  plan  for  what  to  do 
in the event of actual or suspected insider 

  225  ■

CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

misbehavior  or  law-breaking.  The  plan 
should describe how and when to contact 
law  enforcement  and  other  authorities 
regarding  insider  threats  or  actions.  It 
should  provide  a  framework  of  possible 
legal  remedies  to  pursue  in  the  event  of 
an insider attack. This action plan should 
be  tested  on  a  regular  basis  through 
scenario-based  exercises  involving  the 
company offi cials who would actually be 
involved if a real event were to occur.

 䊏 Evolving  the  approach.  The  executive 
committee  should  refi ne  the  program  as 
the  organization  matures  in  the  use  of 
this capability within the specifi c business 
environment.
‘going 

it  alone.’  The  executive 
committee  should  take  advantage  of  the 
many  resources  available  for  planning 

 䊏 Not 

and  conducting  operations  pertaining  to 
the insider threat. Proven approaches and 
practices  for  addressing  this  threat  are 
available, allowing the company to build 
on  the  learnings  of  other  organizations. 
(See inset box.)

■   Summing up
Companies  often  declare  that  people  are 
their  greatest  asset.  Surely  the  human 
resource  is  what  propels  a  company  for-
ward.  However,  the  insider  threat  will 
always  be  present.  Commitment,  loyalty, 
and general affi liation with the organization 
cannot be taken for granted. Personal ethics 
and allegiance to the employer collide with 
the  chance  for  selfi sh  gains  in  those  who 
have  become  security  risks  or  who  are 
vulnerable  to  compromise.  With  legitimate 

Resources
The following resources can help enterprises deal with the insider threat. Each provides a wealth of 
information on proven approaches and practices that companies can build upon.

 䊏 Insider Risk Evaluation and Audit Tool. This tool is designed to help the user 

gauge an organization’s relative vulnerability to insider threats and adverse behavior 
including espionage against the U.S., theft of intangible assets or intellectual property, 
sabotage or attacks against networks or information systems, theft or embezzlement, 
illegal export of critical technology, and domestic terrorism or collaboration with 
foreign terrorist groups.

  The tool can be used for a number of purposes, including self-audit of an organization’s 

current defenses against insider abuse, the development of a strategic risk mitigation 
plan, and employee training and awareness.

  http://www.dhra.mil/perserec/products.html#InsiderRisk

 䊏 CERT Insider Threat Center. Since 2001, the CERT Insider Threat Center has 

conducted empirical research and analysis to develop and transition socio-technical 
solutions to combat insider cyberthreats. Partnering with the U.S. Department of 
Defense, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Secret Service, other 
federal agencies, the intelligence community, private industry, academia, and the 
vendor community, the CERT Insider Threat Center is positioned as a trusted broker 
that can provide short-term assistance to organizations and conduct ongoing research.

  https://www.cert.org/insider-threat/

 䊏 Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Insider Threat: An introduction to detecting and 

deterring an insider spy.

  This brochure provides an introduction for managers and security personnel on how 

to detect an insider threat and provides tips on how to safeguard trade secrets.

  https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/counterintelligence/the-insider-threat

■  226 

  A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER  

authorization to access company and infor-
mation  resources,  a  rogue  insider  can  do 
tremendous  harm  to  the  company.  The 
effects  of  an  insider  attack  can  be  felt  as 
fi nancial  loss,  erosion  of  competitive  posi-
tion,  brand  degradation,  customer  aliena-
tion, and more. The Snowden disclosures of 
2013 have, at least for now, sensitized busi-
ness leaders to the grave risks posed by the 
insider threat.

The unwitting insider is the equal of the 
malicious  insider  in  potential  damaging 
impact.  A  momentary  and  unintentional 
lapse in vigilance regarding security threats 
can be all it takes for a major compromise to 

occur.  Insiders  are  also  the  target  for  care-
fully  scripted  phishing  tactics;  the  insider 
who innocently clicks a link in an email may 
enable damage to the company well beyond 
her or his pay grade.

However, there is much that the organi-
zation’s  executive  leadership  can  do  to 
mitigate the insider threat, including estab-
lishing  the  right  culture,  implementing 
security controls, conducting ongoing mon-
itoring  and  detection  efforts,  and  being 
ready to respond quickly if indicators point 
to a likely insider threat. The following box 
summarizes  the  actions  that  are  recom-
mended here.

Summary of actions to address the insider threat

 1. Establish a culture of threat awareness, institutional integrity, and personal reliability

 䊏 Provide regular insider threat awareness training as well as realistic phishing 

training exercises.

 䊏 Articulate clear expectations in an enterprise Acceptable Use Policy governing IT 

resources.

 䊏 Create a safe environment in which to self-report accidental actions that jeopardize 

security.

2. Build a multi-disciplinary program to deter, prevent, detect, and respond to insider 

threats and to limit their impact.

 3. Build and operate security controls designed to mitigate the insider risk.

 4. Monitor insider behavior:

 䊏 multiple interdisciplinary dimensions
 䊏 draw on outside resources
 䊏 look inside the network for observables of potential insider threat activity

 
5. Have a plan for what to do in the event of actual or suspected insider malfeasance

 䊏 Know how and when to contact law enforcement and other authorities regarding 

insider threats.

 䊏 Explore legal remedies.

6. Be ready to develop your approach as conditions continue to change.

7. Don’t ‘go at it alone.’ There are many resources available for planning and ongoing 

operations. Best practices can be implemented based on another organization’s learning 
curve.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  227  ■

The Internet of Things
The Chertoff Group – Mark Weatherford, Principal

In the time it takes you to read this sentence—about eight 
seconds—approximately 150 new devices will have been 
added to the Internet of Things (IoT). That’s 61,500 new 
devices per hour, 1.5 million per day. There are currently 
about 7.4 billion devices connected to the IoT, more than 
there are human beings on the planet. By 2020, according 
to Gartner, there will be 26 billion. Cisco puts the number 
at 50 billion, and Morgan Stanley says it will be 75 billion. 
By any estimation, it will be a lot more devices than are in 
existence today.

People are beginning to notice this phenomenal rate of 
growth,  and  some  companies  are  seeing  incredible  eco-
nomic opportunities. However, the fact that the fi eld has 
grown so quickly and so dynamically means that some of 
the lessons we’ve learned in the past about security and 
privacy are not being employed—in the interest of fi rst-to-
market  opportunities—and  the  lack  of  oversight  has 
many wondering about the unknown unknowns.

These  three  defi nitions  together  provide  a  starting 
point  for  understanding  the  IoT  and  its  implications  for 
our future:

 䊏 In the physical sense, the IoT is all of those billions of 
devices,  installed  on  apparel,  appliances,  machines, 
vehicles,  electronics—most  of  them  incorporating 
sensors  to  gather  bits  of  data  and  then  sharing  that 
information via the Internet through central servers. The 
concept of the IoT was introduced in 1999 and evolved 
from  the  Machine-to-Machine  (M2M)  technology  that 
originated  in  the  1980s,  in  which  computer  processors 
communicated  with  each  other  over  networks.  The 
major difference is that most of the new devices cannot 
be considered processors but rather sensors and relays 
that simply facilitate the aggregation of data. Analogous 
to  the  shift  to  “cloud”  computing,  it  may  be  useful  to 
consider  this  new  data-generating  aspect  as  “the  fog.” 

229  ■

 CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

The  two  concepts—the  IoT  and  M2M—
are  now  poised  for  complete  integration, 
in  what  is  termed  convergence,  as  we 
move  into  technology’s  future.  Keep  in 
mind that in that future, anything that can 
be  connected  will  be  connected.  Christian 
Byrnes,  a  managing  vice  president 
at  Gartner,  says  that  “The  Internet  of 
Things  brings  a  major  addition  to  the 
responsibilities of cybersecurity: safety. IoT 
includes the fi nal convergence of physical 
and 
security  practices. 
As  such,  CIOs  and  CISOs  will  face  the 
possibility of their failures being the direct 
cause  of  death.  Confi dentiality,  Integrity 
and  Availability  will  be  remembered  as 
‘the good old days.’”

information 

 䊏 The IoT can also be thought of as just the 
collected data. With billions of connected 
devices,  all  contributing 
information 
around  the  clock,  it’s  more  data  about 
more  machines,  operations,  and  people 
than  has  ever  been  collected  before—
more  in  the  past  year  than  perhaps  has 
been recorded in all of human history, and 
certainly more than was imagined possible 
just  a  few  years  ago.  The  intelligent 
management and implementation of that 
data  make  it  possible  to  do  such  things 
as  navigate  a  driverless  car  through  city 
traffi c,  monitor  a  person’s  anatomical 
signals  and  take  action  to  manage  his 
or  her  health,  monitor  the  movement 
and  health  of  livestock,  provide  global 
tracking  and  communications,  manage 
energy use in buildings, and even operate 
sophisticated  industrial  equipment  from 
remote  locations.  Our  intelligence  and 
industrial abilities in the era of the IoT will 
be  limited  only  by  our  imaginations;  we 
will have the data we need to accomplish 
almost anything we can envision.

 䊏 In the philosophical sense, the IoT is also 
part  of  a  movement.  It’s  been  evolving 
for  more  than  a  century,  from  our  fi rst 
ability  to  communicate  with  each  other 
instantaneously by radio. The early days 
of  the  Information  Age  quickly  showed 
us  how  important  data  gathering  could 
be to the success of an operation. The IoT 

■  230 

is,  in  that  existential  meaning,  the  latest 
iteration  of  communication  technology. 
Of  course,  as  soon  as  we  developed  the 
ability  to  send  information  over  great 
distances  in  just  seconds,  some  people 
began  to  look  for  ways  to  capture  that 
information  from  sources  other  than 
their  own.  Early 
twentieth  century 
wartime  code  breakers  monitoring  the 
enemy’s radio communications often are 
mentioned as the fi rst hackers.

The  last  aspect  of  the  IoT  should  cause  the 
most  concern.  As  technology  has  become 
ever more sophisticated in its march toward 
providing  greater  capabilities  for  private 
enterprise,  governments,  and  the  people 
they serve, so have the tools and strategies of 
the  people  who  would  access  and  use  the 
information  for  more  malicious  purposes. 
The lack of recognition about the seriousness 
of this threat to companies and governments 
leads to a lack of security suffi cient to defend 
against attacks.

■  IoT benefi ts
According to John Chambers, CEO of Cisco 
Systems  Inc.,  the  Internet  of  Everything 
(which  includes  the  IoT  plus  the  actual 
networks  that  support  and  transmit  the 
data these devices generate) could be worth 
$14.4  trillion  in  revenue,  plus  another 
$4.6  trillion  in  savings  to  industry  and 
government.  That’s  $19  trillion,  greater 
than the GDP of many countries. The ben-
efi ts the IoT provides can be seen in every 
area  that  relies  on  technology,  as  well  as 
many  that  traditionally  have  not.  A  few 
examples:

 䊏 The  amount  of  municipal  solid  waste 
generated  around  the  world  is  expected 
to reach 2.2 billion tons annually by 2025, 
almost  double  the  amount  recorded  in 
2012. The cost of handling this waste will 
be about $375.5 billion per year. However, 
by changing the traffi c patterns of garbage 
trucks  and  installing  sensors  in  garbage 
cans  to  identify  when  they  are  full  and 
should be picked up, U.S. cities alone can 

save  $10  billion  in  waste  management 
costs.

 䊏 Unscheduled  maintenance  events  are 
responsible for about 10 percent of all fl ight 
cancellations  and  delays  in  commercial 
aviation,  costing  $8  billion  per  year. 
According  to  Marco  Annunziata,  chief 
economist  at  General  Electric,  preventive 
maintenance systems can allow airplanes, 
while  in  fl ight,  to  communicate  with 
technicians  on  the  ground  so  that  when 
the  plane  lands,  the  technicians  already 
know what needs attention. These systems 
are  self-learning  and  can  predict  issues 
that  a  human  operator  may  never  see, 
helping  prevent  more  than  60,000  delays 
and cancellations every year.

 䊏 On  the  personal  scale  there’s  Amazon’s 
Dash button. The idea is a perfect example 
of  how  the  IoT  works  at  the  micro 
level.  The  buttons  are  simple  wireless 
devices  with  the  logos  of  consumables 
manufacturers, about the size and shape 
of  a  thumb  drive.  A  Dash  button  for  a 
detergent could be attached to a washing 
machine.  When  the  supply  of  detergent 
is  low,  the  consumer  need  only  press 
the button, and another bottle is ordered 
through  Amazon  Prime.  Amazon  and 
other developers are also working on IoT 
devices  that  sense  when  the  supply  of  a 
consumable  is  low,  and  order  the  item 
automatically, without the consumer even 
being aware of the act.

■  IoT privacy issues
One  of  the  keys  to  IoT  advancements,  of 
course, is the interconnectivity of informa-
tion sources and their recipients. The infor-
mation  is  often  used  in  the  commercial 
realm  for  monetization  strategies,  and  by 
the  government  to  target  security  threats, 
each of which leads inevitably to concerns 
about privacy. In many cases when human 
beings  are  the  sources  of  this  information, 
they  do  not  even  know  they  are  acting  as 
such. Virtually every site a person visits on 
the  Internet  in  return  gathers  information 
about that person, from data stored on the 
computer being used (such as location and 

  THE INTERNET OF THINGS   

personal  information)  to  data  entered 
actively  during  the  site  visit.  In  addition, 
most transactions a person conducts while 
out  in  the  world  have  the  potential  to  be 
recorded and added to databases, and these 
transactions,  when  merged  with  other  col-
lected information, can be interpreted using 
computer  algorithms.  Even  when  the  data 
are anonymized, many people believe their 
privacy  is  violated  by  such  usage.  In  his 
book Future Crimes, Mark Goodman writes, 
“Data  brokers  get  their  information  from 
our  Internet  service  providers,  credit  card 
issuers,  mobile  phone  companies,  banks, 
credit bureaus, pharmacies, departments of 
motor vehicles, grocery stores, and increas-
ingly, our online activities. All the data we 
give  away  on  a  daily  basis  for  free  to  our 
social networks . . . are tagged, geo-coded, 
and  sorted  for  resale  to  advertisers  and 
marketers.”

 䊏 For  example,  in  a  well-publicized  case 
from 2012, mega-retailer Target analyzed 
purchasing  records  to  predict  when 
women  may  be  pregnant  and  even 
when they were due. The company then 
mailed  pregnancy-related  coupons  to 
the  women’s  addresses.  The  program 
came  to  national  attention  when  a  high 
school  student  received  the  coupons  at 
her  family’s  home,  alerting  her  father 
to her condition. Although embarrassing 
for the young woman, Target’s use of the 
information  gathered  was  legal  under 
the  Fair  Credit  Reporting  Act,  which 
allows “fi rst parties” to perform in-house 
analytics on collected data.

 䊏 During the Women’s Mini Marathon held 
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  last  year,  Symantec 
security researcher Candid Wueest stood 
on  the  street  and  stealthily  monitored 
data  from  the  activity  trackers  worn  by 
hundreds  of  runners.  The  data  included 
everything 
their  names  and 
addresses to the type of device they were 
wearing  and  the  passwords  for  those 
devices.

from 

 䊏 In  a  2013  case,  a  British  man  discovered 
that  his  LG  smart  TV  was  clandestinely 

  231  ■

 CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

transmitting viewing information back to 
the  South  Korean  manufacturer,  as  well 
as reporting the contents of devices, such 
as  a  USB  drive,  that  were  connected  to 
the  TV.  LG  claimed  the  information  was 
used,  as  in  the  Target  case,  “to  deliver 
more  relevant  advertisements  and  to 
offer  recommendations  to  viewers  based 
on  what  other  LG  smart  TV  owners 
are  watching.”  However,  the  man,  an 
IT  consultant,  discovered  that  the  TV 
transmitted  the  information  whether  the 
system setting for “collection of watching 
info” was set to on or off.

According to a report on privacy and security 
released by the Federal Trade Commission in 
January of 2015, one company that makes an 
IoT home automation product indicated that 
fewer  than  10,000  households  can  “generate 
150  million  discrete  data  points  a  day,”  or 
approximately  one  data  point  every  six  sec-
onds for each household. Another participant 
in the report noted that “existing smartphone 
sensors  can  be  used  to  infer  a  user’s  mood; 
stress  levels;  personality  type;  bipolar  disor-
der;  demographics  (e.g.,  gender,  marital 
status, job status, age); smoking habits; over-
all  well-being;  progression  of  Parkinson’s 
disease;  sleep  patterns;  happiness;  levels  of 
exercise;  and  types  of  physical  activity  or 
movement.”  Such  “sensitive  behavior  pat-
terns could be used in unauthorized ways or 
by unauthorized individuals.”

■  IoT security issues
The IoT is subject to the same security risks 
as  traditional  computer  systems,  but  the 
issues,  unfortunately,  don’t  stop  there.  Like 
any  storage  aspect  of  the  Internet,  security 
vulnerabilities  can  be  exploited  to  compro-
mise sensitive information. Rick Dakin, CEO 
of  Coalfi re  in  Boulder,  Colorado,  says  that 
“while headlines about cybersecurity usually 
focus  on  the  changing  threat  landscape,  a 
greater  concern  is  the  evolving  technology 
landscape.  Most  people  rapidly  connect 
unsafe  devices  to  their  networks  with  no 
thought  to  security,  and  the  Internet  of 
Things  will  accelerate  the  contamination  of 

■  232 

our networks.” As connectivity grows expo-
nentially, so do the possibilities for security 
breaches. Any  device  in  the  IoT  that  stores 
information, whether it contains Internet or 
TV  viewing  preferences,  credit  card  num-
bers, health information, etc., can become a 
target.  The  proliferation  of  devices  that  are 
part  of  the  IoT  means  that  the  number  of 
access points to a system is limitless.

Don’t think that just because a device has 
a  limited  function—such  as  a  smart  light-
bulb, a FitBit, a smart toilet, or a thermostat—
that it holds no attractiveness for hackers. Put 
enough  of  these  connected  devices  together 
and  cyber  criminals  can  create  a  botnet,  a 
network  of  processors  that  can  be  used  to 
facilitate large, repetitive tasks, such as gen-
erating passcode possibilities.

Also  of  great  concern  is  the  potential  to 
cause  physical  damage  and  harm  to  indi-
viduals  and  property.  The  FTC  report  con-
tains  claims  by  company  researchers  of  the 
ability  to  hack  into  a  self-driving  automo-
bile’s built-in telematics unit and control the 
vehicle’s engine and braking. Another claim 
involves  the  ability  to  access  computerized 
health equipment and change the settings so 
that they are harmful to the patient. Through 
the  medical  device  hijack  attack  vector 
(MEDJACK),  the  TrapX  Labs  security  team 
has  identifi ed  that  in  many  cases,  medical 
devices themselves are the key entry points 
for  health-care  network  attacks.  Devices  as 
diverse as diagnostic equipment such as CT 
scanners  and  MRI  machines,  life  support 
equipment  including  medical  ventilators 
and  dialysis  machines,  and  even  medical 
lasers and LASIK surgical machines are typi-
cally  delivered  to  medical  facilities  wide 
open for attacks that can compromise device 
readings and operations, not to mention put-
ting people’s health and lives at risk.

A  recent  Hewlett-Packard  report  noted 
that 70 percent of IoT devices contain security 
vulnerabilities.  Some  of  these  weaknesses 
pertain to the current differences in commu-
nication  standards,  as  developers  seek  to 
make their devices compatible with all types 
of  systems—an  aspect  of  the  convergence 
factor  mentioned  earlier.  Although  many 

companies  are  working  on  standardization 
protocols, the issue will not go away anytime 
soon.  Sensitive  commercial,  industrial,  and 
government  information  is  at  risk,  and  that 
risk  will  likely  grow  as  the  IoT  develops, 
before  measures  suffi cient  to  mitigate  that 
risk propagate. As Rod Beckstrom, the former 
CEO of ICANN, said in his Beckstrom’s Law:

 䊏 If it’s connected to the Internet it’s hackable.
 䊏 Everything  is  being  connected  to  the 

Internet.

 䊏 Therefore, everything is hackable.

Putting  all  the  security  aspects  together,  as 
some  cyber  criminals  apparently  already 
have,  and  the  risks  that  accompany  the 
growth  of  the  IoT  can  seem  frightening. 
Hackers  have  become  so  sophisticated  in 
their tactics that some are creating databases 
from  the  information  gathered  in  previous 
attacks,  which  can  enable  them  to  defeat 
common security measures. For example, in 
the  successful  breach  of  more  than  100,000 
taxpayer returns fi led electronically with the 
IRS  in  2014,  the  attackers  were  able  to  cor-
rectly  answer  security  questions  that  the 
taxpayers  themselves  had  selected,  simply 
by cross-referencing information collected in 
previous  breaches  of  other  organizations’ 
information.

Put  a  nation-state  or  other  global  entity 
behind such efforts, and the risks to sensitive 
information in the IoT mount exponentially. 
In commerce, as well as in politics and war, 
entities  make  decisions  based  on  what  they 
believe is in their best interests. This is espe-
cially true in the case of state and large non-
state  actors.  It’s  helpful  to  think  of  their 
efforts to infi ltrate technological and security 
information not so much as instigated by an 
evil  intent  or  ideology,  but  as  motivated  by 
the  survival  and  practical  success  of  their 
entity—the concept of realpolitik updated for 
the twenty-fi rst century. They have a vested 
interest in hacking information systems that 
goes far beyond simple greed. It means they 
are  unfazed  by  potential  punishments  or 
repercussions  and  have  the  willingness  to 
commit  resources  and  effort  towards  their 

  THE INTERNET OF THINGS   

goals because the payoffs, if they are success-
ful,  are  huge—such  as  global  economic  or 
even military dominance. Looking at the sit-
uation  in  this  way  helps  validate  the  actual 
threat these actors represent and can in turn 
stimulate  companies  and  governments  to 
mount a more adequate defense.

■  Addressing the issues
The  U.S.  Congress,  since  2012,  has  pro-
posed  more  than  100  pieces  of  legislation 
related  to  Internet  security  and  privacy. 
Only  a  couple  were  actually  signed  into 
law, but continuing security incidents, such 
as the breach of Sony’s network and subse-
quent hostage-taking of one of its movies, 
have created greater awareness of security 
issues  that  will  surely  prompt  more 
attempts  at  legislation  and  regulation.  In 
fact, as of this writing, at least 10 pieces of 
legislation are being considered on Capitol 
Hill. In its report, the FTC endorsed strong, 
fl exible,  and  technology-neutral  general 
legislation but added that IoT-specifi c leg-
islation would be premature, as the fi eld is 
still  in  its  early  stages  of  development. 
They  would  prefer  to  see  industry  adopt 
self-regulatory practices.

At  the  corporate  or  company  level, 
though, there is much decision makers can 
do now to address security and privacy con-
cerns.  Much  of  that  involves  adopting  a 
forward-thinking attitude about the IoT and 
its role.

 䊏 First is to understand that the IoT is not a 
possibility or a projection of the future—it 
is  a  reality.  It  is  here  now  and  will  only 
continue to grow and affect every facet of 
our world.

it’s 

 䊏 The  IoT  carries  with  it  many  risks  and 
challenges; 
the  companies  and 
organizations  that  address  those  issues 
head  on  that  will  survive.  Conventional 
approaches to network security will likely 
have to be rethought.

 䊏 Companies and organizations should stay 
up  to  date  with  evolving  vulnerability 
assessments  and  advancements 
in 
security  solutions.  This  also  applies  to 

  233  ■

 CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK

administrators  and  executives,  who 
should become fl uent in the language that 
describes IoT capabilities, trends, and risks 
so that they can make more relevant and 
responsive decisions for their shareholders 
and  customers.  Administrators  should 
attend  conferences  and  industry  events 
when possible as well.

 䊏 Standardization  of  security  protocols  in 
the IoT space must be made an industry-
wide priority.

 䊏 When breaches to networks do occur, it’s 
important to notify consumers quickly so 
that they can protect themselves from the 
misuse of their data.

 䊏 Such  breaches  should  also  prompt 
industry-coordinated  action  to  address 
the vulnerabilities exposed and propagate 
industry standards.

 䊏 Companies  can  give  themselves  some 
degree of protection also by entering into 
legal  agreements  with  IoT  vendors  to 
provide  adequate,  tested,  and  updated 

security  measures  and  to  guard  against 
the  unauthorized  access  of  sensitive 
information.

Remember  that  IoT  security  is  not  a  battle 
that can be won and left behind. It is a war 
that will be fought for the foreseeable future—
the proverbial marathon versus a sprint.

Keep in mind also that the IoT challenges 
we  face  mean  a  tremendous  opportunity  for 
fresh  thinking.  The  future  of  the  Internet, 
which carries with it the future of our world, is 
ours  for  the  making.  If  you’ve  read  Isaac 
Asimov,  you  know  that  he  was  visionary 
about the future of technology. In his science 
fi ction composed in the 1940s, he wrote, “No 
sensible decision can be made any longer with-
out taking into account not only the world as it 
is, but the world as it will be.” That realization 
is  more  important  now  than  ever  before 
because someday soon we’ll almost certainly 
ask why things aren’t connected to the Internet 
rather than why they are connected.

■  234 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Incident response

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Working with law enforcement 
in cyber investigations
U.S. Department of Justice – CCIPS Cybersecurity Unit

The decision to call law enforcement, or to respond to a 
law enforcement inquiry, during a cyber incident can be a 
harrowing moment for a company’s executives and board 
members.  Fear  of  losing  control  of  key  systems,  of  the 
investigation’s  course,  or  over  sensitive  company  infor-
mation are often given as reasons for caution or even to 
forego  cooperation  altogether.  However,  working  with 
law enforcement need not be fearsome. With early plan-
ning, clear communications, and an understanding of law 
enforcement’s roles and responsibilities, law enforcement 
and private companies can partner successfully on cyber 
investigations.

■   Law enforcement’s role in cyber investigations
Law enforcement’s roles and responsibilities in a cyber 
incident  vary  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  incident, 
the suspected perpetrators, and the desires of the victim. 
Although  every  investigation  is  different,  law  enforce-
ment  agencies  working  on  cyber  investigations  are 
trained  to  understand  company  concerns  and  to  incor-
porate  their  needs  into  the  investigation’s  goals. 
Although a primary law enforcement goal is to protect 
public  safety  and  national  security,  agencies  have 
evolved to do this in a way that does not cause further 
harm to the victims of a cyberattack.

■   Why work with law enforcement?
The  fi rst  question  that  may  come  to  mind  in  the  hours 
after a cyber incident is why a company should work with 
law  enforcement  at  all.  After  all,  it  introduces  another 
source of management challenges to an already diffi cult 
working  environment.  However,  working  with  law 
enforcement can have signifi cant benefi ts:

 䊏 Agencies  can  compel  third  parties  to  disclose  data 
(such  as  connection  logs)  necessary  to  understanding 

237  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

how  the  incident  took  place,  which  can 
help a company better protect itself.

 䊏 Investigators  can  work  with  foreign 
counterparts to obtain assistance that may 
be otherwise impossible.

 䊏 Early  reporting  to  and  cooperation  with 
law enforcement will likely be favorably 
considered  when  a  company’s  response 
is  subsequently  examined  by  regulators, 
shareholders,  the  public,  and  other 
outside parties.

 䊏 Law  enforcement  may  be  able 

to 
secure  brief  delays  in  breach  reporting 
requirements  so  that  they  can  pursue 
active leads.

 䊏 A  successful  prosecution  prevents  the 
criminal  from  causing  further  damage 
and may deter others from trying.

 䊏 Information  shared  with  investigators 
may  help  protect  other  victims,  or  even 
other parts of the same organization, from 
further loss and damage.

Effective  partnership  with  law  enforcement 
can  be  built  into  an  overall  response  plan, 
especially when companies understand law 
enforcement’s priorities and responsibilities.

■   Law enforcement’s priorities 

and responsibilities

Law enforcement agencies, including the FBI 
and  the  U.S.  Secret  Service,  prioritize  con-
ducting  cyber  investigations  in  ways  that 
limit disruptions to a victim company’s nor-
mal  operations.  They  work  cooperatively 
and discreetly with victims, and they employ 
investigative measures that avoid computer 
downtime  or  displacement  of  a  company’s 
employees. If they must use an investigative 
measure  likely  to  inconvenience  a  victim, 
they try to minimize the duration and scope 
of the disruption.

Law  enforcement  agencies  also  conduct 
their investigations with discretion and work 
with a victim company to avoid unwarranted 
disclosure  of  information.  They  attempt  to 
coordinate statements to the news media con-
cerning  the  incident  with  a  victim  company 
to ensure that information harmful to a com-
pany’s  interests  is  not  needlessly  disclosed 

■  238 

and  work  with  companies  on  timing.  Law 
enforcement also has tools, including obtain-
ing judicial protective orders, that can protect 
sensitive information from disclosure during 
investigations and prosecutions.

If  an  investigation  is  successful  and  an 
indictment is contemplated, prosecutors will 
consider victims among other factors when 
making  charging  decisions.  If  a  particular 
charge would place sensitive company infor-
mation at risk, for example, prosecutors may 
seek protections from the court or, if appro-
priate,  use  alternative  charges  that  can 
reduce that risk, while still serving the over-
all interests of justice.

Sometimes,  the  best  available  course  of 
action  in  a  cyber  investigation  may  not  be 
pursuing  an  arrest  of  the  perpetrator  but 
rather  disrupting  the  threat  in  some  other 
way. For example, law enforcement has used 
combinations  of  civil  and  criminal  tools  to 
disrupt  attacks  from  ‘botnets’  designed  to 
steal  fi nancial  information  from  companies 
and individuals. In other cases, pursuing the 
fi nancial  or  technical  infrastructure  of  a 
criminal organization will be the most effec-
tive strategy. Other tools may be available to 
the government that work best in a particu-
lar  case.  Whatever  path  is  chosen,  law 
enforcement’s  aim  is  to  consult  regularly 
with victims to ensure that the path chosen 
advances, rather than harms, the interests of 
the victim as well as the public.

■   Best practices for preparing for work 

with law enforcement

Preparing to work with law enforcement is 
an  essential  part  of  incident  planning.  The 
full scope of such preparation goes beyond 
what  this  chapter  can  cover.  The  CCIPS 
Cybersecurity  Unit  has  published  a  short 
guide  entitled  Best  Practices 
for  Victim 
Response  and  Reporting  of  Cyber  Incidents, 
which  covers  this  topic  in  greater  detail. 
Some  of  the  recommended  preparations 
include the following:

 䊏 Implement  appropriate  technology,  services, 
and  authorizations.  Investigations  will  be 
severely hampered if a business lacks key 

information  needed  for  law  enforcement 
to  develop  and  pursue  leads  early. 
Ensure  that  intrusion  detection  systems 
and  network  logging  tools  are  in  place, 
as  well  as  the  banners  and  other  legal 
authorizations necessary to use them.

 䊏 Identify the information, services, or systems 
that  are  most  essential  to  your  business 
operations.  Knowing  and  communicating 
this  information  to  law  enforcement 
early in an investigation will be crucial to 
prioritizing early investigative steps.
 䊏 Determine  who  will  work  with 

law 
enforcement.  Law  enforcement  may 
need  essential  information  about  your 
systems  and  what  you  have  learned 
about  the  attack  to  pursue  ephemeral 
leads. Designating a person or group as a 
principal liaison to law enforcement will 
ease this process and allow others in your 
company  to  focus  on  other  immediate 
priorities.  This  person  or  group  should 
be  authorized 
to  gather  necessary 
information  and  communicate  it  to  law 
enforcement agents.

 䊏 Ensure  that  legal  counsel  are  familiar  with 
key  legal  and  technology  issues.  Cyber 
investigations  often  raise  diffi cult  legal 
issues relating to privacy and monitoring. 
Legal counsel who are familiar with your 
systems and with legal principles in this 
area will be able to navigate these issues 
with  law  enforcement  counsel  more 
quickly.  These  counsel  can  work  with 
your company’s law enforcement liaison 
to ensure that information is collected and 
transferred lawfully and appropriately.

■   Calling authorities for assistance
Optimally,  your  fi rst  contact  with  law 
enforcement  will  not  be  in  the  throes  of  a 
crisis. Companies should establish relation-
ships  with  their  local  federal  law  enforce-
ment  offi ces  before  they  suffer  a  cyber 
incident.  Having  a  point-of-contact  and  a 
pre-existing relationship with law enforce-
ment facilitates any subsequent interaction 
that may occur if an organization needs to 
enlist law enforcement’s assistance. It also 
helps establish the trusted relationship that 

  WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS  

cultivates  information  sharing  that  helps 
victims and law enforcement.

Law enforcement agencies, including the 
FBI and U.S. Secret Service, have established 
regular  outreach  channels  for  companies 
that  may  be  victims  of  cyberattacks.  These 
include the following:

 䊏 FBI  Infragard  chapters  and  Cyber  Task 

Forces in each of their 56 fi eld offi ces

 䊏 U.S.  Secret  Service’s  Electronic  Crimes 

Task Forces

 䊏 Computer  Hacking  and 

Intellectual 
Property  coordinators  and  National 
Security  Cyber  Specialists  in  every  U.S. 
Attorney’s Offi ce

Incorporating  these  resources  into  your 
planning  can  pay  dividends  in  the  hours 
after you discover that you may be a victim 
of an attack.

Victims may wonder which law enforce-
ment agency is best to call when they face a 
cyberattack. Although  agencies  have  differ-
ent areas of expertise, they work together to 
ensure that there is ‘no wrong door’ for vic-
tims. As agencies follow leads and develop 
information  about  the  likely  attacker,  they 
understand and can bring together expertise 
from  across  the  government  to  ensure  that 
the  investigation  is  pursued  aggressively 
using all appropriate tools.

■   What to expect when law enforcement 

knocks on your door

Often,  a  company  will  not  be  the  fi rst  to 
know  that  they  have  been  the  victim  of  an 
intrusion  or  attack.  Law  enforcement  may 
discover  additional  victims  as  they  investi-
gate an intrusion into a single entity. When 
this happens, agencies typically reach out to 
these additional victims directly.

A  primary  goal  in  such  contacts  is  to 
ensure that additional victims get the infor-
mation  necessary  to  mitigate  harms  and 
secure  their  systems.  At  the  same  time, 
understanding  the  victim’s  business,  the 
information  that  it  processes,  and  its  rela-
tionship  with  other  entities  can  help  agen-
cies  better  understand  the  relationship 

  239  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

among  a  series  of  thefts  and  the  possible 
motivations for a given cyberthreat.

Cyber  intrusions  are  rarely  isolated  to  a 
single  victim,  and  law  enforcement  collects 
examples  of  common  techniques  and  prac-
tices  from  cyberthreats  that  can  assist  vic-
tims in securing their systems. For example, 
knowing that a particular group of criminals 
enters systems through a common vulnera-
bility  but  once  inside  patches  the  original 
vulnerability while introducing several more 
can be crucial information for victims. By the 
same token, knowing that a group is focused 
on a specifi c version of a common software 
package or is targeting a particular industry 
can  help  law  enforcement  narrow  down  a 
list of possible perpetrators.

■   Realities of cybercrime investigations
Not  surprisingly,  the  realities  of  cyber 
investigations  differ  from  their  portrayals 
in movies and television. Agents are rarely, 
if  ever,  able  to  trace  an  intrusion  in  pro-
gress instantly, nor do they often identify a 
perpetrator from halfway around the world 
quickly.  Instead,  such  investigations  often 
require  painstaking  assessment  of  histori-
cal log fi les, a long-term understanding of 
key  motivations  of  likely  attackers,  and 
collection of evidence using exacting legal 
processes.

■   Cooperation with law enforcement 

in the investigation

Robust cooperation with law enforcement in 
the early hours and days of an investigation 
is  essential  to  success.  Agents  likely  will 
have  many  questions  about  the  intrusions 
and the overall confi guration of the system. 
Beginning from the time the intrusion is dis-
covered,  companies  should  make  an  initial 
assessment of the scope of the damage, take 
steps  to  minimize  continuing  damage,  and 
begin  preserving  existing  logs  and  keeping 
an  ongoing  written  record  of  steps  under-
taken. Such documentation is often essential 
to understanding the scope of the intrusion 
at the inception; it can also be essential much 
later in the prosecution, as companies assess 

■  240 

damage and response costs for loss and res-
titution purposes.

When  contacting  law  enforcement  or 
communicating within the company, compa-
nies  should  avoid  using  systems  suspected 
in  the  compromise.  Such  actions  may  pro-
vide  a  key  tip  to  attackers  that  they  have 
been  discovered.  To  the  extent  possible, 
companies should use trusted accounts and 
systems  for  communication  about  the  inci-
dent and be wary of attempts to gather infor-
mation  about  the  investigation  via  ‘social 
engineering.’

■   Network forensics and tracing
One  way  that  law  enforcement  conducts 
investigations  is  through  network  forensics 
and tracing. Although it is occasionally pos-
sible to follow a “hot lead” when an attack is 
ongoing,  investigations  more  often  depend 
on  a  careful  examination  of  network  logs. 
Because company systems are often complex 
and interrelated, investigators must consult 
with  the  system  administrators  who  are 
experts on critical systems to identify where 
information  necessary  to  developing  leads 
will be stored. Such consultations can prove 
diffi cult if all system personnel are working 
intently  on  rebuilding  security  or  restoring 
critical systems.

Companies can help with this by reserv-
ing  a  few  experts  whose  job  it  is  to  work 
with law enforcement and to identify critical 
logs and other information that can be used 
to identify leads for law enforcement. These 
experts will be particularly important if the 
threat  is  believed  to  be  an  insider  who  has 
stolen trade secrets or other sensitive infor-
mation,  because  the  most  important  evi-
dence is likely to be on internal systems.

■   Working with outside counsel and private 

forensic fi rms

Companies  experiencing  a  severe  cyber 
incident often turn to outside legal counsel 
and  private  forensic  fi rms  to  assist  them. 
Such  entities  can  provide  substantial  sup-
port and expertise, based upon their experi-
ence assisting other victims, and can guide 

companies through diffi cult legal and tech-
nical  issues  relating  to  system  monitoring, 
response  options,  and  breach  notifi cation. 
Having ready access to advice from lawyers 
well  acquainted  with  cyber 
incident 
response  can  speed  decision-making  and 
help  ensure  that  a  victim  organization’s 
incident response activities remain on fi rm 
legal footing.

An  additional  benefi t  is  that  legal  and 
forensic fi rms often have established connec-
tions with law enforcement agencies and are 
familiar with the information that they will 
likely seek and understand the cyberthreats 
that  they  are  investigating.  Far  from  a 
replacement for law enforcement, these enti-
ties  are  often  a  crucial  link  between  law 
enforcement and victims.

■   International issues
Because  of  the  unbounded  nature  of  com-
puter  networks  and  hence  of  cyberthreats, 
cyber investigations often cross international 
borders. A prime advantage of working with 
law enforcement on a cyberthreat investiga-
tion is that it has the tools and capabilities to 
broaden  an  investigation  to  include  foreign 
partners and collect foreign evidence.

U.S. law enforcement agencies recognize 
the  international  opportunities  and  chal-
lenges and so have worked to build investi-
gative  and  prosecution  capabilities  around 
the world. The U.S. and other countries have 
entered  into  international  treaties,  most 
prominently  the  Budapest  Convention  on 
Cybercrime,  to  ensure  that  there  is  an  ade-
quate  legal  foundation  for  investigations 
into  cyberthreats.  Investigative  agencies 
have  trained  cyber  agents  who  regularly 
work alongside their foreign counterparts on 
investigations.

Many times, direct police-to-police inter-
national cooperation will be the fastest way 
to get information necessary to advance an 
investigation.  More  formal  processes,  such 
as  Mutual  Legal  Assistance  requests,  are 
used  when  evidence  needs  to  be  in  a  form 
usable  in  prosecutions.  Although  they  are 
often  slower  than  direct  assistance,  they 

  WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS  

provide  an 
means for exchanging evidence.

internationally  recognized 

If  a  suspect  is  identifi ed  overseas,  law 
enforcement has a range of options to obtain 
justice for the victim. Extraditing the suspect 
to  face  charges  in  the  U.S.  is  a  traditional 
means,  but  the  process  can  be  lengthy,  and 
many countries refuse to extradite their own 
nationals.  In  such  cases,  prosecutors  in  the 
U.S.  may  work  with  their  counterparts 
abroad to ensure an appropriate prosecution 
in the suspect’s home country. Other options 
may  be  available  depending  on  the  case. 
Because these choices often implicate victim 
interests,  prosecutors  frequently  consult 
with victims before undertaking major inter-
national investigative steps.

■   Victim rights and expectations
Victims of cyber incidents—including corpo-
rate victims—have established rights under 
federal  law.  The  specifi c  victim  rights  and 
the  responsibilities  of  prosecutors  and  law 
enforcement  are  described  in  the  Attorney 
General  Guidelines  for  Victim  and  Witness 
Assistance  (2012),  which  is  available  on  the 
Department  of  Justice’s  public  website. 
Victim rights typically attach at the time that 
charges are fi led, and include the following:

 䊏 the  right  to  notice  of  public  hearings  in 

the prosecution

 䊏 the  right  to  be  reasonably  heard  at  such 

hearings

 䊏 the  reasonable  right  to  confer  with  the 

attorney for the government

 䊏 the right to full and timely restitution as 

provided in law.

Beyond  these  mandatory  rights,  investiga-
tors and prosecutors in cyber cases strive to 
ensure cooperation with and support to the 
victim, to pass key information back to vic-
tims  to  support  their  security  and  recovery 
efforts, and to work to ensure that the victim 
is  not  further  harmed  by  the  investigation 
and prosecution.

Although law enforcement cannot disclose 
every  aspect  of  an  ongoing  investigation, 

  241  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

especially when such sharing may implicate 
other  victims,  companies  should  expect  that 
law  enforcement  will  communicate  with 
them regularly. Information fl ow should not 
be a “one-way street” to law enforcement.

■   Legal considerations when working closely 

with law enforcement

As useful as it can be to cooperate with law 
enforcement, it is also crucial that companies 
understand  and  delineate  their  role  in  the 
investigation  and  exercise  care  before  they 
take on roles that may effectively make them 
agents  of  law  enforcement.  For  example, 
companies  are  generally  permitted  under 
U.S.  law  to  monitor  their  own  systems  to 
protect  their  rights  and  property.  Usually, 
that  information  can  be  shared  with  law 
enforcement  once  they  arrive  on  scene.  If 
law  enforcement  begins  directing 
the 
response, however, different authorities and 
limitations typically apply.

The  law  relating  to  law  enforcement 
monitoring  is  complex  and  goes  beyond 
what  can  be  discussed  in  this  chapter.  In 
general, companies should carefully delin-
eate  between  actions  undertaken  by  the 
provider  for  its  own  purposes  and  those 
undertaken at law enforcement’s behest. If 
possible,  companies  should  set  out  the 
facts  and  their  understandings  relating  to 
such monitoring in writing shared with the 
investigating agency. More information on 
this topic can be found in Chapter 4 of the 
Department  of  Justice’s  manual  Searching 
and  Seizing  Computers  and  Obtaining 
Electronic Evidence in Criminal Investigations, 
which  is  available  from  the  Department’s 
website.  In  addition,  a  sample  letter  relat-
ing  to  company  monitoring  that  can  be 
used  by  company  counsel  is  included  as 
Appendix G of that manual.

■   Active defense, hacking back, and potential 

liabilities

Companies  undergoing  a  cyber  attack  may 
be  tempted  to  “hack  back”  and  attempt  to 
access or impair another system that appears 
to be involved in a cyber intrusion or attack. 
Although that temptation is certainly under-
standable in the heat of an incident, doing so 
is  often  illegal  under  U.S.  and  foreign  laws 
and  could  result  in  civil  or  even  criminal 
liability.  Many  intrusions  and  attacks  are 
launched  from  already  compromised  sys-
tems, precisely to confuse the identity of the 
true actor. Consequently, hacking back may 
damage or impair another innocent victim’s 
system rather than that of the intruder.

This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  com-
panies  cannot  engage  in  “active  defense” 
within  their  own  systems.  For  example, 
reacting  to  cyberattacks  by  changing  net-
work  confi gurations  or  establishing  “sand-
boxes,”  in  which  companies  place  realistic 
but false data to distract intruders from more 
sensitive  data  are  active  steps  that  can  be 
taken to help defend systems. Law enforce-
ment agencies can help identify other proac-
tive  steps  that  companies  may  be  able  to 
undertake to protect their systems.

■   Conclusion
Effective  cybersecurity  and  cyber  investiga-
tions  are  essential  to  protecting  company 
assets  and  public  safety  in  our  increasingly 
networked world. A close and respectful part-
nership between companies and law enforce-
ment  when  cyberattacks  occur  is  an  impor-
tant  aspect  of  both.  Planning  for  such  coop-
eration in advance and carefully delineating 
the roles played by company representatives, 
law enforcement, and outside experts greatly 
enhances the likelihood of success.

■  242 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Planning, preparation, and testing for 
an enterprise-wide incident response
Booz Allen Hamilton – Jason Escaravage, Vice President; 
Anthony Harris, Senior Associate; James Perry, Senior 
Associate; and Katie Stefanich, Lead Associate

Cyber  incident  management  is  happening  at  your 
organization  right  now.  In  fact,  it’s  happening  every 
day, all day. Sometimes a cyber breach requires very lit-
tle response; for example, it may be a benign attempt by 
a curious but harmless hacker to see if your network can 
be accessed. For large companies, this kind of attack can 
happen  hundreds  of  times  in  a  week.  You  probably 
never  even  hear  about  it  from  your  IT  department 
because  those  small  incidents  aren’t  worth  your  atten-
tion.  They  are  easily  eradicated;  usually,  just  deleting 
the malicious email is enough, so they hardly cause any 
irreparable harm.

But  what  happens  when  it  is  a  not-so-small  breach? 
What happens when your intellectual property is stolen, 
or your employees’ personal records are exposed? What if 
your  e-commerce  website  goes  down  for  a  day?  Those 
incidents you will hear about, and that moment is not the 
time to fi gure out what to do.

Of course, every situation has its own nuance, but at 
a  foundational  level,  every  organization,  regardless  of 
size,  geographical  location,  or  industry  must  have  an 
incident  management  plan.  One  that  includes  partici-
pation  from  organizations  and  staff  throughout  the 
enterprise.

Effective cyber incident management happens in phas-
es; it is not just about a response. Planning and preparing, 
or  “steady-state”  activities  are  just  as  important,  if  not 
more important than responding to a breach. To truly be 
ready for any kind of cyber incident, organizations need 
C-level support for smooth incident management coordi-
nation. This is supported by a plan that is thorough, easy 
to understand, and widely tested.

243  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Fill in the blank: During a major cyber breach, the fi rst thing I 
do is _______
HINT: The answer is not to wait for instruction from the IT department.
If you can’t answer, imagine whether your legal department could. How about HR de-
partment? Or corporate communications team or VP of sales? They all should; they’re all 
impacted by cyber incidents, so they have a role to play.

This chapter will focus on the following:

 䊏 incident  response  responsibility  for  the 

C-Suite and the business

 䊏 key  considerations  for  cyber  incident 

management plans

 䊏 testing a plan
 䊏 enabling plan adoption across the enterprise

■  Incident response for the C-Suite and beyond
Cyber incident response is often thought of 
as an IT department function. This assump-
tion could be a costly mistake. Businesses in 
their  entirety  are  connected  to  the  Internet. 
As  such,  a  cyber  breach  can  happen  any-
where within the business, ranging in sever-
ity,  complexity,  and  impact.  Relying  on  the 
IT  department  alone  to  be  ready  for  any 
manifestation  of  a  cyber  incident  would  be 
an unfair if not impossible expectation.

IT  security,  typically  led  by  a  chief  infor-
mation  security  offi cer  (CISO),  needs  to  be 
empowered by the C-Suite so they can coor-
dinate cyber incident response activity among 
all the impacted organizations and staff—this 
requires the facilitation of good working rela-
tionships  during  non-crisis  times.  One  way 
to do this is for the CISO and the CEO to con-
nect  on  cybersecurity  trends  frequently.  The 
CISO  has  responsibility  for  assembling  the 
right team, making sure the right technology 
architecture  is  in  place,  and  for  reporting 
cybersecurity  issues  upward.  In  a  show  of 
partnership, C-level leadership should enable 
the CISO to improve the organization’s inci-
dent management capability.

The C-suite must understand and enforce 
organization-wide  roles  in  cyber  incident 
management. Everyone—corporate commu-
nications, legal, business unit leaders, and so 
on—has  a  role  to  play.  They  may  not  even 
know it—so it is important for leadership to 
stress their responsibility in these efforts.

In addition to collaborating with the CISO 
and  truly  understanding  the  incident  man-
agement  capability,  stay  on  top  of  current 
cyber risks. They change all the time—phish-
ing becomes spear-phishing becomes pharm-
ing,  for  example.  Not  only  that,  some  are 
exclusive to certain industries. Product secu-
rity risks vary from retail. Retail varies from 
automotive. However, one thing is certain—
all parts of the business have evolving cyber 
risks.  By  staying  on  top  of  cyber  risks,  you 
can incorporate them as part of your enter-
prise-wide risk management strategy. Which 
would  do  the  most  harm?  Which  are  most 
likely?  Anticipating  and  preparing  for  all 
kinds of cyberthreats doesn’t mean sitting on 
edge all the time. It requires simple demon-
stration  of  good  steady-state  behavior—
which is the fi rst phase of any incident man-
agement  lifecycle,  so  a  key  section  of  an 
incident management plan.

■  Putting together the cyber incident 

management plan

Cyber  incident  management  is  constant;  it 
happens  in  phases,  and  an  actual  incident 
lifecycle is only one part of it.

Shown  in  Figure  1  is  a  full  lifecycle  for 

incident management.

If you are starting from scratch, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
Cybersecurity Framework is a good reference point. It was created in collaboration between 
public sector and private industry.

■  244 

  PLANNING, PREPARATION, AND TESTING FOR AN ENTERPRISE-WIDE INCIDENT RESPONSE  

FIGURE

Threat Intelligence

Prepare

Prevent

Event Lifecycle Management

Detect

Respond

Remediate

C
r
i
s
i
s
 
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
c
a

t
i

o
n

S
t
a
k
e
h
o
d
e
r

l

C
o
m
m
u
n
i
c
a

t
i

o
n
 
&

There  is  a  caveat,  however:  incident 
management  lifecycles  do  not  fi t  neatly 
into  a  calendar.  They  overlap,  phases  are 
repeated,  and  truly,  “Preparation”  and 
“Prevention,”  or  steady-state  activities  are 
happening all the time, even in the midst of 
an incident.

When  the  steady-state  activities  are  done 
well, it makes an organization resilient and bet-
ter able to bounce back after a breach occurs.

■  Elements of planning
A  good  cyber  incident  management  plan 
considers  the  whole  enterprise,  and  it 
considers  more  than  just  the  technical 
aspects  of  incident  response.  When  plan-
ning  for  cyber 
incident  management, 
responsibilities and activities can be organ-
ized  and  integrated  by  three  categories: 
people, process, and technology (Table 1).
Each  of  these  things  should  be  consid-
ered  in  the  context  of  your  organizational 
philosophy  to  risk  management.  Policies 
that  help  mitigate  risk—such  as  acceptable 
use policies and data handling policies—can 
be  used  as  governing  authority  for  cyber 
incident management planning.

Although  an  incident  management  plan 
starts with the CISO, the rest of the business 
units  should  follow  suit.  Drafting  an  initial 
plan  requires  substantial  effort  to  integrate 

how  people,  process,  and  technology  work 
together in harmony across the whole enter-
prise.  And,  once  the  plan  is  created,  it 
requires consistent support from the C-level 
to ensure adherence by the whole organiza-
tion. The plans must be tested and updated 
frequently  to  make  sure  they  keep  up  with 
changes in threats, tools, and resources.

■  Testing the plan
Short of being the victim of an actual intru-
sion,  testing  your  incident  response  pro-
gram  is  paramount  to  understanding  how 
well your business would fair during a real 
incident.  Many  organizations  pay  for 
expensive  tools,  documentation,  and  con-
sultation but are unable to replicate any of 
their  strategies  because  they  are  not  pre-
pared  to  use  them.  Executives  should 
understand  that  an  incident  response  pro-
gram with an always vigilant, always ready 
team is the greatest defense to a cyber intru-
sion and will reduce risk and increase con-
fi dence.

Assessing  an  organization’s 

incident 
response program can provide a clear vision 
into their future, showing would happen if a 
cyberattack occurred and delivering insight 
into  what  works  and  what  does  not.  There 
are  several  benefi ts  to  testing  an  organiza-
tion’s incident response plan:

  245  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

TABLE

People

Process

Technology

 䊏 In the main incident 

 䊏 An incident 

 䊏 Technology aids the 

management plan 
should include 
a process and 
procedure for every 
phase of the incident 
management lifecycle.

incident response 
process—from 
vulnerability intake 
to understanding the 
security controls on 
your electronic assets 
to facilitating quick 
communication. At a 
basic level, there should 
be automated process 
for incident handling—if 
your organization is still 
using manual incident 
tracking systems, you are 
overdue for a technology 
investment.

 䊏 The plan should be 

supported by runbooks, 
which are tactical 
guides that address 
specifi c incident 
scenarios most likely 
to affect your business. 
Make sure the processes 
are updated per a 
determined frequency 
to refl ect evolving 
cyberthreats.

 䊏 Threat and vulnerability 
detection technology can 
mitigate the impacts of 
a cyber breach. Beyond 
basic, more sophisticated 
data analytics tools 
provide complex, 
customized statistics 
that can help measure 
the business impact of 
a breach, among other 
capabilities.

management plan, 
consider how the 
incident management 
team is structured 
and staffed. Is it 
composed of people 
already in your IT 
department or are 
there some roles that 
need to be fi lled? Staff 
should have the mix 
of skills necessary 
to orchestrate the 
strategic and technical 
sides of an incident 
response.

 䊏 Consider also the 

touchpoints from the 
IT department into the 
rest of the organization. 
Make sure you know 
who will provide you 
with the information 
you need to make 
critical decisions in the 
midst of an incident.
 䊏 Finally, keep in mind 

the partnerships 
internal and external—
such as vendors 
and media—to the 
organization that must 
be built prior to an 
incident that would 
enable the smooth 
coordination of incident 
response. 

■  246 

  PLANNING, PREPARATION, AND TESTING FOR AN ENTERPRISE-WIDE INCIDENT RESPONSE  

Steady-state activities should be the heftiest part of your plan.
Your IT department is always monitoring your network, but you’d be surprised how often 
organizational cybersecurity relies on the human eye and manual processes. Your IT team 
could use your support to enhance their capability, for example:
 䊏 Automated tool development
 䊏 Asset management
 䊏 Threat detection ability
 䊏 Trend analysis
 䊏 Wargaming and tabletop exercises

 䊏 Keeping the program relevant and at the 
forefront  of  cybersecurity:  reducing  risk 
and increasing executive confi dence

 䊏 Understanding  current  knowledge  and 

tool gaps

 䊏 Increasing work performance and effi ciency 
to reduce cost and time spent resolving an 
incident.

■  Testing methods
Testing  entails  far  more  than  just  making 
sure  employees  are  trained  on  tools  and 
procedures,  they  have  to  be  able  to  detect, 
contain,  and  remediate  active  incidents—
real  or  fi ctional—and  the  only  way  to  do 
that  is  by  managing  realistic  situations. 
There are a variety of ways to provide sce-
narios  that  can  test  an  organization’s  inci-
dent response program.

Using  a  “red  team,”  or  a  group  whose 
purpose is to simulate a cyber adversary, is 
a  way  to  covertly  test  the  response  to  an 
actual  adversary.  Only  employees  with  a 
need to know will be aware of a red team’s 
activities,  so  to  the  organization’s  incident 
responders,  the  scenario  is  treated  like  an 
actual incident (without the loss of capital). 
Results  from  these  exercises  can  be  shared 
with  executives,  providing  an  overview  of 
strengths and weaknesses to tweak the pro-
gram and try again.

Engaging  specialized  third  parties  to 
review  an  incident  response  program  can 
validate program elements. It’s often said that 
a second set of eyes can fi nd fl aws in a docu-
ment  that  the  author  overlooked.  This  same 

strategy  can  apply  to  an  incident  response 
program. Although many organizations have 
plenty  of  documentation  surrounding  their 
program,  they  sometimes  rarely  review  or 
update  it.  The  cybersecurity  landscape 
changes  every  day,  which  leaves  an  under-
reviewed  program  in  an  incomplete  state, 
becoming  more  irrelevant  as  time  passes. 
Employing specialized third parties to review 
an organization’s program on a regular basis 
can assist in maintaining an up-to-date, risk-
averse program.

Strategic simulations, also known as war 
games, can simulate numerous possible situ-
ations  in  which  their  program  will  be 
applied. These scenarios ask participants to 
use  their  current  technological  and  process 
knowledge to solve situations ranging from 
the exfi ltration of organizational intellectual 
property  to  a  large  phishing  campaign 
requesting  employee  information,  to  an 
enterprise-wide  denial  of  service—halting 
productivity,  sales,  or  transactions.  War 
games also help an organization to craft sce-
narios in which teams that do not typically 
communicate  with  one  another  have  to 
cooperate  to  solve  problems.  This  is  espe-
cially  helpful  when  senior  leadership  is 
involved—it  helps  illustrate  major  decision 
points  and  clarifi es  the  business  impact  of 
various cyber breach scenarios.

Although  developing,  preparing,  and 
implementing the incident response plan is 
essential,  making  sure  all  of  that  work  is 
functional and as effi cient as possible is vital 
to  having  a  successful  incident  response 

  247  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

program. By implementing tests such as red 
team  exercises,  war  games,  and  regular 
reviews,  an  organization  can  understand 
what may happen if they are an unfortunate 
victim of a cyberattack and, maybe, through 
solutions  implemented  through  test  fi nd-
ings, prevent a real incident.

■  Internal and external communications 

planning

Once the plans have been written and tested, 
it’s  important  to  keep  up  momentum  and 
continued awareness about cyber risks. Just 
as the IT department is constantly engaged 
in cyber incident management, so too must 
the staff throughout the organization—albeit 
with regard to their own personal role.

Enlist the help of your corporate commu-
nications  department  to  help  with  cyberse-
curity  awareness  messaging  that  is  tailored 
for all staff. Messaging should help employ-
ees  stay  attuned  to  cyberthreats  that  could 
affect them, as well as how they can play a 
part  in  keeping  the  organization  secure. 
Keep in mind that “cyber” may not resonate 
with staff outside the IT department, which 

is  why  corporate  communications  can  help 
craft the appropriate messaging.

In  addition  to  internal  messaging,  make 
sure  cyber  incidents  are  incorporated  into 
the  organization’s  crisis  communications 
capability. Just as corporate communications 
would  be  on  hand  to  protect  the  brand’s 
image  during  an  emergency,  they  should 
similarly have a crisis communications plan 
for a cyber incident. As a part of that, ensure 
that  the  right  spokespersons  are  media 
trained prior to an incident.

■  The inevitable cyber breach
It’s hard to estimate the cost of a cyber inci-
dent.  Undoubtedly,  the  longer  that  busi-
ness operations are affected—production is 
stalled, websites are down, IP is stolen, and 
so  on—the  cost  climbs  higher  and  higher. 
Having a plan that is pervasive enterprise-
wide  that  uses  a  tested,  all-staff  approach 
can  help  resolve  cyber  incidents  quicker. 
Given that cyberthreats are present all the 
time,  an  incident  is  all  but  inevitable. 
Fortunately,  incident  response  planning 
can mitigate the impacts of such an event.

■  248 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Detection, analysis, and 
understanding of threat vectors
Fidelis Cybersecurity – Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist

■  Rapidly evolving cyberthreat landscape
Cybersecurity  and  cyberattacks  are  no  longer  emerging 
issues. Over the past three to fi ve years, the complexity of 
cyberthreats has increased dramatically, and the nature of 
cyberattacks has evolved from the theft of fi nancial data 
and  intellectual  property  to  include  recent  destructive 
attacks. Organizations now face increasingly sophisticat-
ed attacks from adversaries using multiple threat vectors 
and cunning strategies to penetrate the security perimeter.
Although  the  2008  TJX  data  breach  has  long  been 
assumed  to  be  the  turning  point  in  board  of  directors’ 
awareness of cybersecurity, it took the 2013 Target breach to 
have an impact on the boards’ agenda. Faced with the pos-
sibility of loss of data and intellectual property, decreased 
shareholder value, regulatory inquiries and litigations, and 
damaged reputations, boards are realizing that cybersecu-
rity is no longer just an IT issue but one of strategic risk.

Corporate directors understand that they must become 
more involved in addressing cyber risks; however, cyber-
security  is  a  new  and  highly  technical  area  that  leaves 
many  corporate  boards  uncertain  as  to  how  to  proceed. 
Research from the Ponemon Institute reveals that 67 per-
cent  of  board  members  have  only  some  knowledge 
(41 percent) or minimal to no knowledge about cybersecu-
rity  (26  percent).  Although  board  members  realize  that 
they need to invest in cybersecurity, such a lack of knowl-
edge is affecting their ability to respond to cybersecurity 
risk and provide proper oversight.

■  Understand the adversaries
Cybercrime  is  big  business,  and  sophisticated  cyber 
criminals  are  playing  for  high  stakes.  However,  motiva-
tions among the groups may differ:

 䊏 Hacktivists often seek to damage the reputation of an 

organization and cause disruptions.

249  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

 䊏 Organized  cyber  criminals 

include 
international  crime  syndicates  targeting 
organizations  largely  in  the  fi nancial 
services and retail industries for fi nancial 
gain.  Although  there  are  a  number  of 
players,  this  arena  is  dominated  by 
loosely knit teams of attackers located in 
Eastern Europe.

threats 

 䊏 State-sponsored  espionage  threat  actors 
deploy  targeted  malware  in  stealthy, 
multi-stage  attacks,  sometimes  called 
advanced  persistent 
(APT), 
targeting  intellectual  property.  At  risk  is 
anything that may be of value, including 
business  plans  and  contracts;  trading 
algorithms; product designs and business 
processes;  trade  secrets;  client  data;  lists 
of  employees,  customers,  and  suppliers; 
and even employee log-on credentials.

As attackers have sharpened their skills and 
expanded  their  techniques  over  the  last 

couple  of  years,  organizations  are  now  fac-
ing  a  new  challenge.  Cybercrime  has 
advanced to include cyber warfare and cyber 
terrorism as nation-state actors have moved 
from disruptive to destructive attacks.

Experts  predict  that  cyberattacks  will 
intensify as cyber criminals accelerate their 
activities.  Organizations  face  a  world  of 
continuous  compromise.  It  is  no  longer  a 
question  of  whether  the  company  will  be 
breached,  but  when.  Ponemon  research, 
however, shows that board members gener-
ally  lack  knowledge  about  cybersecurity 
breach  activity  within  their  organizations. 
One in fi ve, for example, was unaware if the 
organization  had  been  breached  in  the 
recent past.

Although larger organizations are gener-
ally able to recover from a signifi cant breach, 
providing that negligence is not a factor and 
excessive  liability  is  avoided,  sustaining 
operations  over  the  course  of  two  or  more 

Blurring lines of attack
It used to be that the tactics employed by Eastern European cyber criminals were relatively 
unique compared with those used by hackers deploying state-sponsored APT attacks to target 
intellectual property. Cybercrime experts are now seeing a blurring of the lines of attack, which 
has caused some forensics teams to misidentify the adversary. For example, researchers from 
two forensics fi rms investigated an attack on a global credit card processor for two months 
without success, convinced that it was an APT attack. It wasn’t until the fi rm brought in a new 
forensics team that they were able to identify the attack as originating from Eastern Europe 
and stop the breach.

Corporate espionage leads to company downfall
Cyberattacks aimed at stealing intellectual property can put a company out of business. A 
classic example involves Nortel, a telecommunications giant that was the victim of a decade-
long low and slow attack wherein hackers used seven stolen passwords to extract research, 
business plans, technical papers, corporate emails, and other sensitive data. The attack was 
discovered by an employee who noticed unusual downloads that appeared to have been 
made by a senior executive. The company changed the compromised passwords but did 
little else beyond conducting a six-month investigation that yielded nothing. In the follow-
ing years, the company reportedly ignored recommendations to improve network security. 
Analysts speculate that the extensive cyberattacks on the technology company ultimately 
contributed to its downfall. The company continued to lose ground to overseas competitors 
and ultimately declared bankruptcy.

■  250 

  DETECTION, ANALYSIS, AND UNDERSTANDING OF THREAT VECTORS  

extended  breaches  would  be  considered  a 
huge  challenge.  Clearly,  cybersecurity  has 
become an increasingly challenging risk that 
demands  both  corporate  management  and 
board  attention.  To  provide  the  proper  risk 
oversight,  the  C-level  leaders  and  board 
members are advised to work closely with IT 
security leaders to examine the threat envi-
ronment and how adversaries are attacking 
peer organizations.

■  Understand the threat vectors
The fast pace of cloud, mobile, virtualization, 
and emerging technologies present opportu-
nities to gain operational effi ciencies, deploy 
innovative business models, and create new 
markets. However, as companies increasing-
ly  digitize  valuable  assets  and  move  opera-
tions  online,  the  risk  of  cyberthreats  grows 
even  greater.  In  today’s  digital  world, 
employees  are  increasingly  interconnected 
and  leverage  a  variety  of  mobile  devices, 
applications, and cloud platforms to conduct 
business in the offi ce, at home, and “on-the-
go.”  Mobile  applications,  email,  WiFi  net-
works, and social media sites are just some of 
the  vulnerable  access  points  that  attackers 
seek to exploit.

Not only are employees increasingly inter-
connected,  but  organizations  are  as  well. 
Boards  and  corporate  management  must 
consider the extended attack surface and the 
potential security risks associated with third 
parties such as suppliers, transaction proces-
sors, affi liates, and even customers. Not to be 
overlooked  are  law  fi rm  partners,  as  they 
hold data relating to an organization’s confi -
dential operations and trade secrets.

Internal employees present at least as big 
an  exposure  for  companies  as  do  external 
attacks. There is increasing recognition that 
the  activity  of  employees  with  privileged 
access  and  administrative  rights  must  be 
monitored,  controlled,  and  audited.  Part  of 
the  concern  is  not  necessarily  that  the 
employees  go  rogue  and  become  insider 
threats, which certainly has to be considered, 
but that hackers target the credentials of sys-
tem administrators because they grant unfet-
tered system access. To guard against the use 
of  compromised  credentials,  organizations 
should implement the concept of least privi-
lege  for  employee  digital  rights,  especially 
for those with administrative rights.

Determined  attackers  use  a  variety  of 
approaches to exploit system vulnerabilities 
and  penetrate  virtually  all  of  a  company’s 
perimeter  defense  systems.  Threat  vectors 
used  to  compromise  an  organization  can 
include  network  intrusions,  compromised 
websites  and  web  applications,  malware, 
targeted  “spear  phishing”  and  other  email 
attacks,  Trojans,  zero-day  exploits,  social 
engineering  tactics,  and  privilege  misuse. 
This  dynamic  nature  of  the  cyberthreats 
presents  ongoing  challenges  to  companies 
and  boards  as  every  possible  threat  vector 
must be addressed.

■  Detect advanced threats
Like  any  business  risk,  cybersecurity  risk 
must  be  calculated  and  then  mitigated 
through the use of specifi c types of controls, 
such  as  fi rewall,  antivirus,  intrusion  detec-
tion,  and  other  similar  solutions.  However, 
no  network  is  so  secure  that  hackers  won’t 

Questions to ask about risk
 䊏 Who are our most likely intruders?
 䊏 What is the biggest weakness in our IT systems?
 䊏 What are our most critical and valued data assets? Where are they located?
 䊏 Do we consider external and internal threats when planning cybersecurity programs?
 䊏 Do our vendor partners have adequate security measures? Do we have suffi cient 

contractual clauses regarding such security?

 䊏 What are best practices for cybersecurity? Where do our practices differ?
 䊏 Have we created an incident response plan?

  251  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

fi nd  their  way  in.  Once  in,  they  can  go  for 
months,  even  years,  without  detection. 
Because  deeply  embedded  hackers  can  be 
extremely diffi cult to eradicate, the challenge 
is to detect these threats as soon as possible. 
Unfortunately,  organizations  are  hard 
pressed to match resources with cyber crimi-
nals.  Similar  to  a  game  of  “whack-a-mole,” 
once organizations get on top of one type of 
attack,  the  cyber  criminals  simply  evolve 
their tactics.

A  solid  cybersecurity  governance  pro-
gram is vital to getting ahead of cybercrime. 
Unfortunately, there is a gap in the percep-
tion  of  governance  effectiveness  between 
board members and security professionals.
Ponemon research indicates that 59 per-
cent of board members believe the corpora-
tions’  cybersecurity  governance  practices 
are very effective, whereas only 18 percent 
of  security  professionals  believe  so.  This 
gap in perspective has to be closed if organ-
izations are to improve their ability to face 
increasingly  stealthy  and  sophisticated 
cyber risks.

■  Robust, constant monitoring is key to detection
The saying, “You don’t know what you don’t 
know”  is  especially  true  in  cybersecurity. 
Robust, constant network monitoring is vital 
to  uncovering  threats. Any  number  of  solu-
tions  are  available  that  enable  organizations 
to monitor network activity. Because the vol-
ume  of  network  traffi c  combined  with 
increasingly complex networks defi es manual 
threat analysis, many organizations often rely 

on  the  automated  threat-detection  capabili-
ties  of  numerous  disparate  solutions. 
However,  this  overreliance  on  technology 
alone  to  address  security  threats  can  cause 
organizations to lose sight of the bigger threat 
picture.

Organizations also jeopardize their ability 
to  detect  advanced  threats  through  a  failure 
to  fully  integrate  the  security  solutions  into 
the  entire  network  defense  infrastructure. 
Often  security  technologies  are  deployed 
with default settings, resulting in many false-
positive  alerts.  Many  times  organizations 
overlook  the  human  element.  Organizations 
can’t depend on technology alone to defend 
networks.  Detecting  advanced 
threats 
requires  a  risk  management  program  that 
includes  technology,  people,  and  processes. 
Board  members  should  ensure  that  security 
budgets include funding for security experts 
who  can  understand  the  risk,  interpret  the 
alerts, and act on the intelligence.

■  Anticipate attacks
Today’s threat actors conduct detailed recon-
naissance  and  develop  custom  malware  in 
an effort to penetrate networks. It’s diffi cult 
to  know  when  an  attack  will  happen.  A 
dynamic threat intelligence capability helps 
to  ensure  that  organizations  can  anticipate 
breaches  before  they  occur  and  adjust  their 
defensive strategies.

Widespread  sharing  of  threat  intelli-
gence  among  security  professionals  can 
empower  organizations  to  detect  threats 
more  effi ciently  and  effectively  and  avoid 

Dismissed security alerts lead to massive breach
A large retailer became the victim of a major data breach. The retailer had invested hundreds 
of millions of dollars in data security, had a robust monitoring system in place, and had been 
certifi ed as PCI compliant. Despite the investment, the company failed to completely deploy 
and tune the monitoring system. The system could have been confi gured to remove malware 
automatically, but because the software was new and untested, the feature was deactivated. 
A small amount of hacker activity was surfaced to the security team, evaluated, and acted on; 
however, the team determined it didn’t warrant further investigation. Several subsequent 
alerts were either ignored or lost in the noise of hundreds of false-positive alerts. It wasn’t 
until the Department of Justice warned the company about suspicious activity that the retailer 
began investigating the activity.

■  252 

  DETECTION, ANALYSIS, AND UNDERSTANDING OF THREAT VECTORS  

cyber attacks. At one end of the threat intel-
ligence spectrum are indicators of compro-
mise (IOC). Integrated from several sources 
and  typically  shared  through  an  automat-
ed, continuous, real-time threat intelligence 
data  stream,  IOCs  provide  information  on 
malicious  code  and  malicious  web  pages 
that hackers are using.

At the other end of the threat intelligence 
spectrum  are  threat  advisories,  which  pro-
vide big picture analysis of current security 
issues posing risks to enterprises. Such advi-
sories  typically  feature  an  overview  of  the 
threat,  a  risk  assessment,  indicators,  and 
mitigation strategies.

■  Build board cyber literacy
As boards become more involved in cyberse-
curity,  they  should  address  cybersecurity 
risk  as  they  would  other  types  of  business 
risk. To be effective in leading their organiza-
tions  with  the  right  knowledge,  oversight, 
and  actions,  boards  need  a  base  level  of 
understanding  of  cybersecurity  risks  facing 
the  organization.  However,  organizations 
are challenged with what is the best way to 
build this board cyber literacy.

Many boards already have some form of 
oversight when it comes to cyber exposure, 
generally  in  the  audit  committee  or  risk 
committees  specifi cally  tasked  with  enter-
prise  IT  security  and  emerging  risks.  To 
gain a deeper understanding of the relevant 
issues surrounding cyber risk, some organi-
zations are adding cyber expertise directly 
to  the  board  via  the  recruitment  of  new 
directors.  However,  because  nominating 
and  governance  committees  must  balance 
many  factors  in  fi lling  board  vacancies, 
there  is  a  concern  that  it  may  take  a  long 
time for boards to achieve the proper board 
composition.

In  addition  to  board  composition,  direc-
tors point to a lack of available time on the 
agenda  to  discuss  cybersecurity  as  a  road-
block  in  becoming  cyber  literate.  Although 
board members are not expected to be cyber-
security  experts,  they  need  access  to  exper-
tise  to  help  inform  boardroom  discussions. 
Ways  to  bring  knowledgeable  perspectives 

on cybersecurity matters into the boardroom 
include the following:

 䊏 Periodic  briefings 

from 

in-house 

specialists

 䊏 “Deep  dive”  briefi ngs  from  third-party 
experts,  including  cybersecurity  fi rms, 
government  agencies,  and 
industry 
associations

 䊏 Guidance  from  the  board’s  existing 
external  auditors  and  outside  counsel, 
who will have a multi-client and industry-
wide  perspective  on  cyber  risk  trends 
and how the organizations’ cyber defense 
program  compares  with  others  in  the 
industry

 䊏 Director  education  programs,  whether 

provided in house or externally

 䊏 Periodic exercise of the incident response 

plan to include board members.

■  Empower the chief information security 

offi cer

Boards  have  a  responsibility  to  manage 
cyber  risks  as  thoroughly  as  possible.  One 
critical  element  in  providing  effective  over-
sight  is  to  empower  the  chief  information 
security  offi cer  (CISO)  to  drive  security 
throughout the organization. In many organ-
izations  the  CISO’s  role  is  subordinate  to 
that  of  the  chief  information  offi cer  (CIO). 
Directors should be mindful that the agenda 
of the CIO is sometimes in confl ict with that 
of the CISO. Whereas the CISO is focused on 
data and network security, the CIO is focused 
on  supporting  business  processes  with 
applications  and  networks  that  have  high 
availability.

Recognizing that business strategies that 
lack a security component increase vulner-
abilities and place the organization at risk, 
the CISO must have a strong, independent 
voice  within  the  organization.  To  accom-
plish  this,  the  board  must  ensure  that  the 
CISO is reporting at the appropriate levels 
within the organization. Although there is 
no single right answer, the trend has been 
to migrate reporting lines to other offi cers, 
including  the  general  counsel,  the  chief 
operating  offi cer,  the  chief  risk  offi cer,  or 

  253  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Questions to ask about cyber literacy and CISO empowerment
 䊏 Are we considering cybersecurity aspects of our major business decisions, such as 

mergers and acquisitions, partnerships, and new product launches?

 䊏 Are we allocating enough time for cybersecurity on the board agenda?
 䊏 Are we continuously monitoring and regularly reporting on governance compliance, 

maturity level, progress of information security, and data privacy projects and 
activities, as well as the status of incidents, risks, and issues within the organization? 
Are they used for active oversight?

 䊏 Do we have clear lines of accountability and responsibility for cybersecurity?
 䊏 Is the information security management function organizationally positioned at the 

appropriate level to effectively implement policies?

 䊏 Is the cybersecurity budget adequate? Are we investing enough so that we are not an 

easy target for a determined hacker?

even the chief executive offi cer, depending 
on the industry, size, and scope of the com-
pany,  and  the  organization’s  dependency 
on technology.

■  Conclusion
The  threat  landscape  is  rapidly  evolving  as 
well-funded  cyber  criminals  continue  to 
launch  increasingly  sophisticated  attacks 
through multiple threat vectors. Cybersecurity 
will continue to pose a serious risk that will 
demand  corporate  management  and  board 
attention  and  oversight.  Boards  that  fail  to 
actively  measure  and  continuously  monitor 

cybersecurity  as  part  of  the  organization’s 
strategy will leave their fi rms open to signifi -
cant  fi nancial,  reputational,  and  competitive 
risk.

The overwhelming number of cyber inci-
dents has forced board members to become 
more involved in cybersecurity, which is as it 
should  be.  However,  to  be  effective,  much 
education  is  still  needed.  Board  members 
don’t  need  to  be  cyber  experts,  but  they 
should  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
risks  their  organization  faces  and  provide 
the support needed to the IT security profes-
sionals to protect against those risks.

■  254 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Forensic remediation
Fidelis Cybersecurity – Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber 
Strategist and Ryan Vela, Regional Director, 
Northeastern North America Cybersecurity Services

When  a  data  breach  occurs,  directors  and  C-level  execu-
tives must be ready with an incident response and reme-
diation plan to minimize the damage, limit the company’s 
liability and exposure, and help the company resume nor-
mal  operations  as  quickly  as  possible.  Incident  response 
preparedness,  however,  varies  greatly.  Although  some 
organizations  are  well  prepared,  sometimes  even  compa-
nies  that  have  invested  millions  of  dollars  on  preventive 
and detection systems fall short in responding to and reme-
diating data breaches. Frequently, it’s because the organiza-
tion hasn’t fully developed the relationships and processes 
necessary for rapid and coordinated response.

Companies  that  have  been  compromised  must  act 
quickly  to  investigate  and  remediate  the  breach  while 
preserving all electronic evidence. Ascertaining what data 
were  lost,  destroyed,  or  stolen  is  paramount  because  it 
enables companies to determine their risk exposure and 
potential  liability.  Beyond  digital  forensic  preservation, 
investigation, and containment, the complexities of breach 
remediation require notifi cation of a broad range of third 
parties and engagement with law enforcement. By engag-
ing  breach  resolution  experts  that  provide  forensics 
services,  litigation  support,  and  crisis  communications, 
organizations can more effectively combat today’s sophis-
ticated cyberthreats.

■  Assemble a cross-functional response team
Effective investigation and remediation of a data breach 
requires  an  understanding  of  the  cyber  adversary  and 
specialized forensic skills that most IT staffs lack. When a 
company  that  does  not  have  its  own  internal  security 
team experiences a cyberattack, it is vital that the fi rm hire 
experts who are experienced in digital forensics, incident 

255  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

response,  and  remediation.  Engaging  an 
independent and impartial breach response 
fi rm:

 䊏 provides  the  technological  expertise  and 
industry  knowledge  to  fully  remediate 
the incident

 䊏 ensures integrity in incident response and 
creates a defensible record of investigation 
and remediation

 䊏 enables the organization to maintain and 
secure  attorney-client  privilege  for  the 
reports and other investigative documents.

Breach response also requires that an organi-
zation  have  a  well-prepared  internal  inci-
dent response team. Companies that suffer a 
breach  without  having  established  such  a 
team often waste valuable time trying to get 
organized  and  assign  responsibilities,  stall-
ing  the  breach  remediation  process.  The 
team should include representatives from IT, 
security, legal, compliance, communications, 
risk  management,  and  affected  business 
units. In addition, it is important to involve 
a  member  from  the  executive  leadership 
team to ensure that business considerations 
are addressed and to maintain the remedia-
tion momentum by ensuring rapid approval 
on courses of action when needed.

■  Engage outside legal counsel
The legal ramifi cations of a data breach can 
be devastating, ranging from litigation and 
regulatory  investigations  to  civil  liabilities 
effects  that  may  include  shareholder  and 
customer-driven  lawsuits.  Because  inside 
counsel  lacks  the  specialized  cyber  exper-
tise  that  is  needed  for  effective  breach 
response,  it’s  vital  that  an  organization 
identify, vet, and retain outside counsel that 
has  the  ability  to  respond  on  a  moment’s 
notice.  The  benefi ts  of  outside  counsel 
include the following:

 䊏 specialized 

skillsets: 

cyberattack 
investigations  require  a  team  of  lawyers 
with  regulatory,  data-breach  response, 
privacy, 
litigation,  and  eDiscovery 
expertise;  outside  counsel  brings  the 

■  256 

specialized  skills  and  credentials  that 
internal teams lack

 䊏 law enforcement liaison: serves as liaison 
with law enforcement, such as the Secret 
Service,  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation, 
and Department of Justice

 䊏 attorney-client  privilege: 

engaging 
outside  counsel  secures  the  privilege 
needed to protect internal communications 
from  discovery  by  any  opposing  party 
during  pretrial  investigation  and  from 
being  used  as  evidence  in  a  trial;  also, 
invoked  privilege  allows  the  forensic 
company to report breach results directly 
to the law fi rm

 䊏 leadership  advice:  leadership  of  any 
organization falling victim to a data breach 
instinctively seeks to minimize costs and 
take  shortcuts  in  incident  response;  by 
quarterbacking  the  investigation  and 
remediation, outside counsel often proves 
invaluable  in  providing  a  strategy  and 
helping  C-level  leadership  and  directors 
to hold themselves to the course of action.

■  Control breach communications
Ultimately,  all  communications  about  the 
breach have the potential to leave an organi-
zation open to legal liability. Outside breach 
counsel  should  therefore  oversee  all  breach 
communications.  This  includes  facilitating 
conversations between members of the inci-
dent response team and organizing external 
communications.

Internally, getting the right information to 
the right people at the right time can make or 
break breach incident response efforts. When 
members of the response team are working 
with incomplete, inaccurate, or different sets 
of  information,  it  can  lead  to  costly  ineffi -
ciencies,  delays,  and  errors 
in  breach 
response. Outside counsel is well positioned 
to know the types of conversations that must 
happen  between  incident  response  team 
members to keep efforts on track. Similarly, 
breach  counsel  knows  what  hazards  are 
likely to arise with external communications.
It is also vital that organizations engage a 
crisis  communications  fi rm  to  handle  all 
external  communications.  Because  such 

  FORENSIC REMEDIATION   

Vetted investigation report vital to external communications
When faced with a data breach, the instinct is often to go public as quickly as possible to get 
ahead of the situation. However, to avoid public announcements backfi ring and making an 
already bad situation worse, leadership would do well to wait for confi rmation of breach 
status from the incident response team. On occasion, they even get to give their client good 
news. Case-in-point is a large blood donor system involving multiple hospitals and universi-
ties. The organization was maintaining a database of 90,000 donors when it noticed indications 
of hacker activity in the network.

Already under media pressure for physical loss of sensitive data, leadership was under-

standably concerned about reducing negative publicity by being proactive in its communica-
tions. They agreed to give the response team the time needed to conduct an investigation, 
and fortunately so. It was determined that the indicators were actually false-positive alerts. 
By synching the communication cycle with the progress of the investigation, the organization 
was able to avoid falsely alerting 90,000 donors that their data was at risk.

communications have either positive or neg-
ative lingering effects, it’s important that all 
communications be carefully composed and 
carry the right tone.

Just as important, there is nothing worse 
than having to publically recant information. 
In  deciding  whether  to  release  a  statement, 
organizations should consider the following:

 䊏 Is  there  accurate  information  to  report? 
Executives, feeling pressure to go public, 
may  disclose  key  facts  only  to  retract 
the  statement  at  a  later  date.  Waiting 
until  a  report  from  an  external  forensic 
response  fi rm  has  been  reviewed  can 
help  organizations  maintain  accurate 
communications.

 䊏 Is disclosure within a specifi c timeframe 
required?  Timing  of  disclosures  often 
is  dictated  by  statutory  and  regulatory 
requirements.  Several  state  breach  laws, 
for  example,  require  notifi cation  upon 
discovery  or  without  reasonable  delay. 
Here,  outside  counsel  often  can  be 
invaluable  in  providing  justifi cation  to 
delay  an  announcement  until  the  facts 
are solid.

 䊏 Has the incident been leaked? However 
it occurs, leaks by journalists or postings 
in 
the  blogosphere  can  accelerate 
a  company’s  disclosure  timeline.  It  is 
critical  that  fi rms  experiencing  a  breach 

prepare and pre-coordinate a contingency 
announcement  in  case  their  hand  is 
forced. Crisis communications fi rms also 
have  the  media  relationships  that  can 
enable  the  rapid  response  necessary  in 
these situations.

■  Partner with law enforcement and seek their 

assistance

Seeking  assistance  from  law  enforcement 
can  be  extremely  valuable  in  data  breach 
investigations  because  these  agencies  are 
continuously  following  the  digital  trail  of 
cybercrime.  Law  enforcement  can  play  a 
vital role in providing indicators of compro-
mise  (IOCs)  observed  in  similar  breaches 
that may be linked, thus providing the inci-
dent  response  and  forensic  team  with  key 
data to search for and fi ll in missing pieces in 
the breach investigation. Attributing a single 
breach to a specifi c attacker or hacker organ-
ization is often diffi cult, but when you look 
at  the  IOCs  provided  by  law  enforcement 
across  multiple  hacks,  this  task  often 
becomes much easier.

Involving law enforcement is also prudent 
in that cyber criminals routinely hide behind 
borders, and bringing them to justice remains 
a challenge. The U.S. government is increas-
ingly  partnering  with  foreign  governments 
and  international  law  enforcement  agencies 
in efforts to prosecute malware creators and 

  257  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Collaboration with law enforcement takes down hacking ring
Monday mornings can hit hard for many people, but for a major payments processor, one 
particular Monday morning packed a punch. In a brazen move, a global network of thieves 
had breached the processor’s network. As a result of the hack, the gang was able to generate 
debit cards and crack the ATM PIN codes. Once that was done, the gang withdrew millions 
of dollars over the weekend.

By acting on information provided by the FBI, the forensic team was able to uncover ad-
ditional details about the breach and advance the investigation to the point of identifying 
the culprits. Through cooperation from various law enforcement agencies worldwide, the 
investigation broke the sophisticated computer hacking ring and, for the fi rst time, resulted 
in a Russian court convicting hackers for cybercrimes committed in the United States via 
the Internet.

those who are engaged in cybercrime. If there 
is  any  indication  that  the  investigation  may 
have  an  international  aspect,  federal  law 
enforcement  may  be  able  to  expedite  the 
investigation. Law enforcement’s expertise in 
gathering  evidence  and  conducting  forensic 
analysis can be leveraged to ensure that the 
data can be used in future court proceedings. 
Also,  in  some  cases,  organizations  may  be 
able  to  delay  notifi cation  requirements  if  it 
would impede or interfere with a law enforce-
ment investigation.

■  Alert industry regulators
Threat actors are neither attacking one insti-
tution at a time, nor are they quickly chang-
ing their methods. They often use the same 
techniques on multiple institutions in multi-
ple  sectors.  With  the  increasing  number  of 
data breaches comes a renewed push for the 
sharing  of  cyber  risk  information  between 
the  United  States  government  and  the  pri-
vate sector to help individual organizations 
and  industries  as  a  whole  better  defend 
against attacks. Because of their position in 
the industry, regulators can be an important 
source  of  information  on  cyber  threats, 
attacks, and trends. Information sharing and 
analysis  organizations  have  made  a  resur-
gence and organizations can benefi t by seek-
ing  their  aid  for  insight  on  indicators  of 
compromise during a data breach.

Regulatory investigations have the poten-
tial  to  represent  a  signifi cant  challenge  in 

■  258 

terms of money, time, resources, and distrac-
tions.  Because  regulators  will  have  to  be 
satisfi ed that the data breach has been com-
pletely  resolved,  organizations  should 
engage  with  regulators  as  early  as  possible 
during the remediation process.

■  Notify insurance providers
After a data breach, organizations can expect 
to see signifi cant costs arising from forensic 
investigations,  outside  counsel,  crisis  com-
munications professionals, data breach noti-
fi cation  expenses,  regulatory  investigations 
and fi nes, lawsuits, and remedial measures. 
Such costs can quickly reach tens of millions 
of dollars in a few weeks.

Once  an  incident  is  determined  to  be  a 
breach,  it’s  important  to  engage  with  the 
fi rm’s  insurance  providers  to  evaluate  the 
insurance  coverage  and  determine  which 
existing  policies  may  cover  the  event;  as 
well  as  identify  the  necessary  reporting 
requirements.

One of the challenges with cyber insur-
ance is the lack of standardization in terms 
of coverage. From a broad standpoint most 
policies cover the initial incident response 
and  investigation.  Few,  however,  cover 
remediation.  Because  the  policies  vary 
widely, general counsel and outside coun-
sel  have  to  understand  the  details  of  the 
policies  to  tailor  an  incident  response 
approach  that  maximizes  the  coverage. 
Here,  the  outside  forensics  response  team 

can also be invaluable in helping organiza-
tions  to  articulate  and  justify  cyber  insur-
ance claims.

■  Conduct complete, focused digital forensics 

analysis

When  a  data  breach  occurs,  organizations 
need answers fast: Who was involved? How 
did they do it? What data was compromised? 
What are the risks? Answers depend on the 
forensic analysis of digital evidence. Further, 
the proper preservation of digital evidence is 
crucial to demonstrate to regulators that rea-
sonable  security  controls  are  in  place  or  to 
prove  wrongdoing  in  criminal  prosecution. 
However,  organizations  all  too  often  are 
thrown into panic. Hasty decisions are made 
and  evidence  is  lost.  Here,  directors  should 
look  to  outside  counsel  for  guidance.  Their 
experience  and  focus  on  minimizing  legal 
liability make their advice about what should 
be considered evidence, and thus preserved, 
invaluable.

In  the  course  of  its  forensics  efforts, 
organizations  typically  encounter  two 
challenges:

 䊏 Limited  scope  of  forensics.  Many  times 
organizations  fail  to  look  beneath  the 
surface in the hopes that a simple review 
will  fi x  the  problem.  Alternatively,  they 
may  limit  the  scope  of  the  investigation 
to mitigate the high cost of forensics. Such 
actions may fail to uncover the true cause 
and  extent  of  the  breach.  By  exploring 
all  potentially  compromised  systems, 
organizations  can  reduce  the  risk  of 
overlooking exposed system components.
evidence. 
internal  IT  staff  may 
A  company’s 
compromise  the  evidence  even  before 
forensic  experts 
it. 
Organizations  must  ensure  that  the 
internal  IT  staff  is  mindful  of  proper 
evidence-handling protocol.

 䊏 Improper  handling  of 

can  preserve 

■  Focus on aggressive remediation
When  an  organization  experiences  a  data 
breach,  it  is  often  diffi cult  to  determine  the 
nature  of  the  attack  cycle  and  pathways  of 

  FORENSIC REMEDIATION   

attack  as  hackers  disperse  their  tools 
throughout  the  network.  This  is  especially 
true in advanced persistent threat attacks, in 
which  malware  can  remain  dormant  and 
undetected  for  months.  The  remediation 
phase is therefore critical to remove malware 
from infected hosts and prevent future reoc-
currences of the same or similar breaches.

At one end of the remediation spectrum is 
sequential  eradication.  Here, 
incident 
responders  work  to  eliminate  malware  as 
soon  as  it  is  discovered.  This  traditional 
approach has the benefi t of lower costs and 
reducing the risk of data loss. However, the 
drawback is that the organization forfeits the 
opportunity  to  learn  about  the  hacker’s 
tactics and runs the risk of retaliation. Also, 
attackers may go quiet, making it more dif-
fi cult  to  fi nd  their  tools  and  requiring  that 
forensic  investigators  shift  their  efforts  to 
eradication.

At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  is 
aggressive remediation, in which all reme-
diation actions are executed simultaneously 
across the entire network. If executed prop-
erly,  aggressive  remediation  precludes  the 
hacker  from  detecting  and  reacting  to  the 
remediation actions. This approach is called 
for  when  an  organization  experiences 
repeated  breaches  by  the  same  advanced 
attackers  or  a  breach  has  gone  undetected 
for  weeks  or  months. Aggressive  remedia-
tion provides a better understanding of the 
attacker’s tools, tactics, targets, and motiva-
tions. Because this method fully removes all 
traces  of  the  attacker’s  tools,  threats,  and 
vulnerabilities,  including  the  attacker’s 
ability to re-enter the network, it minimizes 
retaliatory risk.

This  approach  allows  the  attacker  to 
remain active in the network during investi-
gation. Should they become aware of foren-
sic activities, they could move quickly to a 
destructive  attack.  Special  forensic  skills, 
extensive  planning,  and  sophisticated  exe-
cution therefore are required to avoid inter-
fering with or alerting the attacker as to the 
forensic  efforts  underway,  as  well  as  to 
minimize  the  potential  for  damage  and 
data loss.

  259  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Aggressive remediation outwits hacker mastermind
“Please don’t lock the attacker out of the network.” Not the request that any CEO wants to 
hear, let alone the leadership of a major retailer that was under attack by a hacker master-
mind who was stealing 45,000 credit cards every three days. Yet here was the Secret Service 
explaining that it was the best live investigation in three years, and that if kept alive, they 
would be able to track and identify the hacker—with a good chance of getting a conviction.
Faced with the challenge of how to minimize the damage without alerting the attacker, 

the forensic team decided on the strategy of letting the attacker continue his efforts, but 
to change several digits of the credit card numbers the hacker was collecting. Other than 
actually trying to use the cards, the attacker would have no way of knowing he had stolen 
invalid card numbers. The ruse worked, allowing the team to keep the attacker alive in the 
network long enough to complete the forensic analysis and eradication. The attacker is now 
serving two 20-year jail terms.

■  The critical importance of network monitoring
If determined attackers want to get in, they 
will fi nd a way. The real question is whether 
the  organization  will  detect  the  breach. 
Unfortunately,  the  answer  is,  “Probably 
not.”  Advanced,  targeted  attacks  focus  on 
quiet reconnaissance and infi ltration of their 
victims’  network.  Professional  cyber  crimi-
nals are so adept at cloaking their activities 
that they routinely go unnoticed for months, 
even years, without detection.

Although defense-in-depth has long been 
hailed  as  a  best  practice,  organizations  are 
now urged to improve their abilities to detect 
attacks that have succeeded. Robust network 
monitoring  is  a  strategically  important  ele-
ment  in  IT  security  and  is  crucial  to  deter-
mining if anything was stolen. By employing 
robust  network  monitoring  organizations 
can maintain control, limit the damage, and 
plan for an appropriate response.

■  Summary
Organizations  have  reached  a  pivot  point, 
realizing that it is no longer a question of if 
the  fi rm has  been hacked, but  an assump-
tion that it has. Faced with the new reality 
of operating the business while potentially 

executing incident response activities, organ-
izations  are  placing  a  priority  on  robust 
network monitoring to detect the extraordi-
narily  complicated  threats  hidden  in  the 
network.  Once  identifi ed,  these  threats 
demand a host of remediation responses that 
include  forensic  preservation,  containment, 
expulsion, and remediation. Responding to a 
major  breach  correctly  requires  a  team  of 
outside forensic and legal experts partnered 
with their internal incident response team. A 
well-defi ned incident response team includes 
key staff functions and line of business man-
agers as well as C-level executives and cor-
porate directors.

Experiencing a cyberattack is disruptive, 
and  combating  the  malware  behind  large 
data breaches remains a constant challenge. 
Getting the right people involved and under-
standing the best way to effi ciently use them 
is  essential  to  properly  investigating  and 
remediating the event while managing costs 
and extent of business impact. Board direc-
tors and C-level leadership must ensure that 
their  organizations  are  ready  with  a  well 
thought out breach incident response plan to 
help  minimize  the  organization’s  liability 
and exposure.

■  260 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Lessons learned—containment 
and eradication
Rackspace Inc. – Brian Kelly, Chief Security Offi cer

Cyberattacks continue to proliferate and show no signs of 
stopping.  Information  security  is  a  business  risk  issue, 
and  concerns  over  how  to  manage  data  breaches  have 
moved  beyond  IT  security  teams  to  the  C-suite  and  the 
board.  Recognizing  that  attacks  happen  to  the  best  of 
organizations,  board  directors  are  asking,  “What  can  be 
done to minimize the damage?” Based on the experience 
of senior information security leadership servicing some 
of the largest data breaches to date, here are ten lessons 
that offer guidance in successfully containing and eradi-
cating cyberattacks.

■   Cast incident response in the context of business risk
Although the natural tendency has been to treat cyberat-
tacks  as  a  technical  issue  to  be  resolved  by  the  security 
team, such attacks are serious business problems that can 
pose substantial risk to the business. Decisions made uni-
laterally by the security team without an appreciation for 
strategic  initiatives  can  have  signifi cant  implications  for 
the corporation.

To correctly characterize the risk and make the appro-
priate  decisions  to  limit  the  liability  to  the  company, 
cyberattacks  and  incident  response  must  be  put  in  the 
context  of  business  risk.  For  this  to  happen,  discussions 
with  the  board  must  be  two-way  conversations.  CISOs 
have to translate the event or incident into business terms, 
at which point the board and leadership team can provide 
a point of view or strategic focus that may be vital to the 
incident. For example, the incident response team may be 
unaware of such considerations as M&A activity, clinical 
trials, and new R&D efforts. Through board-level conver-
sations the response team can gain the necessary insight 
into the motives of an attacker and make a connection that 
may alter the investigation.

261  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

■   Seek unity of command
Unity  of  command  is  vital  to  respond  to  a 
cyberattack.  However,  not  every  incident 
requires  the  same  command  and  control 
structure.  Careful  planning  should  deter-
mine  in  advance  the  level  of  management 
required  based  on  the  severity  of  the  event 
and identify those that require board atten-
tion and corporate offi cer leadership.

Similar  to  military  operations,  in  which 
the general commands the day-to-day oper-
ations  of  the  military  during  peacetime,  a 
CISO oversees the day-to-day responsibili-
ties and projects. During times of war, com-
mand shifts to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and 
designated  war  fi ghting  commanders.  The 
same holds true in a cyberattack. The inci-
dent  response  leader  takes  control  and 
leads the team through the steps necessary 
to respond to the incident.

Effective  command  and  control  during 
these  times  of  crisis  is  critical.  However, 
when an incident is declared, people often 
come out of the woodwork to get involved. 
Because  time  is  critical,  nothing  can  be 
worse  than  senior  executives  trying  to 
infl uence  activity  or  wrestle  control  when 
an attack is in progress. Slow response and 
uncoordinated  containment  activities  can 
provide  attackers  with  the  time  necessary 
to  move  laterally  in  the  network,  creating 
an even more serious breach. It is therefore 
vital  that  command  and  control  be  clear, 
understood, disciplined, and followed with 
precision.

To  increase  leadership’s  understanding 
of  the  workings  of  command  and  control 
and provide insight into the protocols and 
procedures of incident response, it is imper-
ative  that  organizations  rehearse  the  inci-
dent  response  plan  at  least  annually. 
Whether  the  activity  is  a  mock  tabletop 
exercise  or  a  live-fi re  drill,  the  rehearsal 
gives  company  leadership  and  directors  a 
baseline understanding of the criteria used 
to  determine  the  severity  of  an  event,  the 
lifecycle of an attack and incident response, 
and the goals for each phase of the lifecycle. 

■  262 

The exercises also provide insights into the 
following:

 䊏 how  and  when  to  engage  external 

partners

 䊏 what  can  potentially  go  wrong  during 

the phases

 䊏 what types of communications are needed
 䊏 how  to  protect  the  incident  response 
information fl ow that is for the response 
team’s exclusive use

 䊏 how to bring other departments into the 

investigation.

Armed with such information, leadership 
and board directors are better enabled to for-
mulate questions and act on the information 
to provide proper governance and oversight.

■   Retain incident response teams and 

outside counsel experienced in managing 
cybersecurity incidents

When it comes to containment and eradica-
tion,  it  is  vital  that  internal  security  teams 
understand their strengths and weaknesses. 
Often internal teams assume they can handle 
the event and try to fi x the problems them-
selves, only to make matters worse by acci-
dentally  destroying  or  tainting  crucial  evi-
dence.  Organizations  are  therefore  turning 
to  external  counsel  and  forensic  response 
teams that can step in on a moment’s notice 
to respond to cyberattacks.

Selecting  the  right  counsel  and  forensic 
team—especially those experienced in inter-
actions  with  law  enforcement—can  be  the 
difference  between  success  and  failure.  In 
addition  to  benefi ting  from  their  expertise, 
involvement of an attorney allows organiza-
tions  to  maintain  attorney-client  privilege. 
Because  different  phases  of  the  incident 
response lifecycle require different capabili-
ties,  such  as  evidence  collection,  forensic 
analysis,  and  malware  reverse  engineering, 
organizations should select teams that have 
broad  expertise.  Established  relationships 
with several teams is wise because the scope 
and  magnitude  of  an  incident  may  require 

  LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION  

more than one forensics team. Having rela-
tionships  with  several  partners  provides  a 
fallback.

The worst time to fi nd a partner is during 
an incident. In addition to running the risk 
of  no  fi rm  being  available,  the  breached 
company is faced with paying rates that are 
non-negotiable and entering into a diffi cult 
relationship  that  often  leads  to  protracted 
investigations.  Selecting  and  vetting  cyber 
response teams in advance allows the team 
an  opportunity  to  learn  about  the  fi rm’s 
operational practices and environment. The 
forensics team can come up to speed quickly 
and hit the ground running. In addition to 
the qualitative advantage, selecting partners 
in  advance  provides  a  quantitative  advan-
tage in that you can pre-negotiate rates and 
terms that are acceptable to both parties and 
begin the relationship on a positive note.

Organizations also should look to engage a 
trusted  advisor  to  provide  independent 
advice to directors and offi cers regarding the 
security  incident.  Faced  with  pressure  to 
defl ect accusations or make things look better 
during  an  event,  internal  staff  may  report 
only what is necessary or skew information. 
An  impartial  trusted  advisor  knows  how  to 

interact  with  internal  personnel,  query  the 
forensic  investigators,  analyze  the  fi ndings, 
and  provide  the  perspective  that  the  board 
and  senior  management  need  for  decision 
making. Many fi rms use outside counsel with 
experience in guiding incident response oper-
ations to perform this trusted advisor role.

■   Employ good case management practices
No one ever fully knows how an investiga-
tion will evolve. Even if it is unlikely that a 
security event will become public or that the 
investigation  will  end  up  in  a  court  of  law, 
directors  should  assume  that  it  could  and 
take the appropriate actions from day one. It 
is  vital  to  follow  good  case  management 
practices and do everything possible to pre-
serve forensics evidence—from the fi rst indi-
cation  of  the  event  through  to  the  comple-
tion of the investigation.

Evidence is perishable and can be tainted. 
Organizations  that  are  slow  to  engage  the 
appropriate forensics partners run the risk of 
potentially  destroying,  tainting,  or  missing 
key  evidence  that  could  be  crucial  in  the 
later  stages  of  the  investigation.  By  asking 
the question, “Should this go to court; what 
do we need to do from the moment we start 

Make sure you have the right forensic team
Forensic services fi rms provide highly specialized resources that can cost tens of thousands 
of dollars. An inexperienced team, or one lacking the proper evidence collection, forensic 
analysis, and incident response skills, may not only cost an organization in terms of time and 
money but also jeopardize the success of mitigating the attack by inadvertently destroying or 
tainting evidence. It may be time to bring in a new team if the forensics team:
 䊏 is unable to put a big picture together that includes the scope of the breach as well as 

the sequence and path of movement

 䊏 has no clear plan for collection of evidence
 䊏 is unable to distinguish between evidence that is “need to have” and evidence that is 

“nice to have”

 䊏 takes a checklist approach to incident response
 䊏 is grasping at straws after the fi rst couple of weeks
 䊏 is unable to scale efforts if needed
 䊏 is unable to provide guidance and stand fi rm in communications with clients, 

regulators, and other stakeholders

 䊏 fails to understand or exercise proper chain of custody.

  263  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

this  investigation  to  present  a  solid  case?” 
organizations  can  limit  their  liability  down 
the road and better position themselves for 
successful litigation.

■   Adopt an outcome-based approach
Some forensics organizations take a checklist 
approach to incident response. However, no 
two cyber events are the same, and incident 
response  is  not  a  scripted  process.  Security 
teams  operate  under  the  fog  of  cyberwar, 
and decisions will be made under conditions 
of stress, fatigue, and confusion in response 
to seemingly random events. What is needed 
is  an  outcome-based  approach  to  incident 
response, recognition that there are multiple 
ways to achieve the outcome, and an under-
standing  of  what  can  go  wrong.  Normally, 
outcomes are based on a specifi c list of ques-
tions that must be answered by the incident 
response team based on initial attack indica-
tions and regulatory responsibility. The team 
should be focused on answering these ques-
tions during the investigation. Investigators 
who are experienced in outcome-based inci-
dent  response  are  better  able  to  focus  on 
what  matters,  form  hypotheses,  take  action 
based  on  the  type  of  attack  and  observable 
facts, and pivot should something go wrong.
During  the  course  of  containment  and 
eradication, it is expected that attackers will 
take new action based on the security team’s 
efforts. One model that can be used to pre-
vent  enemies  from  gaining  the  upper  hand 
is  the  “O-O-D-A  Loop”:  Observe,  Orient, 
Decide,  and  Act.  This  model  provides  a 
method for making informed decisions and 
acting  based  on  feedback  from  various 
sources. Recognizing that attackers are doing 
the same, the key is to tighten and accelerate 
the OODA Loop, leveraging people, process, 
and  technology  to  move  faster  than  the 
adversaries.

■   Hire impartial, independent spokespersons 

for crisis communications

The stakes for immediate and effective cri-
sis communications throughout an investi-
gation  have  never  been  higher.  During  a 
cyber crisis, a company may need to notify 

■  264 

customers, answer to the press, respond to 
regulators, and defend the company’s con-
duct in parallel actions, such as a civil suit 
and a regulatory investigation.

A  company’s  internal  public  relations 
team  knows  much  about  the  organization 
but is not an expert in directing cyber breach 
communications.  When  multi-billion  dollar 
payments  and  corporate  reputations  are  at 
risk, board directors and senior management 
must  take  care  to  turn  to  independent, 
impartial crisis communications experts.

Cyberattacks  are  distressing  events. 
Those  involved  often  have  an  emotional 
attachment or are too close to the incident to 
be viewed as impartial in their communica-
tions. Independent experts provide the clear 
thinking  and  unbiased  perspective  that  is 
required  to  assist  the  company  in  all  dia-
logues  and  announcements—from  initial 
notifi cation  to  worst-case  communications. 
Further,  the  external  team  will  be  able  to 
ensure  that  once  communications  are  initi-
ated, such as notifying customers of a breach, 
follow-up communications occur on a timely 
schedule.  Often  overlooked  is  the  need  to 
manage  negative  nonverbal  communica-
tions that may be sent to internal and exter-
nal parties as a result of actions taken by the 
response team. For example, shutting down 
a  website  or  requiring  password  changes 
sends  a  clear  message  that  something  has 
happened.  The  communications  team  must 
manage  these  types  of  communications  as 
well.  Finally,  in  addition  to  being  able  to 
articulate what is happening, it is vital that 
the crisis communications team stands fi rm 
in  its  mission  to  protect  the  company  by 
advancing the facts in the face of unjustifi ed 
assertions or incorrect accusations.

■   Be prepared for containment 

to affect business activities

Incident containment has two major compo-
nents: stopping the spread of the attack and 
preventing further damage to hosts. During 
the containment effort, organizations should 
be prepared to shut down or block services, 
revoke  privileges,  increase  controls,  and 
place  restrictions  on  network  connectivity 

and Internet access. Such activities can affect 
business processes dramatically by restrict-
ing  organizational  functions  and  work 
fl ows;  therefore,  the  decision  to  perform 
such  actions  should  never  be  one  sided. 
Because business activities are dynamic, the 
decision to implement controls during con-
tainment always should include a two-way 
discussion  with  business  process  owners 
and  company  leadership.  It  is  vital  that 
organizations  have  strategies  and  proce-
dures  in  place  for  making  containment-
related  decisions  that  refl ect  the  level  of 
acceptable risk to the organization.

■   Focus on people, process, and technology 

during eradication

Malware detection and eradication can be an 
expensive  and  time-consuming  process,  as 
malware  can  lie  dormant  in  a  system  for 
months and then activate again. Although it 
is easy and tempting to apply a quick fi x in 
the  heat  of  the  incident,  attention  must  be 
given  to  fi nding  and  fi xing  the  true  root 
cause. Here, the natural tendency is to lead 
with a technology solution. With new secu-
rity tools comes the belief that the problem is 
solved.  The  reality  is  that,  without  taking 

  LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION  

Organizations  must 

people  and  processes  into  consideration, 
technology  actually  can  create  more  com-
plexity,  consume  more  resources  than  it 
returns, and deliver only incremental value. 
In short, complexity is the enemy of security.
take  a  holistic 
approach  to  eradicating  and  closing  the 
security  gaps.  This  may  necessitate  new 
processes  and  policies,  new  services  and 
technologies,  and  additional  personnel. 
Skimping  on  cybersecurity  may  result  in 
much  higher  costs  down  the  line.  Board 
directors  should  be  prepared  to  increase 
security budgets and can be fi rm but fair in 
maintaining their fi duciary responsibility by 
requiring  the  right  justifi cation  from  the 
security team.

■   Share information with others 

who can benefi t

The fact that hackers have breached the com-
puter  systems  is  the  kind  of  news  that  no 
organization  wants  to  reveal.  Corporate 
leadership worries about attrition of custom-
ers,  negative  press,  and  diffi culties  with 
partners  that  may  occur  if  news  of  an  inci-
dent leaks out. However, for the good of the 
industry, the sharing of incident details may 

Attacker gains the upper hand—once
When the cyberattack happened, it caught everyone by surprise, but it shouldn’t have. It 
was just a matter of time, because the organization had a high level of technology debt, the 
IT security lacked alignment with the business, the business unit failed to understand its 
level of risk and necessary controls, and the organization had given minimal attention to 
rehearsing incident response.

It took the organization more than 48 hours to detect the breach. Then, several days 

passed before they realized the event was bigger than what could be handled internally. The 
delay in detection and slow action to call in security experts allowed the attackers to move 
quickly through the network, expand their footprint, and ultimately affect more than twenty 
customer environments. The investigation and recovery lasted for about four months, with 
costs totaling in the millions.

Sensing easy prey, the attacker returned in several months. This time the organization 
was prepared. The technology debt had been paid, resulting in a stronger foundation and 
improved security monitoring. IT security was well aligned with the business, and the busi-
ness unit understood and accepted its risk and controls. More important, the organization 
had rehearsed incident response scenarios. This time the attack was detected in minutes. 
The internal response team was able to shut the attack down in a matter of minutes with 
little cost and no risk to the business or customers.

  265  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

be  precisely  what  is  needed.  Cyberattacks 
are the new normal and security breaches no 
longer carry the stigma that they once did.

What  is  important  to  recognize  is  that 
cyber  criminals  use  the  same  attacks  over 
and over again. By using the same code with 
slight modifi cations, cyber criminals achieve 
effi ciency in their efforts while driving their 
costs down. By sharing information with oth-
ers who can benefi t, such as other companies 
within the industry sector, the U.S. Computer 
Emergency  Response  Team,  and  cybersecu-
rity  researchers  who  may  be  able  to  assist, 
organizations  can  help  protect  others  while 
driving up the adversary’s costs.

■   Debrief following an event to capture lessons 

learned

What  is  worse  than  a  big  public  breach?  A 
second  big  public  breach.  Because  the  han-
dling of cyberattacks can be extremely expen-
sive,  organizations  may  fi nd  it  helpful  to 
conduct a robust, non–fi nger-pointing assess-
ment of lessons learned after major cyberat-
tacks to prevent similar incidents from hap-
pening  in  the  future.  Capturing  the  lessons 
learned from the handling of such incidents 
should help an organization improve its inci-
dent  handling  capability.  Questions  to  ask 
include the following:

 䊏 Why did this happen?
 䊏 What could have prevented it?
 䊏 Did  we  classify  the  event  at  the  correct 

risk level?

 䊏 What  were  the  indicators  that  drove  the 

event classifi cation?

 䊏 Are the risk defi nitions correct?
 䊏 Did we manage the command and control 

effectively?

 䊏 Did  we  bring  the  right  people  in  at  the 

right time?

 䊏 Did  we  think  about  everything  properly 
from  a 
risk  perspective,  business 
perspective, communications perspective, 
and customer perspective?

■   Summary
No  matter  what  precautions  are  taken,  no 
organization  is  immune  to  cyberattacks. 
Organizations must have a comprehensive 
incident response team that includes exter-
nal incident response and forensic analysis, 
outside and in-house counsels, and public 
relations fi rms in place prior to any breach 
event.  These  partners  provide  incident 
response forensics, legal and crisis commu-
nications  assistance;  and  will  manage  the 
incident  in  conjunction  with  the  organiza-
tion to mitigate the damage and return the 
business  to  full  operational  capacity  as 
quickly  as  possible.  Unfortunately,  the 
worst time to fi gure out how to respond is 
during an actual incident. Making the plan 
up on the fl y in the middle of a crisis only 
leads to mistakes that aggravate the situa-
tion.  Lines  of  communication,  roles,  and 
identifi cation  of  decision  makers  must  be 
known before a breach occurs. Tabletop or 
similar exercises that include C-level man-
agement  and  board  directors  should  be 
carried  out  to  help  organizations  practice 
incident  responses  and  stress-test  their 
plans.

■  266 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Cyber incident response
BakerHostetler – Theodore J. Kobus, Partner and 
Co-Leader, Privacy and Data Protection; Craig A. Hoffman, 
Partner; and F. Paul Pittman, Associate

Most security experts acknowledge that a dedicated and 
well-resourced  attacker  will  eventually  fi nd  a  way  to 
break into a company’s network. Sophisticated attackers 
are  not  the  only  threat—fi nancially  or  politically  moti-
vated individuals with less-than-average skills also have 
been able to compromise companies. Faced with an ever-
increasing  number  of  endpoints  to  guard,  online  access 
management  issues  related  to  cloud  services  and  ven-
dors, budgetary constraints, and the fact that systems are 
built  and  maintained  by  individuals  (who  are  fallible), 
companies  are  recognizing  at  an  increasing  rate  that  a 
security incident involving the unauthorized access to its 
customer, employee, or sensitive business data is inevita-
ble. How are companies responding? By taking a series of 
measures  to  become  ‘compromise  ready,’  including 
developing  an  incident  response  plan.  Proper  prepara-
tion for an incident enables a company to be better posi-
tioned  to  respond  in  a  way  that  mitigates  risk  and  pre-
serves  relationships.  In  addition,  how  a  company 
responds infl uences whether the company experiences a 
drop  in  revenue  or  faces  a  regulatory  investigation  or 
consumer litigation. This response can signifi cantly affect 
a company’s reputation.

Offi cers  and  directors  are  tasked  with  ensuring  that 
their company’s incident response strategy is appropriate 
and  adapts  to  the  constantly  changing  threat  landscape. 
They  also  have  a  role  in  overseeing  the  response  to  an 
incident. Incidents often arise just prior to an SEC report-
ing deadline, and companies that are caught unprepared 
may not be positioned well to withstand any subsequent 
scrutiny over their disclosure decision.

In  this  chapter  we  discuss  the  underlying  state  and 
federal  notifi cation  obligations  that  are  implicated  by 

267  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

potential incidents along with best practices 
developed  from  our  experience  in  helping 
companies  respond  to  more  than  1,000 
potential events. Although these laws are a 
critical part of a response, responding to an 
incident  is  not  just  a  legal  issue.  Being 
viewed  as  handling  the  incident  well 
involves  also  an  effective  communications 
response.

■   Incident response best practices
A  company’s  incident  response  should  be 
guided by a plan that has been tailored to the 
company’s industry and fi ne-tuned through 
mock breach exercises. The response plan is 
a  critical  element  of  the  crisis  management 
strategy—not because it provides a prescrip-
tive, detailed list of action items, but because 
it  has  been  refi ned  and  practiced  through 
tabletop drills. A good plan outlines a fl exi-
ble framework of the general steps that must 
be  taken  to  prepare  for,  respond  to,  and 
recover from a security incident. An incident 
response  plan  must  be  fl exible  enough  to 
adapt to the particular security incident the 
company  is  facing  (e.g.,  network  intrusion, 
denial  of  service,  account  takeovers,  mal-
ware,  phishing,  loss  of  paper,  employee 
data,  security  vulnerabilities  detected  by 
third parties, or theft of assets).

 䊏 Identify  the 

internal 

Identify 

team  members 

incident  response 
team. 
from 
critical  departments  (e.g.,  IT,  IS,  legal, 
communications, internal audit, HR, risk 
management,  business  lines),  describe 
their  roles,  and  defi ne  how  and  when 
they  will  be  activated  when  a  potential 
incident is identifi ed.

 䊏 Identify  who  will  lead  the  incident  response 
team. Companies approach this in different 
ways. For some, the IT and IS groups play 
a  signifi cant  role.  At  highly  regulated 
companies, legal and regulatory members 
will  be  integral  to  the  response.  Because 
some  issues  go  beyond  the  technical 
response, being a good project manager is 
probably one of the key traits a company 
should look for when deciding who will 
lead  the  group.  Practice  drills  also  help 

■  268 

to ensure that the various team members 
understand  their  role  and  authority  to 
make decisions.

 䊏 Categorization. Provide a simple structure 
for  classifying  events  by  severity  (e.g., 
low, medium, high) and risk to “level set” 
the team regarding urgency, escalation to 
the  C-suite,  and  level  of  engagement  of 
the representative groups on the incident 
response team.

 䊏 Response protocol. Provide a fl exible frame-
work  for  executing  the  eight  key  steps 
of  incident  response:  (1)  preparation, 
(2) 
(3)  assessment, 
(4)  communication,  (5)  containment, 
(6)  eradication, 
recovery,  and 
(8) post-incident.

identification, 

(7) 

 䊏 Third  parties.  Identify  key  third  parties 
that  will  assist  the  company,  including 
external privacy counsel, forensics, crisis 
communications,  mail  and  call  center 
vendor, and credit monitoring.

Once  the  plan  is  created,  test  the  plan  for 
gaps  and  provide  training  for  the  incident 
response  team.  External  privacy  counsel 
often conducts these exercises, sometimes in 
conjunction  with  the  primary  forensic  fi rm 
and crisis communications fi rm. Most com-
panies choose to use a hypothetical scenario 
that  they  would  consider  to  be  the  most 
likely  catastrophic  incident  they  may  face 
(e.g., a payment card event for a retailer) fol-
lowed by subsequent, periodic testing using 
different  scenarios  (e.g.,  service  disruption, 
employee data).

No  two  incident  scenarios  are  the  same, 
so  there  is  not  a  one-size-fi ts-all,  turnkey 
solution  to  incident  response.  There  are, 
however, critical factors that drive a success-
ful response.

 䊏 Notify  and  assemble  incident  response  team 
members  and  begin  the  investigation.  Don’t 
panic when a security incident arises. Be 
methodical,  but  swift,  in  your  response. 
Assemble  the  incident  response  team 
members and notify them of the security 
incident.  If  a  member  of  the  C-suite  is 
not  on  the  team,  there  must  be  a  direct 

connection to the C-suite so that decisions 
can be approved in a timely fashion and 
the response team can move forward with 
the investigation. It is useful to appoint a 
security  incident  manager;  often  this  is 
someone with strong project management 
skills who can move the process forward 
in  a  productive  way  working  alongside 
outside  privacy  counsel.  Once  the  team 
is assembled, it should initiate an internal 
investigation  into  the  security  incident, 
and  depending  on  the  potential  severity 
of the incident, daily progress calls should 
be scheduled.

 䊏 Identify and fi x the issue. Conduct an initial 
analysis  of  the  reported  incident  and 
focus on getting quickly to a point where 
the  internal  and/or  external  computer 
security fi rm can develop and implement 
an effective containment plan. If news of 
the incident is going to become public, at 
least  the  company  will  be  in  a  position 
to  say  that  it  identifi ed  and  blocked  the 
attack from continuing. The company can 
then  turn  to  identifying  the  full  nature 
and  extent  of  the  attack.  Working  with 
internal resources, at least initially, is very 
common;  however,  consider  bringing  in 
external security fi rms when the company 
is facing capability, credibility, or capacity 
issues.

 䊏 Gather  the  facts  and  let  them  drive  the 
decision-making.  Resist  the  pressure  to 
communicate about the incident too early 
or  to  be  overly  reassuring.  Focus  on  the 
investigation.  Institute  a  plan  early  on 
for collecting all available forensic data—
hardware, devices, database activity, and 
system  logs—and  transfer  it  to  a  safe 
location  for  subsequent  analysis.  Create 
a  timeline  of  events  surrounding  the 
security  incident  and  the  actions  taken 
by  the  company.  Structure  additional 
investigation  and 
response  efforts 
based  on 
information  gathered 
and  the  scope  of  the  incident.  Work  to 
include  any  favorable  fi ndings  in  public 
communications;  notifi cation  letters  are 
often  attached  to  class  action  complaints 
and therefore a company can rely on any 

the 

  CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE   

such  helpful  information  when  fi ling  a 
motion to dismiss.

the 

state, 

 䊏 Determine any legal obligations and comply. 
Experienced outside privacy counsel that 
is  well  versed  in  incident  response  can 
help the company quickly and accurately 
determine 
federal,  and 
international  privacy  and  security  laws 
and  regulations  that  may  be  implicated 
by the security incident. Complying with 
these  laws  is  sometimes  a  balancing  act 
that requires a company to consider other 
factors. Engaging outside privacy counsel 
who  understands  how  the  regulators 
view these laws, as well as the challenges 
companies  face  in  responding  to  these 
types  of  incidents,  is  critical.  Outside 
privacy  counsel  must  be  a  partner  with 
the company in the response. There is no 
one-size-fi ts-all approach.

 䊏 Communicate  with  the  public  and  report 
to  the  incident  response  team.  During  the 
course of the investigation and response, 
there should be constant communication 
among incident response team members. 
Periodic  reporting  meetings  are  useful. 
In addition, offi cers and directors should 
receive reports that provide essential facts 
and  plans  for  responding  to  the  security 
incident.  It  is  critical  to  have  outside 
counsel  involved  in  the  communications 
plan  to  preserve  any  privileges  that 
may  attach  to  communications.  Further, 
develop  a 
for 
executives  to  use  when  communicating 
with the media, affected individuals, and 
shareholders.  Also,  consider  creating 
a  website  and  using  a  call  center  to 
keep  affected  individuals  apprised  of 
developments.

‘holding  statement’ 

 䊏 Eradicate  remnants  of  the  security  incident 
and  recover  business  operations.  When 
the  security  incident  and  any  resulting 
damage  have  been  contained,  develop 
a  plan  to  eliminate  the  vestiges  of  the 
security  incident,  restore  the  company’s 
assets,  and  return  your  business  to 
normal  operations.  Ensure  that  the 
threat created by the security incident is 
eradicated.

  269  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

■   Potential legal issues and obligations
The issues caused by the ‘patchwork quilt’ 
of  state  breach  notifi cation  laws  in  the 
United States receive a lot of attention and 
feed calls for a single federal law that pre-
empts any inconsistent state laws. However, 
in  most  incidents,  especially  for  incidents 
that  affect  individuals  across  the  country, 
differences  across  state  breach  notifi cation 
laws  rarely  make  a  difference  in  how  the 
company responds. Complications do arise 
when only a few state laws are implicated, 
such  as  when  one  state  does  not  have  a 
“risk of harm” trigger that allows a compa-
ny  to  determine  that  notifi cation  is  not 
required but the other states do. There are 
no decisions from courts describing how to 
interpret  and  apply  these  laws.  There  are 
state  attorneys  general  who  have  certain 
interpretations regarding the timing of noti-
fi cation  and  others  who  have  well-known 
‘hot  button’  issues,  neither  of  which  are 
evident from reading the text of the notifi -
cation law.

Notifi cation
Typically, a security incident becomes a data 
breach when there is unauthorized access to 
unencrypted  personally  identifying  infor-
mation  (PII),  which  is  generally  a  person’s 
name  associated  with  his  or  her  Social 
Security  number,  driver’s  license  number, 
health  and  medical  information,  and  fi nan-
cial  information,  depending  on  the  state  or 
federal  law.  When  a  data  breach  occurs,  all 
states  (except  Alabama,  New  Mexico,  and 
South Dakota) require that a company notify 
the  affected  individuals  that  their  PII  has 
been  compromised.  The  breach  notifi cation 
laws of each state and the type of data that 
are  considered  PII  vary  between  states  and 
can create multiple and sometimes inconsist-
ent obligations on the company required to 
provide  notice.  Most  state  laws  require 
notice as soon as reasonably possible, where-
as  a  few  require  notifi cation  within  30  or 
45 days of discovery. Providing notifi cation 
within 30 days of initial discovery is often a 
signifi cant challenge.

■  270 

(HIPAA)  and 

In  addition,  certain  federal  laws  such  as 
Insurance  Portability  and 
the  Health 
Accountability  Act 
the 
Gramm-Leach  Bliley  Act  (GLBA)  require 
companies  to  notify  affected  individuals. 
Under HIPAA, notifi cation is required with-
in  60  days  and  a  failure  to  provide  timely 
notice  will  likely  result  in  an  investigation 
that  may  lead  to  a  fi ne.  Timely  notifi cation 
enables  consumers  to  exercise  self-help  in 
monitoring 
their  payment  card,  bank 
accounts, and credit reports to prevent fraud. 
By  reducing  the  likelihood  that  consumers 
will be subject to fraud, a company can also 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  future  suits  based 
on the data breach.

Reporting
In  addition  to  providing  notifi cation  of  a 
data  breach  to  affected  individuals,  a  com-
pany also may be required to report a data 
breach  to  other  individuals  and  entities 
under  certain  state  and  federal  laws  and 
industry guidelines.

Law  enforcement:  Law  enforcement  can 
be  helpful  during  an  investigation,  but  it 
should be brought in at the appropriate time. 
Telecoms and fi nancial institutions have spe-
cifi c  guidelines  regarding  reporting  to  law 
enforcement,  but  most  industries  do  not 
have  similar  regulations.  Typically,  compa-
nies  engage  either  the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Investigation  (FBI)  or  the  United  States 
Secret  Service  (USSS),  although  local  law 
enforcement can be helpful in certain situa-
tions.  Your  outside  privacy  counsel  should 
have  established  relationships  with  law 
enforcement  and  understand  when  they 
should be contacted. Although law enforce-
ment  can  be  helpful  with  the  investigation 
and  communications  with  regulators,  keep 
in  mind  that  its  goal  is  very  different  from 
the  company’s:  law  enforcement  wants  to 
catch  the  ‘bad  guy’  and  the  company  must 
fi gure out the appropriate way to respond to 
the incident.

Federal  regulators:  Certain  industry-
specifi c  laws  also  require  reporting  of  a 
breach to federal regulators. Under HIPAA, 

a company must report any data breach to 
the Secretary for the Department of Health 
and  Human  Services,  although  the  timing 
of  that  reporting  differs  depending  on 
whether the number of affected individuals 
exceeds  500.  Under  the  GLBA,  fi nancial 
institutions must report a security incident 
to  their  primary  federal  regulator  as  soon 
as possible.

State  attorneys  general  and  agencies: 
Some state laws require a company to report 
a  data  breach  to  the  state  attorney  general, 
depending  on  the  number  of  affected  indi-
viduals,  which  may  range  from  1,000  in 
some  states  to  only  one  person  in  others. 
Other  states  require  notifi cation  to  state 
agencies, such as state consumer protection 
agencies, departments of health, or cyberse-
curity agencies. The form of the notice may 
also vary. Some states require simply that a 
copy of the breach notifi cation letter that was 
sent to the affected individuals be fi led with 
the state attorney general. Other states may 
require more, such as written notice identify-
ing the nature of the breach, the number of 
affected  individuals,  any  steps  taken  to 
investigate and prevent future breaches, and 
the  content  of  the  notice  intended  for  the 
affected  individuals.  Working  with  regula-
tors can be one of the most critical pieces of 
an incident response. Ensure that your out-
side privacy counsel has a working relation-
ship with your regulators and can guide you 
on  the  timing  and  content  of  communica-
tions. In most cases, if this piece is handled 
appropriately,  there  is  a  greater  chance  of 
very little fallout.

Other  entities:  When  payment  card  data 
are at risk, the response is governed by pay-
ment  card  network  operating  regulations 
that merchants have agreed to follow as part 
of  the  merchant  services  agreement  with 
their acquiring bank and payment processor. 
The  card  network  regulations  defi ne  a  spe-
cifi c  security  standard  that  merchants  must 
comply with (PCI DSS). They also dictate the 
investigatory  process  and  provide  for  the 
recovery of noncompliance fi nes and assess-
ments to reimburse banks that issued cards 

  CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE   

affected by the incident for their costs associ-
ated with fraudulent charges and the reissu-
ing of cards. The liability assessments can be 
one of the largest fi nancial consequences of 
an incident.

In certain circumstances, a company may 
be  required  to  report  a  data  breach  to  the 
media.  Under  state  notifi cation  laws,  if  the 
company  does  not  have  suffi cient  contact 
information  to  mail  notifi cation  letters  to 
affected  individuals,  the  company  has  to 
provide  notice  through  substitute  means, 
which involves posting a link in a conspicu-
ous location on the company’s website, issu-
ing a press release to major statewide media, 
and  sending  an  email  to  the  individuals  (if 
the  company  has  their  email  addresses). 
HIPAA  requires  a  press  release  if  a  data 
breach involves more than 500 affected indi-
viduals. In other circumstances, a company 
may  have  no  legal  obligation  to  report  a 
security incident or data breach to the media 
but may feel compelled to do so in an effort 
to  control  the  story  and  prevent  inaccurate 
or  misleading  information  from  being  con-
veyed  to  the  public  by  the  hacker,  affected 
individuals,  or  other  sources.  Accordingly, 
careful thought should be given to develop-
ing  a  communications  strategy  as  part  of  a 
company’s incident response—one that con-
siders not only the message but also the tim-
ing of the message and the medium in which 
it is distributed.

Board  of  directors: Although  reporting  a 
security incident to the board of directors is 
not required by any specifi c state or federal 
law,  a  director’s  duty  to  shareholders 
requires  that  the  director  be  informed  of 
important  topics  that  signifi cantly  affect  the 
overall business of the company. Consequently, 
directors  may  (and  should)  require  that  an 
incident  response  team  member  (preferably 
counsel)  provide  reports  on  any  security 
incidents or data breach, and the progress of 
any incident response efforts. Some compa-
nies are establishing a special audit commit-
tee for cyber incidents and even engaging a 
“cyber  advisor”  to  brief  the  board  on  these 
issues.

  271  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Lawsuits and/or regulatory action
A company’s response to a security incident 
or data breach can have signifi cant legal and 
fi nancial consequences beyond those associ-
ated  with  investigating  and  responding  to 
an  incident.  Some  state  and  federal  laws 
allow  for  consumers  affected  by  a  data 
breach  to  assert  a  private  right  of  action 
against companies. When the incident affects 
a  large  number  of  individuals,  it  is  fairly 
common to see putative class actions fi led in 
the hours or days after the incident becomes 
public.  Regulators,  such  as 
the  FTC, 
Department of Health and Human Services, 
and  Federal  Communications  Commission 
may initiate investigations that may result in 
multimillion-dollar fi nes or the imposition of 
a consent order that imposes a lengthy obli-
gation to implement a privacy and security 
compliance program and have it audited by 
a  third  party.  Last,  although  not  common, 
directors  and  offi cers  may  be  named  in 
shareholder lawsuits.

■   Role of external parties in a company’s 

incident response

An  incident  response  typically  requires  the 
involvement of several external parties who 
serve  important  roles  in  identifying  and 
assessing the cause, extent, and impact of a 
security incident as well as crafting and dis-
seminating  a  response  to  the  affected  indi-
viduals, the public, the media, law enforce-
ment,  and  regulatory  authorities.  One  step 
that may save a few days during an incident 
response is to engage and negotiate the mas-
ter  services  agreements  with  these  compa-
nies  before  an  incident  so  that  only  a  new 
statement of work has to be prepared when 
an incident arises.

 䊏 Privacy counsel. An external law fi rm often 
serves as the ‘quarterback’ of the incident 
response. This role includes engaging other 
third parties to assist the fi rm in providing 
legal  advice  to  the  company,  such  as  a 
forensics  fi rm,  which  then  serves  as  a 
foundation for establishing that attorney-
client  privilege.  Work-product  protection 

■  272 

should  apply  to  the  communications 
with  and  fi ndings  of  the  forensic  fi rm 
and  others  engaged  in  assisting  the  law 
fi rm.  The  external  law  fi rms  also  should 
provide  guidance  to  other  members  of 
the  incident  response  team  on  how  to 
preserve  privileges,  such  as  through  the 
use  of  an  ‘Attorney-Client  Privileged 
Communication’  stamp  in  emails  and 
communications,  for  example.  Outside 
counsel should collaborate with in-house 
counsel in determining whether there are 
any  legal  or  contractual  obligations  to 
notify or report, or potential liability as a 
result of a data breach.

 䊏 Forensics  fi rm.  An  outside  forensics  fi rm 
is  sometimes  needed  to  conduct  an 
examination of the available forensic data 
to  determine  whether  there  are  signs  of 
unauthorized access, and if so, determine 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  issue  and 
provide  recommendations  on  short-term 
containment and longer-term measures to 
remediate and enhance security.

 䊏 Crisis  communication 

firm.  Although 
public  relations  fi rms  understand  how 
to  get  a  company  into  the  news,  crisis 
communications  fi rms  have  to  exercise 
a  different  skill  set  in  guiding  the 
communication  strategy  for  companies 
facing  security  incidents.  Those  fi rms 
understand  that  there  is  often  little,  if 
any,  good  news  to  report,  so  they  focus 
on  communications  designed  to  make  it 
clear  that  the  company  is  responding  in 
a  quick  and  transparent  manner  that  is 
designed  to  protect  affected  individuals. 
They can also provide media training for 
the spokesperson and assist in responding 
to  media  inquiries  in  a  consistent  and 
measured manner.

 䊏 Breach response and notifi cation fi rm. Using a 
dedicated external call center and mailing 
vendor  to  notify  and  handle  inquiries 
from  affected  individuals  can  greatly 
assist  a  company  with  the  logistical 
challenges  it  faces  during  an  incident 
response. The call center can answer calls 
from an approved FAQ sheet.

Regardless of the external parties retained to 
assist in an incident response, it is important 
to  ensure  that  they  are  retained  by  outside 
counsel to enable the assertion of the attor-
ney-client  privilege  and  work-product  doc-
trine to protect documents and communica-
tions  generated  in  the  investigation  and 
during the response to a security incident.

■   Role of offi cers and directors in a company’s 

incident response

The C-suite and boardroom play a small but 
important  part  in  a  company’s  actual  inci-
dent response: they mainly ensure that criti-
cal  executive-level  decisions  concerning 
impact to the business and expenditures are 
made  promptly.  This  is  best  facilitated  by 
having  a  C-suite  representative  serve  as  a 
member of the incident response team. It is 
also important for offi cers and directors to be 
engaged  in  the  incident  response  process, 
because  in  the  event  that  another  security 
incident  occurs,  the  offi cers  and  directors 
could  be  held  accountable  by  consumers, 
shareholders, and regulators for any lack of 
familiarity with the company’s cybersecurity 
program.

Given  the  potential  liability  and  impact 
to a company’s reputation posed by a data 
breach, directors should have procedures in 
place  to  ensure  that  they  receive  timely 
updates  on  any 
response. 
Communications  with  the  board  regarding 
the  incident  response  and  the  fi ndings  of 
any investigation should be carefully craft-
ed and limited to factual information if pos-
sible, because of the prospect of shareholder 

incident 

  CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE   

derivative suits. This is particularly impor-
tant  because  communications  to  directors 
that are not made at the direction of, or by, 
counsel may not be privileged and could be 
discoverable in subsequent litigation.

and  vetted  by 

Should a security incident or data breach 
be  made  public,  executives  should  be  pre-
pared  to  comment  on  the  incident.  When 
necessary,  a  holding  statement  should  be 
developed 
counsel. 
Communications  by  offi cers  or  directors 
with  the  public  should  be  accurate,  com-
plete, and truthful, but also simple, so as not 
to  be  misleading  or  admit  liability. Any  fi l-
ings  or  disclosures  with  the  federal  regula-
tors,  such  as  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission,  should  be  carefully  vetted  to 
ensure  accuracy,  which  may  prove  diffi cult 
when  the  facts  surrounding  a  security  inci-
dent are being determined. This can be par-
ticularly  problematic  in  quarterly  (or  peri-
odic)  earnings  calls  with  analysts  that  may 
occur  while  investigation  and  response 
efforts are taking place.

■   Conclusion
In  this  ‘cyber  climate,’  companies  must  be 
prepared for a security incident. Offi cers and 
directors  cannot  sit  on  the  sideline;  they 
must be aware of cyberthreats and engaged 
in developing and implementing an incident 
response plan to limit the amount of damage 
that  can  be  caused  by  a  data  breach.  An 
effective incident response can help preserve 
the company’s reputation and limit its expo-
sure,  allowing  it  to  continue  and  grow  its 
business operations.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  273  ■

Communicating after a cyber incident
Sard Verbinnen & Co – Scott Lindlaw, Principal

Data security is the number one concern that keeps board 
members up at night, NYSE’s annual Law in the Boardroom 
survey  found.  It’s  a  rational  nightmare  for  anyone  run-
ning a company, given the explosion of data breaches and 
the havoc they can wreak. As recent shareholder deriva-
tive and securities lawsuits underscore, a director is not 
merely  responsible  for  ensuring  that  a  company’s  cyber 
defenses are robust. Rather, lawsuits against directors of 
Target Corp., the TJX Companies, and Heartland Payment 
Systems,  Inc.  have  taught  us  that  directors  must  also 
ensure that the company is prepared to manage the after-
math of a breach. To contain the damage, effective com-
munications  with  a  host  of  internal  and  external  audi-
ences are essential.

The two greatest harms infl icted by a breach are repu-
tational damage and loss of customer loyalty, according to 
the Ponemon Institute, which compiles breach costs glob-
ally. To mitigate reputational damage, loss of customers, 
and related harms from a breach, it is critical that a com-
pany  communicate  clearly  (and  often  simultaneously) 
with  multiple  audiences.  The  board’s  oversight  of  this 
aspect  of  cybersecurity  should  not  start  in  the  fog  of  a 
cyber crisis. It should begin well before an incident.

■   The director’s duties and cybersecurity-related 

communications

A data breach can substantially diminish stock value, as 
several  academic  studies  have  found.  The  most  recent 
study,  involving  174  breaches,  found  “the  cumulative 
change  in  net  earnings  including  extraordinary  items  in 
the four quarters after a breach announcement is a 22.54% 
decrease, indicating deteriorated earnings performance.” 
These  fi ndings  by  Kholekile  L.  Grebu,  Jing  Wang,  and 
Wenjuan Xie of the University of New Hampshire Peter T. 
Paul  College  of  Business  and  Economics  do  not  always 
hold true. A study of several prominent data breaches by 

275  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

Sard Verbinnen & Co. found that share price 
impact is hard to measure because of a mul-
titude of factors affecting stocks. Still, a com-
pany  should  anticipate  that  revenue  and 
profi ts may take a hit after a breach. A pri-
mary goal of a post-breach communications 
strategy should be to mitigate this impact as 
much as possible.

Because  breaches  can  have  a  substantial 
effect on the bottom line, preparing for and 
responding to such incidents fall squarely in 
the director’s fi duciary duties. As explained 
in Chapter 8, directors owe their companies 
certain obligations, such as the duties of care, 
good  faith,  and  loyalty.  In  the  context  of 
cybersecurity incidents, these duties require 
directors to ensure the company develops a 
reasonable crisis-management plan for use in 
the event a breach occurs. This calls for board 
members to have at least a high-level under-
standing  of  communications  strategies  and 
tactics, for internal and external audiences.

For  example,  almost  all  states  have  laws 
requiring  companies  to  notify  customers 
when  a  breach  compromises  sensitive  per-
sonal  data.  Directors  and  companies  have 
been  sued  on  the  ground  that  they  failed  to 
take  reasonable  steps  to  notify  consumers 
that a company’s systems had been breached. 
When the law requires it, notifying customers 
about a breach is fundamentally a legal func-
tion  but  also  a  communications  function. 
Plaintiffs will try to hold directors accounta-
ble  for  a  perceived  failure  of  notifi cation. 
Likewise,  regularly  disseminating  accurate 
information to shareholders may be a regula-
tory  requirement  but  also  requires  effective 
communications. The Securities and Exchange 
Commission has put companies on notice as 
to  the  reputational  harms  of  breaches  and 
companies’  disclosure  obligations  regarding 
cyber 
incidents.  “Reputational  damage 
adversely affecting customer or investor con-
fi dence” may cause an attacked company to 
sustain  “substantial  costs  and  suffer  other 
negative  consequences,”  the  Commission 
wrote  in  disclosure  guidance  in  2011.  The 
Ponemon  Institute  reported  that  in  2014, 
breach-related  lost  business  costs,  including 
turnover  of  customers, 
the  abnormal 

■  276 

increased  customer  acquisition  activities, 
reputation losses, and diminished goodwill, 
cost the victimized companies an average of 
$3.72 million per incident.

Companies  have  an  opportunity  to  miti-
gate  each  of  these  classes  of  loss  through 
effective  communications.  This  means  fol-
lowing  the  law  on  all  notifi cations  required 
to  consumers  and  investors,  of  course. 
However, a company should not stop there. 
Communicating  about  a  cyber  incident  to 
customers and investors as required by law 
should be the bare minimum from a commu-
nications  standpoint.  To  preserve  goodwill 
and  stanch  reputational  losses,  companies 
must  move  beyond  mere  compliance  and 
operate  from  a  perspective  of  stewardship. 
They must demonstrate leadership, integrity, 
and  responsibility  through  thoughtful  com-
munications.  To  achieve  that,  these  princi-
ples should guide any communications relat-
ing to a cyber incident:

 䊏 Preserve  the  company’s  credibility  with 
all  constituencies,  including  consumers, 
customers, partners, regulators, employees, 
investors, journalists, and analysts.

 䊏 Maintain  control  of  the  communications 
process  by  establishing  concise,  agreed-
upon messages so that the company speaks 
with one voice.

 䊏 Provide  pertinent,  confirmed  facts 
without jeopardizing any internal or law 
enforcement investigations.

 䊏 Coordinate  all  public  communications 
with legal counsel to (1) ensure accuracy; 
(2) avoid compromising any investigation 
or 
legal  exposure;  and 
(3) preserve attorney-client privilege.

increasing 

 䊏 Prepare  for  potential  negative  legal, 

fi nancial, and customer scenarios.

These  should  be  the  tactical  goals  of  com-
munications responding to a cyber incident:

 䊏 Reassure  all  constituencies  that  you  are 
taking steps to contain and fi x the issue.
 䊏 Manage  how  the  breach  is  portrayed  in 
news  and  social  media—where  possible, 
position company as victim, not villain.

 䊏 Confi ne  public  comments  to  what  you 

know. Do not speculate.

 䊏 Avoid  prolonging  news  media  coverage 

unnecessarily.

 䊏 Do  and  say  nothing  to  heighten  the 

interest of regulators.

 䊏 Provide no fodder to plaintiffs’ attorneys.
 䊏 Minimize  damage 
the  eyes  of 

in 

consumers, customers, and investors.

 䊏 Protect share price.

Companies  must  integrate  these  communi-
cations principles and goals into a coherent 
incident-response  plan  before  a  breach 
strikes.  An  effective  plan  will  position  the 
victimized company to communicate quick-
ly  and  effectively  in  the  event  of  a  data 
breach or other security incident. Important 
decisions will have to be made in real time, 
but the tools and guidelines in a cyber inci-
dent  response  plan  should  ensure  immedi-
ate engagement of the proper personnel, the 
proper process for obtaining and reviewing 
information needed to determine the appro-
priate communications response, and align-
ment  on  all  appropriate  steps  to  communi-
cate to employees and external audiences.

A  company’s 

incident-response  plan 
should  identify  members  of  several  sub-
teams,  including  legal,  IT,  and  communica-
tions. Anyone who will be directly involved 
in  making  communications  decisions  or  in 
the  dissemination  of  internal  and/or  exter-
nal  communications  must  read  and  under-
stand this plan. Press releases, key messages, 
question-and-answer  documents,  contact 
lists,  and  letters  to  stakeholders  such  as 
investors and employees should be prepared 
in advance, leaving blank spaces to fi ll in as 
facts  emerge.  The  plan  should  contemplate 
the establishment of a dedicated website and 
whether  the  company’s  existing  corporate 
blogs and social media presence may be use-
ful  communications  instruments  after  a 
breach. The communications plan, and espe-
cially its contacts lists, should be treated as a 
living  document.  It  should  be  kept  up  to 
date and reviewed and tested regularly.

Directors  must  make  clear  to  manage-
ment  that  they  expect  the  company  to  be 

  COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT   

prepared  to  respond  very  quickly  to  any 
cyber incident and to communicate the com-
pany’s  position.  As  part  of  this,  the  board 
should  review  the  company’s  budget  for 
security  risk  management,  ensuring  the 
availability  of  the  funds  necessary  to  hire 
outside law fi rms, IT and forensics experts, 
remediation  support  services,  and  commu-
nications consultants.

■   Audiences to consider when responding 

to a breach

A  company  responding  to  a  breach  must 
communicate  with  myriad  audiences.  It 
must coordinate and calibrate its messaging 
with  each  while  recognizing  that  messages 
aimed at investors may end up in news sto-
ries,  that  news  stories  will  shape  investors’ 
perceptions,  and  that  everything  the  com-
pany says could end up on Twitter.

 䊏 Consumers, customers, and partners: In 
addition to legally required notifi cations, 
the breached company must be prepared 
to  communicate  what  it  is  doing  to 
contain an incident; provide assurances, 
if  applicable, 
regarding  safety  of 
customer  information  and  recourse  on 
future  fraudulent  activity;  give  front-
line  customer  service  representatives 
guidance  on  how  to  communicate  with 
customers;  provide  a  dedicated  call 
center  and/or  website 
to  handle 
customer  inquiries;  and  provide  third-
party credit monitoring, if appropriate.

 䊏 Journalists 

and 

social  media 
communities:  It  will  not  be  suffi cient 
to  issue  prepared  public  statements  at 
the  company’s  convenience.  The  victim 
company  must  be  prepared  to  react 
to  a  deluge  of  media  inquiries  and  be 
prepared  for  leaks.  The  company  may 
also have to proactively engage reporters, 
including 
and 
cybersecurity beat reporters. This requires 
developing  a  process  for  engaging  the 
news  media, 
including  designating 
media  spokespersons,  preparing  key 
executives  for  direct  exposure  to  news 
media,  correcting  inaccurate  reports, 

regional,  national, 

  277  ■

INCIDENT RESPONSE

and  monitoring  traditional  and  social 
media on an ongoing basis. The company 
must also prepare to use social media to 
distribute messages.

 䊏 Investors  and  analysts:  The  breached 
company  must  be  prepared  to  answer 
questions about the impact of the incident 
on  fi nancial  outlook  and  about  the  costs 
of  response  and  security  upgrades.  It 
can  expect  to  face  such  questions  on  its 
fi rst  earnings  call  after  the  incident,  and 
thereafter.  A  Form  8-K  may  be  required 
if shareholders would view the impact of 
the incident as material.

 䊏 Internal  audiences:  Employees  need  to 
hear  from  the  company  about  what  has 
transpired, and what changes in security 
policies  and  protocols  are  coming.  They 
must be alert to future attacks and avoid 
talking  publicly  about  the 
incident. 
Human  resources  should  prepare  to 
involve itself if employees had a possible 
role  in  causing  the  incident  or  failing  to 
detect it.

In  addition  to  the  above  audiences,  the 
breached  company  must  carefully  weigh 
and  coordinate  each  statement  with  a  sec-
ondary  set  of  audiences  in  mind.  Plaintiffs’ 
attorneys will be circling and will race to the 
courthouse to sue the company on behalf of 
purportedly aggrieved customers and share-
holders.  Banks  and  credit  card  companies 
who  may  have  lost  money  on  fraudulent 
transactions  will  expect  to  be  made  whole. 
Insurance companies will also be monitoring 
public statements if the victimized company 
has a cyber incident or other relevant policy 
and moves to fi le a claim.

■   Lawsuits against directors: communications 

issues

As  if  the  breaches  themselves  weren’t 
enough to keep directors up at night, board 
members have an additional and unique set 
of worries: shareholder derivative and secu-
rities lawsuits after an incident. Directors of 
Target,  the  TJX  Companies,  and  Heartland 
Payment Systems, among others, have each 
seen these actions after breaches. These suits 

■  278 

typically  comprise  two  main  arguments. 
First, they allege directors failed to prevent 
the  breach.  Second,  they  contend  directors 
covered it up and/or failed to notify inves-
tors and consumers. This latter class of argu-
ments essentially alleges failures of commu-
nication.  The  cases  against  Target  and 
Heartland show how the plaintiffs use deriv-
ative and securities suits to blame directors 
and offi cers for these alleged sins of commu-
nications, or lack thereof:

 䊏 Target  Corp.:  On  December  18,  2013, 
the  blog  Krebs  on  Security  broke  the 
news  of  a  major  breach  at  the  retailer. 
The  next  day  the  company  confi rmed 
it  was  investigating  a  security  breach 
involving  stolen  credit  card  and  debit 
card information of 40 million customers 
who  shopped  in  its  stores. A  few  weeks 
later, the company disclosed that the data 
theft  was  signifi cantly  more  extensive 
and affected millions more shoppers than 
it had initially reported.

Four  sets  of  shareholders 

filed 
derivative 
lawsuits  against  Target 
offi cers  and  directors.  Later  these  were 
consolidated  into  one  derivative  action. 
The  plaintiffs  alleged  that  directors 
breached their fi duciary duties by failing 
to “timely notify customers of the theft of 
their  personal  and  fi nancial  information 
[and]  to  accurately  notify  customers 
regarding the scope and substance of the 
data  breach.”  The  amended  complaint 
chronicled a series of statements in which 
Target  provided  shifting  information. As 
a  matter  of  media  relations,  this  had 
the  effect  of  continually  adding  fuel  to 
the fi re: each time the company updated 
the  number  of  affected  customers,  the 
coverage spiked anew.

The  plaintiffs  also  pre-emptively 
argued  that  the  directors’  actions  in 
managing the response did not constitute 
decisions  under  the  business  judgment 
rule,  which  would  have  protected  them 
against such a lawsuit. “The Board caused 
Target to disseminate false and misleading 
public  statements  concerning,  among 

  COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT   

other  things,  the  true  nature  and  extent 
of  the  data  breach  at  the  Company,”  the 
amended  complaint  stated.  (A  separate 
action  brought  by  consumers  similarly 
alleges that “Target failed to disclose and 
provide timely and accurate notice of the 
data breach to the public...”)

 䊏 Heartland  Payment  Systems,  Inc.:  On 
December  26,  2007,  hackers  broke  into 
Heartland’s corporate computer network 
and  stole  about  130  million  credit  and 
debit card numbers and related card data. 
The SQL injection attack on its corporate 
network resulted in malware being placed 
on its payment processing system.

Plaintiffs  brought  a  securities  class 
action against the company after the U.S. 
Department  of  Justice  indicted  several 
individuals  for  what  was  reportedly 
then  the  largest  data  security  breach 
in  U.S.  history.  They  accused  CEO 
and  Chairman  of  the  Board  Robert  O. 
Carr  and  CFO  Robert  H.B.  Baldwin  of 
concealing  the  breach  for  more  than  a 
year—of “lying about the very existence 
of  the  breach.”  They  also  contended 
the  defendants  knowingly  made  false 
and  misleading 
statements  about 
the  breach  in  a  10-K  annual  report  to 
the  SEC,  during  interviews  with  the 
media,  in  press  releases,  and  in  other 
public  presentations  and  speeches.  The 
plaintiffs  alleged  that  Carr  and  Baldwin 
concealed  the  incident  and  made  a 
series of materially false and misleading 
statements on an earnings call, “outright 
den[ying] that a security breach had even 
occurred  at  Heartland.”  The  harm  to 

investors, the plaintiffs claimed, was that 
“Defendants’  misrepresentations  and 
omissions obfuscated the Company’s true 
fi nancial  condition  and  future  business 
prospects, artifi cially infl ating the price of 
Heartland’s common stock.”

■   Conclusion
Cybersecurity is the number one fear keep-
ing directors up at night, but they can rest a 
little easier by holding management account-
able and requiring a current, useful prepar-
edness  plan  before  a  crisis.  Critical  to  any 
company’s  breach-response  plan  must  be 
communications. A breached company can-
not  assume  a  defensive  crouch  and  issue 
reactive statements at the times of its choos-
ing.  On  the  other  hand,  it  should  not  say 
more than it is confi dent of, or more than is 
necessary to safeguard its interests and those 
of  its  customers  and  investors. An  effective 
communications plan helps protect the com-
pany  after  a  cyber  incident  by  blunting  the 
loss  of  reputation  and  customers  and  by 
keeping plaintiffs at bay.

Every breach starts with an event outside 
a  company’s  control,  and  the  Target  and 
Sony  Pictures  attacks  underscore  how 
unfolding  events  can  further  buffet  a  com-
pany. However, with a communications plan 
that is carefully conceived and rehearsed, a 
company  can  meet  its  legal  obligations  to 
communicate  and  help  limit  the  secondary 
harms  of  a  cyber  incident,  such  as  loss  of 
reputation and customers. It is incumbent on 
directors to ensure that the plan’s communi-
cations  components  are  ready  to  activate 
when the cyber crisis strikes.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  279  ■

Cyber risk management 
investment decisions

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Optimizing investment to 
minimize cyber exposure
Axio Global, LLC – Scott Kannry, CEO and 
David White, Chief Knowledge Offi cer

“We  are  living  in  the  Dark  Ages  of  security.  We  cling  to 

outmoded world views and rely on tools and tactics from 
the past, and yet we are surprised to fi nd ourselves living 
in an era of chaos and violence.”

 

Amit Yoran, President of RSA; 
2015 RSA Conference Keynote

Why begin a chapter about minimizing cyber exposure with 
a recent quote criticizing the security industry and raising a 
question  about  whether  it  is  even  possible  to  succeed?  It 
underscores  the  importance  of  understanding  the  current 
climate,  how  it  has  evolved  to  the  current  state,  and  its 
inherent challenges. Ideally, one can then grasp that a new 
way  of  thinking  about  cybersecurity  is  critical  to  succeed 
and  look  to  defi ne  a  process  and  methodology  that  gives 
security leaders a better foundation to achieve that goal.

Let’s start with where we’ve been. Our hope is that few, 
if any, security leaders still believe that impenetrability is 
achievable.  We’ve  been  subject  to  a  barrage  of  verbiage 
such as, “There are only two kinds of companies—those 
that know they have been hacked and those that don’t yet 
know it,” and hacked executives publicly expressing sur-
prise that their organization was successfully victimized, 
despite investing in the best possible defense. However, 
that belief was prevalent for many years, and investment 
decisions during this “castle-wall” era were fairly easy to 
make: focus on buying technological controls to fortify the 
perimeter.

Thankfully,  we  have  evolved  from  that  era  into  one 
that  we’ll  call  the  “defense-in-depth”  era.  The  original 
premise  was  fairly  simple:  put  up  more  castle  walls,  or 
perimeters, and hopefully the multiple layers will act in 
concert to create impenetrability, or at least something as 
close to it as possible. A more evolved premise is based on 
a mantra such as, “Operate as if the bad guys are already 

283  ■

CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS

inside,”  which  starts  to  balance  perimeter 
controls with those that focus on behavioral 
monitoring,  segmentation,  and  simulated 
internal  environments.  This  trend  is  defi -
nitely  one  that  is  taking  hold.  Many  fi rms 
still  spend  the  majority  of  their  security 
budgets  on  perimeter-focused  controls,  but 
spending is now being shared with internal 
and reactive controls.

However, despite the improved strategy, 
events  over  the  past  year  and  those  that 
undoubtedly have happened since this chap-
ter  was  written  should  easily  debunk  any 
notion  that  the  defense-in-depth  era  has 
been substantially more successful than the 
castle-wall era. Arguably, it has gotten worse, 
in  large  part  because  of  improvements  and 
industrialization of the tools and techniques 
used by adversaries. This has led not only to 
calls  for  a  rethinking  of  how  security  is 
approached  but  also  to  the  practical  reality 
that security leaders’ jobs are more diffi cult 
than ever: their rate of success at protecting 
the  enterprise  seems  to  be  precipitously 
declining, along with their job longevity.

Plus, the castle-wall and defense-in-depth 
eras exacerbated a problem central to secu-
rity leader decision making; they facilitated 
a  monumental  buildup  in  the  availability 
and  use  of  technological  controls.  Evidence 
of  this  is  apparent  at  the  RSA  conference, 
where a landscape of thousands of security 
providers  displays  their  wares,  each  claim-
ing to be the ultimate solution or silver bul-
let. Security leaders ask where to start. What 
should I spend my next dollar on? How can 
I justify this investment and intended return 
to the board? How can I keep my job when 
an event inevitably occurs? Welcome to the 
modern reality for security leaders.

We propose that it is time to evolve into 
what  we’ll  call  the  cybersecurity  enlighten-
ment  era.  It’s  an  era  that  focuses  on  risk 
management,  not  risk  elimination,  and 
where  cybersecurity  strategy  is  acknowl-
edged  as  an  investment  challenge.  It’s  also 
an era that highly values impact minimiza-
tion because cyber events are inevitable and 
ultimately,  the  organization’s  resilience 
depends on having the fi nancial resources to 

■  284 

weather  the  storm.  This  point  supports  the 
relevance of the insurance industry, not only 
as a provider of fi nancial certainty but also 
as an industry that can provide insight and 
data  to  support  thoughtful  cybersecurity 
investments.  We’ll  now  explain  all  of  these 
elements and how this approach stands the 
greatest  chance  of  minimizing  exposure  to 
the organization.

The approach is best evidenced by Figure 1, 
which  depicts  the  relationship  between 
cyber  risk  and  cybersecurity  capability. 
Organizations that have minimal cybersecu-
rity  capability  face  an  extraordinary  degree 
of  risk.  For  these  organizations,  investments 
in  basic  controls  will  produce  meaningful 
downward movement on the risk curve. It’s 
also  the  reality  that  organizations  on  the  far 
left side of the curve will be given harsh treat-
ment  by  the  insurance  industry—premiums 
will be extraordinarily high or coverage may 
not be available at all—which is a signal that 
the  organization  must  bolster  its  capability 
through  traditional  controls.  At  a  certain 
point,  however,  the  curve  begins  to  fl atten 
and the relative reduction in risk per dollar 
invested pales in comparison to that which 
was previously achieved. Beyond this point 
fi rms would be wise to invest more substan-
tially in insurance because of its dispropor-
tionate effect on the risk curve. Unlike a tra-
ditional  control,  insurance  actually  reduces 
(or  eliminates)  the  cost  of  an  event  and 
therefore  shifts  the  entire  risk  curve  down-
ward.  An  organization  that  adopts  this 
approach  is  one  that  is  more  thoughtfully 
protected  and  better  able  to  withstand  the 
impact of that inevitable event.

To  better  understand  the  elements,  let’s 
look  at  the  risk  calculus,  which  can  be 
explained with the following equation:

Risk =

 Business Impact ⫻ Likelihood

Capability

where  business  impact  is  a  measure  of 
impact to the enterprise from a cyber event, 
likelihood is an estimate of an event actually 
occurring, and capability is a measure of the 
organization’s  ability  to  detect,  protect, 
respond, and recover from an event.

  OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE  

FIGURE

Risk

Invest in Cyber
Capabilities

Sustain Capability &
Invest in Insurance

Cybersecurity Capability

Insurance lowers the risk
impact curve overall

It is important to understand that organi-
zations may have very little control over the 
numerator in this equation, as these elements 
are  largely  infl uenced  by  the  constantly 
evolving  threat  climate,  the  capability  and 
desire  of  adversaries  to  carry  out  an  attack, 
and  the  ever-increasing  complexity  of  the 
technologies  controlling  operations,  which 
can  fail  unexpectedly  in  ways  that  result  in 
damage. For example, various recent reports 
pegged the cause of a cargo plane crash on a 
failure in software confi guration, evidencing 
the reality that cyber events aren’t only those 
with malicious connotations. It’s also impor-
tant to recognize that neither business impact 
nor likelihood can ever equal zero, even for 
the most capable organizations.

Organizations can infl uence the denomina-
tor by implementing, sustaining, and matur-
ing  a  capable  cybersecurity  program.  This 
measure refl ects the controls that an organiza-
tion has in place to protect its cyber assets and 

to detect events. Many of these controls will be 
technological  or  administrative,  but  the 
human  element  is  also  critical  and  can’t  be 
overlooked,  nor  can  the  protocols  surround-
ing  third-party  vendors,  outsourced  parties, 
and  subcontractors.  The  denominator  is  also 
where the positive impact of insurance takes 
hold, because successfully responding to and 
recovering from an event depends not only on 
technical capabilities but also on the fi nancial 
ability to cover the costs and losses involved.
How  does  an  organization  put  actual 
numbers into the equation? Our recommen-
dation  is  to  start  with  developing  and  ana-
lyzing  organization-specifi c  cyber  loss  sce-
narios.  Gather  a  group  of  individuals  that 
represent key functions and insights into the 
organization—information  technology  and 
operational  technology  security,  safety,  risk 
management, treasury, and legal— and brain-
storm  about  the  likelihood  and  impact  of 
cyber events across the critical functions of the 

  285  ■

CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS

organization. It’s important to capture as much 
of  the  loss  spectrum  as  possible—fi rst-  and 
third-party  fi nancial  damages  and  fi rst-  and 
third-party  tangible  damages,  the  latter  half 
being  critically  important  for  organizations 
that use industrial control systems.

In  our  experience,  this  type  of  exercise 
proves to be very fruitful. We’ve found that 
most  of  the  informational  insight  actually 
resides within the organization—it’s simply 
a matter of getting the right stakeholders at 
the  table.  In  some  instances,  organizations 
are  surprised  at  how  much  they  already 
know and can bake into the calculations. For 
example,  we’ve  worked  with  energy  fi rms 
that  had  already  commissioned  numerous 
loss engineering studies based on traditional 
perils such as earthquake, fi re, or mechanical 
breakdown,  each  with  fully  developed 
impact estimates. All it took in this instance 
was  confi rmation  from  operational  and 
cybersecurity  leaders  that  a  cyber  event 
could produce many of the same outcomes, 
coupled  with  a  technical  discussion  about 
the likelihood of such an event to very effi -
ciently compile enough data for the numera-
tor in the equation.

Using  the  loss  scenario  approach  also 
helps inform the numbers in the denomina-
tor, because the technical part of the discus-
sion  helps  determine  the  organization’s 
capability  to  protect  its  operations  from, 
detect  signs  of,  and  effectively  respond  to  a 
particular  scenario.  For  example,  if  we  are 
working with a retailer and a scenario involv-
ing  the  theft  of  credit  card  information,  we 
may  start  with  the  fi nancial  impact  if  the 
event occurs and then work backward to dis-
cuss where the information resides and how 
it is processed, and most critically, how each 
access  point  is  or  could  be  protected  from 
known  and  conceivable  threats.  Here,  it  is 
useful  to  compare  an  organization’s  current 
capabilities against any applicable standards 
or regulatory frameworks, ensure that appro-
priate  threat  intelligence  for  that  particular 
area  of  risk  is  being  used,  and  continually 
monitor  the  performance  of  the  organiza-
tion’s protective mechanisms in its own envi-
ronment and the environment at large.

■  286 

Benchmarking is also a critical and strongly 
recommended  element  of  the  capability 
factor.  We  recognize  that  many  security 
leaders  may  be  wary  of  supplying  cyber 
program information for benchmarking pur-
poses as to not create additional vulnerabili-
ties  by  giving  away  the  proverbial  keys  to 
the back door, but resources that do so in an 
entirely  de-identifi ed  manner  can  provide 
powerful  comparative  insight  that  is  other-
wise  unavailable.  From  a  security  leader’s 
perspective,  this  information  may  actually 
be the most powerful, because it can provide 
justifi cation  for  additional  investment  in 
controls  and,  in  the  worse  case  event  of  a 
breach, exculpability.

This is an appropriate place to introduce 
the fi nal detail and insight for the denomina-
tor  and  right  side  of  the  risk  curve—the 
importance of insurance coverage and rele-
vance of the insurance industry to deploying 
an  enlightened  cybersecurity  strategy.  One 
of the roles that the industry can serve, and 
will  increasingly  serve,  is  a  resource  for 
benchmarking  intelligence  via  the  under-
writing  and  premium  pricing  process.  This 
capability is candidly in its infancy for a few 
reasons:  the  scope  of  coverage  is  evolving 
and  therefore  the  depth  of  information 
required to underwrite is not truly compre-
hensive, many insurers are happy to deploy 
a  nonintrusive  approach  as  a  competitive 
lever,  and  correlation  information  lacks  in 
areas  where  claims  or  losses  have  not  yet 
occurred.  Despite  this  evolving  capability, 
fi rms can fi nd meaningful value in the pro-
cess,  because  even  an  extraordinarily  high 
premium or a denial of coverage does have 
informative value. Additionally, for areas in 
which  cyber  coverage  is  relatively  more 
mature, top insurers do have enough data to 
provide a “risk engineering” benefi t similar 
to  other  well-established  areas  of  insured 
risk, and the industry is continually evolving 
to provide greater capabilities in this respect.
Another  area  of  insurance  industry  rele-
vance  requires  a  more  nuanced  dive  into 
coverage,  but  one  that  is  important  for  its 
informative value and relevance to security 
leaders 
investment  decisions.  Security 

  OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE  

should  familiarize  themselves  with  their 
own  fi rm’s  insurance  portfolio  as  well  as 
industry  trends  relating  to  coverage  availa-
bility and pricing. The exercise should not be 
limited  to  cyber  insurance,  because  despite 
what many in the insurance industry would 
profess, there is currently no such thing as an 
all-encompassing,  all-risk  cyber  insurance 
policy.  Cyber  insurance,  as  it  is  commonly 
known,  covers  many  fi rst-party  fi nancial 
losses  and  resultant  fi nancial  liabilities  from 
a cyber event, but not tangible losses such as 
property damage and bodily injury. Therefore, 
fi rms also must be attentive to property, casu-
alty, environmental, terrorism, and any other 
type of insurance that could provide coverage 
for losses resulting from a cyber event.

What type of actionable insight does this 
provide?  On  one  hand,  simply  knowing 
what cyber exposures the insurance industry 
is willing to cover can help security leaders 
make investment decisions. For example, the 
insurance  industry  currently  does  not  offer 
much, if any, coverage for losses attributable 
to  the  theft  of  intellectual  property  such  as 
trade  secrets  and  R&D.  Knowing  this  may 
prompt overweight investment into controls 
and  protocols  protecting  trade  secrets, 
whereas investment into other areas of risk 
where  coverage  is  readily  available  can  be 
more balanced.

Beyond the continually evolving risk engi-
neering capabilities of the insurance industry 
and  the  insight  provided  by  simply  under-
standing  the  complete  insurance  landscape 
for cyber exposures, the biggest benefi t pro-
vided  by  insurance  is  the  aforementioned 
ability to meaningfully reduce the risk curve. 
Here  too  it  is  critically  important  to  under-
stand the entire insurance landscape, because 
fi rms that purchase a single cyber insurance 
policy  may  be  disappointed  in  how  it  per-
forms. This point is not intended as criticism 
of the insurance industry—the industry does 
offer  coverage  for  the  vast  majority  of  the 
cyber exposure spectrum—it’s a point recog-
nizing that comprehensive coverage for com-
plex cyber events can involve multiple types 
of policies.

Ultimately,  our  hope  is  that  this  process 
and  balanced  approach  provides  a  higher 
likelihood  of  minimizing  cyber  risk,  espe-
cially  in  comparison  to  any  of  the  legacy 
strategies deployed to date. If nothing else, it 
helps to more effectively minimize cyber risk 
through  the  effective  deployment  of  insur-
ance  as  a  complementary  control,  but  the 
process  overall  does  produce  defendable 
insight and a means by which security lead-
ers can optimize investment while minimiz-
ing risk, thus allowing cybersecurity to start 
to evolve out of the dark ages.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  287  ■

Investment in cyber insurance
Lockton Companies Inc. – Ben Beeson, Senior 
Vice President, Cybersecurity Practice

A number of high-profi le corporate data breaches, mainly 
in the US retail sector over the last two years, have led rap-
idly to a major change in enterprise cybersecurity strategy. 
Many chief information security offi cers (CISOs) now view 
risk avoidance as extremely challenging, if not impossible, 
and  a  traditional  approach  that  builds  layered  defenses 
around the network perimeter as increasingly insuffi cient.
Accepting risk means adopting an approach that seeks to 
mitigate and build enterprise resilience. This approach now 
also must weigh the benefi ts of transferring residual sever-
ity  risk  from  the  balance  sheet  through  cyber  insurance. 
Here are 10 reasons to consider making the investment.

 1.  Advanced persistent threats (APTs)

Targeted  attacks,  known  as  APTs,  have  become 
increasingly  diffi cult  to  detect,  let  alone  stop.  The 
emergence  of  the  nation-state  as  an  adversary  leaves 
the majority of organizations vulnerable regardless of 
the resources committed to defense.

 2.  Governance and an enterprise-wide risk management 

strategy
The emergence of cybersecurity as a governance issue 
that  must  be  addressed  by  the  board  of  directors  is 
redefi ning  the  role  of  cyber  insurance  as  purely  a 
fi nancial  instrument  to  transfer  risk.  Cybersecurity 
involves 
the  entire  enterprise,  with  numerous 
stakeholders,  no  longer  only  the  domain  of  the  IT 
department. Driving a culture of collaboration between 
these stakeholders is challenging for many organizations, 
but  cyber  insurance  and,  more  importantly,  the 
underwriting process can be the catalyst.

 3.  Increasing regulatory risk

Liability to boards of directors is expected to increase 
and give added weight to a focus on governance. SEC 
guidance published in 2011 highlights how regulators 
see cyber insurance as part of a strong enterprise risk 

289  ■

CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS

management  strategy.  Many  in  the  legal 
community  see  the  launch  in  February 
2014 of a federal cybersecurity framework 
(known  as  the  NIST  framework)  as 
creating a standard of care to be used by 
plaintiff  attorneys  to  allege  negligence  or 
worse.

 4.  A fi nancial incentive

Legislators are giving greater prominence 
to the role of cyber insurance. The failure 
to  pass  laws  to  drive  stronger  enterprise 
security  has  demonstrated  the  challenges 
in  trying  to  enforce  minimum  standards. 
There is growing support for market-based 
incentives  such  as  insurance  that  can 
reward  strong  cybersecurity  through 
discounted premium or broader coverage. 
However, the insurance market for cyber 
risks is young, if not embryonic in some 
respects, and faces signifi cant challenges 
if it is to continue to grow. Reversing the 
lack  of  actuarial  data  to  model  risk  and 
an  underwriting  process  that  must 
change  to  meet  ever-evolving  threats  sit 
at  the  top  of  the  insurance  industry’s 
priorities.

 5.  Vicarious  risk  to  vendors  and  business 

associates
Adversaries are focusing increasingly on 
third parties that have access to sensitive 
information and other critical assets of the 
target  enterprise.  Professional  service 
fi rms  or  cloud-based  solution  providers 
are examples of business associates whose 
security may be weaker than that of their 
client and consequently provide an easier 
back  door  for  the  attacker.  Liability  for 
a  breach  of  personally 
identifi able 
information  (PII)  or  protected  health 
information (PHI) typically still rests with 
the  enterprise  data  owner,  even  though 
a  breach  may  have  occurred  to  the 
vendor’s  network.  Cyber 
insurance 
addresses costs of responding to a breach 
and possible privacy regulatory action or 
civil litigation.
  6. Insider threat

Attacks  from  the  inside  continue  to  be 
hard  to  prevent.  Cyber  insurance  covers 
the employee as perpetrator as well as an  

■  290 

  attack  by  a  third  party.  This  will  not 
   extend to an act involving the board of 
directors or executive team.

  7.  Security is not about compliance

Treating  security  as  a  compliance 
exercise  only  will  result  in  failure.  For 
example,  many  organizations  that  are 
compliant  with  payment  card  industry 
data  security  standards  have  been 
breached.

  8.  Monetizing the cost of cybersecurity

One  of  the  biggest  challenges  to  the 
CISO is to quantify cybersecurity risk in 
dollar  terms  to  the  executive  team.  The 
premium  charged  by  an 
insurance 
company can help solve this problem.

  9.  Merger and acquisition activity

The  difficulty 
the 
cybersecurity posture in any acquisition 
target leaves the acquirer vulnerable.

in  evaluating 

 10.  Operational technology

sectors 

systems 

dependent 

on 
Industry 
operational  technology  and  industrial 
control 
are  particularly 
vulnerable. Built primarily to be available 
24/7  and  to  operate  in  isolation,  these 
devices are increasingly being connected 
to the corporate information technology 
network and the Internet.

■  The cyber insurance marketplace today
It  is  estimated  that  more  than  50  insurers 
domiciled  mainly  in  the  U.S.  and  London 
insurance  market  provide  dedicated  cyber 
products  and  solutions  today.  Buyers  are 
concentrated  overwhelmingly  in  the  U.S. 
with  little  take  up  to  date  internationally, 
with  low  demand  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Annual premium spending at the end of 2014 
was  estimated  to  be  in  excess  of  $2  billion. 
Total  capacity  (the  maximum  amount  of 
insurance  available  to  any  single  buyer)  is 
currently at about $300,000,000, although this 
is  now  contracting  substantially  in  certain 
sectors such as retail and health care. Cyber 
insurance  fi rst  emerged  at  the  end  of  the 
1990s,  primarily  seeking  to  address  loss  of 
revenue  and  data  restoration  costs  from 
attacks  to  corporate  networks.  However, 
the  underwriting  process  was  seen  as  too 

intrusive  and  the  cost  prohibitively  expen-
sive. It was not until 2003, and the passage 
of the world’s fi rst data breach notifi cation 
law  in  California,  that  demand  started 
to grow.

What does cyber insurance cover?
Insurers do not address all enterprise assets 
at  risk.  The  majority  of  premium  spent  by 
buyers  was  intended  to  address  increasing 
liability from handling personally identifi a-
ble  information  (PII)  or  protected  health 
information (PHI) and the costs from either 
unauthorized disclosure (a data breach) or a 
violation  of  the  data  subject’s  privacy. 
Insurable  costs  range  from  data  breach 
response  expenses  such  as  notifi cation, 
forensics,  and  credit  monitoring  to  defense 
costs,  civil  fi nes,  and  damages  from  a  pri-
vacy  regulatory  action  or  civil  litigation. 
Insurers  also  continue  to  address  certain 
fi rst  party  risks,  including  the  impact  on 
revenue  from  attacks  on  corporate  net-
works, extortion demands, and the costs to 
restore compromised data.

Insurable assets include the following:

 䊏 PII and/or PHI of employees or consumers
Data breach response costs to include the 
following:

Notifi cation
Credit monitoring
IT forensics
Public relations
Defense  costs  and  civil  fi nes  from  a 
privacy regulatory action
Defense costs and damages from civil 
litigation

 䊏 Corporate confi dential information

confidential 

Addresses  defenses  costs  and  damages 
incurred  for  a  breach  of  third-party 
corporate 
information. 
Certain  insurers  will  extend  to  address 
misappropriation  of  a  third  party’s  trade 
secret,  but  fi rst-party  loss  of  intellectual 
property remains uninsurable.

 䊏 Corporate 

information 

technology 

network
Addresses  the  loss  of  income  as  a 
consequence  of  network  downtime. 

  INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE   

Certain insurers will also extend coverage 
to  downtime  of  vendors  on  whom  a 
policyholder is reliant. This is commonly 
known 
business 
as 
interruption.”
Costs to restore compromised data
Reimbursement for costs associated with 
an extortion threat

“contingent 

 䊏 Operational technology

A  few  insurers  have  begun  to  extend 
coverage  for  the  information  technology 
network  to  also 
include  operational 
technology  such  as  industrial  control 
systems.

 䊏 Physical assets

Cybersecurity is no longer just about risks 
to  information  assets.  A  cyberattack  can 
now  cause  property  damage  that  also 
could lead to fi nancial loss from business 
interruption  as  well  as  liability  from 
bodily  injury  or  pollution,  for  example. 
Understanding  where  coverage  lies  in  a 
corporate  insurance  policy  portfolio  is 
challenging and at times ambiguous. An 
assumption  that  coverage  should  rest 
within a property or terrorism policy may 
not  be  accurate.  Exclusionary  language 
has  begun  to  emerge  and  is  expected  to 
accelerate across the marketplace as losses 
occur.  Dedicated  products  also  have 
started to appear.

 䊏 Reputation and brand

Insuring  reputational  risk  from  some 
form  of  cyber  event  remains  out  of  the 
scope  of  the  majority  of  insurers. At  the 
time  of  writing,  the  London  market  has 
begun to innovate to address the fi nancial 
loss  after  adverse  media  publicity. 
However, capacity remains constrained at 
$100,000,000 at best.

What does cyber insurance not cover?
 䊏 Intellectual property assets

Theft  of  one’s  own  corporate  intellectual 
property  (IP)  still  remains  uninsurable 
today as insurers struggle to understand its 
intrinsic loss value once compromised. The 
increasing diffi culty in simply detecting an 
attack and, unlike a breach of PII or PHI, the 
frequent  lack  of  a  legal  obligation  to 

  291  ■

CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS

disclose, suggest that a solution is not in the 
immediate future.

■  Leveraging cyber insurance as a risk 

management tool

Since  2009  the  marketplace  has  evolved  to 
also provide services to help buyers manage 
risk. Focused mainly on post-event response, 
turnkey products have emerged, which pro-
vide  a  panel  of  legal,  forensics,  and  public 
relations  specialists.  Popular  with  smaller 
enterprises  that  lack  the  resources  or  rela-
tionships,  this  innovation  has  been  a  key 
component  in  increasing  the  relevance  of 
cyber insurance and consequently its growth. 
Larger  fi rms  typically  seek  products  based 
on breadth of coverage and the fl exibility to 
use their own vendor network.

Services that help mitigate risk before an 
event occurs have started to emerge. Insurers 
likely  will  begin  to  incentivize  buyers  to 
adopt  these  services  with  rewards  such  as 
discounted premiums.

■  How do insurers underwrite cyber risks?
Historically,  underwriters  have  sought  to 
understand the controls that enterprises lev-
erage  around  their  people,  processes,  and 
technology. However, the majority of assess-
ments are “static,” meaning a snapshot at a 
certain point in time through the completion 
of a written questionnaire, a phone call inter-
view, or a presentation. A consensus is grow-
ing that this approach is increasingly redun-
dant  and  that  insurers  will  seek  to  partner 
with  the  security  industry  to  use  tools  that 
can  help  predict  and  monitor  the  threat  as 
part of the underwriting process to adopt a 
more  threat  intelligence  led  capability  as 
part of the underwriting process. In fact, this 
already  has  started  to  happen,  as  certain 
insurers  have  started  to  use  technology  to 
underwrite vendor and M&A activity risks.

■  How do insurers price risk?
Pricing cybersecurity risk remains a challenge. 
An insurance market that is only 15 years old 
has begun to build up a profi le for frequency 
and severity of loss with regard to PII and PHI 

■  292 

assets.  However,  the  ever-evolving  nature  of 
the threat, particularly the emergence of APTs, 
undermines  the  reliability  of  these  statistics. 
Pricing risk to physical assets is a bigger prob-
lem  because  this  has  begun  to  emerge  only 
since  2010,  and  actuarial  data  are  extremely 
thin on the ground.

Fundamentally insurers continue to look 
for a strong security culture within the fi rm 
as a fi rst step in risk triage. Additional fac-
tors  such  as  industry,  revenue  size,  and 
actual  assets  at  risk  also  contribute  to  how 
risk is priced.

■  How to engage the insurance market
Once a decision has been made to explore a 
suitable solution, the fi rst step is to choose a 
broker. The lack of consistency in policy lan-
guage  from  one  insurer  to  the  next  means 
that a broker with dedicated expertise is vital 
for a successful outcome. First class brokers 
work  with  their  clients  to  understand  the 
assets at risk and how best to address them 
either under the existing insurance program 
or  through  a  new  dedicated  product.  An 
existing  Directors  and  Offi cer’s  policy  form 
(D&O)  addressing  management  liability 
from a cyber event probably offers suffi cient 
coverage. However, more often than not, lia-
bility to the enterprise requires a new dedi-
cated product.

A  broker  should  understand  that  insur-
ers seek to understand the security culture 
of  a  fi rm  and  will  work  to  position  their 
clients as best as possible. For many larger 
organizations  this  does  not  involve  com-
pleting a written questionnaire and staying 
divorced from the process. Rather, an inves-
tor-style presentation to the marketplace by 
key stakeholders in IT, legal, and risk man-
agement in particular, which involves ques-
tions and answers, ensures the best possible 
outcome.  Top-tier  underwriters  appreciate 
that cybersecurity is not a tick-box exercise. 
They  understand  that  the  risk  is  dynamic 
and  will  not  necessarily  penalize  a  buyer 
today  for  shortcomings  if  a  roadmap  is 
spelled  out  as  to  how  these  shortcomings 
will be addressed in the next 12 months.

  INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE   

   upon  up 
front.  Forensics  are  not 
inexpensive  and  can  form  a  signifi cant 
part of the overall cost.

  7.  Law enforcement

Law enforcement typically is involved in 
a  major  security  breach.  In  fact,  many 
times  the  FBI,  the  agency  leading 
cybersecurity corporate defense, notifi es 
the enterprise before it becomes aware of 
the  breach.  A  claim  should  not  be 
excluded  by  an  insurer  for  failure  to 
disclose  as  soon  as  practicable  if  law 
enforcement had advised nondisclosure 
during the investigation.

  8.  War and terrorism

Many insurance policies exclude acts of 
war and terrorism which must be deleted 
with  the  emergence  of  the  nation-state 
adversary in particular.

  9.  Intentional act

Ensure  that  coverage  addresses  the 
employee  or  insider  as  perpetrator 
acting in isolation of the executive team.

 10.  Continuity of coverage

When  renewing  the  insurance  policy 
with  the  same  insurer,  avoid  signing  a 
warranty  regarding  a  circumstance  or 
claim.

■  Conclusion
Cyber insurance has a broader role to play 
than  simply  reimbursing  costs  associated 
with a loss. Fundamentally, engaging in an 
underwriting process that forces collabora-
tion  from  stakeholders  across  the  enter-
prise  can  drive  stronger  cybersecurity 
resilience.  Increasing  regulator  and  share-
holder  scrutiny  means  that  the  case  for 
investment will continue to grow. In addi-
tion,  insurers  will  start  to  provide  premi-
um-  and  coverage-based  incentives  for 
adopting  best  practices  such  as  the  NIST 
framework and leveraging preferred tech-
nology tools.

A  broker  must  then  negotiate  competi-
tive  terms  and  conditions  with  competing 
insurers with a fi nal recommendation as to 
whom their client should choose.

10 key coverage items to negotiate:

 1.  Full prior acts coverage

Insurers try to limit coverage to acts from 
the fi rst day that the policy begins, known 
as  the  retroactive  date.  However,  in  the 
context  of  the  challenges  in  detecting  an 
attack, buyers should seek to remove this 
exclusion  and  avoid  the  risk  of  a  claim 
denial.

 2.  Restrict  knowledge  and  notice  of  a 

circumstance to the executive team
Again, an insurer should not be allowed 
to impute liability to the whole enterprise 
because detection has proven to be such a 
challenge.

 3.  Security warranty

Remove any language that tries to warrant 
that  security  is  maintained  to  the  same 
level  as  represented  in  the  underwriting 
submission.  The  dynamic  nature  of  the 
risk  leaves  this  too  open  to  insurer 
interpretation in the event of a loss.

 4.  Operational technology

The majority of insurance policies provide 
coverage only to the corporate IT network. 
If  relevant,  ensure  that  language  is 
broadened  to  also  address  operational 
technology  such  as  industrial  control 
systems.

 5.  Outside counsel

Choice  of  counsel  must  be  agreed  upon 
up front. In the event of a security breach, 
a  dedicated  legal  expert  must  take 
the  response  lead  not  least  for  attorney 
client  privilege.  Negotiating  with  an 
insurer  during  the  event  would  be 
counterproductive.

 6.  IT forensics

In a similar vein to choice of counsel, the 
preferred  forensics  fi rm  must  be  agreed 

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  293  ■

Cyber risk and workforce 
development

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

Cyber education: A job never fi nished
NYSE Governance Services – Adam Sodowick, President

Whether  it  stems  from  a  lack  of  education,  a  sense  of 
ambivalence,  or,  in  some  cases,  malice,  nearly  all  cyber 
vulnerabilities begin and end with some degree of human 
error.  In  today’s  data-driven  environment,  companies 
must establish a culture of responsibility so that all levels 
of employees work together to maintain vigilant practices 
that mitigate cyber risk. Despite vast amounts of resourc-
es  spent  on  countless  fi rewalls,  security  systems,  and 
algorithms  to  ferret  out  breaches,  these  complex  efforts 
barely scratch the surface of the problem.

■   Overview
Cybercrime is one of the most prevalent economic crimes 
today according to PwC’s Global Economic Crime Survey. 
The damages continue to grow with 24% of the more than 
5,000  organizations  represented  in  the  2014  PwC  study 
reporting being a victim of cybercrime. A recent study by 
Verizon Enterprise Solutions points to another signifi cant 
issue, noting that 66% of cybercrimes are not detected for 
at least six months.

The trajectory of costs continues to rise. According to 
the Ponemon’s Cost of Cybercrime 2014 report, cyberat-
tacks cost the average U.S. company more than $12.7 mil-
lion.  With  some  companies  experiencing  more  than  $61 
million in losses, this average is an increase of more than 
9% from the prior year.

Attacking  the  problem  means  understanding  the 
source.  As  one  of  the  top  fi ve  most  reported  crimes 
against businesses, cybercrime is not merely a technology 
problem  anymore.  “It  is  a  strategy  problem,  a  human 
problem, and a process problem,” according to the PwC 
report.  The  Online  Trust  Alliance’s  (OTA)  2015  Data 
Protection & Breach Readiness Guide reports that employ-
ees  caused  29%  of  data  breaches  between  January  and 
June of 2014, proving that internal weaknesses are a sig-
nifi cant area of vulnerability for every organization. The 

297  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

OTA guide further reports that data leaks by 
employees  who  lost  documents  or  used 
social  engineering  or  fraud  to  access  and 
leak  information  were  caused  by  a  lack  of 
internal  controls.  Therefore,  educating  and 
cultivating true employee buy-in to a culture 
of responsibility is crucial to mitigating pos-
sible damaging breaches.

■   Types of insider threats
The  genesis  of  insider  threats  is  not  always 
malicious;  however,  the  malicious  or  politi-
cally  driven  acts  tend  to  be  the  ones  that 
make  headlines.  Media  did  not  ignore 
instances such as Home Depot’s former secu-
rity  architect  who  sabotaged  his  previous 
employer’s computer network and the April 
2015 case in which the Department of Justice 
indicted  a  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission 
employee  for  attempting  to  deliver  nuclear 
secrets  to  a  foreign  government  via  spear-
phishing tactics.

Although  not  intentionally  malicious,  a 
related  form  of  insider  abuse  stems  from  a 
sense of privilege, when someone abuses the 
trust he or she is given to safeguard sensitive 
and valuable data. The 2014 Verizon Enterprise 
Solutions  report  found  that  in  55%  of  cases 
involving insider incidents, the primary moti-
vator was privilege abuse; the primary moti-
vator in 40% of cases was fi nancial gain.

A  2012  survey  of  global  employees  by 
Boston-based  data  storage  and  information 
management company Iron Mountain found 
that workers often develop a feeling of per-
sonal  ownership  when  they  are  involved 
with the collection of data. The study found 
that  in  Europe,  for  example,  many  offi ce 
workers  are  likely  to  take  data  with  them 
when  they  switch  jobs,  which,  for  certain 
subgroups,  such  as  millennials,  happens 
with  more  frequency  than  with  previous 
generations.  The  study  found  that  of  those 
who  did  steal  company  information,  51% 
exited with confi dential customer databases, 
46% with presentations, 21% with company 
proposals,  18%  with  strategic  plans,  and 
another  18%  with  product/service  road 
maps—all  of  which  represent  highly  sensi-
tive, valuable assets.

■  298 

A vast number of cases are actually a result 
of  error,  employee  ineptitude,  or  apathy. 
These situations can cause severe holes in the 
system  and  are  cases  for  organizations  to 
change behavior so that employees become a 
defensive tool against cyber risk.

The computer manufacturer Dell Inc., for 
example, boasts a “culture of security” that 
is fostered by the following four fundamen-
tal  principles:  security  awareness  training, 
proper access management, mobile security, 
and  securing  and  monitoring  the  organiza-
tion’s networks, according to the company’s 
white paper, The Human Side of IT Security.

Kevin Hanes, executive director, Security 
and  Risk  Consulting,  Dell  SecureWorks, 
describes  how  Dell’s  information  security 
unit works with other organizations to deal 
with  cybersecurity  issues.  “My  view  is 
organizations need to keep in mind that the 
bad  actors  are  going  to  typically  follow  a 
path of least resistance, and often that path is 
the  people,”  he  notes.  Dell’s  approach  to 
imparting a cyber-aware culture at an organ-
ization  begins  at  the  top  and  involves  con-
sistent communication at all levels to ensure 
employees  understand  why  the  vigilance, 
inconvenient though it may be, is necessary 
in all aspects of what they do.

Interestingly,  not  all  employees  view  the 
threats in the same light. In a June 2015 global 
study  commissioned  by  Dell  SecureWorks 
and  the  Ponemon  Institute,  56%  of  the  IT 
security/IT staff surveyed consider ‘negligent 
insiders’ a serious threat, whereas only 37% of 
the IT Security/IT corporate leaders surveyed 
considered such insiders a serious threat. This 
difference, the study’s authors note, points to 
a need to listen more carefully to those in the 
“security trenches who are dealing with these 
threats.”

■   Taking action
Once  companies  have  better  awareness  of 
the root causes of insider threats, what steps 
can  be  taken?  OTA  recently  reported  that 
90%  of  data  breaches  occurring  in  the  fi rst 
half of 2014 could have been prevented eas-
ily by adhering to commonly accepted best 
practices for data protection. For companies 

that are behind the curve, this means there is 
a lot of work to be done.

In addition to implementing stringent best 
practices  and  requiring  employees  to  follow 
them, self-reporting is a key component. Each 
company should have a clear understanding 
about its reporting guidelines as well as what 
items or activities are suspicious.

Each organization’s management and cul-
ture are unique, but looking to what works at 
other  companies  can  help  in  understanding 
and  making  recommendations  on  sound 
starting places that help to benchmark prac-
tices and measure success of respective cyber-
security defense and mitigation programs.

■   Case study perspectives
Taking a look at a few case studies often can 
help pull blue sky ideals down to earth. At 
Teradata,  a  leading  data  analytics  provider, 
Chief Compliance Offi cer Todd Carver says 
cyber awareness is viewed as a funnel, with 
new  information  continually  feeding  into 
the top and recirculating in the form of ongo-
ing  education  to  keep  employees  aware  of 
the  latest  developments.  Carver  says  his 
company’s program spans from the board of 
directors  to  11,000  employees  in  43  coun-
tries. Protecting data and assets is one of the 
commitments in Teradata’s code of conduct, 
and if anything isn’t specifi cally covered in 
the  training,  or  if  employees  come  up  with 
their own questions, Carver explains, there’s 
also an ethics helpline so that employees can 
ask  questions,  request  guidance,  or  say,  “I 
screwed up. What do I do now?”

Annual  ethics  and  compliance  education 
covers a host of issues at Teradata, including 
cyber-related  modules  for  intellectual  prop-
erty,  privacy,  phishing,  and  mobile-device 
awareness. The company also has policies in 
place  regarding  keeping  a  clean  computer, 
password practices, and email usage, to name 
a few. In addition, Teradata uses role-specifi c 
training. It’s all about getting employees truly 
engaged,  Carver  explains.  “It’s  important  to 
explain  why  we  have  these  rules.”  Carver 
says  his  company  has  shared  scenarios  of 
attempted  hacks  to  better  help  employees 
understand the need for the procedures.

  CYBER EDUCATION: A JOB NEVER FINISHED   

Although  Teradata  works  diligently  to 
train employees and maintain awareness of 
cyber  issues,  Carver  concedes  the  job  is 
never fi nished. He continually takes the les-
sons learned and the new angles and feeds 
them back into the funnel, honing and sharp-
ening  the  employee  education  program. 
Even with that level of attentiveness, Carver 
assumes  his  company  will  encounter  a 
breach and is planning for that eventuality. 
He also feels it’s important to help employ-
ees  understand  what  to  do  if  they  think 
they’ve made a cyber-related error and how 
to  report  any  questionable  or  erroneous 
activity.

Carver suggests three tips for chief compli-
ance offi cers who are working to implement a 
more robust cyber awareness program. First, 
begin  with  including  everybody.  “It’s  all 
employees’ job to assure data protection,” he 
says.  Second,  it’s  an  issue  for  all  companies 
across all sectors and needs to be prioritized 
no matter what the industry. Finally, remem-
ber that what makes an organization vulner-
able is the human aspect. “You could do eve-
rything  [right]  technology-wise,  but  could 
still  be  vulnerable  because  people  are 
involved—employees,  third-party  vendors, 
customers, and the bad guys.”

At Dell, Hanes’ SecureWorks group han-
dles  security  monitoring,  consulting,  and 
threat intelligence gathering for itself as well 
as  its  many  clients.  Although  SecureWorks 
has  the  capacity  to  test  “crazy  amounts  of 
malware  samples”  in  a  lab,  according  to 
Hanes,  most  companies  can  take  steps  on 
their own to mitigate risks from such activi-
ties  as  phishing  and  vishing  (hacking 
attempts  made  via  phone  call).  Creating, 
communicating,  and  monitoring  protocols 
can  go  a  long  way  toward  keeping  the 
human  element  in  check,  according  to 
Hanes.

In his experience, Hanes says people gen-
erally have two mentalities: those who want 
to check a compliance box by doing annual 
training  at  their  companies  and  those  who 
want  to  transform  employee  behavior  with 
programmatic changes. The former is much 
easier, but the latter has the potential to offer 

  299  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

tangible  results.  Creating  an  organization 
with a cyber-aware culture requires an ongo-
ing commitment, he explains, because even 
after  years  of  training  “check-the-box” 
employees,  without  a  complete  buy-in  and 
understanding, there will still be those who 
click on a phishing email link.

■   Creating a cyber-aware culture
Proactive companies such as Teradata, Dell, 
and  others  understand  that  effective  cyber 
awareness education can transform employ-
ees into a powerful force in the fi ght against 
cybercrime.  Having  a  culture  of  awareness 
can help prevent breaches, keep data secure, 
and  positively  affect  a  company’s  bottom 
line. In fact, there’s arguably no greater bar-
rier to cyber risk than investing in and sup-
porting the right employee culture.

Surprisingly, only 29% of companies sur-
veyed  by  NYSE  Governance  Services  and 
the  Society  of  Corporate  Compliance  and 
Ethics  train  all  their  employees  for  cyber 
issues despite the fact that cyber was chosen 
one of the top three risk areas for employee 
education, according to the 2014 Compliance 
and  Ethics  Program  Environment  Report 
issued by the same two groups.

Companywide education often means ele-
vating awareness for the board as well; espe-
cially because most board members say it’s a 
diffi cult  area  for  them  to  wrap  their  arms 
around.  In  the  2014  RSA/EY  survey  with 
Corporate Board Member, 83% of directors said 
that  a  signifi cant  impediment  to  their  over-
sight of IT/cyber risk was the fact that it was 
constantly changing. A 2015 Cybersecurity in 
the  Boardroom  report  published  by  NYSE 
Governance Services and Veracode notes that 
IT security matters are discussed in most or 
every  meeting  by  81%  of  director  respond-
ents. In a separate NYSE Governance Services’ 
study  with  Spencer  Stuart,  the  2015  What 

Directors  Think  Survey,  63%  of  director 
respondents  said  they  are  only  somewhat 
confi dent that their board is adequately over-
seeing cyber risk; nearly a quarter of respond-
ents  said  they  are  not  confi dent  about  their 
board’s oversight. In sum, there is clear indi-
cation that there is room for improvement at 
even the highest levels.

These  fi ndings  build  a  strong  case  that 
board  members,  along  with  employees, 
would  benefi t  from  being  included  in  the 
cyber awareness program at their organiza-
tion  to  make  better  decisions  and  oversee 
cyber risk on an ongoing basis and help set 
the  proper  tone  at  the  top.  Roughly  two 
thirds  of  companies  appear  committed  to 
this  idea.  According  to  Ethisphere’s  2015 
World’s  Most  Ethical  Companies  data  set, 
66% of respondents had offered their board 
formal  training  on  information  security/
cybersecurity within the last two years.

■   Conclusion
There  is  no  substitute  for  a  sound,  well-
understood  culture  of  responsibility  and 
awareness  with  regard  to  cybersecurity,  a 
pervasive risk that begins and ends with the 
human  element.  The  bottom  line  is  that 
unhappy  and/or  untrained  employees  can 
be  a  company’s  biggest  threat,  whereas  a 
motivated,  well-educated  workforce  can  be 
its biggest defense. Proofpoint, a Sunnyvale, 
California,  security  service  provider,  warns 
that  cyber  criminals  are  continually  adjust-
ing  to  companies’  employee  education,  so 
the  cat-and-mouse  game  is  never  fi nished 
and constant vigilance is required.

Although the margin for human error will 
never be eradicated, with proper awareness 
education  and  follow  through,  companies 
can  leverage  their  greatest  asset  to  alleviate 
vulnerabilities  and  strengthen  cybersecurity 
resistance.

■  300 

SecurityRoundtable.org

Collaboration and communication 
between technical and nontechnical 
staff, business lines and executives
Wells Fargo & Company – Rich Baich, CISO

“You can have brilliant ideas, but if you can’t get them 

across, your ideas won’t get you anywhere.”

Lee Iacocca

Delivering results is a key metric of success for any leader. 
Exceeding  revenue  goals,  meeting  hiring  and  retention 
goals, or ensuring operational budget goals are well known 
and understood results. These goals are clear, easily meas-
urable,  and  most  importantly  all  individuals  understand 
their role in achieving these results. These goals often are 
established  with  limited  collaboration  and  a  single  com-
munication to the appropriate leaders with minimal toler-
ance associated with not achieving the goals. The language 
used  when  establishing  these  goals  and  publishing  the 
results  transcends  technical  and  nontechnical  executives. 
This  information  must  be  understood  and  actionable; 
regardless of the executives’ background, having this infor-
mation  available  allows  them  to  make  an  informed  deci-
sion. Leaders need the right information, at the right time 
to collaborate, communicate, and ultimately make the best 
decision. Information enables the executive to use a deci-
sion process or framework of reasoning to help rationalize 
the data and choose the best course of action. As the topic 
of cybersecurity rapidly moves to the top of every C-level 
executive’s agenda, cyber leaders must embrace the impor-
tance of collaboration and communication while building 
bridges to ensure decisions are understood and actionable.

■  Establish a cyber risk decision framework
We  live  in  a  time  of  acute  and  persistent  threats  to 
our national security, our economy, and our global com-
munities. The number of reported cyber incidents contin-
ues  to  grow.  The  threat  of  a  cyber  catastrophic  event 
continues to lurk in the distance. New cyber vulnerabili-
ties are reported each day and the frequency of zero-day 
threats  is  increasing.  New  victims  make  the  headlines 

301  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

weekly. As a result, cyber leaders continue to 
be asked if their organizations are spending 
enough  to  address  cyberthreats.  To  answer 
this  question,  cyber  leadership  must  have 
the facts to establish a decision framework to 
guide  them.  Having  a  fi rewall,  purchasing 
the latest technologies, growing the number 
of cyber professionals, and having informa-
tion security policies do not adequately pro-
vide  all  the  information  needed  to  answer 
this question. Knowing what data to collect, 
demonstrating the ability to get the data in a 
timely  fashion,  operationalizing  the  data, 
and ensuring the data get to the right deci-
sion maker can provide an actionable frame-
work.  The  following  are  a  few  examples  of 
what  information  is  needed  to  enable  a 
framework:

 䊏 What  risks  will  be  mitigated  if  these 

 䊏 Specific 

additional funds are provided
are 

known, 
monitored,  and  integrated  into  the  risk 
prioritization decision process.

cyberthreats 

 䊏 Vulnerabilities  are  identifi ed,  prioritized, 
remediated,  and  validated  in  a  timely 
manner.
 䊏 Critical 

known, 
accountability is clear, and responsibility to 
ensure those assets meet defi ned protection 
criteria are met.

are  well 

assets 

 䊏 The likelihood of a specifi c exploit, attack, 
or  signifi cant  occurrence  is  understood 
and utilized in the cyber risk prioritization 
framework.

Having trustworthy data is the foundation 
to  all  cybersecurity  decision  frameworks. 
It is important to have a framework to help 
support the fundamental changes required 
to  enhance  cyber  practices  and  enable 
communication.

Scenario: Cyber risk decision framework
Today, the media announces a new zero-day 
exploit  that  has  been  identifi ed.  Business 
executives want to know:

 䊏 What  do  they  need  to  do  to  respond  to 

the exploit?

■  302 

 䊏 How  vulnerable  are  their  products  and 

solutions to this exploit?

 䊏 Is there any potential for business impact 

to customers or suppliers?

 䊏 Do they need to contact their third parties 

to see if they are secure?

 䊏 Will this affect their ability to service their 

own third-party relationships?

Using  the  following  framework  formula  to 
explain an approach could be helpful:

Risk  =  Vulnerability  ⫻  Threat  ⫻  Asset 
Value ⫻ Probability of Occurrence

Having the trustworthy data readily avail-
able can allow cyber executives to quickly 
and  confi dently  communicate  throughout 
the organization and the third parties. For 
example, a quick query of the asset inven-
tory indicates there are 50 instances of this 
exploit  in  the  current  infrastructure  and 
fi ve  within  the  third-party  ecosystem.  Of 
those  50  internal  instances,  only  three  are 
external  facing,  and  the  remaining  47  are 
internal to the network. All the third-party 
instances  are  internal  to  the  partner’s 
network.  The  associated  vendor  to  the 
zero-day exploit has provided a patch and 
recommended an immediate application of 
the  patch.  The  internal  cyberthreat  team 
has reviewed the external intelligence, and 
there  are  already  indications  of  potential 
miscreants  scanning  for  the  newly  identi-
fi ed vulnerabilities. Additional intelligence 
and analysis suggest exploit code is already 
being crafted to take advantage of this new 
exploit.  If  successful,  the  exploit  can  be 
used to deliver malicious code throughout 
the  organization  providing  kinetic  and 
nonkinetic  damage  to  an  organization. 
Armed with this information, cyber leader-
ship  can  quickly  move  to  gain  consensus, 
communicate recommendations, and infl u-
ence  the  mitigation  activities  required  to 
address the threat.

■  Defi ning your stakeholders
Trustworthy  data  are  a  key  foundation  to 
establishing  cybersecurity  creditability. 

  COLLABORATION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN TECHNICAL AND NONTECHNICAL STAFF, BUSINESS LINES AND EXECUTIVES 

Performance of executives, regardless if they 
work in a line of business, in corporate staff, 
or in technology, is often measured by results. 
Achieving  results  in  cybersecurity  requires 
others  taking  action.  Effective  leaders  can 
motivate  groups  of  like-minded  people  to 
come  together  and  rally  behind  a  cause  to 
achieve a goal. Finding those individuals in 
the  organization 
is  critical  to  success. 
Identifying  individuals  who  will  become 
stakeholders  in  the  cybersecurity  journey 
provide the support needed to drive change. 
The following is a list of potential stakehold-
ers to consider:

 䊏 chief executive offi cer (CEO)
 䊏 chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO)
 䊏 chief auditor
 䊏 chief administration offi cer (CAO)
 䊏 chief communication offi cer (CCO)
 䊏 chief risk offi cer (CRO)
 䊏 member(s) of the board of directors
 䊏 chief information offi cer
 䊏 line of business leader
 䊏 audit committee
 䊏 chief technology offi cer (CTO)
 䊏 line  of  business  leaders,  CIO,  CTO,  risk 

leaders

In  addition  to  individual  stakeholders, 
establishing  a  cybersecurity  steering  com-
mittee with cross-organizational representa-
tion can provide an additional platform for 
collaboration and communication. The pur-
pose of the committee should be to promote 
cybersecurity awareness, provide a forum in 
which cybersecurity topics can be discussed, 
and to solicit cyber feedback to help evolve 
cyber  practices  and  mature  over  time.  In 
addition, the committee will seek to identify 
cybersecurity  topics  that  may  affect  the 
broader applicable industry and the emerg-
ing trends that may affect the organization. 
The cybersecurity committee could:

 1.  review  cybersecurity  strategic  direction 

and planned initiatives

 2.  discuss major milestones for cybersecurity 
initiatives  that  are  in  process  of  being 
deployed

 3.  assess  business 

impact  of  material 

cybersecurity program changes

 4.  discuss lessons learned and situations in 

which program adjustment is prudent

 5.  identify potential areas of confl ict and/or 
resource constraints between cybersecurity 
program and business priorities

 6.  discuss impacts from and/or to the larger 

applicable industry.

Stakeholders  want  the  facts  and  reassur-
ance that the information being reporting is 
trustworthy  and  actionable.  Risk  manage-
ment is everyone’s responsibility, and indi-
viduals  take  great  pride  when  helping 
reduce  risk.  Proactively  removing  risk 
before  the  risk  evolves  in  negative  conse-
quence  is  a  signifi cant  measurement  for 
success.  Providing  a  stakeholder  with  the 
data  that  clearly  demonstrate  a  risk  was 
remediated  before  it  was  signifi cant  will 
win the trust of most individuals.

Scenario: Defi ning stakeholders
You  have  been  asked  by  a  line  of  business 
leader  to  provide  information  regarding  a 
third party before a contract is signed. Due 
diligence is done for third parties before any 
contracts are signed; that is a leading indus-
try practice. However, what if you and your 
cybersecurity  team  were  able  to  provide 
cyber intelligence that suggests the potential 
third-party  partner  is  on  a  top-fi ve  easiest-
to-hack  organization  list  being  posted  in 
credible  underground  forums?  Having 
information  without  being  able  to  make  it 
actionable  often  results  in  a  very  heavy 
paper weight being created. In this scenario, 
having the cyber intelligence to provide the 
stakeholders  helped  provide  transparency 
into cyber risks that can produce measured 
results. Maintaining a results-oriented men-
tality  coupled  with  the  right  stakeholder 
group  can  help  enable  a  cyber  support 
culture.

■  Delivering the message
Effective communication, especially during a 
time of change, requires frequent touchpoints. 
Having a communicator or a communication 

  303  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

team specifi cally aligned with the cybersecu-
rity  team  can  provide  immense  benefi ts. 
There is delicate balance associated with the 
frequency and content that is communicated 
to  stakeholders.  The  fundamental  goal  is  to 
tell  the  cybersecurity  story  throughout  the 
organization  through  clear,  concise,  targeted 
communications  through  the  most  effective 
dissemination channels. Some will want more 
frequent  communications,  whereas  others 
will  desire  less  communication.  Some  will 
prefer “pull” communications and others will 
want  the  information  pushed  to  them. 
Cultural  appetite,  tone  from  the  top,  and 
organizational  commitment  help  drive  the 
various  required  communication  delivery 
techniques to ensure stakeholders are aware. 
Some examples include the following:

 䊏 publish  monthly  newsletters  to  various 

stakeholders

 䊏 create  a  robust  intranet  presence  with 

tools and communications

 䊏 celebrate  success  stories  of  collaborative 

achievements

 䊏 provide  platforms  for  cyber  champion 

recognition

and 

report 

 䊏 track,  measure, 

the 
effectiveness  of  the  communications 
through 
communication 
dashboard

cyber 

a 

Having a venue into the corporate commu-
nications  team  provides  cybersecurity  the 
opportunity  to  align,  infl uence,  and  enable 
the infl ux of cybersecurity into normal busi-
ness  communications.  It  is  critical  that  the 
corporate crisis communication team be part 
of the cybersecurity incident response team 
because of the potential reputational impact 
associated with a signifi cant cyber incident. 
During  a  time  of  crisis,  concise  and  timely 
communications  to  key  stakeholders  and 
customers  can  often  be  the  difference 
between an incident being managed and an 
incident being exaggerated.

Tactically  positioning  the  cybersecurity 
story within the organization through effec-
tive education and awareness while address-
ing  the  latest  trends  in  cybersecurity  can 

■  304 

help  build  collaboration  by  demonstrating 
how  individuals  can  partner  with  cyberse-
curity to address customer needs. Regardless 
of  the  industry,  customers  want  to  know 
their  information  is  safe  and  the  organiza-
tion  that  has  their  data  has  a  clear  plan  to 
achieve  that  goal.  Adding  cybersecurity 
reminders  in  existing  individual  customer 
communications begins to demonstrate that 
commitment to the customer. It takes a long 
time to earn trust, but it only takes a second 
to lose it.

This  also  holds  true  for  internal  stake-
holders. Often the information and measure-
ment of results reported by the cybersecurity 
team may not be perceived as positive news. 
For  example,  the  cybersecurity  team  may 
implement new technology that provides an 
enhanced  visibility  into  the  health  and 
hygiene of various technology assets. If these 
assets have never had this improved visibil-
ity, it is possible that the results may provide 
awareness  of  critical  vulnerabilities  or 
weakness  associated  with  the  platform. 
Consequently, when reporting these results, 
others  may  take  offense  to  these  perceived 
negative  results.  However,  this  is  a  great 
opportunity 
leadership  by 
explaining  that  it  is  far  better  to  fi nd  these 
opportunities  internally  rather  than  be  told 
about  these  vulnerability  gaps  from  a  law 
enforcement  representative.  Don’t  pass  up 
the  opportunity  to  build  a  champion;  one 
champion can quickly lead to two, which, in 
turn, can often grow to thousands.

to  educate 

■  Conclusion
During  times  of  confl ict  it  is  proven  those 
countries  that  have  aligned  themselves  with 
the right allies have prevailed and overcome 
grave challenges. These are challenging times; 
cyberthreats  are  real  and  present  signifi cant 
risks for most organizations. Communicating 
these risks to technical and nontechnical exec-
utives  can  often  be  a  daunting  task  that 
requires additional background and context to 
successfully  communicate 
the  message. 
Executives  are  results  driven  and  appreciate 
other  executives  who  are  proactive  when 
dealing  with  risks.  The  ability  to  provide 

  COLLABORATION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN TECHNICAL AND NONTECHNICAL STAFF, BUSINESS LINES AND EXECUTIVES 

trustworthy data and a cyber decision support 
framework enables cyber executives to trans-
late a new language to other executives. These 
actions can positively enhance cybersecurity’s 
internal reputation by strengthening trust and 
credibility across the organization. Taking the 

time to include, educate, and collaborate with 
stakeholders  can  build  alliances.  Having  the 
right  information  is  powerful,  and  those 
stakeholders  who  get  accurate,  timely,  and 
meaningful data will have the opportunity to 
lead change.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  305  ■

Cybersecurity readiness through 
workforce development
Booz Allen Hamilton – Lori Zukin, Principal; Jamie 
Lopez, Senior Associate;  Erin Weiss Kaya, Lead 
Associate; and Andrew Smallwood, Lead Associate

The  demand  for  skilled  cybersecurity  professionals  cur-
rently outweighs the supply. The growing sophistication 
of  cyber  adversaries,  coupled  with  our  increasingly 
networked enterprises, means that demand will only con-
tinue to grow. To compound this issue, traditional infor-
mation technology (IT) roles are increasingly insuffi cient 
to address enterprise-wide cybersecurity risks. A broader 
skillset,  including  communication,  change  management, 
and  leadership,  is  required  in  order  to  respond  quickly 
and collaboratively to evolving cyber threats.

In  light  of  these  challenges,  it  is  clear  that  a  new 
approach to workforce planning and development is nec-
essary.  Yet  what  would  that  entail?  This  chapter  covers 
fi ve  recommendations  to  improve  your  cybersecurity 
workforce, including: (1) rethink your approach to cyber-
security, (2) develop alternative talent management strate-
gies, (3) empower your cybersecurity leadership, (4) con-
nect  your  organization,  and  (5)  invest  in  your  cyber 
human capital.

■   Redefi ne cyber operations in your organization
Cyber operations are integral to every business function—
a  fundamental  part  of  business  management  in  which 
understanding  your  cyberthreat  is  key  to  your  bottom 
line. Coupled with that is a recognition that the IT func-
tion and the cyber operations function are not one and the 
same. IT is an infrastructure enabler, whereas cyber opera-
tions are an organization-wide risk issue. A major cyber 
breach—one that involves sensitive corporate or customer 
data—poses more than a technical problem or a business 
continuity challenge. A major incident can create a multi-
dimensional  crisis  that  affects  nearly  all  aspects  of  the 
company’s business, as well as its customers, regulators, 
and other external stakeholders.

307  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

In addition, the talent management chal-
lenges  for  cyber  operations  are  much  more 
complex  because  there  is  a  major  crisis  to 
backfi ll cyber talent. Even once your organi-
zations  recruits  top  cyber  professionals, 
there  is  no  guarantee  you  will  retain  them. 
As such, it is not enough for cybersecurity to 
be  relegated  to  a  subset  of  people,  as  with 
the  IT  function.  Every  employee  in  your 
organization  faces  cyberthreats,  and  talent 
management  for  IT  and  cyber  operations 
should  not  be  combined.  By  shifting  this 
mindset  and  developing  strategies  that 
refl ect these realities, your ability to develop 
an  effective  workforce  will  immediately 
improve.

■   Develop alternative talent management 

strategies

Most  cybersecurity  professionals  are  per-
sonifi ed by their love for cutting-edge tech-
nology, casual work environments, and crea-
tive mindsets. These unique tendencies help 
them  excel  under  the  constantly  changing 
cyber  environment  but  differentiate  them 
from the rest of your company in a number 
of ways—fundamentally, their atypical char-
acteristics of (1) work environment, (2) work 
preferences,  and  (3)  nontraditional  career 
paths.

Recruiting, developing, and retaining this 
unique workforce requires alternative talent 
management  strategies—strategies  that  are 
often  connected  to  but  distinct  from  those 
applied across the rest of your company.

Develop an appealing work environment
Not every business has a culture of prevalent 
ping-pong tables, free food, and a dress code 
involving  fl ip-fl ops  and  jeans.  However, 
there are environmental factors that compa-
nies  must  account  for  in  attracting—and 
keeping—the  necessary  talent  for  accom-
plishing cyber work.

The nature of cyber work means that it is 
often  executed  in  an  environment  that  dif-
fers  from  that  of  its  parent  organization. 
Think  of  your  cybersecurity  practice  as  the 
fast  moving,  quickly  adapting  branch  of 
your  organization.  Businesses  that  consider 

■  308 

environmental factors for their cyber work-
force are better prepared to adapt to chang-
ing threats.

Global  business  trends  have  shown  suc-
cessful  cyber  practices  have  fi ve  key  traits: 
they  are  agile,  multifunctional,  dynamic, 
fl exible, and informal.

Agile: Cyber work requires agility. Employees 
act like chameleons shifting quickly and deci-
sively  as  threat  warrants  change  course 
and  as  a  unit,  the  capability  is  alert  to  new 
circumstances.

Multifunctional:  Cybersecurity  is  a  team 
sport. A strong cyber practice is built of teams 
with diverse knowledge sets who can execute 
a variety of activities at once. Your employees 
do not have to be good multitaskers, but your 
overall capability does.

Inquisitive:  Cyber  professionals  embrace 
learning  and  they  will  be  curious;  they  will 
want to solve problems regardless of how hard 
it is to fi nd the solution. Because threat actors 
across the globe are offering an array of new 
threats  to  consider,  your  cybersecurity  work 
practice will change based on evolving infor-
mation.  By  taking  on  new  endeavors,  your 
capability will be ready to solve new problems.

Flexible:  Cyberthreats  move  fast.  With  con-
stantly  changing  work  requirements,  your 
practice must be enabled to adapt to new areas 
of  focus.  Your  cyber  organization  must  be 
infused with a strategy that allows for employ-
ees to expand or change their roles to increase 
your capability’s fl exibility.

Informal: Cybersecurity professionals thrive 
in  a  nontraditional  environment.  Your 
recruits  and  team  members  will  likely  look 
for unconventional working hours and shift-
ing duties. Creating this type of environment 
for  your  cybersecurity  professionals  allows 
your cyber organization to adjust quickly to 
tackle  any  challenge.  Your  cybersecurity 
practice  may  have  different  work  locations, 
matrixed  reporting  lines,  around-the-clock 
shifts, and a more relaxed dress code than the 

  CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  

majority of your workforce. The budget pro-
cess  for  your  cyber  organization  may  be 
centered  around  technological  investments 
or  on  a  different  timeline  to  meet  shifting 
threats.  Given  the  work  requirements,  it  is 
especially  important  that  your  cyber  envi-
ronment  has  leaders  who  not  only  share  a 
competitive nature and passion for technolo-
gy but also have success operating in dynam-
ic, multifunctional environments.

Understand work preferences
Like the work environment, your cybersecu-
rity  professionals  also  have  unique  work 
traits. These traits, or work preferences, make 
them  the  perfect  candidates  to  tackle  the 
daily  challenges  from  threat  actors  around 
the globe but also can separate them from the 
rest of your organization. Recognizing these 
work  preferences,  for  your  capability  as  a 
whole  as  well  as  on  an  individual  level,  is 
critical to developing your cyber talent man-
agement strategies.

If  your  cybersecurity  professional  had  a 

social media profi le, it may look like this:

Lover and early adopter of new technologies, 
as  a  cybersecurity  professional  my  passion 
for  technology  fuels  my  curiosity  to  solve 
complex  problems.  I  am  a  systems  thinker 
with  confi dence  in  my  ability  to  put  things 
together  and  learn  new  techniques  while 
using  my  competitive  nature  to  fuel  my 
work as well as engage in offi ce competitions. 
As  a  natural  problem  solver  and  abstract 
thinker, I tend to look ‘outside the box’ and 
evaluate  challenges  from  many  different 
angles and perspectives before acting.

As  one  method,  try  offering  applicants  an 
on-the-spot  challenge  while  testing  their 
ability  to  solve  problems  using  senario-
based  challenges.  Capitalize  on  your 
employees’ problem solving skills by allow-
ing them to be a part of strategy, offense, and 
defense  and  by  fostering  a  culture  that 
encourages every level of employee to sug-
gest  solutions.  Reward  your  employees  for 
forward  thinking,  provide  them  with  con-
stantly  changing  tasks  with  different  levels 

of  diffi culty,  and  present  opportunities  to 
work with emerging technologies.

Create nontraditional career paths
Placing  two  cybersecurity  resumes  side  by 
side can sometimes feel like you are compar-
ing an apple to an orange. Cyber profession-
als have a variety of experiences, only some 
with  an  educational  background  in  cyber 
and  many  with  certifi cations  to  designate 
profi ciency.  Although  it  would  be  nice  if 
cyber  professionals  could  be  ‘cyber  warri-
ors,’  or  experts  in  all  areas  of  cyber  opera-
tions,  your  cybersecurity  professional’s 
diverse backgrounds more likely match the 
diversity of the cybersecurity fi eld.

Booz  Allen  has  found  that  instead  of 
‘cyber warriors,’ it is much more likely that 
your organization’s cyber workforce will be 
composed of three types with many subsets 
in  each:  senior 
leadership,  specialized 
experts,  and  generalist  staff.  Instead  of 
imposing linear career paths on these cyber 
types,  our  work  has  shown  that  cybersecu-
rity professionals work better under a ‘build-
your-own’ career path option.

Senior leadership cyber professionals are 
a rare breed of combined expertise and lead-
ership  who  can  manage  teams  and  opera-
tions.  With  specialized  experts,  their  deep 
know-how within a specifi c group of cyber-
security  capabilities  often  makes  them  the 
center of the talent war. Your generalist staff 
are early in their cyber careers or have cho-
sen a broad role, making them equally high 
in  demand  but  commonly  part  of  a  larger 
supply pool.

For  most  of  your  company,  established 
career  paths  diagram  career  progression 
options through linear lines of technical expe-
rience or managerial ranks. However, attract-
ing and retaining cyber professionals requires 
alternative pathways that refl ect the diversity 
of positions within the fi eld. For cybersecurity 
professionals,  try  providing  a  nonlinear 
career path—one that can be horizontal, verti-
cal, and diagonal. Show cybersecurity profes-
sionals a set of attributes that describe how to 
progress  using  their  experience,  unconven-
tional  education,  and  industry  certifi cation. 

  309  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

This  provides  your  cyber  professionals  with 
fl exibility  to  put  the  pieces  together  using 
defi ne  career  progression  opportunities  and 
opens  up  your  ability  to  recruit  talent  who 
want to grow with your organization.

■   Give CISOs a ‘seat at the table’
Although progress is being made in profes-
sionalizing and institutionalizing cybersecu-
rity as a fi eld, much remains to be done. In 
fact, less than half of Fortune 100 companies 
have a CISO. Organizations still struggle to 
build,  recruit,  and  retain  a  cybersecurity 
workforce.  There  is  no  ‘one-size-fi ts-all’  for 
placement of the CISO within your organiza-
tion. It depends on the industry, the type of 
organization,  and  what  the  organization  is 
protecting. In some organizations, the CISO 
may report to the CIO. In others, with a dif-
ferent  architecture,  mission  statement,  and 
set  of  complex  challenges,  the  CISO  may 
report to the chief risk offi cer, or even directly 
to the COO or CEO.

No  matter  where  the  CISO  sits  in  your 
organization,  you  need  to  give  the  CISO  ‘a 
seat at the table’ during regular operations, 
for example, when discussing risk analysis, 
profi t  reductions,  performance  indicators, 
and  other  strategies  in  your  organization’s 
balanced  scorecard.  Elevating  the  level  of 
your  CISO  during  normal  operations  helps 
nurture  leadership,  management,  and  non-
technical skills—skills that are critical during 
a cyber crisis. Further, by making the CISO a 
member  of  the  C-suite  leadership  team, 
you  will  be  able  to  raise  the  level  of  cyber 
awareness—and  coordinated  response—
across your entire organization.

The  CISO’s  role  within  the  organization 
abruptly shifts to hands-on, crisis mode in a 
cyber breach. The CISO’s foremost responsi-
bility is to quickly address the crisis from a 
technical  perspective.  The  CISO  should  be 
fully  immersed  in  directing  the  cyber 
response,  working  with  the  computer  inci-
dent  response  team  or  security  operations 
experts to remediate and minimize damage, 
while delegating or outsourcing other roles/
issues such as policy implications, legal, and 
public relations.

■  310 

Once  relegated  to  the  IT  department, 
cybersecurity  is  now  part  of  a  company’s 
core strategic planning and investment port-
folio. That said, many CISOs currently don’t 
have the appropriate skill set to deal with all 
the overall strategic implications of a major 
cyber  breach.  Although  CISOs  likely  have 
the  technical  expertise  required  to  fi x  the 
problem or at least manage it, they may not 
be prepared for the magnitude of other mul-
tidimensional challenges that surface during 
the crisis. In addition to technical know-how, 
CISOs have to be able to think on their feet, 
nimbly and calmly handling the internal and 
external nontechnical issues that may arise.

■   Connect your organization
The cyber-ready organization is a connected 
one.  Ineffective  collaboration  between  lines 
of  business  and  the  cyber  function  limits 
data sharing and effective change. However, 
before  you  can  foster  true  collaboration 
between  your  lines  of  business,  you  must 
have  appropriate  cyber  channels  weaved 
throughout  your  organizational  structure. 
Your  organization  needs  effective  processes 
in place to manage cyber-related communi-
cations  and  policies.  This  ‘interconnected-
ness’ comes to life when your central cyber 
unit  is  feeding  information  to  key  business 
leaders and those business leaders are imple-
menting  change  throughout  their  lines  of 
business  and  communicating  information 
back to the core cyber unit. The cybersecurity 
function deserves to be placed at the center 
of  your  organization,  to  inform  all  of  your 
business units.

Cybersecurity should be viewed as a cen-
tral  business  function  that  informs  other 
business units. See Figure 1.

You also will need strong leaders at the 
helm  of  each  business  unit  who  are  bilin-
gual  in  business  and  cyber  operations. 
Cybersecurity is the new education leaders 
have to undergo to lead your organization 
effectively.  In  connecting  the  channels 
across  your  organization,  all  leaders  must 
be  on  the  same  page,  communicating  the 
same  message,  implementing  the  same 
security measures, with the same vigor.

  CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  

FIGURE

Cybersecurity as a central business function

Technology

Human
Resources

Finance

Cyber
Function

Supply Chain

Operations

Marketing

■   Finally, invest in cyber human capital
Most leaders in today’s business world agree 
cybersecurity  is  important.  However,  when 
the  meeting  is  over,  will  they  truly  buy  in 
and embrace cybersecurity as a key priority 
for  their  divisions?  This  is  the  tough  ques-
tion  CEOs,  CIOs,  and  CSOs  encounter.  An 
organizational  cybersecurity  plan  can  only 
be  as  strong  as  the  weakest  commitment 
from  any  key  leader.  It  doesn’t  matter  how 
strong your security posture is for individual 
departments;  if  one  division  is  vulnerable, 
your entire organization is at risk.

An  effective  way  to  improve  the  long-
term  security  of  your  company  is  by 
investing in your cyber leaders and cyber 
workforce. Investments in technology and 
processes go unrealized unless your organ-
ization has strong cyber leaders along with 
a  capable  workforce  to  defend  your  net-
works  and 
security. 
Successful  organizations  will  invest  in 
their  workforce,  give  their  CISO  a  seat  at 
the  table,  and  foster  integrated  lines  of 
communication  for  the  sharing  of  cyber-
related information.

improve  your 

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  311  ■

Building a cyber-savvy board
Korn Ferry – Jamey Cummings, Senior Client Partner; 
Joe Griesedieck, Vice Chairman and Co-Leader, Board and 
CEO Services; and Aileen Alexander, Senior Client Partner

Given  the  growing  magnitude  and  frequency  of  cyber-
security breaches, which have the potential to shake major 
corporations  to  their  core,  cybersecurity  has  become  an 
issue of enterprise-wide importance. These incidents have 
become commonplace events, and organizations that are 
targets  may  suffer  lost  or  stolen  intellectual  property, 
damage  or  destruction  of  critical  data  or  infrastructure, 
disruptions to critical operations, and loss of confi dence 
among customers, investors, and employees. The longer-
term damage to value and reputation is incalculable.

■  Startling statistics
PwC’s Global State of Information Security Survey 2015 of 
more  than  9,700  security,  IT,  and  business  executives 
found that the total number of security incidents detected 
by  respondents  climbed  to  42.8  million  this  year,  an 
increase  of  48%  over  2013.  That  is  the  equivalent  of 
117,339 incoming attacks per day, every day. The Identity 
Theft Resource Center reported a record high of 738 U.S. 
data breaches, a 28% year-over-year increase.

If you’re thinking you can build a modern-day “moat” 
to keep the bad guys out, consider that the 2014 U.S. State 
of Cybercrime Survey, co-sponsored by PwC, CSO maga-
zine,  the  CERT  Division  of  the  Software  Engineering 
Institute  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University,  and  the  U.S. 
Secret Service, found that almost one-third of respondents 
said insider crimes are more costly or damaging than inci-
dents perpetrated by outsiders. In a virtual ecosystem that 
increasingly  includes  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  tradi-
tional  fi rewalls  do  not  ensure  protection,  as  employees 
come  and  go  each  day  with  connected  devices,  such  as 
smartphones  and  computers,  which  may  wittingly  or 
unwittingly  introduce  threats  that  can  threaten  the  sur-
vival of the organization.

313  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

This  greatly  expanded  cyberattack  sur-
face  and  resulting  breaches  add  up  to  a 
huge  price  tag.  The  annual  cost  of  cyber-
crime to the global economy is estimated to 
be  between  $375  billion  and  $575  billion, 
according  to  a  June  2014  study  by  the 
Center  for  Strategic  and  International 
Studies;  Gartner  Inc.  estimates  that  total 
spending  will  grow  8.2  percent  in  2015  to 
reach $76.9 billion.

If  that’s  not  a  wake-up  call,  we  don’t 
know  what  is.  But,  the  challenge  remains: 
translating  awareness  into  an  action  plan. 
Although CEOs and boards are alert to the 
issue  and  the  devastating,  long-lasting 
effects of security breaches, there is surpris-
ingly  little  knowledge  of  recommended 
practices  to  best  position  organizations 
defensively  and  enable  quick  and  effective 
response  when  the  inevitable  occurs.  Let’s 
be blunt: There is no foolproof way of pre-
venting security breaches, but a systematic, 
proven  approach  can  make  the  difference 
between the survival and the demise of an 
enterprise.

■  Alignment at the top
Cybersecurity  is  an  insidious  threat,  all  the 
more  so  because  breaches,  including  the 
most disastrous ones, often are not detected 
until the damage is done. One cybersecurity 
fi rm  recently  estimated  that  close  to  three 
quarters of security breaches go undetected. 
No board or management team can afford to 
become complacent. If you haven’t yet fallen 
victim, you may have been smart, but most 
likely  lucky.  You  should  assume  it’s  just  a 
matter  of  time,  perhaps  there  already  has 
been a breach that has gone undetected, so 
plan accordingly.

In  a  relatively  short  time  cybersecurity 
has gone from something that was compart-
mentalized  and  handled  by  the  IT  depart-
ment  to  something  that  is  regularly  on  the 
agenda at board meetings. At the same time 
“major  threats”  have  been  redefi ned,  from 
identifying  a  Trojan  horse  and  upgrading 
anti-virus  software  to  threats  that  strike  at 
the very heart of organizations and are capa-
ble  of  taking  them  down.  The  view  and 

■  314 

importance of cybersecurity has shifted from 
something of marginal interest to the board 
to  a  high  priority  that  resides  within  the 
board’s risk management framework.

This is a new role for CEOs and directors, 
many of whom feel unequipped to deal with 
it  because  cybersecurity  does  not  remotely 
relate  to  traditional  areas  of  director  exper-
tise. Armed with a tested protocol to combat 
cyberthreats  and  the  right  resources,  how-
ever,  every  board  should  be  able  to  imple-
ment a preparedness and response plan that 
will give the board and management team, 
as well as investors, the reassurance that the 
company is as well positioned as reasonably 
possible  to  confront  these  ever-evolving 
challenges.

In practical, operational terms, what does 
all this mean for the C-suite and the board, 
and how can they get started on overseeing 
the  many-headed  beast  that  is  cybersecu-
rity?  For  one  thing,  it  starts  with  ensuring 
everyone on the board is speaking the same 
language  when  it  comes  to  cyberthreats. 
Because  directors  are  generally  business 
people, the common language should be the 
language of business.

■  The right questions
According  to  Melissa  Hathaway,  private 
sector  cybersecurity  expert  and  former 
cybersecurity  “czar”  under  Presidents 
George W. Bush and Barack Obama, “Until 
cybersecurity  is  refl ected  in  balance  sheet 
terms, it’s never going to be fully embraced 
by  the  board.”  She  emphasizes  that  once 
cybersecurity has been identifi ed as a criti-
cal risk, it must be managed with the same 
rigor  and  processes  applied  to  other  risks 
and remain visible on directors’ dashboards 
with  key,  comprehensible  metrics.  “Tech 
speak,”  or  any  jargon  that  obfuscates  the 
issues  for  directors,  has  no  place  in  the 
boardroom.

The  reality  of  boardrooms,  however,  is 
that the scale of that impact is often obscured 
or lost in translation. Unless directors can cut 
through  the  technical  jargon  in  what  are 
often  massive  amounts  of  information  they 
receive, the size of the risk and the steps to 

mitigate  it  may  not  be  clear.  Companies 
depend on a functioning Internet, which was 
never  invented  with  security  in  mind,  and 
all that is linked to it. Therefore, related risks 
and costs must be made known to the board 
so that the cost of potential breaches can be 
calculated  in  capital  and  operational  terms, 
rather than remaining hidden.

Among the questions directors should be 
asking  regularly  to  ensure  alignment  as  a 
team and a fi rm grasp on cybersecurity, says 
Hathaway, are the following:

 䊏 Is cyber risk accounted for in our overall 
corporate  planning  process?  The  board 
must  be  assured  that  cyber  risk  is  an 
element  of  a  broader  risk  framework 
and  that  exposures  are  recognized  and 
planned for.

 䊏 What  is  the  process  for  evaluating 
security  and  measuring 
liabilities? 
Boards  should  know  not  only  what 
controls  are  in  place  but  also  how  they 
are evaluated.

 䊏 Do  we  have  directors  with  relevant 
expertise?  Although  boards  may  not 
require  general  technology  expertise, 
it  may  be  advisable  to  have  one  or 
more  directors  who  understand  IT  and 
its  associated  risks,  or  have  a  security 
background.

 䊏 Have we identifi ed executive ownership 
of  the  issue?  The  CEO  should  have 
controls  in  place  that  indicate  how 
cybersecurity  is  being  managed  and  the 
true  costs  to  the  business,  which  should 
be part of an internal and external audit.

 䊏 What will we do in the event of a breach? 
If  and  when  a  problem  arises,  a  process 
should  be  in  place  for  communicating 
effectively,  internally  and  externally,  and 
dealing with attendant costs.

■  Overseeing cyber risk
Boards  are  increasingly  adding  directors 
with  cybersecurity  backgrounds  and,  more 
generally,  security  expertise,  but  boards 
should not assume that they need to add a 
director  with  this  specialized  background. 
Much depends on company specifi cs and the 

  BUILDING A CYBER-SAVVY BOARD   

industry in which it operates, so each board 
should  decide  on  a  case-by-case  basis. 
Shortfalls  in  board  experience  often  can  be 
made up by retaining the appropriate addi-
tional  expertise  to  advise  on  an  as-needed 
basis; however, we are starting to see more 
demand  for  this  specifi c  sort  of  talent  on 
boards.

Sometimes,  as  noted  above,  the  board’s 
most important role lies in asking the right 
questions,  which  may  require  business 
smarts  and  good  old-fashioned  common 
sense  but  not  necessarily  technical  cyberse-
curity expertise.

As  overseer-in-chief  of  the  CEO  and  the 
business,  the  board  has  a  responsibility  for 
managing  the  company’s  risk  portfolio,  of 
which  cybersecurity  is  now  a  key  compo-
nent. Proper oversight entails remaining at a 
high, supervisory level—not getting dragged 
down  into  the  management  weeds—and 
boards can properly perform their fi duciary 
duties by focusing on a few main areas.

The board must be reassured by the CEO 
that the most capable people are in the criti-
cal positions, and this extends to the leader-
ship and team managing cybersecurity. With 
so  much  at  stake,  this  is  not  a  place  to  cut 
corners.

Directors should be kept abreast of main 
cybersecurity risks, as well as the remedia-
tion  process  and  timeline  for  effectively 
dealing with them. Certainly no one expects 
directors to be technology wizards, but they 
should  be  inquiring  about  safeguards  the 
company  has  in  place  to  guard  against 
intrusion  and  be  satisfi ed  by  management 
that  protection  along  with  response  and 
recovery capabilities are adequate. In addi-
tion,  they  will  want  to  be  informed  about 
education  for  everyone  throughout  the 
organization, to ensure awareness of threats, 
and  a  step-by-step  response  plan  to  follow 
in the event of a breach.

■  The board at the nexus
Cybersecurity  has  expanded  well  beyond 
the confi nes of IT and emerged as a concern 
at  the  highest  enterprise  level,  primarily 
because  of  the  devastating  potential  effects 

  315  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

on shareholder value, market share, reputa-
tion,  and  long-term  survival.  Cybersecurity 
is  an  issue  that  crosses  all  organizational 
silos and boundaries top to bottom, encom-
passing  people,  culture,  and  risk  manage-
ment  and  must  bridge  security,  technology, 
privacy,  and  compliance.  Cybersecurity  is, 
therefore, taking its rightful place on a short 
list  of  the  board’s  crucial  responsibilities, 
which now include protecting a company’s 
assets,  particularly  digital,  as  part  of  an 
organization’s overall risk portfolio.

In fact, managing cyber risk doesn’t differ 
signifi cantly from managing more tradition-
al forms of risk and must be managed in a 
similar way, remaining visible on directors’ 
dashboards  so  that 
is  tracked  and 
addressed regularly.

it 

Those boards that do not have a cyberse-
curity  expert  as  a  member  of  their  team 
should not assume they need a director with 
this  experience,  but  they  should  seriously 
evaluate  that  potential  need  based  on  their 
situation  and  needs.  Some  boards  have 
determined that they do require this exper-
tise  on  their  audit  committee—where  risk 
oversight  generally  lives—on  a  special 
cybersecurity  subcommittee,  or  on  a  dedi-
cated  cybersecurity  committee.  While  some 
boards  have  recruited  this  expertise,  many 
have not and may not, accessing what they 
require  to  keep  them  informed  and  able  to 
make key decisions either from internal tech-
nology experts or from external consultants 
to the board. These solutions are varied and 
tailored and continue to evolve.

CEOs  and  those  who  serve  as  directors 
on their boards are generally a smart group 
of people, and they don’t have to be subject 
matter experts to provide oversight for the 
few  crucial  areas—including  strategy  for-
mulation,  succession  planning,  and  risk 
management—in  which  they  exercise  their 
fi duciary duties. Cybersecurity is yet another 
form of risk, but it is a dynamic, still-emerging 
form  that  is  new  to  most  directors.  We  are 
likely  years  away  from  the  point  where 
boards as a whole consider managing cyber 
risk familiar terrain, so additional resources 

■  316 

can always be made available should direc-
tors need bolstering in this area.

In fact, directors owe it not only to their 
shareholders  to  ensure  a  comprehensive 
approach  to  monitoring  and  developing  a 
proactive approach to tackling cybersecurity 
but also to themselves. With cybersecurity in 
the spotlight—where it is likely to remain—
directors  could  also  face  personal  risks, 
because  D&O  insurance  may  not  be  suffi -
cient if boards don’t take what are deemed 
appropriate actions. Boards should consider 
adding cyber insurance as part of a compre-
hensive approach to enterprise risk manage-
ment  if  they  are  to  continue  to  recruit  the 
best directors. According to a recent post on 
the Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate 
Governance  and  Financial  Regulation,  “no 
company  in  the  U.S.  should  forego  buying 
cyber  insurance  to  protect  against  the  real, 
ever-present risk of a major cyber-attack and 
the  massive  costs  associated  with  such  a 
breach.”

■  A framework to meet the cybersecurity 

challenge

Perhaps most important in properly meeting 
the  cybersecurity  challenge,  ensuring  pre-
paredness  and  a  ready  response  to  any 
breaches, directors need a framework, which 
can be tailored to the needs of their organiza-
tion,  in  which  to  operate. A  deep  dive  into 
each area will link to additional responsibili-
ties  and  timeframes,  most  of  which  will  be 
the responsibility of management.

The  baseline  for  board  involvement  in 
overseeing  cybersecurity  should  comprise 
the six following components:

 1.  Security strategy. The board must ensure 
that  the  company  has  a  strategic  vision 
and  a  tactical  road  map  that  proactively 
protect  assets  and  keep  pace  with 
escalating threats and evolving regulatory 
requirements.

 2.  Policy  and  budget  review.  Company 
security  policies, 
and 
responsibilities of all relevant leadership, 
should  be  evaluated,  along  with  data 

roles 

and 

security  and  privacy  budgets  to  ensure 
they are adequately funded.

 3.  Security  leadership.  The  board  must 
confi rm  that  the  organization  has  the 
credible leadership and talent to develop, 
communicate, 
an 
enterprise-wide  plan  to  manage  cyber 
risk.

implement 

and 

 4.  Incident  response  plan.  The  board 
should  oversee  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive  incident  response  plan 
that is widely understood, rehearsed, and 
stress tested.

 5.  Ongoing  assessment.  The  board  should 
periodically review a thorough assessment 
of 
information 
security  capabilities,  targeting  internal 
vulnerabilities and external threats.

the  organization’s 

 6.  Internal  education.  The  board  should 
ensure  that  the  company  implements  a 
strong  communication  and  education 
program 
to  create  an  environment 
in  which  all  employees  embrace 
responsibility for cybersecurity.

■  A cybersecurity strategy
Organizations  must  have  a  cybersecurity 
strategy,  lest  they  simply  be  engaged  in  a 
game  of  whack-a-mole,  reacting  to  one 
threat  after  another  rather  than  having  a 
comprehensive  game  plan.  That  is  not  to 
say  that  cyberthreats  and  breaches  can  be 

  BUILDING A CYBER-SAVVY BOARD   

eliminated—clearly  they  cannot—but  the 
resulting damage can be greatly minimized 
with  signifi cant  planning  and  a  quick 
response protocol.

In  part,  effectively  managing  cyberse-
curity starts at the top with the board rec-
ognizing  what  it  must  manage  and  how 
that  will  be  done,  including  additional 
resources it may require. While the board 
may  have  ultimate  responsibility  for  the 
war  on  cyberthreats,  everyone,  at  every 
level of the organization, must understand 
his  or  her  role  on  the  front  lines  of  this 
ongoing  war,  because  threats  can  come 
from anywhere.

Moreover, in an increasingly robust regu-
latory  environment  with  cybersecurity  high 
on the SEC’s agenda, adherence to best prac-
tices  with  a  well-designed  plan  approved 
and monitored by the board should prove far 
preferable  to  regulations  imposed  from  the 
outside.  Given  the  current  direction,  in  the 
near  future  it  is  likely  that  publicly  owned 
companies will be required to disclose more 
information  about  their  cybersecurity  vul-
nerabilities, including data breaches.

Ultimately,  boards  should  work  with 
senior management to build a cybersecurity-
aware  culture  if  they  are  to  truly  protect 
their  companies  from  this  relatively  new, 
continually morphing, and potentially dev-
astating form of risk.

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  317  ■

Evaluating and attracting your next 
CISO: More sophisticated approaches 
for a more sophisticated role
Egon Zehnder – Kal Bittianda, Selena Loh LaCroix, 
and Chris Patrick

The role of the chief information security offi cer (CISO) 
has changed dramatically in the last decade. No longer 
merely  a  digital  sheriff  called  on  to  protect  the  fi rm’s 
data  valuables,  the  CISO  is  expected  to  act  as  a  full 
strategic  partner  with  the  rest  of  the  C-suite.  The 
upgrading of the role is a natural response to the exten-
sive technological, societal, economic, and geopolitical 
developments  over  the  same  time  period.  For  many 
organizations, information—whether customer records, 
intellectual property, or strategic planning—is now their 
most valuable asset. As those assets have become more 
valuable, they have also become less secure because of 
the  increase  in  the  number  and  the  sophistication  of 
attackers,  as  well  as  the  vulnerabilities  inherent  in  an 
increasingly networked society.

The bottom line is that, although the CISO rarely reports 
directly to the chief executive offi cer, he or she must have 
the  qualities  expected  at  the  CEO-1  level.  Organizations 
endeavoring  to  fi ll  the  CISO  role  must  ensure  that  their 
recruitment strategies and candidate evaluation processes 
keep pace with these greater expectations, lest those organ-
izations increase their risk of unmet security goals, shorter 
CISO tenures, and the associated costs. This is in addition 
to the diffi culty of maintaining a consistent security culture 
in the shadow of frequently changing information-security 
leaders.

■  Taking a holistic view of CISO candidates
Our  observation  at  Egon  Zehnder  has  been  that  when 
looking for their next CISO, organizations can benefi t by 
taking a broader view of the required qualities and capa-
bilities.  Effective  candidate  evaluation  can  be  achieved 
by  dividing  a  candidate’s  career  into  its  past,  present, 
and  future  components  and  evaluating  each  element 

319  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

with the appropriate perspective. A consoli-
dation  of  the  three  elements  provides  a 
holistic  view  of  the  CISO  candidate  that 
corresponds  with  the  multi-faceted  nature 
of the role today.

The past: What has the candidate done?
A  candidate’s  credentials,  work  history, 
and  track  record  have  always  been  a  cen-
tral part of the evaluation process, and for 
good  reason.  This  component  includes 
examining  the  types  of  organizations  in 
which the candidate has worked, their size 
and  complexity,  and  which  markets  they 
served,  and  then  seeing  what  the  candi-
date  accomplished  in  each  role,  what 
transformations the candidate has led, and 
the  security  record  of  the  organizations 
under  the  candidate’s  watch.  These  fi nd-
ings provide the raw material, basic facts, 
and context for measuring the fi t between 
the candidate and role. Although the CISO 
role  has  grown  signifi cantly  beyond  its 
technical  roots,  the  technical  expertise 
indicated  by  work  history  are  essential 
“table  stakes”  for  a  candidate  to  warrant 
further consideration.

The present: What can the candidate do?
Until about a decade or so ago, exploring a 
candidate’s  work  history  generally  consti-
tuted  the  bulk  of  the  assessment  process. 
Then  the  realization  emerged  that  what  a 
candidate had done so far is a mere subset of 
what  a  candidate  could  do,  because  one’s 
work experience can never be so broad as to 
capture  everything  of  which  someone  is 
capable. Looking at competencies is a way of 
taking  an  inventory  of  an  executive’s  full 
leadership toolbox.

The key is to evaluate for the right com-
petencies  given  the  demands  of  the  posi-
tion.  In  our  experience,  fi ve  competencies 
are particularly important when evaluating 
CISO  candidates.  They  are  listed  here  in 
order  from  the  most  common  to  the  most 
elusive:

 1.  Results  orientation:  The  successful 
candidate  must  be  able  to  move  quickly 

■  320 

to  get  the  right  things  done.  Audits  are 
responded  to  in  a  timely  fashion,  the 
board  of  directors  is  clear  on  the  impact 
of information security investments, and 
core data assets are well protected.

 2.  Strategic  orientation:  As  mentioned 
earlier,  the  CISO  must  be  a  strategically 
oriented  partner  with  critical  thinking 
skills.  He  or  she  must  process  disparate 
information  and  generate  valuable 
insight  regarding  external  issues  such 
as shifts in threats and countermeasures 
and  internal  matters  such  as  business 
implications  of 
information  security 
policies and protocols.

 3.  Transformational leadership: Regardless 
of  the  context  into  which  the  new  CISO 
is taking the helm—after a major breach, 
under  the  glare  of  heightened  board 
scrutiny, or with an acquisition that must 
be  integrated—he  or  she  will  need  to 
transform  systems  to  address  current 
challenges,  creating  a  vision  others  buy 
into and moving the organization forward 
while  keeping  day-to-day  operations 
running smoothly.

 4.  Relationship  management:  The  CISO 
must  be  able  to  lead  in  a  matrixed 
environment,  working  diplomatically 
with  a  range  of  constituencies  with 
different  perspectives  on  information 
security,  including  the  board,  the  CEO, 
the  CFO,  the  COO,  and  general  counsel. 
to  managing 
In  addition 
internal 
relationships, 
the  CISO  must  also 
leverage  external  networks  that  include 
peers  at  other  organizations,  Internet 
service  providers,  third-party  security 
solution  vendors,  and  law  enforcement 
and intelligence agencies. The CISO must 
have the gravitas and infl uence necessary 
to  communicate  effectively  with  each  of 
these  internal  and  external  groups  in  a 
range of conditions, from off-site strategy 
sessions to emergency response.

 5.  Team  leadership:  Most  organizations 
focus  all  their  attention  on  fi lling  the 
CISO  position,  leaving  relatively  little 
energy  for  establishing  a  pipeline  of 
internal talent. This is understandable but 

  EVALUATING AND ATTRACTING YOUR NEXT CISO: MORE SOPHISTICATED APPROACHES FOR A MORE SOPHISTICATED ROLE 

shortsighted. Identifying and developing 
internal  information  security  leadership 
talent  is  critical  to  the  long-term  success 
of the function and should be considered 
part of the CISO’s role.

The future: How will the candidate adapt to change 
and unforeseen developments?
Looking  at  competencies  provides  a  more 
complete view of a candidate’s abilities than 
examining  just  professional  history.  But 
competency-based  assessment  has  its  own 
limitations in that it assumes the future will 
be  more  or  less  like  the  past  or  present.  It 
does  not  measure  a  person’s  ability  to 
respond  to  fundamental  changes  such  as 
those brought about by the current waves of 
digital  transformation.  Someone  who  looks 
highly qualifi ed on paper and presents well 
thus can fall short of expectations as condi-
tions  become  highly  complex  and  ambigu-
ous.  Also,  looking  at  only  experience  and 
competencies  means  the  organization  risks 
overlooking  candidates  who  may  seem 
underprepared  today  but  with  suffi cient 
support would be best suited for the future.
In  Egon  Zehnder’s  examination  of  the 
assessments  of  thousands  of  senior  execu-
tives, we discovered that those who fl ourished 
in the face of volatility, complexity, uncertain-
ty,  and  ambiguity  shared  four  traits,  which 
collectively  we  call  potential.  The  four  ele-
ments of potential are the following:

 1.  Curiosity:  A  penchant  for  seeking  out 
new experiences, knowledge, and candid 
feedback,  as  well  as  an  openness  to 
learning and change

 2.  Insight:  The  ability  to  gather  and  make 
sense of information to suggest previously 
unseen opportunities and threats

 3.  Engagement: A knack for using emotion 
and logic for communicating a persuasive 
vision and connecting with people

 4.  Determination: The resilience to fi ght for 
diffi cult  goals  despite  challenges  and  to 
bounce back from adversity.

The  elements  of  potential  add  an  extra 
dimension  to  what  is  learned  from  a 

competency-based  evaluation  in  the  same 
way that examining competencies provides 
much  more  depth  than  merely  looking  at 
work  history.  None  of  these  elements  are 
sufficient  on  their  own  for  identifying 
how a given candidate will respond to the 
unfolding challenges of the CISO role, but 
in combination they produce a vivid, and 
in  our  experience,  highly  accurate,  por-
trait  and  predictor.  These  added  dimen-
sions  are  particularly  important  because 
of how much the CISO role has changed in 
the  last  several  years.  Few  CISOs  have 
established track records acting as the sort 
of strategic leaders—rather than technical 
managers—that  the  role  requires  today. 
The  attributes  of  potential  add  another 
element  to  help  identify  who  is  likely  to 
successfully navigate this leap.

But the above framework is only that—
the  quality  of  its  output  depends  on  the 
quality  of  the  input.  Without  a  concerted 
effort,  reliable  input  can  be  diffi cult  to 
obtain in CISO evaluations because of the 
tendency of data-security function to move 
quickly  from  crisis  to  crisis,  leaving  little 
concrete evidence of who did what when. 
The  key  to  obtaining  the  needed  level  of 
detail is in-depth interviews with multiple 
informed  references.  Doing  so  requires 
the ability to tap an extensive professional 
network.

Because  of  the  number  of  factors  being 
weighed, it is important to not merely collect 
observations  for  each  quality  being  exam-
ined  but  to  place  the  candidate  on  a  scale 
based on average performance in the indus-
try.  Some  organizations  also  complement 
candidate and reference interviews with psy-
chometric testing to provide another layer of 
objective input for the evaluation process.

■  Positioning the role
The market for top-tier CISOs is now highly 
competitive. 
Information  security  has 
become  a  high-profi le  corporate  concern, 
and the bar has been raised on the pool of 
qualifi ed candidates. By one estimate there 
were 2,700 CISO job openings in the United 
States in June 2015. So even if organizations 

  321  ■

CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

are  able  to  effectively  evaluate  candidates 
against  current  and  future  requirements, 
they must also be prepared from the start to 
actively sell the opportunity to an audience 
that is naturally skeptical.

In our experience, every CISO candidate 
asks four overarching questions when evalu-
ating an opportunity:

 1.  “Who  is  my  sponsor  and  how  much 
infl uence  does  he  or  she  have?”  This 
is  likely  to  be  the  fi rst  question  on  the 
CISO candidate’s mind, and he or she is 
thinking about this issue in at least two 
specifi c ways. First, although the CISO is 
likely to have some interaction with the 
board and C-suite, there will still be many 
conversations that affect the information 
security  function  to  which  the  CISO 
will  not  be  privy. As  a  result,  the  CISO 
will  have  to  rely  his  or  her  supervisor 
to  act  as  an  effective  intermediary  in 
advocating  for  resources  and  policy 
initiatives  and  in  educating  the  board 
and CEO on information security issues 
as  they  unfold.  Second,  when  the  CISO 
needs  to  take  an  unpopular  position  to 
strengthen an organization’s information 
security  profi le,  he  or  she  has  to  know 
there will be support in high places.

 2.  “How  deep 

is 

the  organization’s 
commitment  to  information  security?” 
This  is  more  than  a  question  of  staff 
and  budget  allocation,  although  those 
elements  are  certainly  important.  The 
CISO wants to know that the C-suite and 
the board appreciate the complexity and 
uncertainty at the core of the information 
security function and the need for making 
everyone  in  the  organization,  top  to 
bottom,  responsible  for  security.  For  the 
CISO to be successful, he or she must be 
empowered  to  act  and  be  armed  with 
the necessary resources to deploy both in 
times  of  normalcy  and  crisis.  Although 
the  CISO  expects  organizations  to  have 
high  standards,  he  or  she  will  avoid 
enterprises who refl exively cycle through 
security teams.

■  322 

 3.  “What key performance indicators will I 
be measured against?” Given that every 
large organization must assume that it is 
continually  under  cyberattack,  it  follows 
that  security  breaches  are  a  matter  of 
not  “if”  but  “when.”  Therefore,  it  is  not 
realistic for a company to hold its CISO to 
a “one strike and you’re out” performance 
benchmark.  The  conversation  about 
expectations  is  just  as  important  as  the 
ones about resources, reporting lines, and 
compensation.

 4.  “Where  will  I  be  in  fi ve  years?”  Those 
who lead the information security function 
are  like  other  functional  leaders  in  their 
range  of  career  ambitions.  For  some,  the 
opportunity to lead the function at a quality 
organization  is  the  goal;  others,  however, 
are looking ahead to a CIO role or even a 
broader role in organizational leadership. It 
is important to understand each candidate’s 
desires  against  what  the  organization  can 
offer. Remember that the CISO’s reporting 
relationship will be one factor that frames 
this issue in his or her mind.

Long gone are the days when an argument 
had  to  be  made  regarding  the  strategic 
importance of information security. In most 
organizations,  the  CISO  role  now  has  the 
weight and sophistication its responsibilities 
require. Organizations can assess the state of 
their CISO recruitment and assessment strat-
egies  by  asking  themselves  the  following 
four questions:

 1.  Have we identifi ed the CISO’s full range 
of  strategic  responsibilities  and  the 
competencies needed to be successful?

 2.  Do  we  have  a  consistent  methodology 
for  evaluating  a  candidate  against  those 
responsibilities?

 3.  Have  we  reviewed  the  CISO  reporting 
relationship  against  the 
information 
security  context  of  the  organization 
to  ensure  that  the  CISO  is  adequately 
empowered 
the 
organization’s 
security 
goals?

to 
information 

accomplish 

  EVALUATING AND ATTRACTING YOUR NEXT CISO: MORE SOPHISTICATED APPROACHES FOR A MORE SOPHISTICATED ROLE 

 4.  Do  we  have  an  adequate  professional 
development program in place to support 
the CISO and his or her team to help them 
meet  the  standards  demanded  by  the 
function’s heightened importance?

From the answers to these questions, organi-
zations can then begin to make the necessary 

to  ensure 

adjustments 
the 
approach  and  tools  to  identify  and  attract 
the information security talent that can per-
form at the level the position now requires.

they  have 

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  323  ■

Contributor Profi les

Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

    

New York Stock Exchange
11 Wall Street
New York, New York 10005
Tel +1 212 748 4000
Web www.nyse.com

TOM FARLEY
President, NYSE Group
Tom Farley is President of the NYSE Group, 
which includes the New York Stock Exchange 
and  a  diverse  range  of  equity  and  equity 
options  exchanges,  all  wholly  owned  sub-
sidiaries  of 
Intercontinental  Exchange 
(NYSE/ICE).  Mr.  Farley  joined  the  NYSE 
when ICE acquired NYSE Euronext in 2013, 
serving as Chief Operating Offi cer. He held 
previous  roles  at  ICE,  including  SVP  of 
Financial Markets and President and COO of 
ICE  Futures  U.S.,  formerly  the  New  York 
Board of Trade.

Prior  to  joining  ICE,  Mr.  Farley  was 
President  of  SunGard  Kiodex,  a  risk  man-
agement technology provider to the deriva-
tives  markets.  He  has  also  held  various 
positions 
investment  banking  at 
Montgomery  Securities  and  in  private 
equity  at  Gryphon  Investors.  Mr.  Farley 
holds a BA degree in Political Science from 
Georgetown University and is a Chartered 
Financial Analyst.

in 

NYSE GOVERNANCE SERVICES
55 East 52nd St, 40th Floor
New York, New York 10005
Tel +1 212 323 8500

ADAM SODOWICK
President, NYSE Governance Services
Email Adam.Sodowick@nyse.com
Adam  Sodowick  is  currently  President  of 
NYSE  Governance  Services  after  serving  as 
Chief  Operating  Offi cer,  where  he  was 

responsible  for  Product,  Market  Strategy, 
and Marketing.

Prior  to  NYSE  Governance  Services, 
Mr.  Sodowick  founded  True  Offi ce  in  2010 
to solve a long-standing problem: the tedi-
um and high cost of regulatory compliance 
training.  Recognizing  that  humans  are 
hardwired  to  learn  via  stories  and  play, 
True  Offi ce  creates  data-rich  desktop  and 
mobile  compliance  apps  that  help  compa-
nies identify risk, save money, and educate 
employees  on  complex  and  risk-sensitive 
business issues in a fun way.

Since  its  launch,  True  Offi ce  has  experi-
enced a steep growth trajectory and has been 
adopted as the compliance training solution 
of  choice  for  many  Fortune  500  companies. 
True Offi ce has won multiple awards across 
the  GRC,  Technology,  and  Innovation  seg-
ments and has been featured prominently in 
many media outlets, including the BBC, the 
Wall  Street  Journal,  Forbes,  Fortune’s  annual 
500 Issue, and more.

Initially  backed  by  Morgan  Stanley 
Strategic  Investments,  The  Partnership  for 
New York City Fund and Rho Ventures, True 
Offi ce  was  acquired  by  Intercontinental 
Exchange, parent company of the New York 
Stock Exchange in October 2014.

Prior to founding True Offi ce, Mr. Sodowick 
was  the  co-founder  and  CEO  of  50  Lessons. 
During this time, Mr. Sodowick pioneered the 
creation  of  the  award-winning  ‘50  Lessons 
Digital Business Library.’

Today, 50 Lessons is widely recognized as 
the world’s pre-eminent collection of multi-
media  business  insights  from  global  busi-
ness  leaders.  These  assets  are  housed  in  a 
digital library and sold via various channels 
to  more  than  350  corporate  customers  and 
academic institutions globally.

Mr.  Sodowick  envisioned  and  led  the 
publishing initiative behind the best-selling 
Lessons Learned: Straight Talk From The World’s 
Top  Business  Leaders,  a  set  of  24  books  pub-
lished  by  Harvard  Business  School  Press. 
Initially backed by the BBC, 50 Lessons was 
acquired by Skillsoft in 2011.

  327  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Intercontinental Exchange 
5660 New Northside Drive NW
3rd Floor
Atlanta, Georgia 30328
Tel +1 770 857 4700
Web www.intercontinentalexchange.com

JERRY PERULLO
Chief Information Security Offi cer
Email jerry.perullo@theice.com
Jerry  Perullo  has  led  the  Information 
Security  program  at 
Intercontinental 
Exchange,  Inc.  (NYSE:ICE)  since  2001. As 
Chief  Information  Security  Officer,  he  is 
responsible  for  the  security  of  ICE’s 
heavily regulated exchanges and clearing-
houses,  including  the  New  York  Stock 
Exchange.

Mr. Perullo is an active participant in the 
Financial  Services  Sector  Coordinating 
Council  (FSSCC)  and  Financial  Services 
Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Center 
(FS-ISAC), where he serves as Chair of the 
Clearinghouse  and  Exchange  Forum 
(CHEF).  He  also  co-founded  the  Global 
Exchange  Cyber  Security  (GLEX)  working 
group  under  the  World  Federation  of 
Exchanges  and  serves  on  several  industry 
and  customer  advisory  boards  within  the 
cybersecurity industry.

Prior to ICE, Mr. Perullo was a Principal 
Consultant  at  Digital  Consulting  and 
Software  Services  providing  information 
security  testing  and  consulting  services  to 
the  health-care,  energy,  and  data  service 
industries  and  built  an  Internet  Service 
Provider in the mid 1990s.

Mr. Perullo studied Computer Engineering 
at  Clemson  University  and  earned  a  BS 
degree in Legal Studies from the University 
of Maryland and an MBA from Georgia State 
University.

■  328 

Palo Alto Networks Inc.
4401 Great America Parkway
Santa Clara, California 95054
Tel +1 408 753 4000
Web www.paloaltonetworks.com

MARK D. MCLAUGHLIN
Chairman, President, and CEO
Mark D. McLaughlin joined as president and 
CEO  of  Palo  Alto  Networks  in  August  of 
2011 and became Chairman of the Board in 
2012.  Previously  Mr.  McLaughlin  served  as 
President  and  CEO  of  Verisign.  Prior  to 
Verisign, he was the Vice President of Sales 
and  Business  Development  for  Signio  and 
was instrumental in driving the acquisition 
of Signio by Verisign in 1999. Before joining 
Signio, he was the Vice President of Business 
Development for Gemplus, the world’s lead-
ing  smart-card  company.  Previous 
to 
Gemplus, he also served as General Counsel 
of  Caere  Corporation  and  practiced  law  as 
an  attorney  with  Cooley  Godward  Kronish 
LLP. In 2014 President Obama appointed Mr. 
McLaughlin as the Chairman of the National 
Security  Telecommunications  Advisory 
Committee  (NSTAC).  He  received  his  JD, 
magna  cum  laude,  from  Seattle  University 
School  of  Law  and  his  BS  degree  from  the 
U.S. Military Academy at West Point.

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

DAVIS Y. HAKE
Director of Cybersecurity Strategy
As  Director  of  Cybersecurity  Strategy, 
Davis  Y.  Hake  is  responsible  for  building 
and  sharing  the  company’s  strategy  for 
cybersecurity thought leadership and deliv-
ering  valuable  information,  insights,  and 
instructional  tools  on  all  things  related  to 
cyberthreats and today’s security landscape. 
Prior to joining Palo Alto Networks in 2015, 
Mr.  Hake  was  a  leader  in  U.S.  government 
cybersecurity serving in the White House, at 
senior levels in the Department of Homeland 
Security, and as a policy expert for the U.S. 
Congress.  Mr.  Hake  also  drafted  some  of 
the  fi rst  comprehensive  cybersecurity  legis-
lation,  for  which  he  received  a  Federal  100 
Award  for  leadership  in  the  IT  community. 
He  is  a  graduate  of  the  University  of 
California–Davis, where he studied interna-
tional relations and economics and received 
a Masters degree in Strategic Security Studies 
from the National Defense University.

Axio Global, LLC
77 Water Street, 8th Floor
New York, New York 10005
Tel +1 708 420 8611
Web www.axioglobal.com

SCOTT KANNRY
Chief Executive Offi cer
Email skannry@axioglobal.com
Scott Kannry is the Chief Executive Offi cer of 
Axio  Global.  Mr.  Kannry’s  entire  career  has 
been  in  the  commercial  insurance  industry 
with a focus on cyber and previously spent 
10  years  in  the  Financial  Services  Group  at 
Aon. He works with clients in all industries 
but specializes in those with evolving cyber 
risks,  such  as  energy,  utility,  transportation, 
and  manufacturing.  Mr.  Kannry  has  been 

awarded  the  Risk  and  Insurance  Magazine 
“Power Broker” distinction and was named 
to Business Insurance Magazine’s inaugural 
“Top  40  under  40”  brokerage  honor  roll 
and 2014 Rising Star by Reactions magazine. 
Mr. Kannry received a BS and BA from Case 
Western  Reserve  University,  a  JD  from  the 
Northwestern  School  of  Law,  and  his  MBA 
from the Kellogg School of Management.

DAVID W. WHITE
Co-Founder and Chief Knowledge Offi cer
Email dwhite@axioglobal.com
David  W.  White  is  a  founder  and  Chief 
Knowledge Offi cer at Axio Global. Axio is a 
cyber risk-engineering fi rm that helps organi-
zations 
implement  more  comprehensive 
cyber risk management based on an approach 
that  harmonizes  cybersecurity  technology/
controls  and  cyber  risk  transfer.  Mr.  White 
works  directly  with  Axio  clients  and  is 
responsible for the frameworks and methods 
that guide Axio’s services, including cyberse-
curity  program  evaluation  and  benchmark-
ing,  cyber  loss  scenario  development  and 
analysis,  insurance  program  analysis,  and 
data analytics.

Previously,  Mr.  White  worked  in  the 
CERT  Program  at  Carnegie  Mellon’s 
Software  Engineering  Institute,  a  cyberse-
curity  research  program  primarily  funded 
by the U.S. Department of Defense and the 
U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security. 
While there, he was responsible for techni-
cal  leadership  and  research  strategy  for  a 
portfolio  of  cybersecurity  and  resilience 
maturity  models  and  frameworks  and 
associated  research,  diagnostic  methods, 
and training.

Mr. White served as chief architect for the 
Electricity Subsector Cybersecurity Capability 
Maturity Model (ES-C2M2) and served on the 
review  team  for  the  oil-and-natural-gas  ver-
sion  (ONG-C2M2)  and  industry-agnostic 
version  (C2M2).  Mr.  White  co-authored  the 
CERT Resilience Management Model (CERT-
RMM) and served as the chief architect for the 
Smart Grid Maturity Model (SGMM).

  329  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Baker & McKenzie
815 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20006
Tel +1 202 452 7000
Web www.bakermckenzie.com

DAVID C. LASHWAY
Partner
Email david.lashway@bakermckenzie.com
David C. Lashway leads Baker & McKenzie’s 
global  cybersecurity  practice  and  is  located 
in Washington, DC. He focuses his practice in 
the  areas  of  crisis  management,  internal 
investigations,  and  complex  criminal,  civil 
and administrative litigation and has signifi -
cant experience advising clients with respect 
to  various  aspects  of  cybersecurity-related 
matters. Mr. Lashway is a sought-after law-
yer who advises the Fortune 100 on the full 
lifecycle  of  enterprise  risks  associated  with 
information  security,  including  before,  dur-
ing,  and  after  a  network  breach,  as  well  as 
federal  regulatory  and  criminal  matters.  He 
regularly  conducts  global  investigations 
around the theft or compromise of confi den-
tial data and is repeatedly called upon to liti-
gate  post-data  breach  issues.  His  clients 
include  investment  banks,  publicly  traded 
and  private  companies,  trade  associations, 
and  individual  managers,  and  his  matters 
span the globe.

JOHN W. WOODS, JR.
Partner
Email john.woods@bakermckenzie.com
John  W.  Woods  is  a  partner  in  Baker  & 
McKenzie’s  Washington,  DC,  offi ce.  He 
co-leads  the  cybersecurity  practice.  His 
practice in the cybersecurity area focuses on 
internal  investigations,  data  security  com-
pliance, privacy litigation, and information 

■  330 

governance  advice.  He  routinely  counsels 
companies  victimized  by  cybercriminals 
to  investigate  the  underlying  incident, 
coordinate  with  law  enforcement,  and 
manage  consumer-related  civil  litigation 
and  regulatory  investigations.  Mr.  Woods 
has  signifi cant  experience  handling  gov-
ernment 
investigations  and  business 
crimes,  privacy  litigation,  class  actions, 
information  governance,  and  electronic 
discovery  matters.  He  regularly  oversees 
and  advises  on  the  intersection  between 
data  protection  issues  and  data  collection 
issues  associated  with  internal  investiga-
tions and litigations.

NADIA BANNO
Counsel, Dispute Resolution
Nadia  Banno  joined  Baker  &  McKenzie’s 
Dispute Resolution department in London as 
Of Counsel in September 2014. She previously 
held the position of Head of Litigation at the 
BBC,  where  she  regularly  advised  the 
Executive Board and senior management on a 
wide  range  of  high-value,  high-profi le  dis-
putes  and  investigations.  Ms.  Banno  advises 
clients  in  the  areas  of  regulatory  and  public 
law, defamation and media law, data protec-
tion, freedom of information, and commercial 
disputes. She also advises clients on the legal 
aspects of crisis and reputation management, 
including  handling  internal  investigations 
and  appearing  before  Parliamentary  Select 
Committees.

BRANDON H. GRAVES
Associate
Email brandon.graves@bakermckenzie.com
Brandon H. Graves is a member of Baker & 
McKenzie’s  global  cybersecurity  practice 
and  is  located  in  Washington,  DC.  He 
has  extensive  experience  in  conducting 
investigations  and  advising  clients  before, 
during, and after cybersecurity incidents. He 
represents  clients  in  a  variety  of  industries 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

on  incident  response  matters  and  related 
disputes.  Mr.  Graves  was  formerly  a 
law clerk for Judge J. L. Edmondson of the 
United  States  Court  of  Appeals  for  the 
Eleventh  Circuit.  Before  graduating  from 
the  University  of  Virginia  School  of  Law, 
he  was  an 
the 
25th  Infantry  Division  with  service  in 
Iraq.  He  holds  a  BS  degree  in  Computer 
Science  from  the  United  States  Military 
Academy at West Point.

infantry  officer 

in 

BakerHostetler
45 Rockefeller Plaza
New York, New York 10111-0100
Tel +1 212 589 4200
Web www.bakerlaw.com

THEODORE J. KOBUS
Partner and Co-Leader, Privacy and Data 
Protection
Email tkobus@bakerlaw.com
Theodore  J.  Kobus  is  national  leader  of  the 
BakerHostetler’s Privacy and Data Protection 
team. Mr. Kobus focuses his practice in the 
area of privacy and data security. He advises 
clients,  trade  groups,  and  organizations 
regarding  data  security  and  privacy  risks, 
including  compliance,  developing  breach 
response  strategies,  defense  of  regulatory 
actions, and defense of class action litigation. 
Mr.  Kobus  counsels  clients  involved  in 
breaches  implicating  domestic  and  interna-
tional  laws,  as  well  as  other  regulations 
and  requirements.  Having  led  more  than 
800  data  breach  responses,  Mr.  Kobus  has 
respected  relationships  with  regulators 
involved in privacy concerns as well as deep 
experience  to  help  clients  confront  privacy 
issues  during  the  compliance  risk  manage-
ment stages. He is invested in his client rela-
tionships  and  approaches  engagements 
practically and thoughtfully. He is ranked in 

Chambers  USA  and  was  one  of  only  three 
attorneys  named  an  MVP  by  Law360  for 
Privacy & Consumer Protection in 2013.

CRAIG A. HOFFMAN
Partner
Email cahoffman@bakerlaw.com
Craig A. Hoffman provides proactive coun-
sel  on  the  complex  regulatory  issues  that 
arise from data collection and use, including 
customer  communications,  data  analytics, 
emerging  payments,  cross  border  transfers, 
and  security  incident  response  prepared-
ness.  He  uses  his  experience  as  a  litigator 
and works with hundreds of companies who 
have faced security incidents to help clients 
develop  a  practical  approach  to  meet  their 
business goals in a way that minimizes regu-
latory  risk.  Mr.  Hoffman  conducts  incident 
response workshops—built upon applicable 
notifi cation laws and guidelines, “good” and 
“bad” examples from other incidents, and a 
tabletop  exercise—to  prepare  companies 
to  respond  to  security  incidents  quickly, 
effi ciently,  and  in  a  manner  that  complies 
with  applicable  law  while  mitigating  risk 
and  preserving  customer  relationships. 
Mr.  Hoffman  also  serves  as  the  editor  of 
BakerHostetler’s Data Privacy Monitor blog, 
providing commentary on developments in 
data  privacy,  security,  social  media,  and 
behavioral advertising.

F. PAUL PITTMAN
Associate
Email ppittman@bakerlaw.com
F. Paul Pittman provides guidance to clients 
in responding to data security incidents and 
data breaches, ensuring that they meet their 
response and notifi cation obligations under 
state  and 
laws. 
Mr. Pittman also advises clients on data pri-
vacy  and  security  issues  that  may  arise  in 
their  business  and  assists  them  with  the 
development  of  data  privacy  notices  and 

federal  data  privacy 

  331  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

policies to ensure compliance with applica-
ble laws and industry standards. In addition, 
he counsels clients on the permissible collec-
tion of data and usage in online advertising 
in  compliance  with  online  and  mobile  data 
standards. Mr. Pittman also offers his clients 
extensive experience defending against com-
plex  class  action  and  state  attorney  general 
litigation.

Booz Allen Hamilton
8283 Greensboro Drive
Hamilton Building
McLean, Virginia 22102
Tel +1 703 902 5000
Web www.boozallen.com

WILLIAM (BILL) STEWART
Executive Vice President
Email Stewart_William@bah.com
William  (Bill)  Stewart  currently  leads  the 
Commercial  Cyber  Business  for  Booz  Allen 
Hamilton.  In  this  role  he  leads  teams  that 
develop  strategies  and  implement  solutions 
for  the  most  complex  issues  facing  Private 
Sector  Organizations.  He  has  more  than 
25  years  of  professional  experience  building 
consulting and systems integration businesses.
Mr.  Stewart  is  responsible  for  providing 
services that appropriately balance risk and 
resource expenditure. Current clients include 
C-suite executives as well as senior govern-
ment  offi cials.  Mr.  Stewart  has  extensive 
experience  envisioning,  designing,  and 
deploying  solutions  that  enhance  business 
performance. He helps clients create cutting 
edge  strategies  that  optimize  and  secure 
critical business systems.

Mr.  Stewart  and  his  team  help  clients 
develop  state-of-the-art  cyber  solutions, 
including  Threat  Intelligence,  Advanced 
Adversary Hunt, Incident Response, Insider 
Threat,  and  Identity  and  Access  Control. 
Mr. Stewart also led Booz Allen Hamilton’s 
Cyber  Technology  Center  of  Excellence 

■  332 

(COE)  with  more  than  3000  staff  members, 
and he built a large Technology Consulting 
and  Integration  Business  focused  on  the 
U.S. government.

Before  joining  Booz  Allen,  Mr.  Stewart 
worked for a major electronics fi rm, where he 
developed  communications  security  and  key 
management  devices.  He  also  served  as  a 
Signal Offi cer, Battalion Commander, Brigade/
Battalion S-3, and Company Commander in 
the U.S. Army.

He holds a BS degree in Engineering from 
Widener  University  and  an  MS  degree  in 
Electrical Engineering from Drexel University.

JASON ESCARAVAGE
Vice President
Email Escaravage_Jason@bah.com
Jason  Escaravage  is  a  leader  in  the  Strategic 
Innovation  Group  for  Booz Allen  Hamilton. 
With a focus on Digital Services and Solutions, 
he  drives  the  integration  of  Global  Threat 
solutions for the fi rm’s Predictive Intelligence 
division. He is an expert in the systems devel-
opment  lifecycle,  software  solution  design 
and development, and intelligence support to 
real-world mission operations.

Mr.  Escaravage  is  recognized  for  leading 
large-scale,  complex  information  technology 
(IT) and analytical support programs support-
ing government and commercial clients and in 
multiple  focus  areas,  including  conventional 
operations,  counter-terrorism,  anti-money 
laundering,  and  cyberthreat  analysis.  He  has 
led  teams  of  global/cyberthreat  intelligence 
analysts  in  support  of  U.S.  government  and 
commercial  customers  focused  on  collecting, 
processing,  and  fusing  data  to  create  action-
able intelligence. He holds a degree in Military 
History  and  Computer  Science  from  Rutgers 
University  and 
is  a  certified  Project 
Management Professional (PMP).

SEDAR LABARRE
Vice President
Email Labarre_Sedar@bah.com 
Sedar LaBarre is a Vice President with Booz 
Allen  Hamilton,  where  he  leads  the  fi rm’s 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

commercial  High-Tech  Manufacturing 
Practice. He has more than 18 years of practi-
cal consulting experience—providing clients 
with  unique  advisory  services  equally  bal-
anced  in  strategy  and  functional  expertise. 
Mr. Labarre leads a multi-disciplinary team 
focused  on  helping  companies  realize  tech-
nology-enabled growth from advanced ana-
lytics, military grade cyber, and cutting-edge 
IT transformation.

Mr. Labarre is a recognized international 
expert  in  cybersecurity  standards  and  was 
the  chief  architect  of  Booz Allen’s  CyberM3 
reference model. He has worked extensively 
within  all  sectors  of  the  U.S.  government 
(cabinet-level  agencies,  all  branches  of  the 
military, the intelligence community, as well 
as several small to micro government agen-
cies);  public  sector  clients  in  the  United 
Kingdom, Europe, and the Middle East; and 
within  the  private  sector  areas  of  fi nancial 
services,  retail,  telecommunications,  con-
sumer  products,  industrial  manufacturing, 
and automotive.

for 

the 

she 

LORI ZUKIN
Principal
Email Zukin_Lori@bah.com
Lori  Zukin  is  a  leader  with  Booz  Allen 
Hamilton,  where 
leads  People 
Innovations 
firm’s  Strategic 
Innovations Group. She has led engagements 
for  clients  in  the  public  and  private  sectors 
and engaged with them to solve their tough-
est organizational challenges. She has direct-
ed  several  high-profi le  projects  for  federal 
and commercial organizations, providing tal-
ent  management  expertise  to  help  them 
improve the bottom line. 

Most  recently,  Ms.  Zukin  worked  with  a 
global pharmaceutical company to dramati-
cally  improve  how  a  newly  formed  senior 
leadership team manages and measures per-
formance while reducing risk during a period 
of signifi cant growth. In other client engage-
ments she has worked with large organiza-
tions  to  help  them  implement  cutting  edge 
solutions  for  cyber  talent  management  and 
leadership  development.  She  was  also 

instrumental  in  developing  Booz  Allen’s 
CyberSim  tool,  an  immersive  training  and 
assessment  tool  used  to  select,  train,  and 
place cyber professionals.

Ms.  Zukin  holds  a  Doctorate  degree  in 
Organizational  Psychology  from  George 
Mason University and a Master’s degree in 
Organizational  Psychology  from  Columbia 
University.  She  also  holds  a  certifi cate  in 
leadership  coaching 
from  Georgetown 
University. She is a certifi ed executive coach 
through 
International  Coaching 
Federation.  Ms.  Zukin  is  on  the  faculty  at 
Georgetown  University’s 
for 
Transformational  Leadership  and  served  as 
a  coach  for  the  inaugural  class  of  the 
Presidential  Leadership  Scholars  Program 
created by former Presidents George W. Bush 
and Bill Clinton.

Institute 

the 

DENIS COSGROVE
Senior Associate
Email Cosgrove_Denis@bah.com 
Denis  Cosgrove  is  a  leader  in  Booz  Allen 
Hamilton’s 
Commercial  High-Tech 
Manufacturing  business,  where  he  is  an 
advisor to senior clients and oversees project 
teams  delivering  strategy  and  analytical 
solutions.  His  recent  client  engagements 
include  working  with  staff  members  of  a 
major automaker to reimagine their approach 
to vehicle cybersecurity and partnering with 
them  to  build  new  capabilities.  Within  the 
fi rm, he drives thought leadership for brand-
ing  and  intellectual  capital.  Mr.  Cosgrove 
previously  worked  with  clients  in  the  U.S. 
government national security market, devel-
oping new methods in risk analytics.

Prior to joining Booz Allen, he served as a 
Senior  Associate  Scholar  at  the  Center  for 
European Policy Analysis and taught under-
graduate  courses  in  philosophy.  He  earned 
graduate  degrees  studying  political  philoso-
phy at the University of Chicago and interna-
tional  relations  at  Georgetown  University. 
Mr. Cosgrove has published essays on foreign 
policy and presents an annual graduate-level 
lecture on strategy in Machiavelli’s The Prince 
at Johns Hopkins University.

  333  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

MATTHEW DOAN
Senior Associate
Email Doan_Matthew@bah.com
Matthew  Doan 
leads  Booz  Allen’s 
Commercial  Cyber  Strategy  practice  while 
also serving as a leader in the fi rm’s High-
Tech Manufacturing business. He specializ-
es  in  driving  innovative  cybersecurity 
and risk management solutions, particularly 
for  automotive,  industrial,  and  consumer 
product companies. Mr. Doan provides fun-
damental knowledge in large-scale maturity 
assessments,  enterprise  risk  management, 
strategic  planning,  organizational  change 
management, and governance.

Mr. Doan has an array of experiences in 
consulting  C-suites,  boards,  and  other  sen-
ior  decision  makers  in  driving  important 
changes that effectively reduce business risk 
and  capture  new  opportunity.  Mr.  Doan 
holds  an  MA  in  Security  Studies  from 
Georgetown  University  and  a  BBA  in 
Computer Information Systems from James 
Madison  University,  as  well  as  a  Graduate 
Certifi cate  in  Applied  Intelligence  from 
Mercyhurst University.

TONY GAIDHANE
Senior Associate
Email Gaidhane_Tony@bah.com
Tony Gaidhane is a dynamic and innovative 
information  security  leader  with  a  strong 
background  in  implementing  IT  security, 
compliance  (including  NIST  and  ISO),  pri-
vacy, and risk management. His most recent 
experience  includes  diverse  engagements 
such as leading the assessment of high-risk 
technology  platforms  for  attack  surface 
reduction  for  a  large  retailer,  leading  the 
build of a Cyber Incident Response Playbook 
for a large fi nancial institution, and leading a 
supply  chain  cyber  risk  assessment  for  a 
large  high-tech  client.  Mr.  Gaidhane  has 
more than 17 years of experience with cyber-
security, and his experience includes manag-
ing  large  Affordable  Care  Act  implementa-
tions  in  multiple  states  for  Accenture,  as  a 
senior  leader  in  its  Information  Security 
Practice  and  as  a  Director  of  Information 

■  334 

Security  for  WellPoint,  Inc.  Mr.  Gaidhane 
holds  an  MBA  from  Duke  University’s 
Fuqua  School  of  Business  and  also  BS  and 
MS  degrees  in  Computer  Science  from 
Nagpur  University  (India)  and  Texas  Tech 
University,  respectively.  He  also  holds 
numerous  certifi cations,  such  as  the  PMP, 
CISSP,  CISM,  CGEIT,  CRISC,  CISA,  and 
CIPP/US 
in  the  fi elds  of  Information 
Security,  Audit,  Information  Privacy,  and 
Project Management.

JAMIE LOPEZ
Senior Associate
Email Lopez_Jamie@bah.com
Jamie  Lopez  is  a  leader  with  Booz  Allen 
Hamilton’s  Strategic  Innovation  Group, 
where  he  provides  thought  leadership  and 
talent solutions to his client base across the 
commercial  and  federal  sector.  He  helps 
drive  Booz Allen’s  TalentInsight™  Solutions 
focusing  on  Data  Science  and  Cyber  and 
Predictive  Intelligence.  In  addition  to  his 
core  consulting  and  advisory  duties, 
Dr. Lopez serves as the Booz Allen Program 
Manager  for  a  large  human  capital  vehicle, 
where he leads a sizable team in the devel-
opment of HR Shared Services, Competency 
Modeling,  Talent  Placement  &  Acquisition, 
Change Management, Promotional Systems, 
and Professional & Leadership Development.
Prior  to  joining  Booz  Allen  Hamilton, 
Dr.  Lopez  was  the  Vice  President  of  Lopez 
and  Associates 
thirty-year-old 
Industrial-Organizational  psychology  con-
sulting  company  focusing  on  commercial 
clients  in  the  fi nancial  services  and  utility 
sectors. In this capacity he specialized in tal-
ent  management,  individual  assessment, 
and personnel selection.

Inc.,  a 

Dr.  Lopez  completed  his  PhD 

in 
Industrial-Organizational  Psychology  at 
Hofstra  University  and  MA  degree  with  a 
Scholars  Designation  in  I/O  Psychology 
from  New  York  University’s  Graduate 
School  of  Arts.  He  also  holds  an  MBA  in 
Finance with a specialization in Trading and 
Portfolio  Management  from  the  Fordham 
Graduate  School  of  Business,  a  BA  in 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Psychology  from  the  College  of  the  Holy 
Cross, and an Advanced Graduate Certifi cate 
in  Counterintelligence  from  Mercyhurst 
University.

JAMES PERRY
Senior Associate
Email Perry_James@bah.com 
James Perry is a Chief Technologist in Booz 
Allen  Hamilton’s  Strategic 
Innovation 
Group, where he leads the commercial cyber 
incident  response  planning,  investigation, 
and  remediation  services  offerings,  includ-
ing  our  National  Security  Cyber Assistance 
Program  Certifi ed  Incident  Response  capa-
bility.  Mr.  Perry  works  with  chief  informa-
tion  security  offi cers,  security  operations 
center directors, and incident response teams 
across  fi nance,  retail,  energy,  health,  manu-
facturing,  and  public  sectors.  In  this  role, 
he helps organizations to design and imple-
ment Cyber Security Operations capabilities 
to  protect  from,  detect,  and  respond  to 
advanced  cyberthreats.  Mr.  Perry  leverages 
his experience supporting incident response 
investigations across multiple sectors to help 
these organizations prepare for and rapidly 
contain cyber incidents.

LAURA EISE
Lead Associate
Email Eise_Laura@bah.com
Laura  Eise  is  a  cybersecurity  consultant  in 
Booz  Allen’s  commercial  practice.  In  this 
role, she works with leaders across multiple 
industries  in  aligning  cybersecurity  pro-
grams to manage risk and meet the needs of 
the  business.  She  specializes  in  program-
matic  assessment,  incident  response,  enter-
prise risk management, strategy setting, and 
organizational design. Recently, she has led 
teams across the fi nancial, retail, and manu-
facturing  industries  to  create  three-year 
strategy roadmaps to improve their cyberse-
curity  programs.  Ms.  Eise  is  a  co-author  of 
the  CyberM3  maturity  model  and  co-leads 
the fi rm’s internal investment in the capabil-
ity.  She  is  also  an  Executive  Coach  and 
focuses  on  helping  leaders  and  leadership 

teams  achieve  signifi cant  organizational 
transformations. She is an Associate Business 
Continuity Manager with Disaster Recovery 
Institute International, a Certifi ed Information 
Privacy  Professional,  and  received  a  gradu-
ate certifi cate from University of Maryland in 
Cyber Security.

KATIE STEFANICH
Lead Associate
Email Stefanich_Katie@bah.com 
Katie  Stefanich  is  a  management  consultant 
that specializes in cyber incident management 
strategy,  cyber  education  and  outreach,  and 
crisis communication. She has strong experi-
ence  in  authoring  enterprise-wide  cyber 
incident  management  strategies  for  retail, 
energy,  and  high-tech  commercial  organiza-
tions. Ms. Stefanich helps clients understand 
cybersecurity in terms of risk management, as 
well as identify and build cross-organization 
relationships  for  smooth  incident  response. 
She  also  has  extensive  experience  providing 
strategic  counsel  to  startups,  entrepreneurs, 
and  organizations  interested  in  using  lean 
startup methodology. Prior to her time at Booz 
Allen, Ms. Stefanich implemented integrated 
marketing campaigns for high-tech commer-
cial organizations.

ERIN WEISS KAYA
Lead Associate
Email Weiss_Kaya_Erin@bah.com
Erin  Weiss  Kaya  is  a  Lead  Associate  with 
Booz  Allen  Hamilton.  She  has  more  than 
15 years of experience designing and manag-
ing strategic transformation programs, most 
recently serving as an external consultant on 
cybersecurity  workforce  and  organization 
issues  to  the  Department  of  Homeland 
Security  and  a  number  of  large  fi nancial 
services institutions. 

Ms. Weiss Kaya has served as an external 
consultant  to  Fortune  500  companies,  state 
government  agencies,  and  non-profi ts  and 
as  an  internal  strategic  advisor  and  execu-
tive.  She  has  led  large  projects  for  effective 
change implementations as well as cyberse-
curity  human  capital  strategies,  including 

  335  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

the  hiring,  compensation,  development, 
and  allocation  of  cybersecurity  workforce. 
She also manages Booz Allen’s internal ini-
tiative  in  Cybersecurity  Workforce  and 
Organization,  where  she  established  a  new 
service offering and designed a suite of tools 
to  support  clients  in  the  development  and 
maturation of their cybersecurity workforce 
capabilities. Ms. Weiss Kaya holds a BA from 
University of Maryland-College Park and a 
Masters degree from Columbia University.

project  management 

providing strategy, competitive analysis, pro-
cess  improvement,  organizational  design, 
and 
support 
to  commercial  and  government  clients. 
Ms.  Wong  works  with  clients  to  seize  busi-
ness  opportunities  while  navigating  risks 
around connected products and the data used 
to power them. She holds a Masters degree in 
City  and  Regional  Planning  from  Cornell 
University  and  a  BA  in  Political  Economy 
from the University of California, Berkeley.

CHRISTIAN PAREDES
Associate
Email Paredes_Christian@bah.com
Christian  Paredes  is  an  Associate  on  Booz 
Allen Hamilton’s Predictive Intelligence team 
within the fi rm’s Strategic Innovation’s Group 
(SIG), where he focuses on cyberthreat intel-
ligence (CTI) and CTI program development 
for commercial clients. Mr. Paredes has expe-
rience helping commercial clients to produce 
actionable  threat  intelligence  for  internal 
stakeholders at the operational and strategic 
levels. He has expertise in analytic tradecraft 
and  production  standards;  technical  threat 
intelligence;  intelligence  workfl ow  integra-
tion with security operations; and threat intel-
ligence  program  development.  He  has  also 
worked  with  global  organizations  to  assess 
their information security capabilities.

His emphasis on improving analytic qual-
ity  by  maximizing  analyst  time,  resources, 
workfl ows, tools, and data sources has helped 
clients  to  realize  value  in  their  cyberthreat 
intelligence  programs.  Mr.  Paredes  holds  an 
MS  degree  in  International  Affairs  from 
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology  and  a  BA 
degree  in  Political  Science  from  Georgia 
College & State University.

WAICHING WONG
Associate
Email Wong_Waiching@bah.com 
Waiching  Wong  is  part  of  Booz  Allen 
Hamilton’s high-tech manufacturing practice, 

■  336 

BuckleySandler LLP
1250 24th Street NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20037
Tel +1 202 349 8000
Web www.buckleysandler.com

ELIZABETH E. MCGINN
Partner
Email emcginn@buckleysandler.com
Elizabeth  E.  McGinn  is  a  partner  in  the 
Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  BuckleySandler 
LLP, where she assists clients in identifying, 
evaluating,  and  managing  risks  associated 
with privacy and information security prac-
tices  of  companies  and  third  parties. 
Ms. McGinn advises clients on privacy and 
data security policies, identity theft red fl ags 
programs, privacy notices, safeguarding and 
disposal  requirements,  and  information 
sharing  limitations.  She  also  has  assisted 
clients in addressing data security incidents 
and  complying  with  the  myriad  security 
breach  notifi cation  laws  and  other  U.S. 
state  and  federal  privacy  requirements. 
Ms. McGinn is a frequent speaker and author 
on a variety of topics, including privacy and 
data  security,  consumer  fi nancial  services 
litigation,  electronic  discovery,  and  vendor 
management.  Ms.  McGinn  received  her  JD, 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

cum  laude,  from  The  American  University, 
Washington  College  of  Law  in  2000,  and 
received  the  Mooers  Trial  Practice  Award. 
She  received  a  BS  from  St.  Lawrence 
University. Ms. McGinn has been recognized 
with the fi rm’s Privacy, Cyber Risk, and Data 
Security  practice  group  in  Legal  500  (2013 
and 2015).

RENA MEARS
Managing Director
Email rmears@buckleysandler.com
Rena  Mears  is  a  Managing  Director  at 
BuckleySandler  LLP,  where  she  focuses  on 
data risk, cybersecurity, and privacy. She has 
more  than  25  years’  experience  advising 
fi nancial  services,  hospitality,  technology, 
bio-tech,  and  consumer-focused  companies 
and boards on effective methods for address-
ing  data  asset  risks  while  operating  in  com-
plex  business  and  regulatory  environments. 
Prior  to  joining  BuckleySandler,  Ms.  Mears 
was  a  partner  in  a  Big  Four  advisory  fi rm’s 
Enterprise  Risk  Services  practice,  where  she 
founded and led the Global and U.S. Privacy 
and Data Protection practice. She has signifi -
cant  experience  building  and  implementing 
multinational and enterprise data risk, priva-
cy  and  security  programs,  performing  com-
pliance assessments, developing cybersecuri-
ty  initiatives,  and  leading  breach  response 
teams.  Ms.  Mears  has  served  on  industry 
standards committees and company advisory 
boards for privacy and security. She regularly 
researches,  speaks,  and  publishes  on  data 
risk, privacy, and cybersecurity and holds the 
CISSP, CIPP, CISA, and CITP certifi cations

STEPHEN (STEVE) M. RUCKMAN
Senior Associate
Email sruckman@buckleysandler.com
Stephen  (Steve)  M.  Ruckman  is  a  senior 
associate  in  the  Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of 
BuckleySandler,  where  his  practice  focuses 
on privacy, cyber risk, mobile payments, and 

data  security,  as  well  as  federal  and  state 
investigations and enforcement actions. 

Mr. Ruckman joined BuckleySandler from 
the  Federal  Communications  Commission, 
where he served as Senior Policy Advisor to 
Commission’s  Enforcement  Bureau  Chief, 
advising  him  on  enforcement  strategies  in 
the areas of privacy and data security.

Prior to his time at the FCC, Mr. Ruckman 
spent  fi ve  years  as  an  Assistant  Attorney 
General at the Maryland Attorney General’s 
offi ce, where he was the fi rst Director of the 
offi ce’s Internet Privacy Unit. The Unit played 
a leading role in several multistate investiga-
tions  into  practices  that  threatened  consum-
ers’ online privacy and security, including the 
largest privacy settlement in AG history.

Mr.  Ruckman  is  a  graduate  of  Yale  Law 

School and Yale Divinity School.

TIHOMIR YANKOV
Associate
Email tyankov@buckleysandler.com
Tihomir  Yankov  is  an  associate  in  the 
Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  BuckleySandler 
LLP.  Mr.  Yankov  represents  clients  in  a 
wide range of litigation matters, including 
class actions and complex civil litigation, as 
well as government enforcement matters. 

His  government  enforcement  experience 
includes  representing  clients  before  the 
Consumer  Financial  Protection  Bureau 
(CFPB),  the  New  York  Department  of 
Financial  Services  (DFS),  and  various  state 
regulators and attorneys general, as well as in 
cases involving unfair, deceptive, and abusive 
acts and practices (UDAAP). 

Mr. Yankov also counsels clients on elec-
tronic  discovery  issues,  including  matters 
related to document and data retention, data 
assessment,  data  extraction  strategies,  and 
pre-litigation discovery planning.

Mr. Yankov received his JD from American 
University (cum laude) and his BA from the 
University of Virginia.

  337  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

The Chertoff Group
1399 New York Avenue, NW
Suite 900
Washington, DC 20005
Tel +1 202 552 5280
Web www.chertoffgroup.com

MICHAEL CHERTOFF
Co-Founder and Executive Chairman
Email Emily.Dumont@chertoffgroup.com 
(assistant)
is  Co-Founder  and 
Michael  Chertoff 
Executive Chairman of The Chertoff Group, 
a premier global advisory fi rm that focuses 
exclusively  on  the  security  and  risk  man-
agement  sector  by  providing  consulting, 
mergers and acquisitions (M&A), and risk 
management  services  to  clients  seeking  to 
secure  and  grow  their  enterprises.  In  this 
role, Mr. Chertoff provides high-level stra-
tegic counsel to corporate and government 
leaders on a broad range of security issues, 
from  risk  identifi cation  and  prevention  to 
preparedness, response, and recovery.

From 2005 to 2009, Mr. Chertoff served as 
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS), where he led the federal gov-
ernment’s efforts to protect our nation from a 
wide  range  of  security  threats,  including 
blocking potential terrorists from crossing the 
United States border or allowing implemen-
tation of their plans on U.S. soil. Before lead-
ing  DHS,  Mr.  Chertoff  served  as  a  federal 
judge  on  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the 
Third  Circuit  and  earlier  headed  the  U.S. 
Department of Justice’s Criminal Division. In 
this role he investigated and prosecuted cases 
of political corruption, organized crime, and 
corporate fraud and terrorism—including the 
investigation of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.

■  338 

JIM PFLAGING
Principal
Email jim.pfl aging@chertoffgroup.com
Jim Pfl aging is the global lead for The Chertoff 
Group’s  business  strategy  practice.  Based  in 
Menlo  Park,  California,  Mr.  Pfl aging  works 
closely  with  leading  technology  companies, 
private equity investors, and system integra-
tors to identify, diligence, acquire and build, 
exciting companies. Based on dozens of suc-
cessful client engagements, Mr. Pfl aging has 
become a trusted advisor on technology and 
security  to  many  in  the  U.S.  Government 
and  private  industry.  Mr.  Pfl aging  has  more 
than  25  years  of  Silicon  Valley  experience 
including 15 years as chief executive offi cer of 
cybersecurity and data management compa-
nies. He serves on the board of several secu-
rity companies and is a frequent speaker on 
technology and security issues.

MARK WEATHERFORD
Principal
Email mark.weatherford@chertoffgroup.com 
or andrea.katzer@chertoffgroup.com 
(assistant)
Mark  Weatherford  is  a  Principal  at  The 
Chertoff Group, where he advises clients on a 
broad array of cybersecurity services. As one 
of the nation’s leading experts on cybersecuri-
ty, Mr. Weatherford works with organizations 
around the world to effectively manage today’s 
cyberthreats  by  creating  comprehensive 
security  strategies  that  can  be  incorporated 
into core business operations and objectives.
Prior  to  joining  The  Chertoff  Group, 
Mr.  Weatherford  served  as 
the  U.S. 
Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  fi rst 
Deputy Under Secretary for Cybersecurity. 
In this position, he worked with all critical 
infrastructure sectors as well as across the 
federal  government  to  create  more  secure 
network  operations  and  thwart  advanced 
persistent  cyber  threats.  He  previously 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

served  as  the  Chief  Information  Security 
Offi cer  for  the  states  of  Colorado  and 
California and as Vice President and Chief 
Security  Offi cer  for  the  North  American 
Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC).

Coalfi re
361 Centennial Parkway, Suite 150
Louisville, Colorado 80027
Tel +1 303 554 6333
Web www.coalfi re.com

RICK DAKIN
Chief Executive Offi cer (2001-2015)
Rick  Dakin  provided  strategic  manage-
ment  IT  security  program  guidance  for 
Coalfi re and its clients. After serving in the 
U.S.  Army  after  graduation  from  the  U.S. 
Military Academy at West Point, Mr. Dakin 
began  his  management  career  at  United 
Technology Corporation. Prior to co-found-
ing  Coalfi re,  he  was  President  of  Centera 
Information Systems, a leading eCommerce 
and  systems  integration  fi rm.  He  was  a 
past  president  of  the  FBI’s  InfraGard  pro-
gram,  Denver  chapter,  and  a  member  of  a 
committee hosted by the U.S. Secret Service 
and  organized  by  the  Joint  Council  on 
Information Age Crime.

Mr. Dakin passed away June 20, 2015.

LARRY JONES
Chief Executive Offi cer
Email Larry.Jones@Coalfi re.com
Larry  Jones  has  served  as  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Coalfi re  since  2012  and  became 
CEO in 2015. He has more than 25 years of 
experience building, operating, and growing 

public  and  private  companies  in  the  busi-
ness process outsourcing, marketing servic-
es, enterprise software, smart-grid, informa-
tion,  and  IT  services  industries.  He  has 
a  proven  track  record  as  the  CEO  of  six 
companies  and  has  served  as  director  of 
13  private  equity,  public,  and  VC-backed 
companies  and  executive  chairman  of  two 
others.  Prior  to  his  leadership  role  with 
Coalfi re,  from  2007  to  2011,  Mr.  Jones  was 
CEO  of  Denver-based  StarTek,  Inc.  (NYSE: 
SRT),  a  provider  of  global  outsourced  call 
center  and  customer  support  services.  He 
has also served as CEO of Activant Solutions, 
an  enterprise  software  company;  chairman 
of WebClients, an internet affi liate marketing 
fi rm;  CEO  of  Interelate,  Inc.,  a  marketing 
services fi rm; CEO of MessageMedia (NASD: 
MESG),  an  email  marketing  services  com-
pany; CEO of Neodata Services, Inc., a direct 
marketing  services  fi rm;  and  was  founding 
CEO  of  GovPX,  a  provider  of  government 
securities  data.  Mr.  Jones  also  was  a  senior 
vice president at Automatic Data Processing 
and  held  various  positions  at  Wang 
Laboratories between 1977 and 1987.

Mr. Jones currently also serves as a direc-
tor of Diligent Corporation (NZX: DIL) and 
Essential Power, LLC. He is also active mem-
ber  and  Fellow  in  the  National Association 
of  Corporate  Directors  (NACD).  Over  the 
past  10  years,  Mr.  Jones  has  served  as 
director  of  numerous  public  and  private 
companies  including  Work  Options  Group, 
StarTek, Exabyte, Activant Solutions, Realm 
Solutions,  SARCOM,  WebClients,  DIMAC, 
and Fulcrum Analytics. Mr. Jones graduated 
from  Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute  with 
a  degree  in  computer  sciences  in  1975 
and earned his MBA from Boston University 
in 1980.

  339  ■

NIGEL L. HOWARD
Partner
Email nhoward@cov.com
Nigel  L.  Howard,  a  partner  in  Covington’s 
New York  offi ce,  helps  clients  execute  their 
most  innovative  and  complex  transactions 
involving  technology,  intellectual  property, 
and data. Mr. Howard has been at the fore-
front of initiatives to protect data assets for 
his clients, helping them achieve a competi-
tive  advantage  or  fend  off  a  competitive 
threat.  He  advises  clients  on  their  proprie-
tary  rights  to  data  and  global  strategies  for 
protecting  these  assets.  He  has  represented 
companies  in  transactions  covering  the  full 
spectrum of data-related activities, including 
data capture and storage, business and oper-
ational intelligence, analytics and visualiza-
tion,  personalized  merchandizing,  and  the 
related  cloud  computing  services,  such  as 
Data as a Service and Analytics Infrastructure 
as a Service.

ELIZABETH H. CANTER
Associate
Email ecanter@cov.com
Elizabeth  H.  Canter  is  an  associate  in  the 
Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  Covington.  She 
represents  and  advises  technology  compa-
nies, fi nancial institutions, and other clients 
on data collection, use, and disclosure prac-
tices,  including  privacy-by-design  strate-
gies  and  email  marketing  and  telemarket-
ing  strategies.  This  regularly  includes 
advising  clients  on  privacy  and  data  secu-
rity issues relating to third-party risk man-
agement.  Ms.  Canter  also  has  extensive 
experience  advising  clients  on  incident 
preparedness  and  in  responding  to  data 
security breaches.

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Covington & Burling LLP
One City Center
850 Tenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001-4956
Tel +1 202 662 6000
Web www.cov.com

DAVID N. FAGAN
Partner
Email dfagan@cov.com
David  N.  Fagan,  a  partner  in  Covington’s 
global privacy and data security and inter-
national practice groups, counsels clients on 
preparing  for  and  responding  to  cyber-
based  attacks  on  their  networks  and  infor-
mation,  developing  and 
implementing 
information  security  programs,  and  com-
plying  with  federal  and  state  regulatory 
requirements.  Mr.  Fagan  has  been  lead 
investigative and response counsel to com-
panies in a range of cyber- and data security 
incidents,  including  matters  involving  mil-
lions of affected consumers.

KURT WIMMER
Partner
Email kwimmer@cov.com
Kurt  Wimmer  is  a  Washington  partner  and 
U.S.  chair  of  Covington’s  privacy  and  data 
security  practice.  Mr.  Wimmer  advises 
national  and  multinational  companies  on 
privacy, data security, and digital technology 
issues  before  the  FTC,  the  FCC,  Congress, 
the  European  Commission,  and  state  attor-
neys general, as well as on strategic advice, 
data  breach  counseling  and  remediation, 
and privacy assessments and policies. He is 
chair of the Privacy and Information Security 
Committee of the ABA Antitrust Section and 
is  a  past  managing  partner  of  Covington’s 
London offi ce.

■  340 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

PATRICK REDMON
Summer Associate
Email PatrickRedmon@gmail.com
Patrick  Redmon  will  graduate  from  the 
University of North Carolina School of Law 
in  2016.  He  graduated  from  Fordham 
University in 2007 with a BA in Philosophy 
and Economics and in 2013 was awarded an 
MA in Liberal Arts from St. John’s College in 
Annapolis,  Maryland.  Mr.  Redmon  is  the 
Managing  Editor  of  the  North  Carolina  Law 
Review.

Dell SecureWorks
One Concourse Pkwy NE
#500
Atlanta, Georgia 30328
Tel +1 404 929 1795
Web www.secureworks.com

MICHAEL R. COTE
Chief Executive Offi cer
Email info@secureworks.com
Michael  (Mike)  R.  Cote  became  chairman 
and CEO of SecureWorks in February of 2002 
and led the company through an acquisition 
by  Dell  in  February  of  2011.  Under  his 
leadership  Dell  SecureWorks  has  become  a 
recognized  global  leader  in  information 
security  services,  helping  organizations  of 
all sizes protect their IT assets, reduce costs, 
and  stay  one  step  ahead  of  the  threats. 
Previously Mr. Cote held executive positions 
with Talus Solutions, a pricing and revenue 
management  software  fi rm  acquired  by 
Manugistics  in  2000.  He  joined  Talus  from 
MSI Solutions, where he was Chief Operating 
Offi cer,  and  his  early  career 
included 
international  assignments  with  KPMG.  He 

was the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the 
Year Regional winner for Alabama/Georgia/
Tennessee  in  2011  and  was  awarded  The 
Deal  of  the  Year  by  The  Association  of 
Corporate  Growth  (ACG)  and  The  IndUS 
Entrepreneurs  (TiE).  Mr.  Cote’s  leadership 
style  is  punctuated  by  high  integrity  and  a 
client-centric philosophy.

Delta Risk LLC
4600 N Fairfax Dr., Suite 906
Arlington, Virginia 22203
Tel +1 571 483 0504
Web www.delta-risk.net

THOMAS FUHRMAN
President
Thomas Fuhrman is President of Delta Risk. 
In this capacity he is a practicing cybersecu-
rity  consultant  and  the  leader  of  the  Delta 
Risk business.

Prior  to  joining  Delta  Risk,  Mr.  Fuhrman 
was the founder and president of 3tau LLC, a 
specialized  consulting  fi rm  providing  infor-
mation  security  and  technology  advisory, 
analysis, and strategy services to senior clients 
in  commercial  industry  and  government,  in 
the United States and internationally. He is a 
former Partner at Booz Allen Hamilton, where 
he  led  a  $100  million  consulting  practice  in 
cybersecurity  and  science  and  technology 
serving Department of Defense clients.

Mr.  Fuhrman  has  more  than  35  years  of 
military and government experience and has 
expertise  in  many  areas  including  cyberse-
curity  strategy,  policy,  and  governance; 
cybersecurity  controls  and  technology;  and 
risk management.

Mr.  Fuhrman  has  degrees  in  electrical 
engineering,  mechanical  engineering,  and 
mathematics  and  is  a  Certifi ed  Information 
Systems Security Professional (CISSP).

  341  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Egon Zehnder
350 Park Avenue, 8th Floor
New York, New York 10022
Tel +1 212 519 6000
Web www.egonzehnder.com

KAL BITTIANDA
Email kal.bittianda@egonzehnder.com
Kal Bittianda is a consultant at Egon Zehnder, 
a  global  executive  search  and  assessment 
fi rm.  Based  in  the  fi rm’s  New  York  offi ce, 
Mr.  Bittianda  advises  and  recruits  senior 
executives  in  technology,  telecommunica-
tions,  and  fi ntech,  with  a  special  focus  on 
emerging  technologies.  He  also  leads  the 
fi rm’s Cybersecurity Practice.

Prior to joining Egon Zehnder, Mr. Bittianda 
served in leadership positions at several pri-
vately  held  technology-enabled  businesses. 
He  built  teams  and  led  growth  in  North 
America for Kyriba, an enterprise cloud solu-
tions  provider,  for  EXL,  a  knowledge  and 
business  process  outsourcing  fi rm,  and  for 
Inductis, an analytics consulting and services 
fi rm.  He  was  previously  an  Engagement 
Manager  at  the  Mitchell  Madison  Group. 
Mr. Bittianda started his career in technology 
and 
roles  at  Unisys  and 
International Paper.

leadership 

Mr.  Bittianda  earned  a  BTech  in  Naval 
Architecture  at  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Technology,  MA  in  Industrial  Engineering 
from  Purdue  University,  and  an  MBA  from 
Harvard Business School.

SELENA LOH LACROIX
Email selena.lacroix@egonzehnder.com
Selena Loh LaCroix is a consultant at Egon 
Zehnder,  a  global  executive  search  and 
assessment  fi rm.  Based  in  the  fi rm’s  Dallas 
offi ce,  she  is  global  leader  of  the  Legal, 
Regulatory and Compliance Practice and of 
the  Global  Semiconductor  Practice.  She 

■  342 

recruits  senior  legal  and  technology  execu-
tives  for  Fortune  500  and  private-equity 
owned portfolio companies and consults to 
boards of directors on a range of issues.

Prior to joining Egon Zehnder, Ms. LaCroix 
was  a  senior  international  attorney  with 
major international law fi rms as well as serv-
ing  in  house  at  Texas  Instruments  and 
Honeywell  International,  where  she  was 
Asia  Pacifi c  General  Counsel.  Ms.  LaCroix 
began  her  career  as  an  attorney  in  private 
practice  at  Gray  Cary  Ware  &  Freidenrich 
(now  DLA  Piper)  in  California  and  in 
Singapore,  focusing  on  mergers  and  acquisi-
tions, intellectual property, and admiralty law.
Ms.  LaCroix  completed  the  Graduate 
Program in American Law at the University 
of  California  at  Berkeley  and  Davis.  She 
holds  an  LLB  from  the  National  University 
of Singapore and is admitted to practice law 
in  Singapore,  California,  and  the  United 
Kingdom.

CHRIS PATRICK
Email chris.patrick@egonzehnder.com
Chris  Patrick  is  a  consultant  at  Egon 
Zehnder,  a  global  executive  search  and 
assessment fi rm. Based in the fi rm’s Dallas 
offi ce,  he  is  a  trusted  advisor  for  CIO  and 
C-suite talent strategy and development for 
global  companies  across  a  diverse  set  of 
industries, including retail/consumer prod-
ucts, IT services, industrial, fi nancial servic-
es, and digital. As the global leader for Egon 
Zehnder’s  Chief 
Information  Officer 
Practice,  Mr.  Patrick  advises  some  of  the 
world’s  leading  corporations  on  talent 
development  and  assessment  at  the  board 
level and across the executive suite.

Prior to joining Egon Zehnder, Mr. Patrick 
was  CIO/Vice  President  of  Mergers  and 
Acquisitions  with  Chatham  Technologies,  a 
start-up telecommunications systems manu-
facturer/integrator.  Previously,  he  was  a 
Senior  Manager  with  Ernst  &  Young 
Consulting  and  MD80  Project  Manager  for 
McDonnell Douglas in Los Angeles.

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Fidelis Cybersecurity
4416 East West Highway
Suite 310
Bethesda, Maryland 20814
Tel 1 800 652 4020 or +1 617 275 8800
Web www.fi delissecurity.com

JIM JAEGER
Chief Cyber Strategist
Email jim.jaeger@fi delissecurity.com
Jim  Jaeger  serves  as  Chief  Cyber  Strategist 
for  Fidelis  Cybersecurity,  responsible  for 
developing  and  evolving  the  company’s 
cyber  services  strategy  while  synchronizing 
it  with  product  strategy.  Mr.  Jaeger  previ-
ously  managed  the  Network  Defense  and 
Forensics business area at Fidelis, including 
the Digital Forensics Lab. He also held lead-
ership  roles  for  a  wide  range  of  cyber  pro-
grams, including General Dynamics’ support 
for the DoD Cyber Crime Center, the Defense 
Computer  Forensics  Lab,  and  the  Defense 
Cyber Crime Institute.

Mr. Jaeger is a former Brigadier General 
in the United States Air Force. His military 
service  includes  stints  as  Director  of 
Intelligence for the U.S. Atlantic Command, 
Assistant  Deputy  Director  of  Operations 
at  the  National  Security  Agency,  and 
Commander  of  the  Air  Force  Technical 
Applications Center. Mr. Jaeger frequently 
advises  organizations  on  strategies  to 
mitigate  damage  caused  by  network 
breaches  and  prevent  their  reoccurrence. 
He  also  presents  on  Large  Scale  Breach 
“Lessons  Learned”  at  cyber  symposiums 
worldwide.

RYAN VELA
Regional Director, Northeastern North 
America
Email rvela@fi delissecurity.com
Ryan Vela brings expertise in large-scale breach 
incident  response  management  to  Fidelis 
Cybersecurity. He has 15 years’ experience in 

led 

large-scale  breach 

conducting  investigations  and  digital  foren-
sic analysis and has served as Director, Lead 
Investigator,  Quality  Assurance  Manager, 
and Forensic Examiner. For the past 12 years 
he  has 
incident 
responses for the private and public sectors, 
specializing in organizational strategies, inci-
dent  response,  network  security,  computer 
forensics,  malware  analysis,  and  security 
assessments. He facilitates liaison with legal 
counsels,  regulators,  auditors,  vendors,  and 
law  enforcement.  Also  during  this  time 
Mr. Vela served as a Strategic Planner at the 
Defense  Computer  Forensics  Laboratory 
(DCFL)  and  Defense  Cyber  Crime  Institute 
(DCCI),  where  he  established  operational 
improvements  and  laboratory  accreditation. 
Mr. Vela earned his MBA from Johns Hopkins 
University  and  bachelor’s  degree  from 
Georgetown University.

Fish & Richardson P.C.
One Marina Park Drive
Boston, Massachusetts 02210-1878
Tel +1 617 521 7033
Web www.fr.com

GUS P. COLDEBELLA
Principal
Email coldebella@fr.com
Gus P. Coldebella is a principal at the law fi rm 
of Fish & Richardson concentrating on cyber-
security,  litigation,  and  government  investi-
gations. From 2005 to 2009, he was the deputy 
general counsel, then the acting general coun-
sel,  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland 
Security, focusing on all major security issues 
confronting  the  nation. As  the  department’s 
top lawyer, Mr. Coldebella helped lead imple-
mentation of President Bush’s Comprehensive 
National Cybersecurity Initiative, designed to 
shore up the government’s civilian networks 
from attack and to promote information shar-
ing and cooperation between the public and 
private sector.

  343  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

At Fish & Richardson, he focuses on help-
ing  companies  plan  for  and  respond  to 
cyberattacks.  As  a  securities  litigator,  he  is 
well positioned to advise public companies 
on  SEC  disclosures  regarding  cybersecurity 
and  boards  of  directors’  corporate  govern-
ance responsibilities to oversee and manage 
this important enterprise risk.

Mr.  Coldebella  is  a  graduate  of  Colgate 
University,  where  he  currently  serves  as 
audit  committee  chair  on  its  Board  of 
Trustees; he received his JD, magna cum laude, 
from Cornell. He is on Twitter at @g_co.

CAROLINE K. SIMONS
Associate
Email simons@fr.com
Caroline K. Simons is a litigation associate at 
Fish  &  Richardson  P.C.  Her  practice  focuses 
on  white  collar  defense,  cybersecurity  and 
trade secret theft, internal investigations, and 
complex commercial litigation, including sig-
nifi cant state and federal appellate experience. 
In 2013 Ms. Simons was selected by the Boston 
Bar  Association  to  participate  in  the  Public 
Interest Leadership Program. Ms. Simons is a 
graduate  of  Harvard  College  and  Columbia 
Law School.

Georgia Institute of Technology
North Ave NW
Atlanta, Georgia 30332
Tel +1 404 894 2000
Web www.gatech.edu

JODY R. WESTBY, ESQ.
Adjunct Professor
Email westby@globalcyberrisk.com
Jody R. Westby is CEO of Global Cyber Risk 
and provides consulting services in the areas 
of  privacy,  security,  cybercrime,  and  cyber 
governance. She is a professional blogger for 
Forbes  and  also  serves  as Adjunct  Professor 
at  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology’s  School 
of Computer Science.

■  344 

senior  managing  director 

Previously, Ms. Westby launched In-Q-Tel, 
was 
at 
PricewaterhouseCoopers,  was  senior  fellow 
and  director  of  IT  Studies  for  the  Progress 
and  Freedom  Foundation,  and  was  director 
of  domestic  policy  for  the  U.S.  Chamber  of 
Commerce.  Ms.  Westby  practiced  law  at 
Shearman  &  Sterling  and  Paul,  Weiss, 
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison. 

She  is  co-chair  of  the  American  Bar 
Association’s  Privacy  &  Computer  Crime 
Committee  (Science  &  Technology  Law 
Section)  and  co-chair  of  the  Cybercrime 
Committee  (Criminal  Justice  Section)  and 
served  three  terms  on  the  ABA  President’s 
Cybersecurity Task Force. Ms. Westby speaks 
globally  and  is  the  author  of  several  books 
and articles on privacy, security, cybercrime, 
and  enterprise  security  programs.  She  has 
special expertise in the governance of privacy 
and  security  and  responsibilities  of  boards 
and  senior  executives.  She  is  author  of  the 
2008,  2010,  2012,  and  2015  Governance  of 
Enterprise  Security  Reports  and  was  lead 
author  of  Carnegie  Mellon  University’s 
Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation 
Guide.  She  graduated  magna  cum  laude  from 
Georgetown  University  Law  School  and 
summa cum laude from the University of Tulsa 
and  is  a  member  of  the  Order  of  the  Coif, 
American Bar Foundation, and Cosmos Club.

Institutional Shareholder Services Inc.
702 King Farm Boulevard
Suite 400
Rockville, Maryland 20850
Tel +1 646 680 6350
Web www.issgovernance.com

MARTHA CARTER
Head of Global Research
Email martha.carter@issgovernance.com
Martha Carter is the head of global research 
for ISS. In this role, she directs proxy voting 
research  for  the  fi rm,  leading  a  research 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

team that analyzes companies in more than 
110  markets  around  the  world,  provides 
institutional  investors  with  customized 
research,  and  produces  studies  and  white 
papers  on  issues  and  topics  in  corporate 
governance.  In  addition,  Ms.  Carter  serves 
as the head of the ISS Global Policy Board, 
which develops the ISS Global Proxy Voting 
Policies.  Named  for  fi ve  years  in  a  row  to 
the  National  Association  of  Corporate 
Directors’  Directorship  100  list  of  the  most 
infl uential  people  in  the  boardroom  com-
munity  (2008–2012),  Ms.  Carter  has  been 
quoted in media around the world and is a 
frequent  speaker  for  corporate  governance 
events  globally.  Ms.  Carter  holds  a 
PhD  in  fi nance  from  George  Washington 
University and an MBA in fi nance from the 
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

PATRICK MCGURN
Executive Director and Special Counsel
Email patrick.mcgurn@issgovernance.com
Patrick  McGurn  is  executive  director  and 
special counsel at ISS. Considered by indus-
try  constituents  to  be  one  of  the  leading 
experts on corporate governance issues, he is 
active on the U.S. speaking circuit and plays 
an integral role in ISS’s policy development. 
Prior to joining ISS in 1996, Mr. McGurn was 
director of the Corporate Governance Service 
at  the  Investor  Responsibility  Research 
Center,  a  not-for-profi t  fi rm  that  provided 
governance  research  to  investors.  He  also 
served as a private attorney, a congressional 
staff member, and a department head at the 
Republican  National  Committee.  He  is  a 
graduate  of  Duke  University  and  the 
Georgetown University Law Center. He is a 
member of the bar in California, the District 
of Columbia, Maryland, and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. Mr. McGurn serves on the Advisory 
Board  of  the  National  Association  of 

Corporate  Directors.  He  was  named  to  the 
2011  National  Association  of  Corporate 
Directors’ Directorship 100 list.

Internet Security Alliance
2500 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, Virginia 22201
Tel +1 703 907 7090
Web www.isalliance.org

LARRY CLINTON
President
Email lclinton@isalliance.org
Larry  Clinton  is  President  of  the  Internet 
Security  Alliance  (ISA).  He  is  the  primary 
author  of  ISA’s  “Cyber  Social  Contract,” 
which  articulates  a  market-based  approach 
to  securing  cyber  space.  In  2011  the  House 
leadership GOP Task Force on cybersecurity 
embraced  this  approach.  In  2012  President 
Obama abandoned his previous regulatory-
based  approach  in  favor  of  the  ISA  Social 
Contract  model.  The  ISA  document  is  the 
fi rst and most often referenced source in the 
President’s  “The  Cyber  Space  Policy 
Review.”  He  is  also  the  primary  author  of 
the Cyber Security Handbook for corporate 
boards published by the National Association 
of  Corporate  Directors  (NACD)  in  2014.  In 
2015  Mr.  Clinton  was  named  one  of  the 
nation’s 100 most infl uential persons in the 
fi eld of corporate governance by NACD. He 
has published widely on various cybersecu-
rity  topics  and  testifi es  regularly  before 
Congress  and  other  government  agencies 
including  the  NATO  Center  for  Cyber 
Excellence.

  345  ■

Kaye Scholer LLP
The McPherson Building
901 Fifteenth Street NW
Washington, DC 20005-2327
Tel +1 202 682 3500 
Web www.kayescholer.com

ADAM GOLODNER
Partner
Email adam.golodner@kayescholer.com
Adam Golodner is a partner and the Leader 
of the Global Cybersecurity & Privacy Practice 
Group at Kaye Scholer LLP, a leading global 
law fi rm. Mr. Golodner represents companies 
on  cyber  and  national  security  matters 
globally—including  public  policy,  litigation, 
corporate governance, and transactions.

Prior  to  joining  Kaye  Scholer,  he  spent 
ten years as an executive at Cisco Systems, 
Inc.,  where  he  led  cyber  policy  globally. 
Before  Cisco,  Mr.  Golodner  was  Associate 
Director  of  the  Institute  for  Security, 
Technology and Society, Dartmouth College; 
Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Antitrust  Division, 
United States Department of Justice: Deputy 
Administrator of the Rural Utilities Service, 
USDA;  and  Search  Manager,  The  White 
House  Offi ce  of  Presidential  Personnel  (on 
leave from law fi rm).

Mr. Golodner is also a Senior Advisor at 
The  Chertoff  Group,  a  member  of  Business 
Executives  for  National  Security  (BENS), 
and a Fellow at the Tuck School of Business.

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

K&L Gates LLP
K&L Gates Center
210 Sixth Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15222-2613
Tel +1 412 355 6500
Web www.klgates.com

ROBERTA D. ANDERSON
Partner
Email roberta.anderson@klgates.com
Roberta  D.  Anderson  is  a  partner  of  K&L 
Gates LLP. A co-founder of the fi rm’s global 
Cybersecurity,  Privacy  and  Data  Protection 
practice  group  and  a  member  of  the  fi rm’s 
global  Insurance  Coverage  practice  group, 
Ms.  Anderson  concentrates  her  practice  in 
insurance coverage litigation and counseling 
and  emerging  cybersecurity  and  data  priva-
cy-related issues. She has represented clients 
in connection with a broad spectrum of insur-
ance issues arising under almost every kind 
of business insurance coverage. A recognized 
national  authority  in  insurance  coverage, 
cybersecurity,  and  data  privacy–related 
issues, Ms. Anderson frequently lectures and 
publishes  extensively  on  these  subjects.  In 
addition to helping clients successfully pur-
sue contested claims, Ms. Anderson counsels 
clients  on  complex  underwriting  and  risk 
management  issues.  She  has  substantial 
experience in the drafting and negotiation of 
“cyber”/privacy liability, D&O, professional 
liability,  and  other  insurance  placements. 
Ms.  Anderson  received  her  JD,  magna  cum 
laude,  from  the  University  of  Pittsburgh 
School  of  Law  and  her  BA  from  Carnegie 
Mellon University.

■  346 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Korn Ferry
2101 Cedar Springs Road
Suite 1450
Dallas, Texas 75201
Tel +1 214 954 1834
Web www.kornferry.com

AILEEN ALEXANDER
Senior Client Partner
Email aileen.alexander@kornferry.com
Aileen Alexander is a Senior Client Partner 
and  co-leads  Korn  Ferry’s  Cybersecurity 
Practice.  Based  in  the  fi rm’s  Washington, 
D.C.,  offi ce,  she  has  led  senior  executive 
searches across the security domain. She also 
partners  with  the  fi rm’s  Board  &  CEO 
Services practice.

In a previous position with another inter-
national executive search fi rm, Ms. Alexander 
served clients in the aerospace and defense 
and professional services sectors.

Prior to the talent management profession, 
Ms.  Alexander  was  a  Professional  Staff 
Member on the Committee of Armed Services 
in 
the  U.S.  House  of  Representatives. 
Previously, she was a Presidential Management 
Fellow in the Offi ce of the Secretary of Defense 
and served as a Captain in the U.S. Army.

Ms. Alexander holds a master’s degree in 
public  policy  from  Harvard  University’s 
Kennedy School of Government and earned 
a  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  from  The  Johns 
Hopkins University.

JAMEY CUMMINGS
Senior Client Partner
Email jamey.cummings@kornferry.com
Jamey Cummings is a Senior Client Partner 
in  Korn  Ferry’s  Global  Technology  and 
Information  Offi cers  Practices,  and  he  co-
leads 
the  fi rm’s  Global  Cybersecurity 
Practice. Based in the fi rm’s Dallas offi ce, he 
is  also  a  member  of  the  fi rm’s  Aviation, 
Aerospace & Defense Practice.

Prior to Korn Ferry, Mr. Cummings served 
as  an  associate  principal  in  the  industrial, 
supply chain, and transportation and logis-
tics  practices  of  another  leading  executive 
search  fi rm,  where  he  executed  executive 
search  assignments  for  public  and  private 
equity-backed companies. 

Earlier in his career, Mr. Cummings was a 
consultant  with  The  Boston  Consulting 
Group in Dallas and, before that, he served 
nine  years  with  distinction  as  an  offi cer  in 
the U.S. Navy’s SEAL teams. 

He earned a master’s degree in business 
administration  from  Stanford  University 
and graduated with merit with a bachelor of 
science in aeronautical engineering from The 
United States Naval Academy.

JOE GRIESEDIECK
Vice Chairman & Co-Leader, Board & CEO 
Services
Email joe.griesedieck@kornferry.com
Joe  Griesedieck  is  Vice  Chairman  and 
Co-Leader, Board and CEO Services at Korn 
Ferry. He focuses primarily on engagements 
for  board  director  searches  across  multiple 
industries, as well as working with boards of 
directors  on  succession  planning  and  other 
related senior talent management solutions.
Mr. Griesedieck’s prior experience includes 
two terms as global chief executive offi cer of 
another  international  search  fi rm.  He  also 
served as co-head of the fi rm’s strategic lead-
ership services practice in North America.

Prior to entering the executive search pro-
fession,  Mr.  Griesedieck  was  a  group  vice 
president  with  Alexander  &  Baldwin,  Inc., 
and spent a number of years with the Falstaff 
Brewing Corporation, concluding his tenure 
as president and chief operating offi cer and 
as a director of this NYSE company.

Mr.  Griesedieck  has  been  named  by  The 
National Association of Corporate Directors 
(NACD) to the Directorship 100, recognizing 
the  most  infl uential  people  in  corporate 
governance and the boardroom.

Mr.  Griesedieck  is  a  graduate  of  Brown 

University.

  347  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Latham & Watkins LLP
555 Eleventh Street NW
Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20004-1304
Tel +1 202 637 2205
Web www.lw.com

JENNIFER ARCHIE
Partner
Email jennifer.archie@lw.com
Jennifer Archie is a litigation partner in the 
Washington, DC, offi ce of Latham & Watkins 
with extensive experience investigating and 
responding to major cybersecurity and hack-
ing  events,  advising  clients  from  emerging 
companies  to  global  enterprises  across  all 
market  sectors  in  matters  involving  com-
puter  fraud  and  cybercrime,  privacy/data 
security  compliance  and  program  manage-
ment,  advertising  and  marketing  practices, 
information  governance,  consumer  fraud, 
and trade secrets. Ms. Archie regularly sup-
ports  Latham  &  Watkins’  leading  national 
and global M&A, private equity, and capital 
markets  practices  in  identifying,  evaluating 
and mitigating deal or company privacy and 
data security risks.

Littler Mendelson P.C.
1900 Sixteenth Street
Suite 800
Denver, Colorado 80202
Tel +1 303 629 6200
Web www.littler.com

PHILIP L. GORDON, ESQ.
Co-Chair, Privacy and Background Checks 
Practice Group
Email pgordon@littler.com
Philip  L.  Gordon  chairs  the  Privacy  and 
Background Check Practice Group of Littler 

■  348 

Mendelson,  the  nation’s  largest  law  fi rm 
representing  only  management  in  employ-
ment  law  matters.  He  counsels  employers 
on the full range of workplace privacy and 
data  protection  issues,  including  back-
ground  checks;  monitoring  employees’ 
electronic  communications; 
regulating 
employees’  social  media;  developing 
“bring-your-own-device”  programs;  com-
pliance  with  HIPAA  and  other  federal, 
state,  and  international  data  protection 
laws;  and  security  incident  preparedness 
and  response.  Mr.  Gordon  sits  on  the 
Advisory  Board  of  BNA’s  Privacy  and 
Security  Law  Report  and  Georgetown 
University  Law  Center’s  Cybersecurity 
Law  Institute.  Mr.  Gordon  was  named  to 
Best  Lawyers  in  America  in  2014  and  2015 
and a Colorado Super Lawyer annually since 
2006. He received his undergraduate degree 
from  Princeton  University  and  his  law 
degree  from  the  New  York  University 
School of Law. He served as a law clerk on 
the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Tenth Circuit.

Lockton Companies Inc.
1801 K Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
Tel +1 202 414 2653
Web www.lockton.com

BEN BEESON
Senior Vice President, Cybersecurity 
Practice
Email bbeeson@lockton.com
Ben Beeson advises organizations on how best 
to  mitigate  emerging  cyber  risks  to  mission 
critical assets that align with the business strat-
egy. As  insurance  continues  to  take  a  greater 
role in a comprehensive enterprise cyber risk 
management  program,  he  also  designs  and 
places customized insurance solutions to fi t an 
organization’s specifi c needs.

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Mr. Beeson is also engaged in the devel-
opment  of  Cybersecurity  Policy  in  the  U.S. 
and  U.K..  In  March  2015  he  testifi ed  before 
the  Senate  Commerce  Committee  on  the 
evolving cyber insurance marketplace.

A  frequent  public  speaker,  in April  2015 
Mr. Beeson was one of the fi rst panelists to 
present  on  the  topic  of  Cyber  Insurance  at 
the  world’s 
largest  Cyber  Security 
Conference, RSA, San Francisco.

Prior  to  moving  to  Washington,  DC, 
Mr. Beeson was based in Lockton’s London 
office for seven years, where he cofounded 
and built one of the leading cybersecurity 
teams  within  the  Lloyd’s  of  London 
marketplace.

Mr. Beeson holds a BA (Hons) degree in 
modern  languages  from  the  University  of 
Durham,  U.K.,  and  a  certifi cation  in  Cyber 
Security 
from  Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC.

Strategy 

National Association of Corporate 
Directors
2001 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Suite 500
Washington, DC 20006
Tel +1 202 775 0509
Web www.nacdonline.corg
KEN DALY
Chief Executive Offi cer
Ken  Daly  is  the  Chief  Executive  Offi cer  of 
the  National  Association  of  Corporate 
Directors  (NACD).  As  head  of  the  nation’s 
largest  member-based  organization  for 
board  directors,  Mr.  Daly  is  a  recognized 
expert  on  corporate  governance  and  board 
transformation.  Prior  to  NACD,  Mr.  Daly 
was  an  audit  partner  at  KPMG,  where  he 
also  served  as  the  partner-in-charge  of  the 
national  risk  management  practice.  After 
retiring from the fi rm, he assumed the role of 

executive  director  of  KPMG’s  Audit 
Committee Institute. He routinely lends his 
regulatory  expertise  to  counsel  audit  com-
mittees in critical areas, and he has extensive 
experience as an auditor and consulting with 
companies  in  the  banking  and  insurance 
industries.  Mr.  Daly  is  a  frequent  speaker 
and  writer  on  many  issues  confronting 
today’s corporate board, including executive 
compensation.  He  regularly  appears  in 
media and has been quoted in the Wall Street 
Journal,  the  New  York  Times,  and  Fox  News 
Radio, among others.

Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
51 West 52nd Street
New York, New York 10019-6142
Tel +1 212 506 5000

ANTONY KIM
Partner
Email akim@orrick.com
Antony Kim is a partner in the Washington, 
DC,  offi ce  of  Orrick,  Herrington  &  Sutcliffe 
and  serves  as  Global  Co-Chair  of 
its 
Cybersecurity  and  Data  Privacy  practice. 
Mr. Kim represents clients in federal and state 
regulatory investigations, private actions, and 
crisis-response  engagements  across  an  array 
of  cybersecurity,  data  privacy,  sales  and 
marketing, and consumer protection matters, 
on behalf of private and public companies.

ARAVIND SWAMINATHAN
Partner
Email aswaminathan@orrick.com
Aravind  Swaminathan  is  a  partner  the 
Seattle offi ce of Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe 
LLP and serves as the Global Co-Chair of its 
Cybersecurity  and  Data  Privacy  practice. 
Mr.  Swaminathan  advises  clients  in  proac-
tive assessment and management of internal 

  349  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

and external cybersecurity risks, breach inci-
dent response planning, and corporate gov-
ernance responsibilities related to cybersecu-
rity and has directed dozens of data breach 
investigations  and  cybersecurity  incident 
response  efforts,  including  incidents  with 
national  security  implications.  A  former 
Cybercrime  Hacking  and 
Intellectual 
Property 
federal  prosecutor, 
Mr. Swaminathan also represents companies 
and  organizations  facing  cybersecurity  and 
privacy-oriented  class  action  litigation  that 
can often follow a breach.

Section 

DANIEL DUNNE
Partner
Email ddunne@orrick.com
Dan Dunne, a partner in the Seattle offi ce of 
Orrick,  Herrington  &  Sutcliffe  LLP,  repre-
sents  corporations,  fi nancial  institutions, 
accountants,  directors,  and  offi cers  in  com-
plex  litigation  in  federal  and  state  courts. 
Mr. Dunne defends directors and offi cers in 
shareholder derivative suits, securities class 
actions,  SEC,  and  other  state  and  federal 
regulatory matters.

Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP
1200 Seventeenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Tel +1 202 663 8062
Web www.pillsburylaw.com

BRIAN FINCH 
Partner
Email brian.fi nch@pillsburylaw.com 
Brian  Finch  is  a  partner  in  the  Washington, 
DC,  offi ce  of  Pillsbury  Winthrop  Shaw 
Pittman LLP. He has been named by Law360 
as one of its “Rising Stars” in Privacy Law in 
2014  and  a  “Rising  Star”  by  National  Law 
Journal D.C. He is a recognized authority on 

■  350 

cyber and physical security matters, focusing 
his  practice  on  providing  proactive  liability 
mitigation advice to clients.

Mr.  Finch  is  also  a  leading  authority  on 
the  SAFETY  Act,  a  federal  statute  that  can 
provide liability protection to companies fol-
lowing a terrorist or cyberattack.

He  is  a  senior  advisor  to  the  Homeland 
Security  and  Defense  Business  Council, 
serves on the National Center for Spectator 
Sports Safety and Security’s advisory board, 
and  is  an  adjunct  professor  at  The  George 
Washington University Law School.

Mr. Finch regularly speaks and writes on 
security  issues  and  has  written  articles  for 
the Wall Street Journal, Politico, The Hill, and 
other publications.

Rackspace Inc.
1 Fanatical Place
City of Windcrest
San Antonio, Texas 78218
Tel +1 860 869 3905
Web www.rackspace.com

BRIAN KELLY
Chief Security Offi cer
Email brian.kelly@rackspace.com
Brian  Kelly  brings  three  decades  of  leader-
ship  in  security,  special  operations,  investi-
gations and intelligence to Rackspace.

In the Air Force, Mr. Kelly rose to the rank 
of lieutenant colonel. He led teams involved 
in  satellite  surveillance,  cybersecurity,  and 
special  operations;  as  a  Department  of 
Defense  Senior  Service  Fellow,  advised  the 
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the  Secretary  of 
Defense;  and  received  a  Department  of 
Defense meritorious service medal.

In  the  private  sector,  Mr.  Kelly  held  the 
positions of vice president with Trident Data 
Systems,  principal  (select)  at  Deloitte,  and 
CEO  of  iDefense.  He  led  the  Giuliani 
Advanced  Security  Center  and  served  as 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

executive  director  of  IT  risk  transformation 
for Ernst and Young. Mr. Kelly is the author 
of  From  Stone  to  Silicon:  a  Revolution  in 
Information  Technology  and  Implications  for 
Military Command and Control.

Mr. Kelly holds a degree in management 
from  the  U.S. Air  Force Academy,  an  MBA 
from  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  and 
an MS degree from the Air Force Institute of 
Technology.

Sard Verbinnen & Co
475 Sansome St. #1750
San Francisco, California 94111
Tel +1 415 618 8750
Web www.sardverb.com

SCOTT LINDLAW
Principal
Email slindlaw@sardverb.com
Scott Lindlaw is a Principal at Sard Verbinnen 
& Co, a strategic communications fi rm that 
helps clients manage overall positioning and 
specifi c events affecting reputation and mar-
ket  value.  He  counsels  companies  on  how 
best  to  prepare  for  and  respond  to  data 
breaches, as well as how to effectively com-
municate  in  a  wide  range  of  other  special 
situations  and  transactions.  Before  joining 
Sard  Verbinnen,  Mr.  Lindlaw  practiced 
cybersecurity  and  intellectual  property  law 
at the law fi rm Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe 
LLP. In addition to litigating IP cases, several 
of which went to trial, he wrote extensively 
about  developments  in  data-breach  litiga-
tion.  Prior  to  his  legal  career,  Mr.  Lindlaw 
was  a  reporter  for  The  Associated  Press, 
including  a  four-year  posting  as  an  AP 
White  House  correspondent,  covering 
President George W. Bush.

Stroz Friedberg LLC
2101 Cedar Springs Rd #1250
Dallas, Texas 75201
Tel: +1 214 377 4556
Web www.strozfriedberg.com

ERIN NEALY COX
Executive Managing Director
Email enealycox@strozfriedberg.com
Erin  Nealy  Cox  is  an  Executive  Managing 
Director at Stroz Friedberg, a global leader in 
investigations,  intelligence,  and  risk  man-
agement.  In  this  capacity,  she  leads  the 
Incident Response Unit for Stroz Friedberg. 
Ms. Nealy Cox is responsible for the overall 
operations  of  the  global  incident  response 
group,  including  supervising  fi rst  respond-
ers,  threat  intelligence  analysts,  and  mal-
ware  specialists.  These  responders  are 
deployed to assist corporate clients affected 
by  cyberattacks,  state-sponsored  espionage, 
and  data  breach  cases  in  sectors,  including 
retail,  hospitality,  energy,  biomedical  and 
health, and critical infrastructure. Ms. Nealy 
Cox also maintains a full docket of corporate 
client assignments in the areas of cybercrime 
investigations, data breach response, digital 
forensics,  and  electronic  discovery  process-
ing.  She  is  a  trusted  advisor  to  top  execu-
tives, in-house lawyers, and outside counsel.
Prior  to  Stroz  Friedberg,  Ms.  Nealy  Cox 
served as an Assistant U.S. Attorney, leading 
major  cybercrime  prosecutions  nationwide 
while also handling complex cases of white-
collar fraud, public corruption, and intellec-
tual property theft. Additionally, she served 
as Chief of Staff and Senior Counsel for the 
Offi ce of Legal Policy at the Department of 
Justice in Washington, DC, during the Bush 
Administration.

  351  ■

U.S. Department 
of Justice
Cybersecurity Unit
1301 New York Ave NW
Suite 600
Washington, DC 20530
Tel +1 202 514 1026
Web www.justice.gov
Email cybersecurity.ccips@usdoj.gov
In  December  2014  the  Criminal  Division 
created  the  Cybersecurity  Unit  within  the 
Computer Crime and Intellectual Property 
Section to serve as a central hub for expert 
advice  and  legal  guidance  regarding  how 
the  criminal  electronic  surveillance  and 
computer fraud and abuse statutes impact 
cybersecurity. Among the unit’s goals is to 
ensure  that  the  powerful  law  enforcement 
authorities are used effectively to bring per-
petrators to justice while also protecting the 
privacy of every day Americans. In pursu-
ing  that  goal,  the  unit  is  helping  to  shape 
cybersecurity  legislation  to  protect  our 
nation’s computer networks and individual 
victims  from  cyberattacks.  The  unit  also 
engages in extensive outreach to the private 
sector  to  promote  lawful  cybersecurity 
practices.

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Treliant Risk Advisors LLC
1255 23rd Street NW
Suite 500
Washington, DC 20037
Tel +1 202 249 7950
Web www.treliant.com

DANIEL J. GOLDSTEIN
Senior Director
Email dgoldstein@treliant.com
Daniel J. Goldstein is a Senior Director with 
Treliant  Risk  Advisors.  He  advises  clients 
operating in complex business and regulatory 
environments on data risk mitigation strate-
gies and solutions. His career has centered on 
guiding  U.S.  and  multinational  clients 
through  complex  international  data  protec-
tion  requirements  to  provide  business  solu-
tions  that  can  be  implemented  across  large 
organizations.

Prior  to  joining  Treliant,  Mr.  Goldstein 
was  the  Director  of  International  Data 
Privacy  for  Amgen  GmbH  in  Switzerland. 
At Amgen, he initiated and led privacy and 
data protection efforts across Amgen’s glob-
al affi liates, while managing an international 
privacy offi ce and a network of data protec-
tion offi cers.

Mr. Goldstein is a graduate of the UCLA 
and  the  Golden  Gate  University  School  of 
Law  and  a  member  of  the  State  Bar  of 
California.  He  is  a  Certifi ed  Information 
Systems Security Professional (CISSP) and a 
Certifi ed  Information  Privacy  Professional 
(CIPP–US and Europe).

■  352 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Visa Inc.
900 Metro Center Boulevard
Foster City, California 94404
Tel +1 415 932 2100
Web usa.visa.com

CHARLES W. SCHARF
Chief Executive Offi cer
Email Offi ceoftheCEO@visa.com
Prior to joining Visa Inc., Charles W. Scharf 
spent nine years at JPMorgan Chase & Co. as 
the chief executive offi cer of Retail Financial 
Services,  one  of  JPMorgan  Chase’s  six 
lines  of  business  and  a  major  issuer  of 
Visa-branded  cards.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  fi rm’s  Operating  Committee  and  its 
Executive Committee. Mr. Scharf was previ-
ously  managing  director  at  One  Equity 
Partners,  which  manages  $10  billion  of 
investments and commitments for JPMorgan 
Chase.

From  2002  through  2004,  he  led  Bank 
One’s  consumer  banking  business,  helping 
to rebuild the brand, expand the branch and 
ATM network, and develop senior talent. He 
was  appointed  Chief  Financial  Offi cer  of 
Bank  One  in  2000,  leading  the  company’s 
effort  to  fortify  its  balance  sheet,  improve 
fi nancial discipline, and strengthen manage-
ment reporting. Mr. Scharf spent 13 years at 
Citigroup  and  its  predecessor  companies, 
serving  as  chief  fi nancial  offi cer 
for 
Citigroup’s Global Corporate and Investment 
Bank prior to joining Bank One. He was chief 
fi nancial  offi cer  of  Salomon  Smith  Barney 
when 
company—Travelers 
Group—merged with Citicorp in 1998 to cre-
ate  the  nation’s  largest  fi nancial  institution. 
Mr. Scharf became CFO of Smith Barney in 
1995,  after  serving  in  a  number  of  senior 
fi nance roles at Travelers companies, includ-
ing Smith Barney, Primerica and Commercial 
Credit Corporation. He previously served on 

its  parent 

the  Board  of  Visa  U.S.A.  from  2003  to  2007 
and the Visa Inc. Board from 2007 to January 
2011.  He  was  also  previously  director  of 
Travelers Insurance.

He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from 
Johns  Hopkins  University  and  an  MBA 
degree from New York University. He is cur-
rently  on  the  Executive  Council  for  UCSF 
Health,  the  Board  of  Trustees  for  Johns 
Hopkins  University,  the  Board  of  Directors 
for  the  Financial  Services  Roundtable,  and 
the Board of Directors for Microsoft Corp.

Wells Fargo & Company
420 Montgomery Street
San Francisco, California 94104
Tel +1 800 869 3557
Web www.wellsfargo.com

RICH BAICH
Chief Information Security Offi cer
Rich Baich is Wells Fargo’s Chief Information 
Security Offi cer. Prior to joining Wells Fargo, 
he  was  a  Principal  at  Deloitte  &  Touche, 
where  he  led  the  Global  Cyber  Threat  and 
Vulnerability Management practice. Mr. Baich’s 
security  leadership  roles  include  retired 
Naval  Information  Warfare  Offi cer,  Senior 
Director for Professional Services at Network 
Associates (now McAfee) and after 9/11, as 
Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for 
the National Infrastructure Protection Center 
(NIPC) at the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI).  He  recently  retired  after  20+  years  of 
military service serving in various roles such 
as  a  Commander 
Information 
Operations Directorate at NORAD/Northern 
Command  Headquarters;  Commanding 
Offi cer Navy Information Operations Center 
(NIOC), Denver, Colorado; Special Assistant 
at the National Reconnaissance Offi ce (NRO), 

the 

in 

  353  ■

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Real  Time  Military  Analysis  Center,  the 
Reserve  Armed  Forces  Threat  Center,  the 
Center  for  Information  Dominance,  and  the 
Information  Operations  Technology  Center 
(IOTC)  within  the  National  Security  Agency 
(NSA). Mr. Baich was also selected as an advi-
sor  for  the  44th  President’s  Commission  on 
Cybersecurity.

Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman 
& Dicker LLP
55 West Monroe Street
Suite 3800
Chicago, Illinois 60603
Tel +1 312 821 6105
Web www.wilsonelser.com

MELISSA VENTRONE
Partner
Email melissa.ventrone@wilsonelser.com
Melissa  Ventrone,  chair  of  Wilson  Elser’s 
Data  Privacy  &  Security  practice,  focuses 
privacy  breach  response  (pre-  and  post-
event), including assisting clients with iden-
tifying, evaluating, and managing fi rst- and 
third-party  data  privacy  and  security  risks. 
Ms.  Ventrone  frequently  advises  clients  on 
compliance with state, federal, and interna-
tional laws and regulations. She has assisted 
numerous clients with identifying and miti-
gating  cybersecurity  risks,  including  inci-
dent response.

A  member  of  the  Marine  Corps  Reserve 
for  more  than  20  years,  she  uses  her  strong 
organizational  skills  to  manage  Wilson 
Elser’s breach response team, quickly bring-
ing lawyers, clients, and forensic and breach 
response  vendors  together  to  optimize 
response time and effectiveness. Ms. Ventrone 
has  handled  numerous  breaches  for  small 
and  large  entities,  including  merchants, 
fi nancial institutions, medical providers, and 
educational  institutions,  successfully  reduc-
ing public and regulatory scrutiny and pro-
tecting clients’ reputations.

■  354 

LINDSAY NICKLE
Partner
Email lindsay.nickle@wilsonelser.com
Lindsay  Nickle  is  experienced  in  assisting 
clients with the development and implemen-
tation  of  risk  management  processes  and 
data security measures related to the receipt 
and use of confi dential, private, and highly 
sensitive  data.  As  part  of  the  fi rm’s  breach 
response  team,  Ms.  Nickle  assists  clients  in 
developing an effi cient and prompt response 
to  the  loss  or  compromise  of  sensitive  and 
protected  data.  She  has  assisted  numerous 
clients  with  responding  to  data  security 
incidents, and she is experienced with stand-
ards and issues unique to consumer protec-
tion,  as  well  as  the  payment  card  industry. 
She also has provided guidance and advice 
regarding regulatory compliance within the 
fi nancial industry.

Ms. Nickle is an experienced civil litigator 
with a background in general civil litigation 
and  creditors’  rights.  In  her  years  of  repre-
senting  fi nancial  institutions,  she  has  han-
dled  litigation  and  arbitrations  involving 
fraud  and  identity  theft  issues  related  to 
fi nancial accounts. Ms. Nickle has extensive 
courtroom experience, including successful-
ly  handling  more  than  one  hundred  bench 
and jury trials.
World Economic Forum

World Economic Forum
91-93 route de la Capite,
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
SWITZERLAND
Tel +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Web www.weforum.org

DANIL KERIMI
Director, Center for Global Industries
Danil Kerimi is currently leading the World 
Economic Forum’s work on Internet govern-
ance, evidence-based policy-making, digital 
economy, and industrial policy. In addition, 
he  manages  Global  Agenda  Council  on 
Cybersecurity.  Previously,  Mr.  Kerimi  led 

   

CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES

Forum’s engagement with governments and 
business leaders in Europe and Central Asia, 
was  in  charge  of  developing  the  Forum’s 
global  public  sector  outreach  strategy  on 
various  projects  on  cyberspace,  including 
cyberresilience, data, digital ecosystem, ICT 
and competitiveness, and hyperconnectivity. 
Before joining the Forum, Mr. Kerimi worked 
with the United Nations Offi ce on Drugs and 
Crime/Terrorism  Prevention  Branch,  the 
Organization  for  Security  and  Cooperation 
in Europe, the International Organization for 
Migration,  and  other  international  and 
regional organizations.

ELENA KVOCHKO
Cyber Security Strategist
Elena Kvochko is currently head of global 
information  security  strategy  and  imple-
mentation  in  the  fi nancial  services  indus-
try.  Previously,  she  was  Manager 
in 
Information Technology Industry at World 
Economic  Forum,  where  she  led  global 
partnership  programs  on  cyber  resilience 
and the Internet of Things and was respon-
sible for developing relationships with top 
information  technology  industry  partners. 
Prior  to  her  position  at  the  Forum,  she 
worked as Information and Communication 
Technology  specialist  at  the  World  Bank. 
Ms. Kvochko focused on a portfolio of pro-
jects aimed at leveraging ICT for economic 
growth  and  transparency  in  emerging 
economies.

Ms.  Kvochko  is  an  author  of  numerous 
publications and reports and has contribut-
ed to Forbes, the New York Times, and Harvard 
Business Review.

Individual Contributor

ROBERT (BOB) F. BRESE
Former Chief Information Offi cer, U.S. 
Department of Energy
Email rfbrese@gmail.com
Robert (Bob) F. Brese is a Vice President and 
Executive  Partner  with  Gartner,  Inc.,  the 
world’s  leading  information  technology 
research  and  advisory  company.  He  brings 
his  recent,  real-world  Federal  CIO  experi-
ence  to  provide  IT  leaders  with  insight  on 
their  most  pressing  issues  and  their  most 
thrilling  business  opportunities.  Most 
recently, Mr. Brese was the Chief Information 
Offi cer  (CIO)  for  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy (DOE), whose national laboratories, 
production  facilities,  and  environmental 
cleanup  site  missions  span  open  science  to 
nuclear security. Mr. Brese led DOE’s policy, 
governance,  and  oversight  of  more  than 
$1.5  billion  in  annual  IT  investments,  as 
well  as  DOE’s  key  initiatives  in  open  data, 
cloud  computing,  and  energy-effi cient  IT 
strategies.  Mr.  Brese  also  served  as  the 
Department’s  Senior  Agency  Offi cial  for 
Privacy  and  for  Information  Sharing  and 
Safeguarding.  A 
the  U.S. 
Government’s cybersecurity community, Mr. 
Brese  was  a  key  contributor 
the 
Administration’s efforts in cyber legislation; 
policy;  cybersecurity  technology  research, 
development  and  deployment;  and  in  the 
cybersecurity  protection  of  the  country’s 
critical infrastructure.

leader 

in 

to 

 

SecurityRoundtable.org 

  355  ■

