Legal Aspects of Cybersecurity 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Artur Appazov 

Faculty of Law 

University of Copenhagen 

2014 

1 

 

Contents 
1 

Purpose and Scope ......................................................................................................................................................... 3 

2 

Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................................... 4 

3  General Introductory Remarks ................................................................................................................................. 5 

4 

Legal Problematics ......................................................................................................................................................... 9 

4.1 

4.2 

Sovereignty and Jurisdictional Fragmentation ..................................................................................... 10 

Attribution: Determining the Responsibility for Harmful Conduct .............................................. 11 

5 

Cybersecurity as an Umbrella Concept .............................................................................................................. 14 

5.1 

5.2 

5.3 

5.4 

Cybercrime and Cybercrime Tools ............................................................................................................. 22 

Hacking and Hacktivism ................................................................................................................................. 27 

Cyberwar and Cyberterrorism ..................................................................................................................... 31 

Cyberespionage – the Advanced Persistent Threat ............................................................................. 33 

6 

Legal Solutions and Strategies ............................................................................................................................... 34 

6.1 

6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

6.7 

Criminalization ................................................................................................................................................... 36 

Hacktivism and Criminalization .................................................................................................................. 37 

Procedure and Evidence ................................................................................................................................. 38 

Harmonization of Laws ................................................................................................................................... 40 

Incident Reporting and Information Sharing ......................................................................................... 41 

Institutional Arrangements for Cybersecurity Bureaucracy ........................................................... 42 

Personnel Recruitment and Educational Training .............................................................................. 45 

7 

Technical Solutions ..................................................................................................................................................... 46 

7.1 

7.2 

Defense and Monitoring Systems ................................................................................................................ 46 

Standardization and Air-Gapped Networks ........................................................................................... 47 

8 

Policy Considerations ................................................................................................................................................ 48 

8.1 

8.2 

Vulnerability Mitigation and Threat Deterrence .................................................................................. 50 

Private-Public Sector Dynamic .................................................................................................................... 53 

9 

International Cooperation in Criminal Matters .............................................................................................. 56 

10 

11 

12 

 

 

Treaty-Based Approach to Cybersecurity and Cybercrime .................................................................. 62 

General Recommendations ................................................................................................................................ 66 

Bibliography and Consulted Literature ......................................................................................................... 68 

2 

1  Purpose and Scope 

The  following  material  is  the  examination  of  literature  on  cybersecurity  and  cybercrime. 

Although the following material does not include examination of all existing writing in the 

area,  it  includes  a  number  of  important  sources  that  are  illustrative  of  the  main  issues 

covered  in  contemporary  works  on  the  matters  of  cybersecurity  and  cybercrime.  The 

following  material  is  presentation  of  the  main  themes  and  problems  as  reflected  by  the 

literature  as  a  whole  without  providing  separate  reviews  on  specific  academic  or 

professional  works.  Rather,  the  result  of  the  review  is  systematization  of  ideas  and 

concerns as well as existing solutions on the problem of cybercrime and cybersecurity. It is 

an attempt to organize thinking and current state of academic knowledge on the issues of 

cybersecurity in its very general form as allowed by the limitations of the projects.  

Despite  the  initial  proposal  for  the  material  was  examination  of  the  literature  on 

cybercrime, the  closer  analysis  revealed that  consideration of the issues of cybercrime  in 

separation from a broader concern of cybersecurity would be incomplete and would fail to 

reflect  the  entire  picture  of  the  problem  and  risks  associates  with  network  technologies. 

Therefore,  in  addition  to  criminal  matters  the  material  discusses  a  wider  range  of 

considerations. 

The term cybercrime itself, first coined by William Gibson in 1982 and popularized in his 

novel  Neuromancer,  became  a  popular  descriptor  of  the  “mentally  constructed  virtual 

environment within which networked computer activity takes place.”1 This term has come 

to symbolize the insecurity and risks online, and is generally referred to for description of 

the  general  concerns  of  cybersecurity.  These  terms  are  sometimes  used  interchangeably. 

Although these concepts have yet to receive clear legal definitions and are to some extent 

overlapping, in this work the term cybercrime refers to considerations of criminal law and 

is a subset of the general cybersecurity concept. Cybercrime therefore will be articulated as 

a component of cybersecurity in light of the general concerns and problems generated by 

the network and information technologies. 

                                                           
1 DAVID S. WALL, CYBERCRIME: THE TRANSFORMATION OF CRIME IN THE INFORMATION AGE 10  (Polity Press. 2007). 

 

3 

2  Executive Summary 

With  the  development  of  information  and  network  technologies  and  the  growing 

interconnectedness  of  the  world,  the  risks  connected  to  online  communication  have 

become increasingly pressing.  Due to the global nature of such communication unhindered 

by  physical  boundaries,  network  technologies  challenge  the  existing  international  legal 

structure  based  on  such  notions  as  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty,  where  each  sovereign 

jurisdiction  regulates  communication 

that 

takes  place 

in 

its 

territory.  Online 

communication,  that  bypasses  geographical  and  jurisdictional  restraints,  is  a  serious 

concern for the national and international legal orders in their current form. 

It is a serious concern in part due to such attributes of online communication as anonymity 

of  the  participants  of  the  communication  as  well  as  asymmetry  of  their  efforts  and  the 

effects  that  they  can  achieve.  Communication  with  these  attributes  operating  in  the 

boundless  environment  of  the  internet  open  doors  to  a  wealth  of  deviation,  misuse  and 

crime. Just like the network technology has penetrated virtually every sphere of life on the 

planet, so did the risks associate with this technology. The crime, facilitated by the network 

and  computer  technologies,  has  become  cybercrime;  the  war,  in  turn  –  has  turned  cyber. 

Cybercrime,  cyberwar  and  cyberterrorism  are  among  the  emerging  phenomena  that  law 

needs  to  accommodate.  Risks  of  cyber  manifest  on  various  levels  –  national  and 

transnational  (e.g.  cybercrime  and  cyberterrorism)  and  international  (e.g.  cyberwar). 

Collectively, these concerns are describes by the umbrella concept of cybersecurity. 

On  the  national  and  transnational  levels,  the  matters  of  cybersecurity  primarily  concern 

criminal matters. The main issues are highlighted by the fragmentation of national criminal 

laws  (substantive  and  procedural)  and  the  need  for  their  harmonization.  Diversity  of 

national  laws  is  one  of the  main  reasons  of  the  global  cybercrime  vulnerabilities,  as  such 

diversity does not allow for the development of a single legislative response to the global 

phenomenon.  Many  countries,  especially  developing  countries,  do  not  have  criminal  laws 

that specifically address cybercrime. Neither do they have adequate capacity to enforce the 

laws. 

 

4 

On the international level, cybersecurity is concerned with the application of international 

law to the realities of network and computer technologies, including the possibility of their 

use  in  modern  warfare.  The  attribution  of  the  conduct  –  distinguishing  the  offender 

between  state  or  non-state  actors  –  and  identification  of  the  offender  jurisdiction  are 

significant challenges. 

With  all  these  challenges  in  hand,  the  effective  legal  regulation  of  the  internet  presumes 

creation of the viable policy that can adequately address the substance of the problem and 

its technical complexity on various levels, including legislative interventions in the form of 

criminalization  and  harmonization;  international  cooperation;  collaboration  with  the 

private sector; professional educational and capacity building in terms of technical support 

and assistance, especially in the developing countries.  

3  General Introductory Remarks  

As  information  technologies  become  increasingly  prevalent,  it  becomes  clear  that  the 

global society finds itself in the midst of the communication and technology paradigm shift. 

It is not the appearance of the new technology as such that defines the state of uniqueness 

of  the  current  information  revolution,  as  the  human  society  has  seen  a  number  of  rapid 

technological advances in the  past  without  quite  the  same  consequences. Rather, it is  the 

unprecedented  capability  of  network  and  information  technologies  to  enable  complex 

global  communication  to  a  degree  of  unobstructed  “one-to-many  and  many-to-many 

communication never before seen.”2   

The globally-interconnected digital information and communication infrastructure created 

by the network technologies touches practically everything and everyone. With billions of 

people  relying  on  the  internet  for  a  wide  variety  of  economic,  social,  and  political 

interactions, cyberspace “is nothing short of essential to modern life.”3 It is estimated that 

in just four years from now mobile broadband subscriptions will approach 70 per cent of 

the  world’s  total  population.  By  the  year  2020,  the  number  of  networked  devices  will 

                                                           
2 JULIE E. MEHAN, CYBERWAR, CYBERTERROR, CYBERCRIME: A GUIDE TO THE ROLE OF STANDARDS IN AN ENVIRONMENT OF 
CHANGE AND DANGER 9  (IT Governance Publishing. 2008). 
3 Melanie Teplinsky, Fiddling on the Roof: Recent Developments in Cybersecurity, 2 AMERICAN UNIVERSITY 
BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 227-228 (2013). 

 

5 

outnumber people  by six to one, transforming current  conceptions  of the  communication 

and social interaction.4 

The internet has brought with it a fundamental change in the way nations and their citizens 

engage in global economic activity, manage  critical infrastructure, and communicate  with 

one  another.  The  hyper-connectivity  of  the  modern  world  brings  a  wealth  of  benefits  for 

governments,  enterprises  and  individuals  in  that  the  information  exchange  is  no  longer 

dependent on physical constraints and is available immediately regardless of the distance. 

Although  the  internet  is  omnipresent  in  modern  society  and  plays  a  critical  role  in  many 

aspects  of  everyday  life,  it  was  never  intended  to  be  used  by  so  many  and  for  the  vast 

number of functions it performs today. To the contrary, the internet was designed to allow 

a  small  group  of  scientists  to  share  unclassified  reports;  it  was  not  designed  to  transfer 

sensitive information securely.5 Moreover, the internet was not designed to allow for easy 

monitoring  of  user  behavior  and  was  not  designed  to  protect  against  attacks  originating 

from  within  the  internet  itself.  That  same  inherent  design  persists  today,  largely 

unchanged,  while  the  internet’s  uses  have  evolved  drastically.  The  ease  and  anonymity 

with which people throughout the world can access information systems via the  internet, 

coupled  with  the  internet’s  inherently  flawed  design,  have  created  a  vulnerability  to 

cyberattacks on an unprecedented scale. Targets of cyberattacks are diverse, and the costs 

of  such  attacks  are  necessarily  borne  by  consumers,  private  industry,  and  governments 

alike.  The  frequency  and  sophistication  of  cyberattacks  are  likely  to  increase,  as 

instructions for sophisticated attack methods are made more widely available to would-be 

attackers  via  the  internet,  reducing  the  technical  knowledge  required  to  carry  out  an 

attack.6 

The  level  of  connectivity  of  the  modern  world  and  inherent  vulnerabilities  of  the 

communication  design  has  become  the  root  of  the  main  challenge  –  exploitation  of 

vulnerabilities  in  technological,  organizational  and  legal  systems  of  regulation  by  all 

                                                           
4 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xvii (John Sandage, et al. eds., United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime  2013). 
5 Howard F.  Lipson, Tracking and Tracing Cyber-Attacks: Technical Challenges and Global Policy Issues 13 
(Software Engineering Institute  2002). 
6 William M. Stahl, The Uncharted Waters of Cyberspace: Applying the Principles of International Maritime Law 
to the Problem of Cybersecurity, 40 GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 248 (2011). 

 

6 

participants  of  this  communication.  This  behavior  is  by  no  means  a  novelty  in  human 

behavior.  However,  the  possibilities  exploiting  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  network 

technologies in the  context of inter-connected world are  significant. These vulnerabilities 

in  the  presence  of  the  hyper-connectivity  are  exploited  by  all  participants  of  this 

communication.  The  participants  include  criminal  enterprises,  ‘hackers’  (whether  for 

financial  gain  or  as  a  challenge),  cause-based  groups,  proxies  for  governments,  and 

governments  (including  their  military  and  intelligence  agencies).  Motives  for  the  attacks 

range  from  financial  gain  to  the  advancement  of  national  security  interests,  to  the 

satisfaction of peer recognition, and to the advancement of various causes.7 

The  actual  subject  of  the  debate  therefore  is  not  a  new  type  of  crime  or  deviation,  but 

fundamentally  reshaped  way  in  which  we  interact.  The  academic  discourse  on  the  social 

impact of new technology is nothing new. It is the longstanding concern expressed in the 

volumes  on  industrial  sociology  from  Karl  Marx  to  many  contemporary  commentators.8 

Much like the appearance of the automobile in 1920 created some degree of awe among the 

socio-legal  thinkers,  the  internet  is  equally  apposite  of  the  new  technology  today.    9  This 

new  technology  created  a  new  level  of  opportunities  where  social  deviance,  including 

crime,  followed.  Computer  and  network  related  deviance  possesses  some  specificity  that 

creates effects that national and international legal frameworks have never faced before.  

Some  of  the  key  challenging  features  of  the  communication  mediated  by  network  and 

information technologies are:  

  Global  Reach.  Network  communication  does  not  require  any  degree  of  physical 

proximity.  An  action  in  cyberspace  is  literally  borderless  and  unbounded  by  such 

notions as jurisdiction or sovereignly. An instantaneous action is possible between 

participants  who  are  in  different  cities,  states  or  countries.10  Current  legal 

frameworks  are  traditionally  regarded  as  local  in  nature,  being  restricted  to  the 

                                                           
7 David Satola & Henry L.  Judy, Towards a Dynamic Approach to Enhancing International Cooperation and 
Collaboration in Cybersecurity Legal Frameworks: Reflections on the Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Cybersecurity Legal Issues at the 2010 United Nations Internet Governance Forum 37 WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW 
REVIEW, 1748-1749 (2011). 
8 See in e.g. WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 11. 2007. 
9 JONATHAN  CLOUGH, PRINCIPLES OF CYBERCRIME 3  (Cambridge University Press. 2010). 
10 Susan W. Brenner, Toward a Criminal Law for Cyberspace: Distributed Security, 10 BOSTON UNIVERSITY 
JOURNAL OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY LAW, 24 - WesLaw paging - (2004). 

 

7 

territorial  jurisdiction  in  which  an  event  occurs.  Modern  networked  technologies 

have challenged this paradigm requiring significant adjustments to the law.11 

  Anonymity.  Cyberspace  lets  participants  conceal  or  disguise  their  identities  in  a 

way that is not possible in the real world. Anonymity is an obvious advantage of an 

offender, and digital technology facilitates this in a number of ways. Offenders may 

deliberately  conceal  their 

identity  and  remove  digital  evidence  by  using 

commercially available encryption software, proxy servers and so on.12 

  Asymmetry. Small participants of the internet communication have more capacity 

to  exercise  hard  and  soft  power  in  cyberspace  than  in  many  more  traditional 

domains.13  Launching  a  massive  cyberattack  does  not  require  a  large  number  of 

people.  A  single  individual  with  the  access  to  the  internet  is  capable  of  such  an 

attack  due  to  the  possibilities  of  the  network  and  information  technologies. 

Consequently, a one-to-one scale of commission is not a viable default assumption.14 

These features seem to be ‘incompatible’ with the real world jurisdictional fragmentation. 

Given these challenges that these features introduce, the main question therefore is how to 

ensure  effective  monitoring  and  regulation  of  user  behavior  in  the  integrated  global 

information  network  in  the  presence  of  the  current  disintegrated  legal  framework 

described by a large number of sovereign jurisdictions. 

Due  to  the  fact  that  cyber  networks  present  a  unique  borderless  ‘space,’  it  becomes  a 

lateral,  fluid  and  indivisible  single  system.15  As  such,  physical  analogies  of  space  (as  our 

conceptual referent to describe the unfamiliar) are inapposite because cyberspace is not in 

itself a place; it is an activity, a complex type of mediated communication. In other words, it 

                                                           
11 CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 7. 2010. 
12 Id. at, 6-7. 
13 Jan-Frederik Kremer & Benedikt Müller, Cyberspace and International Relations: Theory, Prospects and 
Challenges 45 (Springer  2014). 
14 CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 5. 2010; Brenner, BOSTON UNIVERSITY JOURNAL OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY LAW, 
24 - WesLaw paging - (2004). 
15 Brian Nichiporuk & Carl H. Builder, Societal Implications, in IN ATHENA'S CAMP: PREPARING FOR CONFLICT IN THE 
INFORMATION AGE (John Arquilla & David Ronfeldt eds., 1997). 

 

8 

is  an  intricate,  multilayered  communicative  process  that  is  sustained  by  a  series  of 

increasingly complicated technologies.16  

The  asymmetry  is  displacing  hierarchies  in  every  sector  of  society  because  hierarchical 

organization  is  not  an effective  means  of  organizing  technologically-mediated  activities.17 

Decentralized  architecture  of  the  cyberspace  equally  decentralizes  power  and  authority 

hierarchy  thereby  empowering  individuals.18  Due  to  anonymity,  cyberspace  has  the 

capacity  to  create  a  climate  in  which  the  bonds  of  social  conformity  are  eased,  if  not 

eradicated,  which  further  raises  the  probability  of  misuse  and  deviation.19  The 

homogeneity  of  the  software  used  worldwide  and  decentralized  architecture  of  the 

internet makes it possible for an individual with a computer linked to the internet to create 

results  for  which  in  real  world  significant  kinetic  resources  would  be  necessary.20  As  the 

information  technology  permeates  all  spheres  of  life,  a  basic  cyberattack  is  in  a  way  an 

underlying offence that can be used for the purposes of crime, war or terrorism. 

These concerns should play an important role in the ongoing development of information 

and  network  technology.  Enhancing  cybersecurity  and  protecting  critical  information 

infrastructures  are  essential  to  each  nation’s  security  and  economic  well-being.  Legal 

regulation  of  conduct  in  cyberspace  and  deterrence  of  misuse  of  ICTs  must  become  an 

integral  component  of  a  national  cybersecurity  and  critical  information  infrastructure 

protection strategy. 

4  Legal Problematics 

There  are  two  main  challenges  that  the  global  interconnectedness  and  its  idiosyncratic 

features present for the legal systems tailored to regulate the ‘real world’ behavior. These 

are the problems that for the sake of convenience can be described as that of jurisdictional 

                                                           
16 Susan W. Brenner, The Privacy Privilege: Law Enforcement, Technology and the Constitution, 7 JOURNAL OF 
TECHNOLOGY LAW & POLICY, 124-131 (2002). 
17 Susan W. Brenner, Toward a Criminal Law for Cyberspace: Product Liability and Other Issues, 5 UNIVERSITY OF 
PITTSBURGH JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY LAW AND POLICY (2005). 
18 Nichiporuk & Builder, Societal Implications. 1997. 
19 Brenner, UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY LAW AND POLICY,  (2005). 
20 Susan W. Brenner & Joseph Schwerha, Transnational Evidence-Gathering and Local Prosecution of 
International Cybercrime, 20 JOHN MARSHALL JOURNAL OF COMPUTER AND INFORMATION LAW, 347-377 (2002). 

 

9 

fragmentation and that of the attribution of behavior. The following briefly introduces the 

two major legal problems of the legal regulation of conduct in cyberspace. 

4.1  Sovereignty and Jurisdictional Fragmentation 

The  problem  of  jurisdictional  fragmentation  follows  from  the  fact  that  it  does  not  and 

cannot  agree  with  the  global  nature  of  cyberspace.  Jurisdiction,  inherently  linked  to  the 

notion of state sovereignty, imposes an area of exclusive responsibility of a sovereign state 

over its territory and/or its citizens, thus excluding any extra-jurisdictional involvement of 

other  states.  The  sovereign  equality  of  states  is  protected  by  rules  of  customary  public 

international  law.21  No  state,  therefore,  can  claim  sovereignty  over  cyberspace  and  thus 

introduce its effective regulation.22  

It is one thing to enact laws that regulate conduct, it is quite another to assert jurisdiction 

over  conduct  that  may  be  located  or  originate  anywhere  in  the  world.  Cyberspace  is  a 

distinct  phenomenon,  beyond  traditional  rules  based  on  geographical 

location.23 

Jurisdictional  fragmentation,  for  example,  becomes  an  obstacle  when  certain  online 

conduct  entails  criminal  responsibility.  Normally,  when  a  suspect  has  allegedly  harmed 

victims or interests in one country, but is located in a second, the law enforcement systems 

of both countries usually have to cooperate in making both the suspect and evidence of the 

crime  amenable  to  justice  processes.  Given  the  relative  ease  with  which  online  offenders 

can commit criminal acts remotely, the law enforcement response to criminal conduct must 

rely  significantly  on  trans-border  mechanisms  such  as  mutual  legal  assistance  and 

extradition.24 However, these mechanisms are not always readily available or practicable, 

partially due to the different legal qualifications of online conduct in various jurisdictions.25 

Specific conduct that is criminally punishable in the country A may not be criminal in the 

country  B.  Yet,  the  alleged  offender  might  be  located  in  the  country  B  creating  effect  or 

interfering  with  information  infrastructure  in  the  country  A.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of 

                                                           
21 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 184. 2013. 
22 Michael N. Schmitt, Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare 16 (Cambridge 
University Press  2013). 
23 CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 405. 2010. 
24 Alamie M. Weber, The Council of Europe's Convention on Cybercrime, 18 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL 
(2014). 
25 Gregor Urbas, Cybercrime, Jurisdiction and Extradition: The Extended Reach of Cross-Border Law 
Enforcement, 16 JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW, 8 (2012). 

 

10 

cyberspace,  it  is  not  easily  identifiable  whether  the  threat  is  originated  internally  or 

externally.26 

While jurisdictional fragmentation does not seem to be an unresolvable problem in highly 

integrated  societies  such  as  the  Europe  Union,  where  the  laws  of  each  participating 

jurisdiction to significant degree correspond to each other and coherently regulate similar 

conduct, this is not the case worldwide. Many developing countries have neither relevant 

laws that regulate conduct in cyberspace and where necessary introduce responsibility for 

breaches,  nor  do  these  countries  have  capacity  to  enforce  such  laws.  In  dealing  with  real 

world  crime,  the  developed  world  can  ward  off  the  potential  threats  by  strengthening 

physical  border control and introducing strict  immigration  policies that regulate  physical 

migration. In the case of conduct in cyberspace, there are no such remedies available. 

An  example  is  provided  by  the  so  called  Love  Bug  malicious  software  or  malware,  which 

made  its  way  around  the  world’s  computers  in  2001.  Originating  in  the  Philippines,  the 

malware infected millions of computers and caused an estimated $10 billion in lost work 

hours  of  such  businesses  as  Ford,  Siemens,  and  Microsoft,  as  well  as  government 

departments  of  various  countries.27  However,  prosecution  of  the  author  of  the  code,  a 

graduate student whose thesis proposal on computer viruses had apparently been rejected, 

proved difficult. At the time, the Philippines had no specific computer crime offenses that 

matched the dissemination of malicious code, and an attempt to charge credit card offenses 

instead  floundered.  Because  of  this  legislative  deficiency,  the  suspect  could  not  be 

extradited to countries that suffered harm and that had adequate laws for prosecution.28 

4.2  Attribution: Determining the Responsibility for Harmful Conduct 

The legal effects of the conduct in cyberspace can be seen from the perspectives of various 

participants  of  online  communication  –  the  perspective  of  an  individual  (a  criminal  act, 

regulated by the national criminal law) and the perspective of a state (an act of aggression 

regulated by the international law). The asymmetry of the cause-effect relationship in the 

                                                           
26 SUSAN W. BRENNER, CYBERCRIME AND THE LAW: CHALLENGES, ISSUES, AND OUTCOMES 211  (Northeastern University 
Press. 2012). 
27 Susan W. Brenner & Bert-Jaap Koops, Approaches to Cybercrime Jurisdiction, 4 JOURNAL OF HIGH TECHNOLOGY 
LAW, 6-7 (2004). 
28 Urbas, JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW, 8 (2012). 

 

11 

internet does not allow distinguishing with ease between participants standing behind an 

attack – an individual or a government. Performed by an individual, it is hard to establish 

whether  that  individual  acted  as  an  agent  of  a  state  or  on  his  own.  Thus,  if  a  participant 

engages in the harmful conduct, the applicable law and the consequences of such conduct 

will depend on whether the participant is a physical person or in fact a government behind 

the individual. The Tallinn Manual, a comprehensive text on the applicability of the existing 

international  law  to  cyber  warfare,  recognizes  this  problem.29  As  countermeasures  can 

only be lawful if it is for the offending state’s conduct, the attribution of conduct is crucially 

important.  A  nation  must  show  that  a  cyberattack  qualifies  as  an  ‘armed  attack’  in  the 

context  of  internationally  accepted  rules  of  warfare  in  order  to  respond  with  force, 

otherwise nations are forced to rely only upon criminal proceedings.30  

Thus,  there  are  two  dimensions  of  legal  effects  produces  by  harmful  online  conduct  – 

provided  that  the  conduct  is  criminalized,  it  will  always  fall  within  the  ambit  of  criminal 

law.  However,  if  the  effects  of  the  conduct  are  serious  enough  to  entail  consequences  for 

the  national  security,  such  conduct  can  be  seen  in  the  dimension  of  cyberaggression  and 

the international law. 

Victimized nations seeking to take action under the current international legal framework 

must  first  determine  the  source  and  nature  of  a  cyberattack.  In  doing  so,  a  nation  must 

equate a cyberattack to either a traditional armed attack, or to a criminal act.  Attributing a 

physical attack perpetrated with traditional weaponry to those responsible involves a two-

prong  analysis;  it  is  determined  whether  another  nation  (as  opposed  to  individuals  or 

other non-state groups) was responsible for the attack, and if not, the attack is addressed 

as a criminal matter. Historically, the evidence indicating that another nation perpetrated a 

physical  attack,  thus  constituting  an  act  of  war,  was  relatively  clear.  An  attack  involved 

physical  destruction  that  only  another  nation  had  the  resources  to  inflict,  and  soldiers 

wearing  the  uniform  of  the  aggressor  nation  carried  out  the  attack.  The  circumstances 

surrounding  most  cyberattacks  rarely  produce  such  clear  evidence.  By  nature, 

cyberwarfare  represents  a  disaggregation  of  combatants  and  requires  significant 

geographic  dispersal  of  assets  where  the  identity  and  location  of  attackers  are  masked. 
                                                           
29 Schmitt, Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare 29-37. 2013. 
30 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 261-262 (2011). 

 

12 

Moreover,  nations  without  sophisticated  cyberspace  capabilities  or  those  wishing  to 

further disguise the attack’s source may contract with for-hire enterprises across the world 

that are willing to carry out cyberattacks against legitimate’ targets. Identifying responsible 

parties  is  further  complicated  by  the  rapid  advancement  in  computer  technology,  which 

creates  an  almost  continuous  learning  curve  that  places  law  enforcement  at  an  extreme 

disadvantage  in  their  attempts  to  attribute  responsibility  for  an  attack.  The  technological 

challenges  cyberspace  poses,  coupled  with  the  problem  of  asymmetry  and  anonymity, 

exponentially increas the complexity of the cross-jurisdictional investigative challenges.31 

It  is  common  for  online  attackers  to  use  so  called  ‘slave’  computers  owned  by  innocent 

parties  in  their  assaults.  The  place  from  which  a  cyberattack  originated  is  ambiguous 

because, while attacks might be routed though internet servers in, for example, China, they 

might not originate in China. The slave computers can be anywhere in the physical world, 

because real space is irrelevant to activity in cyberspace.32 In these circumstances, point of 

origin of an attack provides little guidance in attributing the conduct.  

In  the  notorious  cyberattacks on  Iran,  Estonia  and Georgia,33 the  victimized nations  were 

unable to attribute responsibility for the  attack. Each example demonstrates  the inherent 

difficulty of determining responsibility for a cyberattack, the nature of the attack, and the 

intentions of those responsible. For example, the Estonia attack, which originally appeared 

to  be  a  state-sponsored  cyberattack  by  Russia,  was  relatively  unsophisticated  and  well 

within the capabilities of mere civilians. Such ambiguity surrounding the perpetrators and 

their  intentions  is  a  significant  obstacle  to  any  victimized  nation's  ability  to  defend  itself, 

and  current  legal  regimes  do  little  to  address  the  problem.  The  problem,  at  its  core,  is 

evidentiary;  a  nation  under  attack  must  properly  attribute  the  attack  before  choosing  a 

course of action but rarely has immediate access to the necessary evidence, which is often 

in a foreign jurisdiction and can be destroyed quickly and easily.  Gathering evidence of an 

attack,  which  is  ephemeral  by  nature,  is  further  hampered  by  cross-border  law 

                                                           
31 Id. at. 
32 BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes 195. 2012. 
33 See infra at 20-21. 

 

13 

enforcement's  reliance  on  international  agreements  that  were  not  designed  with  the 

unique problems of cyberaggression in mind.34 

Some literature on the subject offers consideration of the severity of the attack and place of 

origin  as  indicative  of  the  state  involvement  in  the  harmful  online  conduct.  Thus,  Tallinn 

Manual  suggests  that  if  an  attack  is  launched  from  governmental  cyber  infrastructure,  it 

might  be  indicative  of  governmental  involvement.  However,  such  position  is  somewhat 

naïve. It is doubtful that any government is reckless enough to launch an cyber operation 

against another country from its governmental portals when an easier solution would be to 

use hacking personnel operating from anywhere else but the state infrastructure. After all, 

as the Manual recognizes, the government computers may have come under control of non-

state actors.35  

5  Cybersecurity as an Umbrella Concept 

In general, the literature suggests to distinguishing between various types of cybersecurity 

concerns.  It  separates  a  basic  cyberattack  into  three  general  categories:  cybercrime, 

cyberterrorism,  and  cyberwarfare.  Cyberespionage  is  another  separate  cybersecurity 

concern  connected  to  either  state  intelligence  or  such  notion  as  hacktivism.  Dividing 

cybersecurity  into  manageable  components  facilitates  the  development  of  national  and 

international law governing the rights and duties of individuals and nations with respect to 

each category of activity (with the exception of espionage, there are no legal treaties that 

regulate  espionage,  separating  cyberespionage  as  notion  that  falls  outside  the  legal 

regulation).  This  approach  can  help  address  the  shortcomings  of  present  national  and 

international legal frameworks in a more effective manner.36 

As discussed, cyberattacks often do not closely resemble traditional criminal activity; it is 

often difficult to establish that the conduct at issue is criminal, as opposed to an act of war 

or terrorism. In the context of cyberspace,  states generate crime and terrorism as well as 

war,  and  individuals  wage  war  in  addition  to committing  crimes  and  carrying  out  acts  of 

                                                           
34 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 260 (2011). 
35 Schmitt, Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare 34-35. 2013. 
36 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 270 (2011). 

 

14 

terrorism.  Cyberattacks  largely  defy  the  simple  categorization  of  activity  defined  by 

existing  laws  making  it  difficult  for  nations  to  apply  the  traditional  definitions  of  crime, 

terrorism,  warfare  or  espionage  as  understood  under  existing 

law.  Traditional 

classifications  of  crime,  terrorism,  and  warfare  break  down  due  to  the  aforementioned 

asymmetric nature of network communication. By giving nonstate actors access to a new, 

diffuse kind of power, cyberspace erodes states’ monopolization of the ability to wage war 

and effectively levels the playing field between all actors.37 

The legal and legislative analyses of cybersecurity issues must distinguish not only among 

different  cyberthreat  categories  enumerated  above  and  actors,  such  as  nation-states, 

terrorists, criminals, and malicious hackers, but also among different types of cyberthreats. 

Such cyberthreats include threats to critical infrastructure, which could lead to loss of life 

or  significant  damage  to  our  economy;  and  threats  to  intellectual  property,  which  could 

affect a nation’s long-term competitiveness.38 

Concerning critical infrastructure, some commentators believe that at the moment, there is 

no  real  likelihood  that  non-state  actors  possess  the  capacity  to  bring  down  the  banks, 

transportation  systems,  electric  grid,  and  communication  systems  through  catastrophic 

cyberaggression.39 Wall, for example, attributes the ‘popularity’ of cybercrime to the media. 

He  posits  that  the  media  construction  of  the  cybersecurity  imagery  is  so  spectacularly 

dramatized and the internet is so newsworthy that a single dramatic incident of cybercrime 

has  the  power  to  shape  public  opinion  and  fuel  public  anxiety,  frequently  resulting  in 

demands  for  instant  and  simple  solutions  to  extremely  complex  situations.40  However, 

despite  such  skepticism,  commentators  accept  that  cyberterrorism  and  cyberwar  are  a 

nearing  reality.  Cybercrime,  they  warn,  is  advancing  in both  volume  and  sophistication.41 

Modern hackers use increasingly sophisticated methods to attack a variety of targets that 

occupy  nearly  every  corner  of  our  society:  private  persons,  corporations,  religious 

                                                           
37 Id. at, 261. 
38 Jorge L. Contreras, et al., Mapping Today's Ceybersecurity Landscape, 62 AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 
1119 (2013). 
39 Brian B. Kelly, Investing In a Centralized Cybersecurity Infrastructure: Why "Hacktivism" Can And Should 
Influence Cybersecurity Reform 92 BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1671-1673 (2012); CLOUGH, Principles of 
Cybercrime 11. 2010. 
40 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 14. 2007. 
41 Peter M. Shane, Cybersecurity: Toward a Meaningful Policy Framework, 90 TEXAS LAW REVIEW (2012). 

 

15 

institutions,  and  governmental  entities,  including  local  police  units,  industrial  and  utility 

systems, and major governmental agencies and legislative bodies.42  

Other  commentators,  such  as  Kelly  and  Mehan,  are  somewhat  more  alarmist.43  Consider 

the following statistics from 2010. The cost of cyberattacks on private citizens worldwide, 

when  accounting  for  both  the  direct  financial  harm  and  time  lost  due  to  recovery  after 

cyberattacks,  totaled  $388  billion.  This  figure  amounts  to  more  than  the  global  black 

market  for  marijuana,  cocaine,  and  heroin  combined.  Statistics  aside,  the  magnitude  of 

harm posed by a major cyberattack was summarized in 2003 by Richard A. Clarke, former 

Special  Advisor  on  Cyberspace  Security  to  President  George  W.  Bush,  in  his  testimony 

before Congress:44 

The  threat  is  really  very  easy  to  understand.  If  there  are  major  vulnerabilities  in  the 

digital networks that make our country run, then someday, somebody will exploit them 

in  a  major  way  doing  great  damage  to  the  economy.  What  could  happen? 

Transportation  systems  could  grind  to  a  halt.  Electric  power  and  natural  gas  systems 

could malfunction. Manufacturing could freeze.  [… E]mergency call centers could jam. 

Stock,  bond,  futures,  and  banking  transactions  could  be  jumbled.  If  that  major  attack 

comes at a time when we are at war, it could put our forces at great risk by having their 

logistics system fail.45 

With  the  convergence  of  today's  commercial  systems,  a  coordinated  cyberattack  against 

stock markets and banks could erode consumer confidence and effectively create a global 

financial crisis.46 

Particularly  significant  is  the  observation  that  the  actual,  rather  than  perceived,  dangers 

posed  by  cyberaggression  are  not  always  immediately  evident  to  potential  or  actual 

victims.  Either  they  are  not  individually  regarded  as  serious,  or  they  are  genuinely  not 

serious,  but  possess  a  latent  danger  in  their  aggregation  or  being  precursors  to  more 

serious  crimes.  For  example,  computer  integrity  offences  often  pave  the  way  for  other 
                                                           
42 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1671-1673 (2012). 
43 MEHAN, Cyberwar, Cyberterror, Cybercrime: A Guide to the Role of Standards in an Environment of Change 
and Danger 73. 2008. 
44 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1674-1675 (2012). 
45 Cited in id. at, 1675. 
46 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 249 (2011). 

 

16 

forms  of  more  serous  offending  –  identity  or  information  theft  from  the  computer  only 

becomes serious when it is used against the owner (or incitement to violence).47 

While  cybersecurity  concerns  of  non-critical  nature  do  not  generate  doubts  as  to  their 

plausibility,  the  danger  to  which  the  critical  infrastructure  can  be  exposed  is  still 

questionable.    In  order  to  demonstrate  the  true  scope  of  the  threat,  a  sober  analysis 

provided  in  the  literature  of  the  largest  cybersecurity  incidents  in  recent  time  is 

illustrative.48  

The SQL Slammer 

 One of the earliest examples go back to 2003 when at 00:30 (EST) on January 25 a virus 

that  is  known  as  Slammer  infected  its  first  computer:  a  web  server  running  Microsoft’s 

database software SQL. Slammer was designed to replicate itself and send new copies out 

across the Internet. That simple but efficient design ensured that in just three minutes, by 

00:33, the number of infected machines was doubling every 8.5 seconds.49 

One infected network belonged to Ohio utility company FirstEnergy; it was located in their 

Davis-Besse  nuclear  power  plant.  Slammer  snaked  its  way  into  the  plant’s  systems  via  a 

contractor’s unsecured connection and began to slow down the plant’s servers due to the 

constant  flow  of  Slammer  copies  being  flung  out  across  the  network.  Eventually,  two 

monitoring  systems  at  the  plant  crashed  and  were  not  restored  until  six  hours  had 

passed.50  The  story  of  Slammer’s  infection  of  a  nuclear  power  plant  back  in  2003  is 

indicative  of  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  digital  systems  of  control  of  critical  infrastructural 

objects. However, the consequences of Slammer infection were much less impressive than 

the fact itself. The plant was offline at the time the infection occurred, and had been so for 

nearly  a  year.  The  failed  monitoring  system  had  an  analog  backup  system  that  was  not 

compromised.  Moreover,  no  disruptions  in  service  or  power  outages  were  traced  to 

                                                           
47 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 209-210. 2007. 
48 Karson K. Thompson, Not Like an Egyptian: Cybersecurity and the Internet Kill Switch Debate, 90 TEXAS LAW 
REVIEW (2011). 
49 Id. at, 470. 
50 Id. at, 471. 

 

17 

Slammer, and the vulnerability that Slammer exploited was so well-known that Microsoft 

had deployed a patch fixing the problem six months before Slammer was released.51 

However, the mere fact that the virus did not produce devastating consequences and that 

the  system  was  protected  enough  to  cope  with  the  infection  does  not  in  itself  testify  for 

implausibility of such consequences. After all, disruption of the integrity of the monitoring 

and systems of the nuclear facility might not have been the intention of the author of the 

virus. 

Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  (SCADA) Systems Security and Stuxnet  

Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems are used to monitor and control 

critical  industrial  processes  like  power  generation.52  A  variety  of  industries  across  the 

globe employ some form of SCADA system. SCADA systems were developed in the 1960s, 

and  many  systems  based  in  whole  or  in  part  on  that  initial  design  remain  in  use  today. 

These  technological  dinosaurs  were  never  designed  to  interface  with  massive  corporate 

intranets that put SCADA systems within reach of the Internet and all its cyber pathogens, 

such as Stuxnet.53 

Stuxnet, discovered on July 14, 2010, was  described as  one of the most sophisticated and 

unusual pieces of malicious software ever created and was the first worm built not only to 

spy  on  industrial  systems,  but  also  to  reprogram  them,  and  manage  their  industrial 

infrastructure.54  The  worm  spread  like  a  traditional  Windows-based  rootkit  but  was 

uniquely  targeted  at  specific  SCADA  subsystems.  Though  tens  of  thousands  of  computers 

were  ultimately  infected  with  Stuxnet,  the  ‘epicenter’  of  the  infection  was  Iran,  where  it 

targeted five Iranian  industrial processing organisations.  Some security experts speculate 

that  the  final  target  was  Iran’s  Bushehr  nuclear  power  plant,  a  fear  confirmed  at  least  in 

part by the Iranian government.55 While Stuxnet did not take control of the nuclear facility, 

which  it  was  more  than  capable  of  doing,  the  damage  it  caused  delayed  the  facility’s 

opening by several months. Stuxnet has also been found in other infrastructure systems in 

                                                           
51 Id. at, 471-472. 
52 CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 11. 2010. 
53 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 472 (2011); CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 11. 2010. 
54 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 259 (2011). 
55 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 472-473 (2011). 

 

18 

India, Pakistan, and Indonesia raising concerns that once sophisticated malware is released 

into a network, it can spread unpredictably.56 

Though Stuxnet’s sophistication and specificity are indeed a cause for concern, once again, 

the risks were blown out of proportion by the media and their cybersecurity sources.57 In 

the aftermath of its detection, experts and media personnel alike were quick in putting the 

implicative tag of ‘act of war’ onto the use of the malicious program, although no competent 

justification  for  such  labeling  was  offered.58  Siemens,  the  manufacturer  of  the  targeted 

machines,  reported  that  no  plant  operations  had  been  disrupted  as  a  result  of  Stuxnet. 

Further,  the  Siemens  systems used in Iran were  modified and illegally acquired, meaning 

they seemed to lack even the imperfect security measures typical of SCADA systems.59 

Given the potential military capacity of Stuxnet, the problem of attribution is illustrative. If 

a hostile nation were able to seize control of a nuclear facility in this manner, a threatened 

nation  would  find  it  difficult  to  justify  retaliation  by  force  under  existing  international 

law.60 

Information Security 

Internet-based threats are not only about crippling infrastructure and disabling important 

systems. Information security is a prime consideration for many web-connected entities. In 

December  2010,  Google  was  on  the  receiving  end  of  a  cyberattack  intended  to  give  the 

perpetrators  access  to  the  Gmail  accounts  of  various  Chinese  human  rights  activists. 

Analysts  believe  the  attackers  sent  e-mails  to  Google  employees,  attaching  PDF  files 

containing  hidden  software  that  automatically  (but  discreetly)  installed  itself  when  the 

documents  were  opened.  Once  installed,  the  software  gave  the  attackers  the  ability  to 

explore some of Google’s internal systems.61 

                                                           
56 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 259 (2011). 
57 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 473-474 (2011). 
58 Sascha Knoepfel, Clarifying the International Debate on Stuxnet: Arguments for Stuxnet as an Act of War in 
CYBERSPACE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS: THEORY, PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES 117-124, (Jan-Frederik Kremer & 
Benedikt Müller eds., 2014). 
59 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 473-474 (2011). 
60 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 260 (2011). 
61 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 474 (2011). 

 

19 

In March 2011, RSA, the computer-security division of EMC Corporation, was also attacked. 

The  RSA  hack  took  advantage  of  unwary  employees,  enticing  them  to  open  spreadsheets 

laced  with  malicious  code.  Once  inside,  the  hackers  extracted  information  related  to  the 

company’s  SecurID  authentication  products,  which  some  forty  million  businesses  use  to 

add  another  layer  of  protection  to  their  networks.  Though  RSA  insists  the  stolen 

information  does  not  enable  a  successful  direct  attack  on  any  of  their  RSA  SecurID 

customers,  the  incident  does  illustrate  that  no  one  –  not  even  a  security  expert  –  is 

perfectly safe.62 

Attacks on Estonia and Georgia 

The attack on Estonia represents the best-known example of a coordinated cyberattack on 

a  sovereign nation’s critical infrastructure, and it  illustrates  the  need for an international 

effort  to  coordinate  cybersecurity  policy.  The  attack  was  debilitating,  disrupting 

government communication support systems, and the online platforms of banks, retailers, 

and  newspapers.  The  damage  inflicted  by  the  attack  necessitated  a  response  from  the 

Estonian  government;  however,  the  government  could  do  very  little  in  the  absence  of 

established  procedures  for  international  cooperation  because  the  attacks  originated  in 

foreign  jurisdictions.  The  attack  demonstrated  that  the  internet  is  a  viable  alternative  to 

traditional  modes  of  warfare  and  terrorism.  It  also  reaffirmed  that  the  absence  of  a 

comprehensive international legal framework with the flexibility to cope with the complex 

nature  of  cyberspace  has  hampered  efforts  to  deter  such  acts  and  prosecute  those 

responsible.63 

Estonian public and private sectors suffered a prolonged cyberattack campaign that lasted 

several  weeks.  The  attack,  which  occurred  in  waves  over  several  weeks,  disrupted  the 

websites of the Estonian President and Parliament, the vast majority of Estonian ministries, 

three  of  the  country’s  six  largest  news  organizations,  and  two  of  its  major  banks.  The 

crippling  impact  of  the  attack  was  due,  in  part,  to  the  fact  that  the  Estonian  government 

conducts  most  of  its  basic  operations  using  the  Internet.  The  prolonged  disruption  of 

critical  websites  caused  widespread  unrest.  Although  it  is  claimed  that  the  attacks 

                                                           
62 Id. at, 474-475. 
63 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 250-251 (2011). 

 

20 

originated within Russian jurisdiction, Estonia was never able to link them directly to the 

Russian  government.  However,  the  speculation  that  Russian  government  was  behind  the 

attacks  led  some  Estonian  officials  to  advocate  for  an  official  request  for  assistance 

pursuant  to  Article  V  of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty,  which  requires  members  of  the  North 

Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  (NATO)  to  assist  an  ally  in  the  event  of  an  armed  attack. 

Article V expressly states that such assistance may include use of ‘armed force’ against the 

aggressor.  This  marked  the  first  time  in  NATO  history  that  a  member  state  sought 

assistance from NATO allies in response to an Internet-based attack on its infrastructure.64 

Although the Estonian government claims to have proof that the earliest attacks originated 

from Russian government computers, the nature of a DDoS attack makes determining the 

original  source  of  the  attack  difficult.  Moreover,  hackers  who  use  botnets  continue  to 

develop  increasingly  sophisticated  command  structures  that  make  the  task  of  tracing  an 

attack to the original source nearly impossible. A subsequent U.S. government investigation 

found that it is  not likely that Russian  security agencies were responsible for the  attacks, 

but rather politically driven hackers.65 

The attack on Georgia in 2008 was designed to disrupt the Georgian government’s ability to 

communicate,  demonstrating  that  a  cyberattack  can  complement  traditional  armed 

conflict.  The  DDoS  attack  on  Georgia  began  weeks  before  the  armed  conflict  with  Russia, 

and  it  overloaded  and  effectively  shut  down  Georgian  servers.  A  DDoS  attack  can  be 

enormously  effective  in  disrupting  an  enemy’s  ability  to  coordinate  defense  measures  in 

preparing  for  an  armed  conflict,  transmit  emergency  communications  to  its  citizens,  and 

communicate  with  the  outside  world.  The  attack  on  Georgia  is  an  example  of  the  crucial 

role  that  cyberattacks  may  play  in  future  instances  of  armed  conflict.  Cyberattacks  are  a 

cost  effective  alternative  or  complement  to  traditional  warfare,  as  the  cost  of  initiating  a 

cyberattack relative to developing, producing, and using traditional weaponry is nominal. If 

states can fund an entire cyberwarfare campaign for the cost of replacing a tank tread, it is 

likely to gain favor as a viable complement or alternative to traditional warfare. The source 

of  the  cyberattack  on  Georgia,  as  with  Estonia,  is  still  the  subject  of  debate.  Evidence 

suggests  that  a  Russian  criminal  organization  was  responsible  for  the  attack,  but  the 
                                                           
64 Id. at, 256-257; BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes 205-208. 2012. 
65 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 257-258 (2011). 

 

21 

difficulty in sorting through an attack perpetrated using numerous computers throughout 

the  world  makes  it  impossible  to  be  certain.  The  lack  of  consensus  on  who  initiated  the 

attack underscores the challenge of determining who should ultimately be held responsible 

for initiating a cyberattack.66 

5.1  Cybercrime and Cybercrime Tools 

Computer-related  crime  is  a  long-established  phenomenon,  but  the  growth  of  global 

connectivity is  inseparably tied to the  development of contemporary cybercrime. Today’s 

cybercrime  activities  focus on utilizing globalized information communication technology 

for committing criminal acts with transnational reach.67 Cybercrime is perhaps one of the 

more clearly identified thematic areas of cybersecurity and the one where there is almost 

universal  agreement  on  best  practice,  as  expressed  in  the  Budapest  Convention  (the 

Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime).68 

The  term  cybercrime  is  used  to  refer  both  to  traditional  crimes  (e.g.,  extortion,  fraud, 

forgery, identity theft, and child exploitation) that are committed over electronic networks 

and information systems as well as to crimes unique to electronic networks  (e.g., hacking 

and denial of service attacks).69 

‘Definitions’  of  cybercrime  mostly  depend  upon  the  purpose  of  using  the  term.  A  limited 

number  of  acts  against  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  computer  data  or 

systems represent the core of cybercrime. Beyond this, however, computer-related acts for 

personal or financial gain or harm, including forms of identity-related crime, and computer 

content-related acts (all of which fall within a wider meaning of the term ‘cybercrime’) do 

not  lend  themselves  easily  to  efforts  to  arrive  at  legal  definitions  of  the  aggregate  term. 

Certain definitions are required for the core  of cybercrime acts. However, a ‘definition’ of 

cybercrime is not as relevant for other purposes, such as defining the scope of specialized 

                                                           
66 Id. at, 258-259. 
67 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 4. 2013. 
68 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1753 (2011); Convention on Cybercrime. Council of Europe.  
(2001). 
69 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 249 (2013). 

 

22 

investigative and international cooperation powers, which are better focused on electronic 

evidence for any crime, rather than a broad, artificial ‘cybercrime’ construct.70  

Numerous  academic  works  have  attempted  to  define 

‘cybercrime.’  National  and 

international legislation, however, does not appear concerned with a strict definition of the 

word.  Rather,  legislation  more  commonly  referred  to  ‘computer  crimes,’  ‘electronic 

communications,’ 

‘information  technologies,’ 

‘high-tech  crime,’ 

‘offence  relating  to 

computer  information,’  ‘criminal  act  of  which  the  target  is  computer information,’  or  ‘the 

use of information resources and (or) the impact on them in the informational sphere for 

illegal purposes.’71 

It  is  clear  from  these  approaches  that  a  number  of  general  features  could  be  used  to 

describe cybercrime acts. One approach is to focus on the material offence object – that is, 

on the person, thing, or value against which the offence is directed.72 Another approach is 

to consider whether computer systems or information systems form an integral part of the 

modus  operandi  of  the  offence.73  Identifying  possible  cybercrime  offence  objects  and 

modus  operandi  does  not  describe  cybercrime  acts  in  their  entirety,  but  it  can  provide  a 

number of useful general categories into which acts may be broadly classified.74 

In 2007, Wall suggested three main categories of cybercrime: (i) computer integrity crimes, 

which are offences relating to the integrity of the computer systems (for example hacking 

and  DDoS);  (ii)  computer  assisted  crimes,  which  are  offences  assisted  by  computers  (for 

examples virtual robberies, scams and thefts); and (iii) computer content crimes, which are 

offences  that  focus  on  the  content  of  computers  (for  example  pornography  and  offensive 

                                                           
70 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xvii. 2013. 
71 Id. at, 11-12. 
72 Francesco Calderoni, The European Legal Framework on Cybercrime: Striving for an Effective 
Implementation, 54 CRIME, LAW AND SOCIAL CHANGE (2010). 
73 Ellen S. Podgor, International Computer Fraud: A Paradigm for Limiting National Jurisdiction, 35 U.C. DAVIS 
LAW REVIEW (2002). 
74 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 15. 2013. 

 

23 

communication).75  UNODC  in  its  2013  Comprehensive  Study  on  Cybercrime  proposes  14 

acts that may constitute cybercrime, organized in those same three broad categories:76 

Acts against the confidentiality, integrity and availability of computer data or systems: 

• 

• 

• 

Illegal access to a computer system 

Illegal access, interception or acquisition of computer data 

Illegal interference with a computer system or computer data 

•  Production, distribution or possession of computer misuse tools 

•  Breach of privacy or data protection measures 

Computer related acts for personal or financial gain or harm: 

•  Computer related fraud or forgery 

•  Computer related identity offences 

•  Computer related copyright or trademark offences 

•  Sending or controlling sending of Spam 

•  Computer related acts causing personal harm 

•  Computer related solicitation or 'grooming' of children 

Computer content related acts: 

•  Computer related acts involving hate speech 

•  Computer related production, distribution or possession of child 

pornography 

•  Computer related acts in support of terrorism offences 

The  basic  security  breach  tools  with  which  the  enumerated  crime  are  committed  are 

backdoors, botnets, denial-of-service attacks, keyloggers, logic bombs, malware, pharming, 

phishing,  rootkits,  smurfing,  spoofing,  spyware,  Trojan  horses,  viruses,  worms,  and  many 

more,77 the reach variety and the definition of which can be found elsewhere.78  

                                                           
75 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 49-50, 52-129. 2007. 
76 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 16. 2013. For substantive elements of each proposed group please 
refer to the Study  at 17-21. 
77 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 469 (2011); BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and 
Outcomes 36-56, 121-126. 2012. 
78 There are numerous publicly available sources on the technical nature of cybercrime tools. See for example 
Yvonne Jewkes & Majid Yar, Handbook of Internet Crime  (Routledge 2010). 

 

24 

It should be noted that these basic tools are used to commit cyberattacks falling with the 

categories – cybercrime and cyberaggression (cyber warfare). 

Generally, cyberattacks are separated into three major categories: (i) ‘automated malicious 

software delivered over the Internet,’ (ii) ‘denial-of-service attacks,’ and (iii) ‘unauthorized 

remote  intrusions  into  computer  systems.’79  Recent  high  profile  attacks  perpetrated 

against Estonia, Georgia, and Iran80 have involved a combination of these attack methods, 

but  two  types  of  attack  are  of  particular  importance  because  they  are  relatively  easy  to 

carry  out  and  they  are  extremely  effective.  The  first  type  utilizes  malware,  which  was 

traditionally  classified  as  either  a  virus  or  worm.  Malware  typically  infects  a  computer 

system  through  e-mail  or  when  a  user  visits  infected  websites,  and  the  nature  of  its 

interaction  with  the  system  depends  on  whether  it  operates  like  a  virus  or  worm.  For 

example, a virus cannot replicate itself until a user runs the infected program and can lay 

dormant  until  that  occurs.  When  it  does,  the  virus  replicates  itself,  infiltrates  other 

programs on the host computer, and modifies them to carry out functions other than those 

originally intended. Worms, on the other hand, are themselves programs and can replicate 

independently. Worms can spread within a host computer system and also to any system 

connected to it by a network or the Internet. As malware has grown more sophisticated it 

has been further classified by its specific function, common examples of which are Trojan 

horses, rootkits, sniffers, exploits, bombs, and zombies. Many cyberattacks involve another 

form of malware that allows multiple computers to be remotely controlled by – or ‘slaved’ 

to the commands of – a single operator who can dictate the behavior of those computers. 

Cyberattackers  can  effectively  magnify  the  potential  devastation  caused  by  an  attack  by 

using  this  slaving  technique.  This  method  of  attack,  used  in  the  2007  cyberattack  on 

Estonia,  allows  a  cyberattacker  to  implement  a  coordinated  attack  from  numerous 

locations,  including  within  the  target  network,  with  very  limited  warning  for  a  nominal 

cost.81 

                                                           
79 Mathhew J. Sklerov, Solving the Dilemma of State Responses to Cyberattacks: A Justification for the Use of 
Active Defenses Against States Who Neglect Their Duty to Prevent, 201 MILITARY LAW REVIEW (2009). 
80 See supra at 20-21. 
81 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 254-255 (2011). 

 

25 

The  second  frequently  used  method  of  cyberattack  is  known  as  a  denial-of-service  (DoS) 

attack. A DoS attack is initiated from a single computer and overwhelms a target computer 

system  with  requests  until  the  system  can  no  longer  function  properly,  denying  users 

access  to  and  use  of  the  targeted  system.  A  DOS  attack  operates  by  paralyzing  the  target 

system's functionality, while malware operates by changing the function the target system 

is  programmed  to  perform.  Both  methods  capitalize  on  basic  flaws  in  the  Internet’s 

architecture and are often used in conjunction with one another to maximize damage to the 

target system. The recent cyberattacks on Estonia and Georgia offer vivid examples, as they 

were carried out using a combination of malware and DoS known as a Distributed Denial of 

Service (DDoS).82 

In a DDoS attack, hackers use malware to take control of numerous computers and use the 

hijacked computers – referred to as ‘zombies’ – to send a massive series of data packets to 

the targeted networks. It is particularly difficult to track a DDoS attack to its original source 

because  the  owners  of  the  hijacked  computers  are  rarely  aware  that  their  systems  are 

being  used  remotely  to  carry  out  a  cyberattack.  A  network  of  compromised  ‘zombie’ 

computers is often referred to as a ‘botnet.’ In 2007, Vint Cerf, widely recognized as one of 

the  fathers  of  the  Internet,  estimated  that  as  many  as  25%  of  networked  computers 

worldwide, or 150 million computers, may be part of botnets. Although hackers use other 

methods  in  carrying  out  attacks,  malware,  DoS,  and  DDoS  used  in  recent,  high  profile 

attacks demonstrates the urgency of addressing cyberattacks and the challenges they pose 

for victimized nations.83 

Describing  the  current  cyberthreat  landscape,  Kellerman  addressed  the  proliferation  of 

targeted  attacks,  professionalization  of  cybercrime,  automation  and  commoditization  of 

cyberattack  tools,  and  the  evolution  of  mobile  threats,  including  the  explosion  in  use  of 

mobile malware. Kellerman also identified several recent IT-related trends that challenge 

our  ability  to  secure  cyberspace,  such  as  the  migration  to  cloud  computing,  the 

consumerization of IT, the rise of social networking and social media, and the explosion in 

the  use  of  mobile  devices.  To  address  the  evolution  of  the  cyberthreat  landscape,  which 

                                                           
82 Id. at, 255-256. 
83 Id. at, 256. 

 

26 

urges  the  development  of  improved  standards  for  browser  security,  application  security, 

and e-mail authentication in order to enhance cybersecurity and address cybercrime.84 

5.2 

 Hacking and Hacktivism 

Early on in the age of the personal computer, manycomputer users performed ‘hacks’: legal 

or  illegal  computer  manipulations  (e.g.,  access,  defacement,  redirects)  of  computer 

systems/networks  imbued  with  innovation,  style,  and  technical  virtuosity.85  Hacking 

activity  today  involves  all  types  of  cyberattacks  utilizing  the  whole  range  of  cybercrime 

tools.  In  essence,  hacking  is  an  umbrella  term  that  most  commonly  describes  illegal  or 

harmful cyberactivity. 

While  the  problem  of  hacking  is  primarily  addresses  by  the  criminal  law  on  the  level  of 

prohibition  of  the  objective  elements  of  hacking  conduct,  hacktivism  introduces  a  very 

distinct mental element to hacking.  The term hacktivism describes hacking with a leap of 

political  ideology  introduced  into  the  hacking  activity.  It  is  also  commonly  defined  as  the 

marriage  of  political  activism  and  computer  hacking.    When  hacking  becomes  explicitly 

political  -  i.e.,  becomes  hacktivism  -  it  is  reframed  from  technical  feats  with  an  implied 

philosophical underpinning to the explicit pursuit of attention for various issues in order to 

shift public discourse, raise awareness, and create public pressure.86 

Hacktivists share a set of beliefs, such as tolerance for legal risk, naming practices, scale of 

collective  action  and  propensity  for  multinational  cooperation.  In  engaging  in  illegal 

activity,  hacktivists  frequently  form  a  collective  in  order  to  target  singular  issues  rather 

than  merely  fragmented  pockets  of  data  or  code.  Yet,  despite  hacktivists’  sense  of 

collectivity  behind  any  particular  motive  for  a  hack,  individual  hacktivist  operations  are 

primarily conducted by solo or small-group hackers, with little or no apparent coordination 

of the overall campaign.87 

In 2010, WikiLeaks gained notoriety for distributing hundreds of thousands of confidential 

American diplomatic cables via its website. The controversial leaks made the organization 

                                                           
84 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1117 (2013). 
85 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1676-1677 (2012). 
86 Id. at, 1677. 
87 Id. at, 1677-1678. 

 

27 

both  famous  and  infamous,  subjecting  founder  Julian  Assange  to  criticism  and  criminal 

investigation.88 

Meanwhile the WikiLeaks website was struggling to stay connected in the face of multiple 

DDoS attacks. Fighting fire with fire, WikiLeaks supporters in the online group Anonymous 

launched Operation Payback, orchestrating DDoS attacks of their own against MasterCard, 

Visa,  and  PayPal89  (for  suspending  donations  to  WikiLeaks)  and  flirted  with  attacking 

Amazon (for taking down the WikiLeaks site hosted on its servers).90 

The  group  Anonymous  is  the  current  embodiment  of  the  idea  of  hacktivism.  There  are 

other  examples  of  the  group  Anonymous  activity.  Thus,  in  April  2011,  Sony’s  PlayStation 

Network - an online gaming community for the company’s top-selling video game console - 

was  the  victim  of  a  more  intrusive  cyberattack.  Hackers  breached  security  safeguards  to 

steal  data  from  each  of  the  PlayStation  Network’s  seventy-seven  million  individual  user 

accounts, including birthdates and credit card numbers. Upon discovering the breach, Sony 

promptly shut down the PlayStation Network for more than a month in order to conduct a 

thorough  security  and  damage  assessment.  Sony  estimated  that  the  cyberattack  caused 

approximately  $170  million  in  losses  for  the  company.  In  the  weeks  preceding  the 

cyberattack, the hackers alleged to be responsible had taken to the blogosphere to declare 

war on Sony for its decision to sue a hacker in January 2011 for publishing the PlayStation 

3 console code obtained from reverse-engineering the device.91 

In  August  2011,  Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  (BART)  -  the  San  Francisco  Bay  Area’s  public 

transportation  system  –  shut  down  cell  phone  service  in  its  subway  tunnels  to  prevent 

mobile  communication  between  protestors  seeking  to  halt  movement  of  subway  trains. 

Hackers swiftly denounced BART’s action, condemning it as a violation of civil rights, and 

executed  a  series  of  cyberattacks  on  BART  websites  as  retribution.  Simultaneously,  the 

hackers orchestrated a live protest with like-minded Bay Area residents in BART stations, 

causing the complete closure of two downtown San Francisco subway stations during rush 

                                                           
88 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 475 (2011). 
89 See also Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1665 (2012). 
90 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 475-476 (2011). 
91 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1665-1666 (2012). 

 

28 

hour.92 Also in 2011, Anonymous also targeted U.S. federal and state government entities. 

CIA.gov and Senate.gov were the victims of DDoS attacks. 

In  2011,  Anonymous  also  began  increasingly  targeting  governments  and  government 

entities, giving its cyberattacks an overtly political flavor. This trend began early in the year 

when  a  Tunisian  marketplace  vendor  set  himself  on  fire  after  the  dictatorship  seized  his 

goods.  Anonymous  caught  wind  of  the  event  and  after  investigating  the  dictatorship  in 

greater  depth,  determined  the  Tunisian  government  was  guilty  of  widely  suppressing  its 

citizens’  access  to  the  Internet,  or  at  least  portions  of  the  Internet  that  contained 

unfavorable (but truthful) stories. Anonymous then conducted cyberattacks against several 

Tunisian government websites and provided Tunisian citizens with software to circumvent 

the dictatorship’s censorship blocks. Within a month, President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, the 

country’s dictator, fled after the Arab Spring protests escalated. 93 

On 11 April 2013, Denmark experienced a massive DDoS attack on its country-wide digital 

identification system NemID, for a few hours crippling the access to all services requiring 

digital  identification,  which  covers  almost  all  areas  of  life  in  Denmark,  including  online 

banking,  municipal  services,  taxation  and  health  care  systems,  real  estate  and  land 

registration, library services, and many other areas. Earlier same week, the websites of the 

Danish  Local  Government  Association  (Kommunernes  Landsforening)  and  the  Danish 

Social Democrats (Socialdemokraterne) had been subjected to DDoS attacks following the 

group  Anonymous  declaration  of  support  of  the  Danish  Union  of  Teachers  (Danmarks 

Lærerforening) in its dispute with the ‘Kommunerne.’94  

Illustrated by the examples above, Anonymous is not defined as, and does not intend to be 

defined  as,  the  traditional  cast  of  voiceless,  faceless  hackers.  Rather, Anonymous  publicly 

leads  the  hacktivism  movement,  the  nonviolent  use  of  illegal  or  legally  ambiguous  digital 

tools in pursuit of political ends. Even under the discrete umbrella of hacktivism, however, 

Anonymous  has  a  distinct  make-up:  a  decentralized  (almost  nonexistent)  structure, 

                                                           
92 Id. at, 1666-1667. 
93 Id. at, 1680-1681. 
94 Mads Allingstrup, Danmark under Massivt Cyberangreb. Berlingske (11 April 2013), 
http://www.b.dk/tech/danmark-under-massivt-cyberangreb-0. 

 

29 

unabashed moralistic/political motivations, and a proclivity to couple online cyberattacks 

with offline protests.95 

On  its  website,  Anonymous  describes  itself  as  an  internet  gathering  rather  than  a  group. 

Moreover, Anonymous states that it has a very loose and decentralized command structure 

that operates on ideas rather than directives.96 Prior to 2008, Anonymous had been most 

notable  for  the  spread  of  harmless,  humorous  Internet  pranks  like  the  ‘rickroll’  and 

‘lolcats.’97 A clash with the Church of Scientology in January 2008 changed that perception, 

however,  shedding  light  on  who  (or  what)  Anonymous  is  today.  The  group  began  a 

campaign  against  the  Church  of  Scientology  after  the  Church  tried  to  suppress  Internet 

media  outlets’  publication  of  a  notorious  video  of  movie  star  Tom  Cruise  speaking 

fanatically  (and  incoherently)  about  the  religion.  What  differentiated  this  Anonymous 

campaign  from  its  prior  attacks  was  its  seriousness  and  breadth.  More  than  6000 

participating  members  of  the  operation,  dubbed  Project  Chanology,  donned  Guy  Fawkes 

masks  and  protested  in  the  streets  of  ninety  cities  worldwide,  spanning  North  America, 

Europe,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand.  Meanwhile,  online  members  raided  Scientology 

websites  and prevented  the  Cruise  video  from altogether disappearing from the  Internet. 

The  Church  of  Scientology  had  done  nothing  to  initially  provoke  Anonymous,  but 

Anonymous  members  took  issue  with  the  Church’s  litigious  history  and  attempted 

suppression of free speech on the Internet.98 

Thus, in the wake of its battle against Scientology, some key characteristics of Anonymous 

emerged:  (i)  an  unrelenting  moral  stance  on  issues  and  rights,  regardless  of  direct 

provocation;  (ii)  a  physical  presence  that  accompanies  online  hacking  activity;  and  (iii)  a 

distinctive brand.99 

                                                           
95 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1667-1668 (2012). 
96 Id. at, 1678. 
97 Id. at, 1679. 
98 Id. at, 1679-1680. 
99 Id. at, 1680. 

 

30 

5.3  Cyberwar and Cyberterrorism  

Wars  are  fought  within  the  context  of  their  age  with  the  weapons  determined  by  the 

prevalent  technology  of  the  age.100  At  that,  concepts  like  electronic  warfare,  information 

warfare, network warfare, cyberwar and cyberterrorism have been offered to explain the 

emerging area  of conflict. Unlike  kinetic weaponry, such as  weapons of mass destruction, 

that  cause  numerous  casualties  instantaneously,  cyber  warfare  creates  disruptive  rather 

than destructive effects with no less serious consequences.101  

The  term  cyberwar  refers  to  actions  by  a  nation-state  to  penetrate  another  nation’s 

computers or networks for the purposes causing damage or disruption. It is believed that 

the  world’s  largest  militaries  are  building  cyberwarfare  programs,  with  several  nation-

states  –  including  the  U.S.,  China,  Russia,  Israel,  and  Iran  –  already  considered  to  have 

joined the ranks of the cyberwar-capable. These potential military or terrorist threats are, 

inter alia, the effects of cyberattacks (i) on the power grid could lead to cascading failures 

across  the  nation  with  catastrophic  consequences;  (ii)  on  financial  systems  could  lead  to 

economic  panic  and/or  a  crashing  stock  market;  (iii)  on  water  systems  could  open  dams 

causing  flooding  or  make  entire  cities  uninhabitable;  (iv)  on  rail  systems  (e.g.,  involving 

intentional  misrouting  of  trains)  could  cause  massive  collisions;  (v)  on  air-traffic  control 

systems could lead to mass casualties; and (vi) on nuclear facilities could result in a nuclear 

reactor meltdown, leading to catastrophic loss of life.102 

As  already  discussed,  some  experts  have  suggested  that  cyberwar  concerns  have  been 

greatly exaggerated. A recent Dartmouth study of cyberwar funded by DHS concluded that 

the  degree  of  damage  that  could  be  caused  in  a  cyberattack  bears  no  resemblance  to  an 

electronic  ‘Pearl  Harbor,  although  inflicting  significant  economic  costs  on  the  public  and 

private sectors and impairing performance of key infrastructures (via IT networks linked 

to embedded computer systems, for example) seem both plausible and realistic. Prominent 

cybersecurity expert James Lewis at the Center for Strategic and International Studies has 

                                                           
100 MEHAN, Cyberwar, Cyberterror, Cybercrime: A Guide to the Role of Standards in an Environment of Change 
and Danger 21. 2008. 
101 Craig B. Greathouse, Cyber War and Strategic Thought: Do the Classic Theorists Still Matter?, in CYBERSPACE 
AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS: THEORY, PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES 23, (Jan-Frederik Kremer & Benedikt Müller 
eds., 2014). 
102 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 265-267 (2013). 

 

31 

repeatedly  expressed  skepticism  of  the  view  that  cyberattacks  are  likely  to  cause 

widespread death, damage, and destruction.103  

Cyberattacks are not very destructive, compared to kinetic weapons, particularly strategic 

weapons.  It  seems  fair  to  say  that  at  this  time,  the  possibility  of  damage,  death  and 

destruction  from  cyberattack  is  low.  Cyber  weapons  will  have  difficulty  producing 

casualties.  While  acknowledging  the  gravity  of  the  cyber  threat,  intelligence  officials 

dramatically  toned  down  their  cyberwar  rhetoric  in  early  2013.  For  example,  while 

Director  of  National  Intelligence  James  Clapper  told  Congress  in  March  2013  that 

cyberattacks are the most dangerous threat facing the United States, he also said that the 

intelligence  community  sees  only  a  remote  chance  of  a  major  computer  attack  on  the 

United  States  in  the  next  two  years.  Rhetoric  aside,  experts  are  struggling  to  identify 

appropriate responses to nation-state cyberattacks.104 

The  U.S.  military  formally  distinguishes  between  two  types  of  offensive  cyberpower 

available  to  nation-states:  Cyber  Network  Exploitation  (CNE)  and  Cyber  Network  Attack 

(CNA).  While  CNE  is  essentially  espionage,  CNA  refers  to  destructive  attacks.  Specifically, 

CNAs are defined as actions taken through the use of computer networks to disrupt, deny, 

degrade,  or  destroy  information  resident  in  computers  and  computer  networks  or  the 

computers and networks themselves.105 

As with any traditional forms of war, there are different levels of intensity of cyberwar. Not 

all  of  these  types  of  attacks  are  going  to  be  directed  towards  destruction  of  resources  or 

misdirection  during  an  attack.  Some  will  engage  in  military  destructive  or  disruptive 

activities, some – in intelligence gathering constituting cyberespionage.106 

Although  creating  a  typology  of  cyber  operations  is  difficult  due  to  the  nature  of  the 

technology involved,107 Mehan suggests the following calcification of the cyberwar: Class I 

cyberwar  is  concerned  with  the  protection  of  personal  information  or  personal  privacy. 

While  the  results can still be  devastating,  Class I  cyberwar is  considered to be  the  lowest 
                                                           
103 Id. at, 273. 
104 Id. at, 274. 
105 Id. at, 267-268. 
106 Greathouse, Cyber War and Strategic Thought: Do the Classic Theorists Still Matter? 24. 2014. 
107 See Kremer & Müller, Cyberspace and International Relations: Theory, Prospects and Challenges. 2014. 

 

32 

grade. Class II cyberwar concerns itself with industrial and economic espionage, which can 

be  directed  against  nations,  corporations  or  other  organizational  structures.  Class  III 

cyberwar is about global war and terrorism, which includes cyberterrorism, but which may 

also  include  attacks  against  other  parts  of  the  critical  infrastructure.  Finally,  Class  IV 

cyberwar is the combination of the techniques of Classes I – III in combination with kinetic 

military activities.108 

As for the cyber weaponry itself, it includes all those basic cyber technics that we can find 

in cybercrime, that is viruses, malware, denial of service, spying, jamming, blocking and so 

on.109 The factors that distinguish cyberwar from cybercrime are the object and the level of 

intensity of the attack and sophistication of the strategy of the attack.  

An  interesting  and  rather  alarming  development  is  that  in  November  of  2011,  the  U.S. 

Department of Defense concluded for the first time that cyberattacks can constitute an act 

of  war  to  which  the  United  States  may  respond  using  traditional  military  force  (i.e.,  a 

kinetic, rather than cyber-based, response).110 

5.4  Cyberespionage – the Advanced Persistent Threat 

Cyberespionage  refers  to  state-sponsored  theft  of  industrial  and  defense  secrets  and/or 

intellectual property.111 The state sponsored cyberespionage poses a serious threat to the 

economic  and  national  security.  Military  secrets  and  valuable  corporate  intellectual 

property undermine the long-term competitiveness of the targeted countries.112 

Some  prominent  examples  of  cyberespionage  include:  Moonlight  Maze  (1998);  Byzantine 

Hades (2002); Operation Titan Rain (2003); Operation Buckshot Yankee (2008); Operation 

Night Dragon (2008-2011); Operation Aurora (2009); penetration of Lockheed Martin, BAE 

Systems and Northrop Grumman (2009); Operation Shady RAT (2006); GhostNet (2009); 

                                                           
108 MEHAN, Cyberwar, Cyberterror, Cybercrime: A Guide to the Role of Standards in an Environment of Change 
and Danger 28. 2008. 
109 See Jewkes & Yar, Handbook of Internet Crime. 2010. 
110 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 268-269 (2013). 
111 Id. at, 252. 
112 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1114-1115 (2013). 

 

33 

the RSA Breach (2011); and twenty-three natural gas pipeline operators (December 2011-

June 2012).113  

By some reports, cyberespionage is estimated to cost the United States alone (in terms of 

lost  jobs,  innovation,  and  national  security)  and  its  corporations  (in  terms  of  lost 

intellectual property, remediation, and reduced consumer confidence) up toillion annually, 

but  reliably  quantifying  the  potentially  staggering  costs  of  cyberespionage  has  been  an 

elusive  goal.  Obstacles include  the  fact  that  many  companies  do  not know  that  they  have 

been victimized and even those that do know are often reluctant to disclose out of concern 

for their reputation.114 

One  particularly  insidious  form  of  cyberespionage  is  known  as  an  advanced  persistent 

threat (APT). APTs are highly targeted malware-based attacks with several distinguishing 

features. First, as their name suggests, APTs are often advanced. In many cases, they utilize 

the full spectrum of computer intrusion technologies and techniques and combine multiple 

attack  methodologies  and  tools  in  order  to  reach  and  compromise  their  target.  Second, 

APTs  are  persistent.  APT  operators  seek  long-term  access  to  their  targets,  with  attack 

objectives generally extending beyond immediate financial gain. In order to maintain long-

term  access  to  targets,  APTs  generally  operate  stealthily  for  as  long  as  possible.  Finally, 

APTs  rely  on  skilled,  motivated,  organized  and  well-funded  operators  to  coordinate  and 

execute attacks. The substantial resources required to operate APTs generally makes them 

a  tool  of  nation-states.  At  their  essence,  APTs  are  computer  intrusions  staged  by  threat 

actors  that  aggressively  pursue  and  compromise  specific  targets,  often  leveraging  social 

engineering or the ‘art of manipulation,’ in order to maintain a persistent presence within 

the victim’s network so that they can move laterally and extract sensitive information.115 

6  Legal Solutions and Strategies 

While a viable cybersecurity policy includes a wide range of considerations, legal measures 

play  a  key  role  in  the  prevention  and  combating  of  cybercrime.  These  are  required  in  all 

                                                           
113 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 253-255 (2013). 
114 Id. at, 256. 
115 Id. at, 256-257. 

 

34 

areas, including criminalization, procedural powers, jurisdiction, international cooperation, 

and internet service provider responsibility and liability. In particular, at the national level, 

cybercrime laws most often concern criminalization – establishing specialized offences for 

core cybercrime acts. Countries increasingly recognize the need, however, for legislation in 

other areas.116 

The technological developments associated with cybersecurity and cybercrime mean that – 

while traditional laws  can be  applied to  some  extent  –  legislation  must also grapple with 

new concepts  and  objects, such as  intangible  ‘computer data,’ not traditionally addressed 

by  law.  In  many  states,  laws  on  technical  developments  date  back  to  the  19th  century. 

These laws were, and to a great extent, still are, focused on physical objects – around which 

the daily life of industrial society revolved. For this reason, many traditional general laws 

do not take into account the particularities of information and information technology that 

are associated with cybercrime and crimes generating electronic evidence. These acts are 

largely characterized by new intangible objects, such as data or information.117  

While criminal law is often perceived as being most relevant when it comes to cybercrime, 

the  legal  responses  to  wider  concerns  of  cybersecurity  also  include  the  use  of  other 

branches  of  law,  such  as  civil  law  and  administrative  law.  Further  divisions  within  these 

legal  regimes  include  substantive  and  procedural  law,  as  well  as  regulatory  and 

constitutional,  or  rights-based,  laws.  In  many  legal  systems,  each  of  these  regimes  are 

characterized  by  specific  aims,  institutions,  and  safeguards.  Cybercrime  laws  are  most 

usually  found  within  the  areas  of  substantive  and  procedural  criminal  law.  However,  a 

number of other areas of law are also important.118 

The matter of criminalization of undesirable conduct in the internet has a two-fold effect: 

(i) creation of the legal basis for retributive suppression of the conduct, and (ii) creation of 

a  climate  of  social  unacceptability  of  cybercrime,  de-romanticizing  and  stigmatizing  such 

conduct. Those who use internet to commit crimes grew up with and were socialized by a 

climate in which the predominating mode of unlawful activity was real-world crime, in its 

                                                           
116 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xviii, 51. 2013. 
117 Id. at, 51. 
118 Id. at, 52. 

 

35 

traditional  guises,119  whereas  hacking,  for  example,  does  not  invoke  a  feeling  of  social 

unacceptability.  Rather,  it  is  marked  by  the  ethos  of  sport  almost.  Currently,  hacking 

behavior  is  characterized  by  a  laissez-faire  attitude  toward  liability  and  legality  in  many 

jurisdictions globally..120 In this sense,   conceptualization of cybercrime as a crime proper 

advances both retribution and deterrence. 

6.1  Criminalization 

At  the  national  level,  both  existing  and  new  (or  planned),  cybercrime  laws  most  often 

concern  criminalization,  indicating  a  predominant  focus  on  establishing  specialized 

offences  for  core  cybercrime  acts.  Globally,  many  jurisdictions  tend  to  perceive  their 

criminal  and  procedural  law  frameworks  to  be  sufficient,  although  this  masks  large 

regional differences.121  While  many countries in Europe  tend to  consider their  legislation 

sufficient,  the  picture  is  reversed  in  Africa,  the  Americas,  Asia  and  Oceania,  where  more 

countries view laws as only partly sufficient, or not sufficient at all.122 

Also,  while  high-level  consensus  exists  regarding  broad  areas  of  criminalization,  the 

detailed  provisions  reveal  more  divergent  approaches.  Thus,  offences  involving  illegal 

access to computer systems and data differ with respect to the object of the offence (data, 

system, or information), and regarding the criminalization of ‘mere’ access as an inchoate 

crime or the requirement for further intent, such as to cause loss or damage. The requisite 

intent  for  an  offence  also  differs  in  approaches  to  criminalization  of  interference  with 

computer systems or data. Most countries require the interference to be intentional, while 

others  include  reckless  interference.123  For  interference  with  computer  data,  the  conduct 

constituting  interference  ranges  from  damaging  or  deleting,  to  altering,  suppressing, 

inputting  or  transmitting  data.  Criminalization  of  illegal  interception  differs  by  virtue  of 

whether the offence is restricted to non-public data transmissions or not, and concerning 

whether  the  crime  is  restricted  to  interception  by  technical  means.  Not  all  countries 

criminalize computer misuse tools. For those that do, differences arise regarding whether 

                                                           
119 Susan W. Brenner, Toward a Criminal Law for Cyberspace: a New Model of Law Enforcement?, 30 RUTGERS 
COMPUTER AND TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 39 (2004). 
120 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1693-1694 (2012). 
121 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xviii. 2013. 
122 Id. at. 
123 Id. at, xx. 

 

36 

the offence covers possession, dissemination, or use of software (such as malware) and/or 

computer access codes (such as victim passwords). From the perspective of international 

cooperation,  such  differences  may  have  an  impact  upon  findings  of  dual-criminality 

between countries.124 

6.2  Hacktivism and Criminalization 

Some  commentators  propose  that  targeting  hacktivism  (as  opposed  to  hacking)  in 

criminalization  efforts  will  most  obviously  minimize  a  threshold  problem  in  the  larger 

cybersecurity  debate.125  Perhaps  the  problem  is  that  criminalization  of  hacktivism  is  too 

complex a legal issue involving specific intent to promote, inter alia, political goals. Also, it 

might  also  be  challenging  from  the  perspective  of  social  acceptability  of  such  crime.  The 

examples  of  the  Anonymous  and  Anonymous-led  cyberattacks  discussed  above  are 

illustrative  precisely  because  of  the  ‘Robin  Hood’  flavor  of  the  Anonymous  intent.  Just  as 

the  mafia  was  once  singled  out  as  the  face  of  organized  crime,  governmental  authorities 

should capitalize on Anonymous’s visibility when discussing cybersecurity with the general 

public.  This  singling-out  of  Anonymous  would  not  be  unwarranted.  According  to  a  2012 

report published by Verizon, hacktivists (generally) overtook cybercriminals as the group 

responsible  for  the  largest  amount  of  damage  resulting  from  cyberattacks  in  absolute 

dollar  figures.  Moreover,  Anonymous  specifically  has  high  public  recognition  due  its 

reliance  on  social  media  (Twitter  feeds,  YouTube  pages,  and  websites),  branding 

mechanisms  (iconic  Guy  Fawkes  masks  and  naming  practices),  and  politically-charged 

viewpoints  in  the  course  of  conducting  cyberattacks  on  highprofile  victims.  Undoubtedly, 

sizable  sectors  of 

the  American  public 

followed  or  were  affected  by 

the 

PayPal/Visa/MasterCard  cyberattacks,  the  Sony  outage,  and  the  Occupy  Movement 

protests.126 

On the other hand, hacktivism is an umbrella term that covers a number of acts that rather 

than being a unique activity as such. This is at least true for the objective elements. Some of 

these  acts  are  already  criminalized  in  various  jurisdictions.  These  acts  constitute  such 

crimes  as,  for  example,  illegal  access  to,  interception  and  interference  with  computer 
                                                           
124 Id. at. 
125 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1706 (2012). 
126 Id. at, 1706-1707. 

 

37 

data.127 Hacktivism, however, may differ in its subjective element, that is the specific intent 

to achieve a specific goal or result. 

6.3  Procedure and Evidence 

The trans-border nature of cybercrime and the commission of a cybercrime in an electronic 

environment  are  the  main  difficulties  that  the  law  enforcement  faces.  The  traditional 

assumptions  about  a  perpetrator’s  being  observed  preparing  for,  committing  or  fleeing 

from an offense no longer hold true.128 Challenges in the investigation of cybercrime arise 

from  criminal  innovations  by  offenders,  difficulties  in  accessing  electronic  evidence,  and 

from  internal  resource,  capacity  and  logistical  limitations.  Suspects  frequently  use 

anonymization and obfuscation technologies, and new techniques quickly make their way 

to a broad criminal audience through online crime markets.129 

Identifying a perpetrator, investigating and gathering evidence of the crime can be difficult 

for  various  reasons.  In  addition  to  the  anonymization  and  obfuscation  challenges,  the 

country  that  hosts  the  cybercriminal  and  his  activities  may  not  define  what  is  done  as 

illegal and may therefore be unable to prosecute him or cooperate in his being extradited 

for  prosecution  elsewhere;  the  host  nation  may  not  have  agreements  in  effect  with  the 

victim nation which obligate it to assist in gathering evidence that can be used against the 

perpetrator;  or  extremely  volatile  electronic  evidence  may  have  been  destroyed, 

advertently  or  because  it  was  routine  transactional  data  that  was  not  retained  by  the 

Internet Service Provider which the offender used to commit the crime. Cyberspace makes 

physical space irrelevant. It becomes as easy to victimize someone who is halfway around 

the world as it is the next-door neighbor.130 

Therefore, on  the  procedural  level, the  main problem  for the  national  law enforcement is 

reconciliation  of  the  historical  fact  that  police  is  operationally  and  organizationally 

                                                           
127 BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes 21. 2012; Comprehensive Study on 
Cybercrime 78. 2013. 
128 Brenner, RUTGERS COMPUTER AND TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 30 (2004). 
129 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxi-xxii. 2013; BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, 
and Outcomes 138-144. 2012. 
130 Brenner, RUTGERS COMPUTER AND TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 32-35 (2004). 

 

38 

localized  within  the  boundaries  of  a  jurisdiction  (inherently  linked  to  state  sovereignty), 

whereas cybersecurity and cybercrime are globalized and jurisdiction-disturbed.131 

Law  enforcement  cybercrime  investigations  require  an  amalgamation  of  traditional  and 

new policing techniques. While some investigative actions can be achieved with traditional 

powers,  many  procedural  provisions  do  not  translate  well  from  a  spatial,  object-oriented 

approach to one involving electronic data storage and real-time data flows.132 

Evidence is the means by which facts relevant to the guilt or innocence of an individual at 

trial  are  established.  Electronic  evidence  is  all  such  material  that  exists  in  electronic,  or 

digital,  form.  It  can  be  stored  or  transient.  It  can  exist  in  the  form  of  computer  files, 

transmissions,  logs,  metadata,  or  network  data.  Digital  forensics  is  concerned  with 

recovering – often volatile and easily contaminated – information that may have evidential 

value. Forensics techniques include the creation of ‘bit-for-bit’ copies of stored and deleted 

information  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  original  information  is  not  changed,  and 

cryptographic  file 

‘hashes,’  or  digital  signatures,  that  can  demonstrate  changes  in 

information.  This  means  that  sufficient  numbers  of  forensic  examiners,  availability  of 

forensics  tools,  and  backlogs  are  required  on  the  part  of  the  law  enforcement  due  to 

overwhelming quantities of data for analysis. Suspects make use of encryption, rendering 

access to this type of evidence difficult and time-consuming without the decryption key. In 

most  countries,  the  task  of  analyzing  electronic  evidence  lies  with  law  enforcement 

authorities.133  

An additional challenge is usage of the technology on the part of the law enforcement – at 

the moment, cyber offenders seem to better utilize the technological capabilities that they 

have.  The  presence  of  a  relevant  body  of  the  special  knowledge  and  expertise  within  the 

police force is the crucial element in effective regulation of cyberspace.134 Prosecutors must 

view and understand electronic evidence in order to build a case at trial. Many developing 

countries  globally  do  not  have  sufficient  resources  for  prosecutors  to  do  so.  Prosecution 

computer skills are typically lower than those of investigators. The same holds true for the 

                                                           
131 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 160. 2007. 
132 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxii. 2013. 
133 Id. at, xxiii-xxiv. 
134 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 160. 2007. 

 

39 

judges  handling  highly  specialized  cybercrime  cases.  Judicial  training  on  cybercrime  law, 

evidence collection, and basic and advanced  computer knowledge  represents a particular 

priority.135 

Many  jurisdictions  do  not  make  a  legal  distinction  between  electronic  evidence  and 

physical  evidence.136  While  approaches  vary,  many  countries  consider  this  good  practice, 

as it ensures fair admissibility alongside all other types of evidence. A number of countries 

outside  of  Europe  do  not  admit  electronic  evidence  at  all,  making  the  prosecution  of 

cybercrime,  and  any  other  crime  evidenced  by  electronic  information,  unfeasible.  While 

countries  do  not,  in  general,  have  separate  evidentiary  rules  for  electronic  evidence,  a 

number of countries referred to principles such as: the best evidence rule, the relevance of 

evidence,  the  hearsay  rule,  authenticity,  and  integrity,  all  of  which  may  have  particular 

application to electronic evidence.137 

6.4  Harmonization of Laws 

Many countries have elements of the legal enabling environment addressing cybersecurity 

and cybercrime, but these national legal frameworks vary widely in terms of the manner in 

which  these  issues  are  addressed.138  In  today’s  globalized  world,  the  law  consists  of  a 

multitude of national, regional and international legal systems. Interactions between these 

systems occur at multiple levels. As a  result, provisions sometimes  contradict each other, 

leading to collisions of law, or fail to overlap sufficiently, leaving jurisdictional gaps. These 

differences  between  national  laws  lead  to  the  question  of  whether,  and  if  so,  how  far, 

national  legal  differences  in  cybercrime  laws can  and  should  be  reduced.  In  other  words, 

how important is it to harmonize cybercrime laws? This can be undertaken in a number of 

ways, including through both binding and non-binding international or regional initiatives. 

The  basis  of  harmonization  may  be  a  single  national  approach  (with  all  others  revising 

their laws in line), or, more often, common legal elements identified in the law of a number 

                                                           
135 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxiii-xxiv. 2013. 
136 BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes 127-138. 2012. 
137 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxiv. 2013. 
138 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1758 (2011). 

 

40 

of states, or expressed within a  multilateral instrument  –  such as  a treaty or non-binding 

international standard.139 

One  of  the  main  arguments  in  favor  of  unification  of  laws  across  jurisdictions  is  to  avoid 

safe  havens  and  penalty  havens  for  perpetrators.  Thus,  if  harmful  acts  involving  the 

internet are criminalized, for example, in State A, but not in State B, a perpetrator in State B 

can be free to target victims in State A via the internet. In such cases, State A cannot, on its 

own,  effectively  protect  against  effects  from  such  transnational  activities.  Even  where  its 

criminal law allows the assertion of jurisdiction over the perpetrator in State B, it will still 

require consent or assistance from State B – either regarding the gathering of evidence, or 

the  extradition  of  the  identified  perpetrator.  In  order  to  protect  persons  within  its  own 

jurisdiction,  State  B  is  unlikely  to  assist  where  the  conduct  is  not  also  criminalized  in  its 

own country.140 

Harmonization  can  also  allow  for  global  evidence  collection.  The  harmonization  of 

procedural  law  is  a  second  indispensable  requirement  for  effective  international 

cooperation. In the above example, if State B does not have the necessary procedural power 

for expedited preservation of computer data, for instance, then State A will not be able to 

request this facility through mutual legal assistance. In other words, a requested state can 

only  provide  assistance  within  its  territory,  to  the  extent  that  it  could  do  so  for  an 

equivalent national investigation.141 

6.5 

Incident Reporting and Information Sharing 

Because of the difficulties arising when trying to define and identify cybercrime, nationally 

and  cross-nationally  comparative  statistics  on  cybercrime  are  much  rarer  than  for  other 

crime  types.142  The  measures  that  might  be  wanting  are  those  that  would  improve 

transparency 

through  obliging 

individual  and  corporate  victims,  under  certain 

circumstances, disclose data breaches.143 

                                                           
139 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 56-58. 2013. 
140 Id. at, 60. 
141 Id. at, 61. 
142 Id. at, 6; CLOUGH, Principles of Cybercrime 13-14. 2010. 
143 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 276-278 (2013). 

 

41 

Cybercrime  acts  most  frequently  come  to  the  attention  of  law  enforcement  authorities 

through reports by individual or corporate victims. The UNDOC study provides that 80 per 

cent  of  individual  victims  of  core  cybercrime  do  not  report  the  crime  to  the  police.144 

Underreporting  derives  from  a  lack  of  awareness  of  victimization  and  of  reporting 

mechanisms,  victim  shame  and  embarrassment,  and  perceived  reputation  risks  for 

corporations.  It  is  important  to  highlight  initiatives  for  increasing  reporting,  including 

online  and hotline reporting systems,  public awareness  campaigns, private sector liaison, 

and  enhanced  police  outreach  and  information  sharing.  An  incident-driven  response  to 

cybercrime accompanied by medium and long-term tactical investigations can successfully 

identify  the  crime  markets  and  criminal  scheme  architects,  which  means  a  better 

understanding of the area in need of regulation.145 

Until  the  law  enforcement  has  a  cumulative  picture  of  victims  of  cybercrime  and  their 

offenders, confusion will remain as to who they are (whether they are physical persons or 

corporation or governments), the manner of their victimization, and the amount of policing 

resources that should  be allocated to the problem. The inability to construct the offender 

profile leads to inability to isolate offender motivation for the purposes of criminalization, 

for  example.146  Reliable  information  about  cybercrime  informs  policy,  practice,  and  the 

public. It helps to prevent information sources from over-representing their own interest 

and  it  reconciles  the  needs  of  the  state  and  interests  of  other  stake-holders,  rather  than 

dividing them. Reliable information helps shape public expectations more realistically.147 

6.6 

Institutional Arrangements for Cybersecurity Bureaucracy 

The institutional arrangements  supporting cybersecurity are as  varied and diverse  as  the 

approaches  to  the  issues.  First,  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  response  to  effective 

institutional  design  as  globally  institutional  arrangements  vary  dramatically.  Second,  not 

all cybersecurity issues have a specific institutional dimension. The most obvious one is the 

                                                           
144 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxi. 2013. 
145 Id. at. 
146 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 19-21. 2007. 
147 Id. at, 28. 

 

42 

area  of  cybercrime,  where  practice  indicates  that  issues  of  cybercrime,  once  passed  into 

legislation, are usually within the purview of the law enforcement and the judiciary.148 

In terms of privacy, for example, a number of examples demonstrate the wide practice of 

institutional responses: 

In  the  E.U.,  generally,  each  country  has  a  Data  Protection  Agency  (DPA)  principally 

responsible for the interpretation and enforcement of data privacy violations. Each DPA is 

typically  an  independent  agency,  with  the  authority  to  enforce  against  other  government 

entities.  For  those  E.U.  member  states  with  a  criminal  component  to  data  protection 

legislation,  national  or  regional  prosecutors  may  be  engaged  by  the  DPA  for  particular 

matters.  In  addition,  at  the  E.U.  level,  there  is  a  Working  Party  on  Data  Protection  that 

determines which countries are compliant with the Directives.149 

In  Argentina,  the  National  Data  Protection  Directorate  (NDPD)  established  under  the 

Personal Data Protection Act is responsible for digital data protection. The NDPD is under 

the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.150 

In  Canada,  at  the  federal  level,  the  Personal  Information  Protection  and  Electronic 

Documents  Act  (PIPEDA)  assigns  its  oversight  and  enforcement  role  to  the  Office  of  the 

Privacy Commissioner of Canada (OPC) which reports to Parliament.151 

In  Malaysia,  processing  of  personal  data  is  regulated  by  the  Personal Data  Protection  Act 

2009 (PDPA). The Personal Data Protection Commissioner is appointed by the Ministry of 

Information, Culture, and Communications and is in charge of implementing and enforcing 

the personal data protection laws in Malaysia.152  

                                                           
148 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1781 (2011). 
149 Id. at, 1782-1783. 
150 Id. at. 
151 Id. at. 
152 Id. at. 

 

43 

In  South  Africa,  the  Protection  of  Personal  Information  Act  (PPIA)  requires  that  personal 

information may only be processed by a responsible party that has notified the information 

Protection Regulator (Regulator), which reports to the President of South Africa.153 

Strong  governmental  involvement  and  institutional  solutions  in  securing  cyberspace  are 

justified due to the heavy dependence of the government on technology and cyberspace for 

its  own  operations.  In  addition,  government  has  a  unique  vantage  point  from  which  to 

observe and understand global economic, political, and technological forces that could give 

rise to cyberthreats.154 

On the international level, if members of the international community were able to develop 

a convention mandating international cooperation on cybersecurity and applying universal 

jurisdiction  to  acts  of  cyberaggression,  the  benefits  would  be  palpable.  One  such  benefit 

would  an  opportunity  to  create  a  UN  agency  comparable  to  the  International  Maritime 

Organization  (IMO)  whose  purpose  would  be  to  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the 

internet.155  

The  IMO  was  created  pursuant  to  the  adoption  of  the  Convention  on  the  International 

Maritime  Organization.  The  purpose  of  the  IMO  is  to  facilitate  cooperation  among 

governments  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  highest  practicable  standards  in  matters 

concerning  maritime  safety  are  in  place.  The  IMO  also  maintains  detailed  records  of  all 

incidents  of  piracy,  which  supports  the  IMO’s  policy  recommendations  and  efforts  to 

develop  new  law  when  the  need  arises.  The  IMO’s  strategy  consists  of  compilation  and 

distribution of periodical statistical reports, piracy seminars and field assessment missions 

to regions affected by piracy and the preparation of a code of practice for the investigation 

and prosecution of the crime of piracy.  An agency similar in function to the IMO dedicated 

to  tracking  incidents  of  cyberaggression  and  fostering  cooperation  between  member 

nations  would  help  to  consolidate  the  international  effort  to  monitor  and  deter 

                                                           
153 Id. at. 
154 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1123 (2013). 
155 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 270-271 (2011). 

 

44 

cyberaggression. Moreover, such an agency would help to legitimize the international legal 

regime that created it, and would provide sound policy rooted in empirical evidence.156 

6.7  Personnel Recruitment and Educational Training 

There  is  a  need  for  many  governments  to  broaden  cybersecurity  personnel  recruitment 

and  educational  training  efforts  (in  particular  for  law  enforcement,  judiciary  and  other 

authorities).  The  US  government,  for  example,  established  the  National  Institute  for 

Cybersecurity  Education  (NICE).  NICE  together  with  the  Department  of  Education,  and 

other  agencies  launched  a  four-prong  strategy  to  build  a  cyber  savvy  nation  through 

training,  awareness,  through  post-graduate  educational  programs,  and  professional 

development  for  federal  security  professionals.  To  meet  that  goal,  NICE  targeted  a  wide 

array of the population as prospective employees: students and private sector partners.157 

Any  cybersecurity  reform  legislation  should  make  these  arrangements  permanent. 

Governmental  agencies  should  be  given  the  authority  and  resources  to  initiate  new 

recruitment and education campaigns and extend the scope of existing ones. The rationale 

for  this  investment  is  two-fold.  First,  in  a  world  of  ever-increasing  connectivity,  more 

cybersecurity  will  be  needed  to  manage  that  connectivity,  so  there  will  be  a  parallel 

increase  in  demand  for  cybersecurity  jobs.  Second,  through  enhancing  its  presence  in 

recruitment  and  education,  the  federal  government  can  attract  those  individuals  to  fill 

cybersecurity  jobs  who  might  otherwise  have  joined  the  ranks  of  Anonymous  or  other 

hacker  groups.  Granted,  persons  who  are  anti-government  or  even  apathetic  towards 

government may not be persuaded by the government’s recruitment efforts. But for those 

young people who exhibit exceptional computer skills and seek a community that utilizes 

and  appreciates  those  skills,  the  recruitment  and  education  campaigns  will  certainly  aid 

governments  in  this  mission.158  While  not  all  hacktivists  are  young,  many  of  them  are, 

suggesting  that  they  might  be  subject  to  ideological  capture.  Without  a  substantial 

recruitment  effort  by  governments,  there  is  an  obvious  lack  of  an  alternative  hacking 

‘career path,’ so to speak, for those young persons looking for an outlet for their computer 

                                                           
156 Id. at, 271. 
157 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1695 (2012). 
158 Id. at, 1696. 

 

45 

skills.  Additionally,  increased  recruitment  efforts  might  even  help  persuade  those  who 

already have joined hacktivist endeavors to work for governments.159  

7  Technical Solutions 

There are two basic technical strategies for critical systems protection – (i) defending the 

system  from  the  internet  risks  while  the  system  stays  online,  and  (ii)  air  gapping  the 

system and the general networks, that is a disconnection of such critical systems from the 

internet  entirely  by  the  authorities.160  Such  proposals  have  recently  been  popular  with 

some politicians in light of the developments with the US National Security Agency leaks.  

7.1  Defense and Monitoring Systems  

The  US  government  partially  guards  its  computers  and  networks  with  an  intrusion 

detection system nicknamed ‘Einstein.’ The Einstein software is designed to conduct real-

time surveillance on, make threat-based decisions on, and provide an intrusion prevention 

system  for  any  activity  taking  place  in  certain  government  computer  networks.  In 

performing  these  functions,  Einstein  shares  information  and  cooperates  with  the 

Department of Homeland Security and the National Security Agency. Thus, currently within 

its  own  network,  the  US  government  closely  coordinates  among  departments,  wipes 

personally identifiable information from shared cybersecurity data, and operates on a real-

time response basis.161 

As  for  defense  systems  for  the  private  sector,  or  maintaining  cyber-hygiene,  many 

cybersecurity  experts  believe  that  basic  cyberhygiene  is  a  simple  and  logical  first  step  in 

corporate  cybersecurity.  Estimates  suggest  that  good  cyberhygiene  could  prevent  up  to 

eighty-five  percent  of  cyber-intrusions.  Rather  than  waiting  for  legislative  mandates  to 

spur  corporate  cybersecurity  spending,  corporations  would  be  wise  to  consider  whether 

some  proactive  investments  in  basic  cyber-hygiene  are  warranted  as  part  of  their  basic 

                                                           
159 Id. at, 1707-1708. 
160 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 494 (2011). 
161 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1684-1685 (2012). 

 

46 

corporate  responsibility.  However,  even  basic  cyberhygiene,  let  alone  sophisticated 

software such as Einstein, is expensive, if not costprohibitive, for some companies.162 

If not subsidizing private sector in equipping private sector with cost-prohibitive defense 

systems, an important source component for developing technical solutions for the private 

sector  can  be  seen  in  identification  of  vulnerabilities,  security  breaches  and  potential 

hazards. This can be achieved by communication crucial findings on vulnerabilities to the 

network owners and the private sector.163 

7.2  Standardization and Air-Gapped Networks 

Standardization  can  be  seen  as  both  an  advantage  and  a  disadvantage.  Standards  are 

necessary  for  the  interoperability  of  products  by  multiple  vendors.  Interoperability  is 

critical  in  communications  and  national  infrastructure,  including  the  national  power  grid 

and  the  medical  and  financial  establishments.  The  result  of  the  tens  of  thousands  of 

standards in use toda, is a world that is massively interconnected.  The interoperability in 

critical  infrastructural  assets  helps  prevent  and  hinder  cybersecurity  risks  through,  for 

example,  development  of  improved  standards  for  browser  security,  application  security, 

and e-mail authentication.164  

With  increased  interconnection  and  unified  standards,  however,  comes  increased 

vulnerability,  both  to  external  and  internal  threats.165  The  use  of  identical  security 

processes  on  every computer network  does  not seem to be  an  optimal solution –  at least 

not  without  weighing  the  competing  costs.166  The  negative  effect  of  interoperability  is 

greater potential vulnerability of the entire system, which is easier access to the rest of the 

systems  once  a  part  of  it  is  compromised.  This  includes  spread  of  viruses  and  other 

malware,  as  well  as  hacking.  The  defense  for  such  systems  should  be  absolutely 

impenetrable  to  outweigh  for  the  risks,  which  in  itself  is  a  rather  remote  possibility,  if  a 

possibility at all. 

                                                           
162 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 313-314 (2013). 
163 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1685-1686 (2012). 
164 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1117 (2013). 
165 Id. at. 
166 Shane, TEXAS LAW REVIEW,  (2012). 

 

47 

Some  commentators  suggest  disconnecting  critical  system  networks  from  the  internet 

entirely;167  such  systems  as  power  generation  and  water  distribution,  core  services  the 

nation  depends  on  to  remain  functioning.  The  security  industry  refers  to  this  process  as 

creating an “air gap” between supercritical systems and the general network. Air gaps may 

be somewhat burdensome, but the security payoff is unparalleled: air-gapped systems are 

fully  isolated  and  practically  impervious  unless  an  attacker  manages  to  physically  access 

the system. 168 

8  Policy Considerations 

A  viable  cybersecurity  framework  shall  aim  at  the  development  of  the  adequate 

cybersecurity  culture.  Therefore  it  shall  include  national  and  international  cooperative 

efforts  to  develop  standards,  methodologies,  procedures,  and  processes  that  align  policy 

comprising  legislation,  business,  education  and  technology  approaches  to  address  cyber 

risks.169 Given the inclusive and comprehensive nature of the desirable policy framework, 

the  private  sector  will  naturally  play  as  significant  a  role  in  the  implementation  of  the 

policy as does the public sector. At that, the policy on cybersecurity and cybercrime shall be 

informed  by  the  adequate  understanding  of  the  cyber-vulnerability  threat  on  the  part  of 

the policy developer.170  

In this light, perhaps the most critical of all problems connected with the development of a 

viable cybersecurity policy framework is the problem formulated by Shane as “the current 

state  of  public  ignorance  and  indifference  to  this  issue,”171  which  includes  executive  and 

legislative  authorities  of  various  jurisdictions.  Although  Shane’s  analysis  concerned  the 

United  States,  there  is,  however,  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  situation  is  significantly 

different in the rest of the world. Although there are many legislative initiatives addressing 

cybersecurity in many jurisdictions, it is unlikely that executive and legislative authorities 

of the majority of governments have sufficient understanding of cybersecurity as an actual 

                                                           
167 RICHARD A. CLARKE & ROBERT KNAKE, CYBER WAR: THE NEXT THREAT TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND WHAT TO DO 
ABOUT IT 132  (Harper Collins. 2010). 
168 Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW, 494 (2011). 
169 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 300 (2013). 
170 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1117 (2013). 
171 Shane, TEXAS LAW REVIEW,  (2012). 

 

48 

problem of policy.172 That is not to say, of course, that the governments see the matters of 

cybersecurity  as  unimportant.  Rather,  there  are  no  viable  and  comprehensive  policies  at 

place  that  would  aim  at  cultivation  of  social  awareness  of  the  cyber  risks  and  adequate 

skills to manage these risks. 

The  issues  of  policy  suggest  considerations  that  would  incentivize  the  parties  with  the 

greatest  capacity  to  improve  the  security.  The  public  good  with  regard  to  public  security 

shall  be  balanced  against  other  public  goods,  such  as  privacy,  productivity,  economic 

growth,  organizational  flexibility,  military  effectiveness,  government  transparency,  and 

accountability.173  To  this  end,  Shane  suggests  that  “only  such  initiative  –  which  looks  at 

cybersecurity  through  the  eyes  of  everyone  whose  interests  are  implicated  –  will  be 

adequate to produce the sort of political movement that can produce significant change.”174 

At that, policy considerations shall not be based on an “security at all costs” approach and 

avoid alarmist or sensationalist rhetoric that has no touch with reality, which could lead to 

weakling of such public goods as government transparency and accountability.175  

Also,  the  policy  considerations  should  include  longstanding  and  controversial  issues.  For 

example, can the market be relied upon to police itself when it comes to protecting critical 

infrastructure?  What  is  the  government’s  proper  role  vis-à-vis  the  private  sector 

cybersecurity given that the internet is largely private-sector-owned and operated? Would 

legislative  action,  such  as  setting  voluntary  or  obligatory  cybersecurity  standards  for 

critical infrastructure incentivize the right behavior or inhibit innovation?176 

To this end, some believe that the most important cybersecurity issue is ensuring that the 

private  sector  adequately  adheres  to  standards  for  critical  infrastructure  protection  and 

propose  that  the  law  enforcement  agencies  take  the  lead  in  creating  a  regulatory  model. 

Others believe that the most important cybersecurity problem to be solved in the near term 

                                                           
172 Id. at. 
173 Id. at. 
174 Id. at; See also Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1709 (2012). 
175 See e.g. Thompson, TEXAS LAW REVIEW,  (2011). 
176 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1119 (2013). 

 

49 

is ensuring a better flow of information between the private and public sectors and that the 

intelligence community has the necessary expertise to lead the way.177 

8.1  Vulnerability Mitigation and Threat Deterrence 

Contreras  et  al  suggest  that  the  cybersecurity  policy  shall  be  based  not  only  on  reactive 

vulnerability  mitigation,  that  is,  on  developing  protection  against  cyber-threats,  but  also, 

and for the most part, on threat deterrence. Vulnerability mitigation alone cannot provide 

for the adequate level of sustainable security as even the most sophisticated defenses can 

be defeated by those with the adequate resources and the will.178 In this light, the role of 

the private sector in development of deterrence policies is warranted exactly because the 

private sector owns a significant portion of critical infrastructure worldwide. 

Some countries, such as the United States, which has the largest cyber infrastructure on the 

planet,  has  adopted  a  largely  self-regulatory,  market-based  approach  to  cybersecurity, 

relying on the private sector to secure its own networks. In keeping with this approach, no 

federal agency is responsible for defending the civilian domain, and the federal government 

has avoided generally-applicable federal mandates regarding private sector cybersecurity 

practices.179 

There are two main strategies to address harmful conduct: (i) to react after such conduct 

has  been  committed  in  order  to  incapacitate  and  punish  the  actor(s);  (ii)  to  prevent  the 

conduct  from  occurring;  the  two  strategies  are  not  necessarily  inconsistent.  For  the  last 

century,  there  has  been  an  evolving  emphasis  upon  preventing  undesirable  conduct  or 

crime  rather  than  simply  reacting  to  it  occurring.  The  preventative  strategy  though  still 

plays a relatively minor role in our overall approach to dealing with real-world crime. One 

reason why prevention is a small part of the current strategy is that it is resource-intensive; 

this implies not only qualitative and quantitative increase in policing of the environment in 

which  undesirable  conduct  may  occur,  but  also  collaboration  with  other  cybersecurity 

participants,  such  as  community  members.  Of  crucial  importance  in  deterrence  strategy 

                                                           
177 Id. at, 1119-1120. 
178 Id. at, 1114. 
179 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 232 (2013). 

 

50 

plays  creation  of  a  climate  in  which  the  commission  of  crime  is  seen  as  a  high-risk  and 

therefore unattractive proposition.180 

The efficacy of the traditional approach to enforcing the criminal law is eroding, at least in 

part dealing with cybercrime. The traditional model of law enforcement does not seem to 

be  able  to  deal  effectively  with  cybercrime  because  online  crime  possesses  few, if  any,  of 

the  essential  characteristics  of  real-world  crime,  such  as  those  enumerated  above  in  the 

introduction.181  There  is  therefore  the  emergence  of  an  alternative  approach  to  law 

enforcement,  one  that  emphasizes  collaboration  between  the  public  and  private  sectors 

and the prevention of crime rather than merely reacting to it.182  

The traditional model is a reactive model; its fundamental premise is that officers react to 

completed  crimes  by  apprehending  the  perpetrators,  who  are  prosecuted  and  punished; 

this renders them incapable of re-offending and ensures that their experience deters others 

from  offending.  This  is  a  territorial  approach  to  law  enforcement;  it  assumes  that 

perpetrators,  victims  and  officers  are  all  physically  situated  in  a  reasonable  degree  of 

proximity within a single territorially-defined state. When these assumptions are valid, the 

model  works;  police  officers  who  know  the  area  stand  a  good  chance  of  being  able  to 

identify  and  apprehend  perpetrators,  and  the  local  legal  system  stands  a  good  chance  of 

being  able  to  convict  and  punish  them.  However,  these  assumptions  do  not  hold  for 

cybercrime.  The  assumptions  predicated  on  territory  are  irrelevant  in  dealing  with 

cybercrime.183 

In  addition  to  the  traditional  retributive  justice,  cybercrime  deterrence  includes  the 

promulgation  of  legislation,  effective  leadership,  development  of  criminal  justice  and  law 

enforcement  capacity,  education  and  awareness,  the  development  of  a  strong  knowledge 

base,  and  cooperation  across  government,  communities,  the  private  sector  and 

internationally.  At  that,  the  cybercrime  strategies  are  likely  be  closely  integrated  in 

                                                           
180 Brenner, RUTGERS COMPUTER AND TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL, 42 (2004). 
181 Id. at, 25. 
182 Id. at, 1-2. 
183 Id. at, 41. 

 

51 

cybersecurity  strategies,  highlighting  components  on  awareness  raising,  international 

cooperation, and law enforcement capacity.184 

The continued importance of public awareness raising campaigns, including those covering 

emerging  threats,  and  those  targeted  at  specific  audiences,  such  as  children,  was 

highlighted by responding Governments, private sector entities, and academic institutions. 

User  education  is  most  effective  when  combined  with  systems  that  help  users  to  achieve 

their  goals  in  a  secure  manner.  If  user  cost  is  higher  than  direct  user  benefit,  individuals 

have  little  incentive  to  follow  security  measures.  Private  sector  entities  also  report  that 

user  and  employee  awareness  must  be  integrated  into  a  holistic  approach  to  security. 

Foundational principles and good practice referred to include accountability for acting on 

awareness,  risk  management  policies  and  practices,  board-level  leadership,  and  staff 

training.  Two-thirds  of  private  sector  respondents  had  conducted  a  cybercrime  risk 

assessment,  and  most  reported  use  of  cybersecurity  technology  such  as  firewalls,  digital 

evidence preservation, content identification, intrusion detection, and system supervision 

and monitoring. Concern was expressed, however, that small and medium-sized companies 

either do not take sufficient steps to protect systems, or incorrectly perceive that they will 

not be a target.185 

Regulatory frameworks have an important role to play in cybercrime prevention, both with 

respect to the private sector in general and service providers in particular. Nearly half of 

countries have passed data protection laws, which specify requirements for the protection 

and use of personal data. Some of these regimes include specific requirements for internet 

service  providers  and  other  electronic  communications  providers.  While  data  protection 

laws  require  personal  data  to  be  deleted  when  no  longer  required,  some  countries  have 

made  exceptions  for  the  purposes  of  criminal  investigations,  requiring  internet  service 

providers to store specific types of data for a period of time. Many developed countries also 

have  rules  requiring  organizations  to  notify  individuals  and  regulators  of  data  breaches. 

Internet  service  providers  typically  have  limited  liability  as  mere  conduits  of  data. 

Modification  of  transmitted  content  increases  liability,  as  does  actual  or  constructive 

knowledge  of  an  illegal  activity.  Expeditious  action  after  notification,  on  the  other  hand, 
                                                           
184 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxvi. 2013. 
185 Id. at, xxvi-xxvii. 

 

52 

reduces  liability.  While  technical  possibilities  exist  for  filtering  of  internet  content  by 

service  providers,  restrictions  on  internet  access  are  subject  to  foreseeability  and 

proportionality  requirements  under  international  human  rights  law  protecting  rights  to 

seek, receive and impart information.186 

Public-private partnerships are central to cybercrime prevention. Over half of all countries 

report  the  existence  of  partnerships.  These  are  created  in  equal  numbers  by  informal 

agreement  and  by  legal  basis.  Private  sector  entities  are  most  often  involved  in 

partnerships, 

followed  by  academic 

institutions,  and 

international  and  regional 

organizations. Partnerships are mostly used for facilitating the exchange of information on 

threats and trends, but also for prevention activities, and action in specific cases. Within the 

context  of  some  public-private  partnerships,  private  sector  entities  have  taken  proactive 

approaches  to  investigating  and  taking  legal  action  against  cybercrime  operations.  Such 

actions  complement  those  of  law  enforcement  and  can  help  mitigate  damage  to  victims. 

Academic  institutions  play  a  variety  of  roles  in  preventing  cybercrime,  including  through 

delivery of education and training to professionals, law and policy development, and work 

on  technical  standards  and  solution  development.  Universities  house  and  facilitate 

cybercrime  experts,  some  computer  emergency  response  teams  (CERTs),  and  specialized 

research centres.187 

Crime  prevention  draws  upon  the  criminologies  of  everyday  life  to  focus  upon  the 

reduction  of  opportunity  by  increasing  the  level  of  effort  needed  to  commit  a  crime, 

increasing the risks to the offender, or reducing the reward of crime. Crucial to the success 

of  crime  control  policies  is  the  ability  of  the  implementer  not  only  to  control  the  design 

process  of  the  technology  and  its  support  systems,  but  also  to  be  able  to  identify  and 

vulnerabilities and then to be able to modify design accordingly prior to production.188  

8.2  Private-Public Sector Dynamic   

As mentioned above, the role of the private sector in policy consideration can be structured 

two-fold – (i) cooperation between the private and public sectors and (ii) introduction by 

                                                           
186 Id. at, xxvii. 
187 Id. at. 
188 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 187-188. 2007. 

 

53 

the public sector of cybersecurity standards and their enforcement through imposition of 

administrative  and/or  criminal  sanctions, as well as  creating cybersecurity infrastructure 

in  the  form  of  specialized  regulatory  agencies.  These  two  dimensions  of  the  dynamic 

between the private and the public sectors are not mutually exclusive. 

The  basic  problem  of  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sectors  is  the  lack  of 

incentives  sufficient  to  make  companies  in  most  critical  infrastructure  sectors  take 

voluntary  action  to  bring  the  security  of  their  networks  to  the  level  needed  for  national 

security.189  The  main  theme  tension  between  the  public  and  private  sectors  is  seeking 

forms  of  justice  that  represent  their  different  interests.190  The  relatively  low  levels  of 

prosecutions for breaches of computer security and low levels of recorded internet-related 

fraud  are  poignant  examples  of  this  tension. They  suggest  that  most  breaches  of  security 

tend to be dealt  with by victims rather than the police, highlighting the  preference of  the 

private  sector  to  seek  private  justice  solutions  instead  of  invoking  the  public  criminal 

justice  process  that  might  expose  their  weaknesses  to  customers  or  commercial 

competitors. This indicates that the model of criminal justice offered to corporate victims 

by  the  police  and  other  public  law  enforcement  agencies  is  not  generally  regarded  as 

conductive to their business interest.191 

A key challenge to achieving an adequate private sector investment in cybersecurity is the 

fact that cybersecurity is a public good. One company’s underinvestment in cybersecurity 

can  redound  to  the  detriment  of  other  companies  with  whom  they  connect.  While  some 

companies may be  motivated to  invest sufficiently to protect their own  assets,  others are 

unlikely  to  invest  sufficiently  to  protect  the  assets  of  companies  with  whom  they  do 

business,  leading  some  experts  to  conclude  that  the  private  sector  is  unlikely  to  supply 

adequate cybersecurity on its own.192 

                                                           
189 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 305 (2013). 
190 Id. at, 306-307. 
191 WALL, Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age 25-26. 2007; MEHAN, Cyberwar, 
Cyberterror, Cybercrime: A Guide to the Role of Standards in an Environment of Change and Danger 78-81. 
2008. 
192 Teplinsky, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW, 310 (2013). 

 

54 

The  dilemma  of  the  private-public  sector  dynamic  can  be  illustrated  with  the  following 

example. In the United States, the so called Task Force Proposal193 reveals a hesitation to 

endorse  any  legislative  package  that  contains  a  significant  level  of  federal  government 

involvement in cybersecurity. This hesitation is primarily motivated by two beliefs: (i) the 

need for fiscal savings, and (ii) the superiority of market incentives over direct regulation 

for private entities. This approach contrasts sharply with the so called Obama Proposal, the 

Cybersecurity  Legislative  Proposal,  which  envisions  considerable 

investment 

in 

cybersecurity  infrastructure  coupled  with  directly  mandated  cybersecurity  standards  for 

the  private  market.  Second,  the  Task  Force  Proposal  would  create  a  non-governmental 

agency to establish cybersecurity standards for private entities, where the Obama Proposal 

would  delegate  that  authority  to  the  federal  law  enforcement  agencies,  such  as  the 

Department  of  Homeland  Security.  Moreover,  while  the  Task  Force  Proposal  standards 

would be voluntary, the standards promulgated by the law enforcement agencies under the 

Obama Proposal would be mandatory for covered entities.194  

This  dynamic  underlies  a  fundamental  problem  of  the  situation  with  legal  regulation  of 

cybersecurity and cybercrime in that law, policy, and market mechanisms are experiencing 

significant  difficulty  keeping  pace  with  the  rapid  and  enormous  technological  changes. 

Although industry has made significant changes to address cybercrime, there is a dire need 

                                                           
193 At least twenty-two different cybersecurity-related legislative proposals, in the form of Congressional 
bills, executive proposals, and formal recommendations from a Republican House of Representatives task 
force. For detail see: Identifying Cybersecurity Risks to Critical Infrastructure Act of 2012, H.R. 6221, 112th 
Cong. (2012); Cybersecurity Act of 2012, S. 3414, 112th Cong. (2012); Strengthening and Enhancing 
Cybersecurity by Using Research, Education, Information, and Technology (SECURE IT) Act of 2012, S. 3342, 
112th Cong. (2012); Federal Information Security Amendments Act of 2012, H.R. 4257, 112th Cong. (2012); 
Strengthening and Enhancing Cybersecurity by Using Research, Education, Information, and Technology 
(SECURE IT) Act of 2012, S. 2151, 112th Cong. (2012); Cybersecurity Act of 2012, S. 2105, 112th Cong. 
(2012); Promoting and Enhancing Cybersecurity and Information Sharing Effectiveness (PRECISE) Act of 
2011, H.R. 3674, 112th Cong. (2011); Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act, H.R. 3523, 112th Cong. 
(2012); Personal Data Protection and Breach Accountability Act of 2011, S. 1535, 112th Cong. (2011); 
International Cybercrime Reporting and Cooperation Act, S. 1469, 112th Cong. (2011); Data Security Act of 
2011, S. 1434, 112th Cong. (2011); Data Breach Notification Act of 2011, S. 1408, 112th Cong. (2011); Secure 
and Fortify Electronic (SAFE) Data Act, H.R. 2577, 112th Cong. (2011); Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 
2011, S. 1152, 112th Cong. (2011); Personal Data Privacy and Security Act of 2011, S. 1151, 112th Cong. 
(2011); Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2012, H.R. 2096, 112th Cong. (2012); Cybersecurity and Internet 
Freedom Act of 2011, S. 413, 112th Cong. (2011); Cybersecurity and Internet Safety Standards Act, S. 372, 
112th Cong. (2011); Cyber Security and American Cyber Competitiveness Act of 2011, S. 21, 112th Cong. 
(2011); Homeland Security Cyber and Physical Infrastructure Protection Act of 2011, H.R. 174, 112th Cong. 
(2011). 
194 Kelly, BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1696-1697 (2012). 

 

55 

to  find  policies  that  will  incent  the  right  behaviors  without  dampening  the  innovation 

needed for both good security and a robust economy.195 

9  International Cooperation in Criminal Matters 

The natural  independent  character of the  network and information infrastructure  and its 

growing  importance  for  economies,  public  safety  and  our  society  in  general  makes 

controlling  and  countering  potential  threats  a  demanding  and  critical  challenge  for  both 

governments and enterprises.196 Many cybercrime acts involve a transnational dimension, 

engaging  issues  of  transnational  investigations,  sovereignty,  jurisdiction,  extraterritorial 

evidence, and a requirement for international cooperation.197 The issues of cooperation are 

of  utmost  importance  for  any  effective  regulation  of  globalized  networked  technologies. 

International  best  practice,  if  not  international  cooperation  and  collaboration,  is  more 

evident  in  the  area  of  cybercrime,  perhaps  due  in  part  to  the  near  universality  of  the 

substantive provisions of the Budapest Convention.198 

It  often  is  said  that  cybercrime  knows  no  borders,  meaning  that  criminals  can  with  ease 

and effectiveness commit crimes across national boundaries through the use of the internet 

and  associated  electronic  communications.  This  observation  is  then  contrasted  with  the 

traditional  limitations  faced  by  law  enforcement  agencies  and  judicial  systems,  which 

remain stubbornly circumscribed by geographical limitations on investigative, prosecution, 

and judicial powers, as in the observation, cybercrime knows no borders, yet the criminal 

law remains fundamentally territorial in nature.199 

Despite  the  fact  that  many  attacks  are  carried  out  across  multiple  jurisdictions  and  often 

originate in foreign countries, current international law does not recognize nations as duty 

bound  to  assist  in  investigating  a  cyberattack  that  allegedly  originated  within  their 

jurisdiction. As a result, nations attempting to develop and enforce cybersecurity measures 

often lack international support from nations where a given cyberattack likely originated. 

                                                           
195 Contreras, et al., AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW, 1120 (2013). 
196 Kremer & Müller, Cyberspace and International Relations: Theory, Prospects and Challenges 42-44. 2014. 
197 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxiv-xxv. 2013. 
198 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1771 (2011). 
199 Urbas, JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW, 1 (2012). 

 

56 

Even when  a  victimized nation does receive cooperation  from a  foreign  nation under, for 

example, a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT), evidentiary requests often take several 

months to be honored, if at all. Since evidence of a cyberattack may be disposed of quickly, 

current  international  agreements  like  MLATs  providing  for  law  enforcement  cooperation 

operate too slowly to be effective.200 

No nation-state can achieve adequate cybersecurity on its own; international coordination 

and  cooperation  must  be  part  of  the  response.201  The  current  international  cooperation 

takes  no  account  of  the  specificities  of  electronic  evidence  and  the  global  nature  of 

cybercrime. This is particularly the case for cooperation in investigative actions. A lack of 

common  approach,  including  within  current  multilateral  cybercrime  instruments,  means 

that requests for actions, such as expedited preservation of data outside of those countries 

with  international  obligations  to  ensure  such  a  facility  and  to  make  it  available  upon 

request,  may  not  be  easily  fulfilled.  Globally,  divergences  in  the  scope  of  cooperation 

provisions  in  multilateral  and  bilateral  instruments,  a  lack  of  response  time  obligation,  a 

lack  of  agreement  on  permissible  direct  access  to  extraterritorial  data,  multiple  informal 

law  enforcement  networks,  and  variance  in  cooperation  safeguards,  represent  significant 

challenges to effective international cooperation regarding electronic evidence in criminal 

matters.202 

Moreover, sovereignty and other issues present countries with inherently conflicting policy 

objectives and cultural clashes, including the need to balance different interests and rights 

such  as  security  and  privacy,  and  are  compounded  by  the  impact  of  rapidly  developing 

technologies on the structure of any agreement.203  

Despite the challenges, in recent years there have been notable law enforcement successes. 

Some of these have involved a high degree of international law enforcement cooperation, 

assisted  by  modernized  understandings  of  legal  jurisdiction  and  the  use  of  cross-border  

mechanisms such as  mutual legal assistance  and extradition.204 Because  law enforcement 

                                                           
200 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 249-250 (2011). 
201 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1783 (2011). 
202 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxvi. 2013. 
203 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1772 (2011). 
204 Urbas, JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW, 1-8 (2012). 

 

57 

powers generally do not extend beyond national boundaries, for example, allowing police 

from  one  country  to  travel  to  and  investigate crimes  in  others  without  the  permission  of 

the latter, cross-border investigations usually depend on cooperation at national agency or 

even local officer level. Cooperation can occur with minimal formality, through temporary 

officer-to-officer contacts, or through more established channels of communication such as 

24/7  contact  points  for  law  enforcement,  as  envisaged  in  the  Council  of  Europe’s 

Convention on Cybercrime.205 

Forms  of  international  cooperation  include  extradition,  mutual  legal  assistance,  mutual 

recognition of foreign judgments, and informal police-to-police cooperation.206 Due to the 

volatile nature of electronic evidence, international cooperation in criminal matters in the 

area  of  cybercrime  requires  timely  responses  and  the  ability  to  request  specialized 

investigative  actions,  such  as  preservation  of  computer  data.  Response  times  for  formal 

mechanisms, that are used currently, are of the order of months, for both extradition and 

mutual legal assistance requests, a timescale which presents challenges to the collection of 

volatile electronic evidence.207 Initiatives and innovations for informal cooperation and for 

facilitation  of  formal  cooperation,  such  as  24/7  networks,  offer  important  potential  for 

faster response times.208 

Formal  and  informal  modes  of  cooperation  are  designed  to  manage  the  process  of  State 

consent  for  the  conduct  of  foreign  law  enforcement  investigations  that  affect  a  state’s 

sovereignty.  Increasingly,  however,  investigators,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  access 

extraterritorial data during evidence gathering, without the consent of the state where the 

data  is  physically  situated.  This  situation  arises,  in  particular,  due  to  cloud  computing 

technologies  which  involve  data  storage  at  multiple  data  centres  in  different  geographic 

locations. Data ‘location’, whilst technically knowable, is becoming increasingly artificial, to 

the extent that even traditional mutual legal assistance requests will often be addressed to 

the country that is the seat of the service provider, rather than the country where the data 

centre is physically located. Direct foreign law enforcement access to extraterritorial data 

                                                           
205 Id. at, 9. 
206 BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and Outcomes 178-179. 2012. 
207 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxv. 2013; BRENNER, Cybercrime and the Law: Challenges, Issues, and 
Outcomes 179-182. 2012. 
208 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime xxv. 2013. 

 

58 

could  occur  when  investigators  make  use  of  an  existing  live  connection  from  a  suspect’s 

device,  or  where  investigators  use  lawfully  obtained  data  access  credentials.  Law 

enforcement  investigators  may,  on  occasion,  obtain  data  from  extra-territorial  service 

providers  through  an  informal  direct  request,  although  service  providers  usually  require 

due legal process.209 

Examples of such cooperation between law enforcement officers in different countries are 

provided  by  several  recent  cases  in  which  Australian  suspects  have  been  prosecuted  in 

relation  to  child  grooming.  In  one  case,  Australian  Federal  Police  (AFP)  were  alerted  by 

their  New  Zealand  counterparts  that  a  Canberra  man  had  been  communicating  sexually 

online  with  a  supposedly  14  year-old  girl  named  ‘Roxanne,’  in  reality  a  fictional  identity 

used by an Auckland police officer to track online child groomers. AFP officers arranged a 

meeting in Canberra between the ‘girl’ and the suspect, at which he was arrested and then 

charged. In another case, AFP officers were first alerted by German police that a Canberra 

resident had been downloading material from a child pornography Web site, and later by 

the FBI that he had been in contact with a supposedly 14 year-old boy named ‘Brad’ in the 

state of New Hampshire, actually a fictitious identity used by an FBI agent. In subsequent 

correspondence,  the  FBI  agent  and  his  AFP  counterpart  agreed  to  have  “Brad”  introduce 

the  suspect  online  to  ‘Jamie,’  a  12  year-old  boy  in  Canberra,  who  was  actually  an  AFP 

investigator.  At  an  arranged  meeting  with  “Jamie”  the  suspect  was  arrested  and  then 

charged.210 

Such examples depend on relationships of trust that have been developed through regular 

contact  between  law  enforcement  agencies  or  officers  in  different  countries.  Among 

countries  such  as  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada,  the  United States,  and  many European 

states,  sufficient  contacts  have  been  made  over  many  years  to  facilitate  highly  effective 

cooperation.  With  states  in  Eastern  Europe  or  in  developing  countries,  new  relationships 

have been forged. For example, in the last decade or so, the US Department of Justice (DOJ), 

particularly  through  its  Computer  Crime  and  Intellectual  Property  Section  (CCIPS),  has 

successfully fostered cooperative relationships with law enforcement agencies in Belarus, 

                                                           
209 Id. at, xxv-xxvi. 
210 Urbas, JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW, 9 (2012). 

 

59 

Bulgaria, Estonia, Poland, Romania, and the Ukraine as well as its more traditional partners 

to disrupt international cybercrime groups and bring their members to justice.211 

In the most sophisticated of such co-operative arrangements, law enforcement agencies in 

several countries are able to share operational information and co-ordinate critical actions 

in real time so that search warrant executions and arrests occur simultaneously in different 

locations  across  the  globe.  Clearly,  this  is  important  in  ensuring  that  all  members  of 

globally dispersed groups can be apprehended before they have an opportunity to flee or to 

destroy  evidence.  Significant  internationally  coordinated  enforcement  actions  have  been 

reported  against  international  child  exploitation  rings  and  global  copyright  piracy 

groups.212  

An example is the recent Operation Delego, which resulted in the dismantling of an online 

pedophile network using a private, highly encrypted bulletin board known as Dreamboard. 

This  network  included  more  than  500  members,  and  its  strict  rules  of  access  and 

membership, which required the posting of child exploitation material including images of 

children  who  were  abused  specifically  to  produce  new  material  for  the  network,  were 

printed  in  English,  Russian,  Japanese,  and  Spanish.  The  international  enforcement 

operation  resulted  in  the  charging  of  72  members  with  conspiring  to  advertise  and 

distribute  child  pornography  and  50  also  were  charged  with  engaging  in  a  child 

pornography enterprise, located across five continents and 13 countries: Canada, Denmark, 

Ecuador, France, Germany, Hungary, Kenya, the Netherlands, the Philippines, Qatar, Serbia, 

Sweden,  and  Switzerland.  This  involved  the  collaborative  efforts  of  the  DOJ  and 

Immigration  and  Customs  Enforcement  (ICE),  the  European  Union’s  Judicial  Cooperation 

Unit, and the law enforcement agencies of the other countries involved.213 

The  private,  governmental,  and  non-governmental  sectors,  on  the  basis  of  both  national 

and international efforts, have been taking steps to increase the security of their products, 

services,  and  networks.  These  efforts  include,  for  example,  the  work  of  international 

standards  bodies,  which  range  from  the  treaty-based  International  Telecommunication 

                                                           
211 Id. at. 
212 Id. at. 
213 Id. at, 9-10. 

 

60 

Union  (ITU)  to  non-governmental  but  highly  influential  and  essential  bodies  such  as  the 

Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Important issues for consideration include the role 

of standards and the role of government in developing standards.214 

Despite  the  positive  examples  of  cooperation,  in  terms  of  an  evolving  cybersecurity  legal 

framework,  there  are  a  number  of  evident  vulnerabilities  and  impediments  to  effective 

international cooperation. Among these are:215 

Dissonance in national approaches to cybersecurity. Different countries, even members of 

the  same  regional  organizations,  can  take  different  approaches  to  the  concept  of 

cybersecurity in terms of national policies, laws, and implementation. Some countries see 

Internet governance as having state security at its core, by which they mean that the State 

can  know  exactly  who  sent  and  received  every  transmission,  every  transmission's 

traceroute,  and  the  contents  of  every  transmission;  it  can  delete,  block,  and/or  seize  any 

transmission  of  which  it  disapproves;  and  it  can  punish  efficiently  those  who  send  or 

receive  unapproved  transmissions.  At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  are  countries  and 

organizations  that  strongly  believe  that  proper  Internet  governance,  including  Internet 

security,  must  be  integrated  and  balanced  with  the  type  of  freedoms  protected  by 

instruments  such  as  the  First,  Fourth,  Fifth,  and  Fourteenth  Amendments  of  the  United 

States  Constitution,  the  European  Union  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,  and  numerous 

United Nations  human  rights  documents. This “dissonance” can lead to a  lack of effective 

coordination and can result in part because of a lack of multi-stakeholder participation in 

both policy-making and legislation.216 

Cybersecurity  is  a  twenty-first  century  problem  that  requires  twenty-first  century 

responses. However, in the legal sphere, many concepts developed in an analog era simply 

do not apply in a digital era or they cause friction when applied. For example, the lack of 

consensus  on  the  fundamental  and  related  issues  of  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty  make  it 

difficult  to  effectively  cross  borders  to  address  international  cybersecurity  incidents.  A 

nation  state  may  view  its  sovereignty  as  being  impaired  if  another  nation  state  may 

                                                           
214 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1755 (2011). 
215 Id. at, 1749. 
216 Id. at, 1750. 

 

61 

exercise 

‘jurisdiction’  within  its  borders.  However,  nation  states  may  view  their 

sovereignty as being enhanced if by mutual agreement they obtain jurisdiction within each 

other’s territories. In order for the rule of law to prevail, the inherent cross-border nature 

of  cyberspace  seems  to  require  such  agreements  for  the  mutual  expansion  of 

jurisdiction.217  

Existing  tools  and  instruments  are  not  fully  applied  or  are  only  partially  implemented. 

Another  source  of  vulnerabilities  in  the  existing  cybersecurity  legal  frameworks  results 

from  failure  to  apply  the  terms  of  existing  instruments  or  only  partial  implementation  of 

such instruments. Legal systems are increasingly responding to this source of vulnerability 

by  establishing  liability  for  failure  to  implement  existing  cybersecurity  tools  in  a  manner 

proportional  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  data  held.  This  liability  may  be  imposed  because 

proportional  security  mechanisms  were  not  employed  as  promised  or  regardless  of 

whether  a  promise  was  made.  However,  this  liability  is  often  imposed  on  a  case-by-case 

basis  and  not  pursuant  to  statutory  or  regulatory  requirements  aimed  at  the  particular 

issue.218 

10 Treaty-Based Approach to Cybersecurity and Cybercrime 

The  international  community  has  a  clear  interest  in  developing  a  comprehensive, 

multilateral cybersecurity framework because the widespread use of the internet in every 

aspect  of  daily  life  has  created  an  almost  irreversible  dependence  on  its  technological 

benefits,  and  because  the  conceptual  underpinnings  of  existing  legal  frameworks  are  not 

readily adaptable to threats emerging in cyberspace.219 

No  comprehensive 

international 

legal  framework  addressing  cybersecurity  exists. 

International efforts to address the issue have been narrow in scope, focusing primarily on 

data privacy regulations and human rights, at the expense of a broader effort to define and 

differentiate various levels of cyberaggression and codify an international approach to deal 

                                                           
217 Id. at, 1750-1751. 
218 Id. at, 1751. 
219 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 249 (2011). 

 

62 

with  its  challenges.220  In  the  absence  of  codified  law,  nations  attempting  to  enforce  their 

cybersecurity  regimes  against  foreign  perpetrators  have  done  so  largely  by  analogy  to 

international  law  governing  military  use  of  force221  and  domestic  criminal  law.  Existing 

international cybersecurity agreements are narrow in scope, focusing on criminal activity 

in cyberspace, and fail to adequately account for cyberspace as a platform for terrorism and 

military action.222  

These shortcomings may be due, in part, to the nature of cyberaggression, which challenges 

the  conceptual  categories  we  have  so  far  used  to  avoid  chaos  and  maintain  order  in  our 

societies and in our lives. Without a comprehensive international definition of the types of 

cyberaggression,  nations  will  continue  to  face  challenges  in  assessing  the  legality  of  their 

response  to  a  given  attack.  Also,  because  there  is  no  international  body  authorized  to 

investigate  and  prosecute  cyberaggression  without  limitation  based  upon  the  attack’s 

location, nations resort to legal systems founded on the principle of territorial jurisdiction 

in  crafting  a  response  to  cyberattacks.  Nations’  efforts  are  hampered  by  the  fact  that 

international 

law  recognizes  no  duty 

to  assist  other  nations 

in 

investigating 

cyberaggression absent an explicit agreement to the contrary among the parties.223 

A comprehensive international treaty is wanting on some or all aspects of the cybersecurity 

problem.224  When  analyzing  the  merits  of  a  treaty-based  approach  to  cybersecurity,  a 

myriad  of  questions  arise,  including:  What  are  the  key  issues  that  should  or  could  be 

addressed in a cybersecurity treaty? What would be the added value of such a treaty? What 

would be the risks? What prior efforts have been attempted and what caused them to fail 

or  have  limited  effect?  What  incremental  steps  can  be  taken  to  break  through  the 

problems?  How  can  treaty  compliance  be  verified?  How  could  countries  globally  be 

supported  in  the  strengthening  of  their  cybersecurity  capacities,  through  technical 

assistance and other means?225 

                                                           
220 Id. at, 260-261. 
221 See e.g. Schmitt, Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare. 2013. 
222 Stahl, GEORGIA JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW, 250 (2011). 
223 Id. at, 260-261. 
224 Satola & Judy, WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW, 1783-1784 (2011). 
225 Id. at, 1785. 

 

63 

Any effort to reach international consensus on cybersecurity is likely to expose a range of 

concerns,  which  in  part  flow  from  different  visions  of  national  security,  of  the  role  and 

value of the  internet, of human  rights, and of economic policy. Some see cybersecurity as 

having state security at its core, which leads to an emphasis on capabilities to monitor and 

attribute transmissions and to block any undesirable content. Others strongly believe that 

internet governance (including internet security) involves the integrating and balancing of 

interests, including not only national security, but also human rights and the economic and 

developmental interests associated with a vibrant, innovative, and competitive ICT sector. 

These differing perspectives manifest themselves in many areas, including, for example, the 

increasing debate over the issue of attribution, referred to above.226 

Although  no  significant  developments  in  the  promulgation  of  a  cybersecurity  treaty  have 

been  seen  in  the  last  decade,  the  promulgation  of  international  and  regional  instruments 

aimed  at  countering  cybercrime  have  been  more  successful.  These  include  binding  and 

nonbinding  instruments.  Five  clusters  of  international  or  regional  instruments  can  be 

identified,  consisting  of  instruments  developed  in  the  context  of,  or  inspired  by:  (i)  the 

Council of Europe or the European Union, (ii) the Commonwealth of Independent States or 

the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, (iii) intergovernmental African organizations, (iv) 

the League of Arab States, and (v) the United Nations.227 

These  clusters  are  not  absolute  and  a  significant  amount  of  crossfertilisation  exists 

between  the  instruments.  The  basic  concepts  developed  in  the  Council  of  Europe 

Cybercrime  Convention,  for  example,  are  also  found  in  many  other  instruments.  United 

Nations  entities,  such  as  UNECA  and  ITU,  have  also  had  some  involvement  in  the 

development  of  instruments  in  the  African  context,  including  the  Draft  African  Union 

Convention.228 

A number of the  instruments  –  notably the  Council of Europe  Conventions, the  European 

Union  instruments,  the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  Agreement,  the  Shanghai 

Cooperation  Organization  Agreement,  and  the  League  of  Arab  States  Convention  –  are 

                                                           
226 Id. at, 1785-1786. 
227 Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 63. 2013. 
228 Id. at, 64. 

 

64 

express  agreements  between  states  intended  to  create  legal  obligations.  Many  of  these 

treaties  are  non-binding.  Instruments  –  such  as  the  Commonwealth  Model  Law,  the 

COMESA  Draft  Model  Bill, 

the  League  of  Arab  States  Model  Law,  and 

the 

ITU/CARICOM/CTU Model Legislative Texts  – are not intended to create legal obligations 

for states. Rather, they are designed to serve as inspiration or ‘models’ for development of 

national 

legislative  provisions.  Non-binding 

instruments  may  nonetheless  have  a 

significant influence at the global or regional level when many states choose to align their 

national laws with model approaches.229 

The  Council  of  Europe  Cybercrime  Convention  has  the  largest  number  of  signatures  or 

ratifications/accessions (48 countries), including five Non-member States of the Council of 

Europe (Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Philippines, and 

Senegal).  Other  instruments  have  smaller  geographic  scope  –  the  League  of  Arab  States 

Convention  (18  countries  or  territories),  the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States 

Agreement  (10  countries),  and  the  Shanghai  Cooperation  Organization  Agreement  (6 

countries). If signed or ratified by all member states of the African Union, the Draft African 

Union Convention could have up to 54 countries or territories.230 The AU Convention will 

also be binging for states. 

The  enumerated  international  instruments  exhibit  differences  in  substantive  focus.  Many 

of these differences derive from the underlying aim of the instrument. Some instruments, 

such as the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention, the Commonwealth Model Law, the 

League  of  Arab  States  Convention,  and  the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States 

Agreement, aim specifically to provide a criminal justice framework for combating forms of 

cybercrime.  Others,  such  as  the  Shanghai  Cooperation  Organization  Agreement  and  the 

Draft African Union Convention, take a broader approach, of which cybercrime is just one 

component.  The  Shanghai  Cooperation  Organization  Agreement,  for  example,  addresses 

cooperation in cybercrime matters within the context of international information security 

– including information warfare, terrorism and threats to global and national information 

infrastructures. The Draft African Union Convention takes a cybersecurity-based approach 

that  includes  organization  of  electronic  transactions,  protection  of  personal  data, 
                                                           
229 Id. at, 65. 
230 Id. at, 67-68. 

 

65 

promotion  of  cybersecurity,  e-governance  and  combating  cybercrime.  Such  differences 

significantly  affect  the  way  in  which  cybercrime  is  ‘framed’  within  the  international  or 

regional legal response. Due to its broader focus on international information security, for 

example, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Agreement does not set out specific cyber 

acts that should be criminalized. Similarly – perhaps due to its focus on cybersecurity as a 

whole,  rather  than  criminal  justice  in  particular  –  the  Draft  African  Union  Convention 

presently  does  not  seek  to  establish  mechanisms  of  international  cooperation  in 

cybercrime criminal matters.231 

11 General Recommendations 

There  are two major areas that are in need of governmental attention at the moment: (i) 

development  of  comprehensive  and  clear  policies  on  cybersecurity,  and  (ii)  development 

and  adoption  of  relevant 

legislation  supporting  the  policy  that  would  enhance 

cybersecurity. 

The  considerations  of  the  policy  is  of  utmost  importance  and  should  include  first  and 

foremost long-term educational efforts on all levels of society including general education 

on  cybersecurity  matters,  as  well  as  professional  education  of  law  enforcement,  judiciary 

and  legislative  authorities.  Also,  an  important  component  of  a  viable  policy  is  promoting 

international  discussion  on  the  issues  cybersecurity  and  its  management  on  an 

international level.  

While  international  cooperation  is  necessary,  each  nation  will  have  to  develop,  as  a 

foundation,  its  own  national  cybersecurity  strategy,  authorities,  and  capabilities.  Within 

any  given  nation  state,  adequate  cybersecurity  will  require  effective  coordination  and 

cooperation among governmental entities on the national and sub-national levels as well as 

the private sector and civil society.  

From the crime prevention and criminal justice perspective, six key areas may benefit from 

either  binding  or  non-binding  guidance  at 

international  or  regional 

level:  (i) 

criminalization;  (ii)  law  enforcement  procedural  powers;  (iii)  procedures  regarding 

                                                           
231 Id. at, 69. 

 

66 

electronic evidence; (iv) state jurisdiction in cybercrime criminal matters; (v) international 

cooperation  in  cybercrime  criminal  matters;  and  (vi)  the  responsibility  of  service 

providers. 

Issues  for  consideration  in  the  area  of  private  sector  involvement  include:  What  are  the 

most  effective  means  to  promote  effective  coordination  and  cooperation  at  the  national 

level? To what extent should cooperation of the private sector be legally compelled? What 

incentives  or  subsidies  may  promote  cooperation?  How  far  should  governments  go  in 

regulating the private sector in the  name of improving cybersecurity? What is  the  role of 

civil liability systems in addressing cyber-vulnerabilities? As governments seek to develop 

their  own  national  policies  and  structures  for  cybersecurity,  questions  include:  Which 

agency  or  ministry  should  have  the  lead?  What  should  be  the  role  of  civilian  agencies 

versus national security agencies? What should be the roles of law enforcement or national 

security agencies versus the roles of ministries for trade, commerce, or communications?  

 

67 

12 Bibliography and Consulted Literature 
 

Convention on Cybercrime. Council of Europe.  (2001). 

Comprehensive  Study  on  Cybercrime    (John  Sandage,  et  al.  eds.,  United  Nations  Office  on 
Drugs and Crime  2013). 

Susan W. Brenner, The Privacy Privilege: Law Enforcement, Technology and the Constitution, 
7 JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY LAW & POLICY (2002). 

Susan  W.  Brenner,  Toward  a  Criminal  Law  for  Cyberspace:  a  New  Model  of  Law 
Enforcement?, 30 RUTGERS COMPUTER AND TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL (2004). 

Susan W. Brenner, Toward a Criminal Law for Cyberspace: Distributed Security, 10 BOSTON 
UNIVERSITY JOURNAL OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY LAW (2004). 

Susan  W.  Brenner,  Toward  a  Criminal  Law  for  Cyberspace:  Product  Liability  and  Other 
Issues, 5 UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY LAW AND POLICY (2005). 

SUSAN W. BRENNER, CYBERCRIME AND THE LAW: CHALLENGES, ISSUES, AND OUTCOMES   (Northeastern 
University Press. 2012). 

Susan  W.  Brenner  &  Bert-Jaap  Koops,  Approaches  to  Cybercrime  Jurisdiction,  4  JOURNAL  OF 
HIGH TECHNOLOGY LAW (2004). 

Susan  W.  Brenner  &  Joseph  Schwerha,  Transnational  Evidence-Gathering  and  Local 
Prosecution  of  International  Cybercrime,  20  JOHN  MARSHALL  JOURNAL  OF  COMPUTER  AND 
INFORMATION LAW (2002). 

Francesco  Calderoni,  The  European  Legal  Framework  on  Cybercrime:  Striving  for  an 
Effective Implementation, 54 CRIME, LAW AND SOCIAL CHANGE (2010). 

RICHARD  A.  CLARKE  &  ROBERT  KNAKE,  CYBER  WAR:  THE  NEXT  THREAT  TO  NATIONAL  SECURITY  AND 
WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT   (Harper Collins. 2010). 

JONATHAN  CLOUGH, PRINCIPLES OF CYBERCRIME   (Cambridge University Press. 2010). 

Jorge L. Contreras, et al., Mapping Today's Ceybersecurity Landscape, 62 AMERICAN UNIVERSITY 
LAW REVIEW (2013). 

Mark  F.  Grady  &  Francesco  Parisi,  The Law  and  Economics  of  Cybersecurity    (Cambridge 
University Press  2006). 

Craig B. Greathouse, Cyber War and Strategic Thought: Do the Classic Theorists Still Matter?, 
in CYBERSPACE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS: THEORY, PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES (Jan-Frederik 
Kremer & Benedikt Müller eds., 2014). 

 

68 

THOMAS  J.  HOLT,  CYBERCRIME  AND  CRIMINOLOGICAL  THEORY:  FUNDAMENTAL  READINGS  ON  HACKING, 
PIRACY, THEFT, AND HARASSMENT (Cognella. 2013). 

Yvonne Jewkes & Majid Yar, Handbook of Internet Crime  (Routledge 2010). 

MARK JOHNSON, CYBER CRIME, SECURITY AND DIGITAL INTELLIGENCE   (Gower. 2013). 

Brian B. Kelly, Investing In a Centralized Cybersecurity Infrastructure: Why "Hacktivism" Can 
And Should Influence Cybersecurity Reform 92 BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW (2012). 

Sascha Knoepfel, Clarifying the International Debate on Stuxnet: Arguments for Stuxnet as an 
Act  of  War  in  CYBERSPACE  AND  INTERNATIONAL  RELATIONS:  THEORY,  PROSPECTS  AND  CHALLENGES 
(Jan-Frederik Kremer & Benedikt Müller eds., 2014). 

Jan-Frederik  Kremer  &  Benedikt  Müller,  Cyberspace  and  International  Relations:  Theory, 
Prospects and Challenges  (Springer  2014). 

NIR KSHETRI, CYBERCRIME AND CYBERSECURITY IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH (Palgrave Macmillan. 2013). 

Howard  F.    Lipson,  Tracking  and  Tracing  Cyber-Attacks:  Technical  Challenges  and  Global 
Policy Issues  (Software Engineering Institute  2002). 

JULIE E. MEHAN, CYBERWAR, CYBERTERROR, CYBERCRIME: A GUIDE  TO  THE ROLE  OF STANDARDS  IN  AN 
ENVIRONMENT OF CHANGE AND DANGER   (IT Governance Publishing. 2008). 

ROBERT  MOORE,  CYBERCRIME:  INVESTIGATING  HIGH-TECHNOLOGY  COMPUTER  CRIME      (Anderson 
Publishing 2011). 

Brian Nichiporuk & Carl H. Builder, Societal Implications, in IN ATHENA'S CAMP: PREPARING FOR 
CONFLICT IN THE INFORMATION AGE (John Arquilla & David Ronfeldt eds., 1997). 

Ellen  S.  Podgor,  International  Computer  Fraud:  A  Paradigm  for  Limiting  National 
Jurisdiction, 35 U.C. DAVIS LAW REVIEW (2002). 

David  Satola  &  Henry  L.    Judy,  Towards  a  Dynamic  Approach  to  Enhancing  International 
Cooperation  and  Collaboration  in  Cybersecurity  Legal  Frameworks:  Reflections  on  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Workshop  on  Cybersecurity  Legal  Issues  at  the  2010  United  Nations 
Internet Governance Forum 37 WILLIAM MITCHELL LAW REVIEW (2011). 

Michael N. Schmitt, Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare  
(Cambridge University Press  2013). 

Peter M. Shane, Cybersecurity: Toward a Meaningful Policy Framework, 90 TEXAS LAW REVIEW 
(2012). 

Mathhew J. Sklerov, Solving the Dilemma of State Responses to Cyberattacks: A Justification 
for the Use of Active Defenses Against States Who Neglect Their Duty to Prevent, 201 MILITARY 
LAW REVIEW (2009). 

 

69 

William  M.  Stahl,  The  Uncharted  Waters  of  Cyberspace:  Applying  the  Principles  of 
International  Maritime  Law  to  the  Problem  of  Cybersecurity,  40  GEORGIA  JOURNAL  OF 
INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW (2011). 

Melanie Teplinsky, Fiddling on the Roof: Recent Developments in Cybersecurity, 2 AMERICAN 
UNIVERSITY BUSINESS LAW REVIEW (2013). 

Karson  K.  Thompson,  Not  Like  an  Egyptian:  Cybersecurity  and  the  Internet  Kill  Switch 
Debate, 90 TEXAS LAW REVIEW (2011). 

Gregor Urbas, Cybercrime, Jurisdiction and Extradition: The Extended Reach of Cross-Border 
Law Enforcement, 16 JOURNAL OF INTERNET LAW (2012). 

DAVID  S.  WALL,  CYBERCRIME:  THE  TRANSFORMATION  OF  CRIME  IN  THE  INFORMATION  AGE      (Polity 
Press. 2007). 

Alamie  M.  Weber,  The  Council  of  Europe's  Convention  on  Cybercrime,  18  BERKELEY 
TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL (2014). 

MAJID YAR, CYBERCRIME AND SOCIETY (SAGE. 2006). 

 

 

70 

