 

 

 

 

 

POLICY BRIEF ON CHILD ONLINE PROTECTION IN GHANA 

Executive Summary 

The internet is a vast and fast growing resource and, together with new technologies, it provides 
new  opportunities  for  children  and  young  people  when  it  comes  to  education  and  skills 
development, communication, social interaction and entertainment.  However, while the internet 
is  acknowledged  to  be  a  powerful  and  invaluable  resource,  it  is  important  that  children  and 
young  people  are  aware  of,  and  protected  from,  the  risks  they  may encounter online  such as 
exposure to sexual and violent content, cyberbullying, cybercrime, among others. 
 
In Ghana there is practically no legislation or policy which directly guarantees children’s safety 
online.  Furthermore, the general public is largely unaware of the threats and risks the internet 
possess  to  children  and  young  people.  This means that there is still a long way to go to keep 
children  safe  online.  Stakeholders  must  therefore  come  together  and  work  collaboratively  to 
improve the safety of children and young people within cyberspace.  

This  policy  brief  offers  a  contextual  analysis  of  the  current  Child  Online  Protection  (COP) 
environment  in  Ghana  and  gives  important  recommendations on how to ensure that children 
can utilise the opportunities the Internet offers without the potential adverse effects.   

 

Introduction 

The  development  of  the  internet  has  opened  up  unprecedented  opportunities  in  the areas of 
communications,  commerce,  culture,  and  politics  and  in  the  exercise  of rights. Access to the 
internet  continues  to  increase  across  the  African  continent  with  enormous  possibilities  for 
Africans of all ages both at home and in the Diasporas. For children in particular, the internet 
offers opportunities to learn, communicate and have fun. In spite of these benefits, the use of 
the internet comes with its own threats and risks especially for vulnerable populations such as 
children.  
 
As everyone else, children engage online as recipients, participants or actors. Any of these roles 
that  is  assumed  by  a  child  at  any  particular  point  in  his  or  her  online  experience,  exposes 
him/her to a variety of appropriate and inappropriate content, which can range from commercial 
information (unsolicited adverts, spam, etc.) to more aggressive content (bullying, harassment, 
hate speech, and other violent content). As recipients, participants or actors, children are also 
susceptible to sexually explicit content which may cause distorted and unhealthy values in young 
people about their personalities and relationships with others. Potential value-laden content such 
as prejudicial/stereotypical and misleading information which many young netizens may not be 
discerning  enough  to  decipher,  and  other  unacceptable  activities such as  online grooming for 
prostitution or terrorism, also endanger children in cyberspace. Online activities that make young 
people  feel  embarrassed,  upset,  depressed  or  afraid  can  damage  their  self-esteem  and  pose a 
threat to their psychological wellbeing. 
 
Unfortunately, many children are unaware of these risks. However, for children to fully utilize 
the  vast  opportunities  the  internet  offers  while  avoiding  the  negative  consequences,  it  is 

1 | P a g e  
 

 

important that they feel confident that they are safe online and know how to protect themselves 
against potential threats. 
 
This analytical piece highlights challenges affecting child online protection (COP) in Ghana in 
terms  of  policies  and  practices.  The  brief  also  outlines  a  number  of  recommendations  for 
improving a safe online experience for children in Ghana. 
 

Overview of Child Online Protection Issues in Ghana 

In  Ghana,  as  in  other  countries  around  the  world, increasing numbers of children are gaining 
access to the Internet. They engage in chat rooms and share personal information when online. 
This  makes  them  vulnerable  targets  for  predators  to  abuse  sexually  and  exploit  for  scams, 
identity theft, and other social vices. 
 
Among the Ghanaian public, especially children, there is a general dearth of knowledge on the 
various threats associated with online activities. This is compounded by the fact that many young 
people do not have what it takes to stay safe online. As a result, children and young people are at 
risk of becoming involved in illegal or inappropriate activities such as buying and selling stolen 
goods,  cyberbullying,  online  gaming  and  addiction,  online  fraud,  privacy  and  identity  theft, 
sexting,  self-harm  and  radicalisation.  Some  are  also  at  risk  of  being  involved  in  the viewing, 
possessing, making and distributing pornographic images. 
 

Policy Environment 

Protecting children online is acknowledged to be a global challenge. Some countries have come 
up  with  policies  and  regulations  targeted  at  protecting  children  online.  The  International 
Telecommunications  Union  (ITU)  has  also  developed  a  global set of Guidelines for children; 
parents, guardians and educators; industry; and policy makers to be adopted and adapted to suit 
national  and  local  realities.  In  Ghana  however,  there  are  no  known  policies  or  institutional 
frameworks,  whether  developed  locally  or  adapted  from  the  ITU  Guidelines  or  other  best 
practices,  intended  to  protect  and  safeguard  children  in  cyberspace.  Even  though  the 
Information  &  Communications  Technology  for  Accelerated  Development  (ICT4AD)  Policy  
exists, it does not make provisions for the protection of children online. The sector regulator, the 
National  Communications  Authority  (NCA),  has  also not developed any specific guideline or 
policy to guide industry players and users on COP issues. 
 
The resultant effect of the lack of policy on COP is the fact that there is no clear guideline on 
how issues of online abuses or violations against children are to be addressed. So far, reported 
cases of online abuses against children have been interpreted as isolated cases of child abuse or 
young people’s non-adherence to rules. Even though Ghana has ratified the UN Convention on 
the Right of the Child, and given meaning to the Convention by enacting the Children Act 1998, 
neither  the  Act  nor  the  recently-introduced  Child  and  Family  Welfare  Policy  has  online 
safety/protection considerations. 

2 | P a g e  
 

 

What is currently available is the Ministry of Communications’ National Cyber Security Policy & 
Strategy  Final  Draft  document  (as  at  July  23,  2015)  which  makes  the  following  provision in 
relation to COP: 
 

Child Online Protection Policy measures will be implemented through multi-stakeholder 
working  by  government,  industry, civil society, and relevant international child online 
protection agencies. Government will encourage dialogue at national and local levels to 
engage  all  concerned  and  create  awareness  of  the  possibilities  and  dangers  of  the 
Internet. 

 
At  a  recent  Africa  Regional  Conference  on  COP,  the  Director  of  Research,  Statistics  and 
Infrastructure  Management  at  the  Ministry  of  Communications  also  shared  a  roadmap  and 
strategies  being  put  in  place  to  ensure  that  children  are  protected  online.  The  four-point 
strategies make the following provision: 

a)  Development  of  a  sound  research  base  on  COP  issues  and  establishment  of  a 
stakeholder working group to serve as the leading expert group that advises government 
on formulation and implementation of a national COP plan  

b)  Capacity building and awareness creation among key stakeholders 
c)  Development  of  legal  measures  to  review  the  existing  child  protection  act  to include 

COP 

d)  Establishment  of  an  online  COP  Portal  with  child  online  education  information  and 
online  forms  for    reporting  COP  incidents,  as  well  as  a  call  centre  with special COP 
support numbers for the public to call for assistance 

 
When implemented, the proposed strategies will help improve the safety of the country’s young 
netizens.  The  cooperation  of  all  relevant  stakeholders  will  make  the  implementation  less 
cumbersome  and  faster.  Stakeholders,  especially  civil  society,  will  have  to  conscientiously 
monitor  closely  the  implementation  of  the  roadmap  to  ensure  that  its  objective  is  achieved. 
Periodic review and update of the strategies will also be appropriate.  
 

Practices 

Compared  to  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  number  of  Ghanaian  children  with  access  to  the 
internet  is  relatively low. The few who go online, access the internet through school libraries, 
internet  cafés,  parents’  computers  and  smart  devices,  and  in  some  cases,  the  children’s  own 
devices.  Many  of  the  parents  whose  children  are  online  do  not  know  much  about  the 
technologies and platforms they use nor the threats associated with their online activities. This 
makes it difficult for them (parents) to provide guidance on safety measures for their wards. This 
is  compounded  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  young  netizens  themselves  do  not  have  the 
knowledge and experience to stay safe online. 
 
Unfortunately,  there  is  very  little  sensitisation  from  the  media,  civil  society  groups  and 
educational  institutions  about  online  hazards  in  Ghana. Media reports about the internet and 
other  ICTs have often focused on the benefits of these technologies. Unless specific issues of 

3 | P a g e  
 

 

online fraud, abuse or crime involving children come up, there is often little or no se nsitisation 
for children about the dangers associated with online activities by the media.  
 
On the civil society front, there has not been lots of work on COP in the country. Civil society 
organisations  (CSOs)  working  on  children-related  issues  in  Ghana are mainly involved in the 
protection  of  children’s  rights  and  wellbeing  offline.  The  Global  Resource  &  Information 
Directory  (GRID),  an  encyclopaedia  of  information  maintained  by  the  Family  Online  Safety 
Institute on worldwide Internet trends for children and youth, notes that there are practically no 
organisations  actively  involved  in  the  provision  of  online  safety  information  for  Ghanaians. 
According  to  GRID,  the  few  websites available focus more on improving access to ICTs and 
somewhat digital literacy. There are, however, few initiatives at the local front targeted at COP 
such as J.Initiative’s advocacy and campaign for COP policy interventions. It has also worked 
collaboratively with World Vision Ghana Office to outdoor the Keeping Children Safe Online 
(KCSO) tool which is aimed at educating children, young people and parents in Ghana. 
 
The government of Ghana, through the ICT for Accelerated Development (ICT4AD) policy , is 
gradually extending ICTs and internet accessibility to a number of educational institutions from 
basic  to  tertiary  levels  in  partnership  with  corporate  and  non-profit  organisations.  ICTs 
education in many of the institutions is however limited to hardware parts, their uses and how to 
use  browsers  for  studies  and  research.  Sensitisation  about  the hazards associated with online 
activities is often neglected; sometimes because some of the teachers themselves have limited 
information on the reality of such risks.   
 

Conclusion 

The  internet  is  indeed  a great tool with which children are able to tap into a vast resource of 
information  and  educational  materials.  It  also  offers  them  the  opportunity  to  interact  with 
others,  play  and  be  innovative.  In  spite  of  the  benefits  derived from internet use, the threats 
associated with being online are real and children are often the most vulnerable because of their 
inexperience  and  gullibility.  Unfortunately,  Ghana  does  not have  adequate  institutional 
frameworks which can be used to protect and safeguard Ghanaian children online.  
 
The  introduction  of  the  roadmap  to  COP  by the Ministry of Communication  appears to be a 
great start. There is however a need for a comprehensive national strategy/policy to protect the 
country’s  young  netizens  from  online  hazards.  The  strategy/policy will have to  be developed 
using  a  multistakeholder  approach  to  ensure  that  the  final  outcome  document  will  meet  the 
demands  and  expectations  of  all  relevant stakeholders. It will also need to  meet international 
standards and practices, and actually give meaning to all the conventions, agreements and treaties 
Ghana is signatory to regarding the protection of children.  
 
Recommendations 
With internet use rapidly increasing across the continent, it is important to shape internet-related 
policies  to  meet  and  protect  the  interest  of  all  stakeholders, including children.  A number of 
recommendations  have  therefore  been  made  below  to  guide  government,  educational 
institutions, parents and civil society in addressing COP challenges in Ghana.  

4 | P a g e  
 

 

 
 
 
Government 
Government  has  a  duty to protect  its citizens, including children, from harm both offline and 
online.  A  COP  policy  in  Ghana  is  therefore  overdue.  The  roadmap  on  COP  in  Ghana  as 
presented  by  the  Ministry  of  Communications is a positive step, but it has to be expanded to 
include  implementation  schedule with timelines for action, periodic monitoring and reporting, 
and roles and responsibilities for all stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels.  
 
The  COP  stakeholder  working  group  will  need  an  advisory  board  made  up  of  experts  in 
technology  and  child  development  to  provide  leadership  and  guidance  and  inform  policies  
through a sustained research programme. In addition, all relevant stakeholders must be roped in 
to the roadmap and other COP policy initiatives to get the commitment of ISPs, enforcement 
bodies,  regional/local  authorities,  the  private  sector,  civil  society  organisations,  schools  and 
parents/guardians even before implementation. 
 
Policy  measures  that  address  different  risks  and initiatives of various stakeholders co-exist at 
different levels. It is therefore important to ensure that new ICT-related policy frameworks align 
with other policies to ensure consistency and effectiveness. This includes the harmonisation of 
all cross-ministerial initiatives on child online/offline protections for effective implementation. 
 
It is also important for government to encourage public-private-partnerships in addressing COP 
issues  in  the  country.  Public-private  partnerships  have  proven  to  be  an  effective  way  to 
encourage  self-  and  co-regulation  by  industry  players  who  are  also  very  critical  in  restricting 
children’s access to potentially harmful and inappropriate content without compromising their 
right to information and freedom of expression. 
 
Educational Institutions 
Internet use is recognised to be an important skill in its own right, in addition to its use as an 
educational  information  resource.  The curricula for  ICTs in schools, especially the basic level 
need to be expanded to cover COP issues. Since a number of teachers, especially those in the 
rural and remote areas often have little knowledge about ICTs and related risks, and many others 
find  it  difficult  to  keep  adapting  teaching  materials  to  evolve  with  children’s  ages  and  new 
technologies,  it  is  recommended  that  periodic  refresher  training  should  be  organised  to  keep 
them up to speed with new technologies and associated risks. 
 
Beyond  the  trainings,  lesson  plans  and  other  teaching  resources  need  to  be  developed  and 
upgraded regularly to help teachers stay on top of COP and e-safety issues in order to educate 
their  pupils/students  on  how  to  stay  safe  online.  Equipment  and  facilities  with  internet 
connection  should  also  be  made  available  to all schools for practical demonstrations of COP 
challenges that are often taught in theory. 
 
Industry/Private Sector 

5 | P a g e  
 

 

Industry players are another group of critical stakeholders in protecting children online. In most 
cases,  they  set  up  the  standards  that  form  the  basis  for  e-safety.  Operators  in  the sector are 
therefore  encouraged  to  put  in  place  measures  that  protect  the  privacy  and  personal  data  of 
children especially while respecting their right to free speech online. They are also encouraged to 
make their safety measures known to the general public particularly parents and children in easy-
to-understand  language.  They  must  also  provide  procedures  for  reporting  online  abuse  of 
children,  including  the  setting  up  of  hotlines  just  for  COP  issues.  In  line  with  reporting 
violations,  it  is  important  for  sector  operators to also liaise with law enforcement agencies in 
dealing  with  cyber  grooming  of  children  for  prostitution  and  terrorism and other cybercrimes 
such as scam and identity theft. Industry players must also support research on COP issues to 
inform  their  in-house  policies  on the protection of children online. As much as possible, they 
should give parents the ability to control their wards’ online activities while directly protecting 
children from age-inappropriate advertising as indicated in the ITU’s Guidelines for Industry on 
Child Online Protection. 
 
Parents 
Technology is constantly advancing and evolving. As early adopters, young people are often fast 
in  keeping  up-to-date  with  technologies  as  they  evolve.  Many  parents  however  find  staying 
updated with technological advancements and what their children are doing online complex and 
challenging.  But  to  provide  guidance  and  safety  tools  for  their  wards,  parents need to invest 
more  in  order  to  appreciate  the  risks  associated  with  the  technologies  and  platforms  their 
children are exposed to. Education about child online safety should not stop in the classroom 
with teachers, parents have to take it up to ensure that children have some safety measures when 
navigating the online world. 
 
Parents  must  therefore  get  themselves  informed  about  COP  issues  and  the  range  of  options 
available to them – social and technical – to keep their young netizens safe online. For instance, 
parents will have to know and choose appropriate technologies for their wards, monitor usage, 
discuss online security issues  with children and set controls until they are discerning enough to 
make  their  own  decisions.  They  can  also  install  safety  tools  on the devices of their children. 
Parents  are  also  advised  to  resort  to  available  guidelines  for parents, such as the ITU’s COP 
Guidelines for Parents, Guardians and Educators and J Initiative’s Safety Information Guides for 
Empowering  Parents  and  Families,  Teenagers  and  Educators i    for  more  guidance  on  how  to 
safeguard  their  children  online.  Finally,  they  should  use  existing  facilities  such  as  the  Police 
Service, the Ministry and Social Welfare Department to report any child abuse.  
 
Civil Society  
It  is  highly  recommended  that civil society organisations (CSOs) working on child’s right and 
other children-related issues also get involved in issue of COP and also include such issues in 
their  programmes  and  activities.  This  will  help in creating more awareness about COP issues 
among parents/guardians and children of the hazards associated with online activities and how 
to  protect  children  online.  CSOs  are  also  encouraged  to  engage  industry  players  regularly  to 
ensure  that  the  interests  of  children  are protected. They should also be proactive in engaging 
governments  to  ensure  that  new  policy  interventions  take  COP  issues  into  consideration.  In 
addition, CSOs should monitor and evaluate the implementation of all interventions, including 

6 | P a g e  
 

 

the roadmap presented by the Ministry of Communication, to ensure all activities are carried out 
creditably. 
 
The academic community is also encouraged to inform COP policy with periodic evidence-based 
research  and  findings.  They  could  also  complement  the  work  of  other  stakeholders  with 
sensitisation activities in the classroom. 
 
Children and the general public are encouraged to build their capacity around COP issues so they 
can  adopt  the  right  safety  measures  when  in  cyberspace.  In  line with that there is a need for 
sustained  information  sharing  and  public  education  by  all stakeholders especially educational 
institutions and the media. As agenda setters and influencers of public opinion, the media are key 
stakeholders  in  promoting  a  culture  of  COP  consciousness  among  children  first,  and  then 
parents and guardians. The media are therefore encouraged to engage more in raising awareness, 
knowledge, skills and understanding around e-safety issues for children and the general public. 
 
                                                                 
i http://cybercitizenghana.com/downloadables/ 

7 | P a g e  
 

