   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity:   A Regulatory Digest*           October 2017   This Digest is intended to be a “live”, periodically updated compilation of recent cybersecurity  laws, regulations, guidelines and other significant documents on cybersecurity for the financial  sector, therefore is organized in reverse chronological order with the most recent document first.
The Digest is not meant to be comprehensive of everything published by all jurisdictions and  international bodies.
The explanatory summaries are composed of text extracted from the  documents and includes links to the original documents or websites that contained them at time  of addition to the Digest.
Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           CONTENTS   TABLES .............................................................................................................................. 4   TABLE 1.
List of Included Documents Applicable to Single Jurisdictions ............................ 4   TABLE 2.
List of Included Documents Applicable to the European Union ........................... 6   TABLE 3.
List of Included Documents Applicable to Multi-Jurisdictions ............................. 6     DIGEST DOCUMENTS (in reverse chronological order) ............................................ 7   56.
ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017) .................................................. 7   55.
AU - Banking Exec Accountability & Related Measures Bill (Sep 2017) ...................... 7   54.
US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (Aug 2017) .............................................. 7   53.
US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk Alert (Aug 2017) ............................ 7   52.
IMF WP- Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability (Aug 2017) .................. 8   50.
SWIFT Customer Security Program (Jul/ May /April 2017) ............................................... 9   49.
Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control objectives and procedures for   outsourced service providers (Jun 2017) ................................................................................. 10   47.
G7 - fundamental elements for effective cybersecurity assessment (May 2017) ........ 11   45.
FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (May 2017) ........................................................... 12   43.
AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity (Apr 2017) ........................................................................... 13   41.
NY cyber-security requirements for financial services companies (Mar 2017) .......... 14   40.
US NIST draft updated Cybersecurity Framework (Jan 2017) ........................................ 16   35.
HKMA circular on Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative (Dec 2016) ........................... 17   32.
G7 Fundamental Elements of Cybersecurity for Financial Sector (Oct 2016) ............ 19   2   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           31.
US FBAs ANPR for enhanced cybersecurity standards (Oct 2016) ............................... 20   29.
MY SC Guidelines to Enhance Cyber resilience of Capital Mkt (Oct 2016) ............... 22   27.
IE CB Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks (Sept 2016) .............. 24   25.
ENISA Strategies for Incident Response & Cyber Crisis Coop.
EU Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (Jul 2016) ................ 26   21.
CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cybersecurity (Jun 2016) ........................................................ 28   19.
Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts (Apr 2016) ................................. 28   18.
ISO/IEC - IT, Security Techniques, InfoSec Management Systems (Feb 2016) ........ 29   16.
MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions (Aug 2015) ............................... 31   13.
UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (Jul 2015) .......................... 32   12.
Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-Defense Management (Mar 2015) ........... 32   11.
ASIC’s Report on Cyber Resilience (Mar 2015) .................................................................. 33   10.
EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments (Dec 2014) ....................................... 33   9.
MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management (Mar 2014) ............................................ 33   8.
BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk (Jun 2011) ........... 34   6.
FFIEC - Authentication in Internet Banking Environment, suppl.
AICPA suite of SOC & Implementation Guidance (Apr 2010) ....................................... 35   4.
ENISA National Exercises Good Practice Guide (Dec 2009) .......................................... 35   3.
ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting (Dec 2009) .................................... 36   2.
on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions (Jan 2007) ................... 36   APPENDIX:  INDEX by CONCEPTS ........................................................................... 38      3   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           TABLES   TABLE 1.
List of Included Documents Applicable to Single Jurisdictions   (Alphabetical Order of Country followed by Date)   INSTITUTION   DATE    NAME   Australia  Treasury  Australian  Securities &  Investment  Commission     China   Sep 2017   Mar 2015   Draft Treasury Laws Amendment (Banking Executive  Accountability and Related Measures) Bill 2017  ASIC Report on Cyber Resilience     Jun 2017     People Republic of China Cyber-Security Law            Germany BaFin   Mar 2017      HK SFC   HKMA   HK SFC     Reserve Bank of  India    Bank of Ireland     Bank of Israel     Korea   Korean  FSC/FSS     SC Malaysia     Association of  Banks in  Singapore  MA Singapore      Dec 2016   Dec 2016   Oct 2016     Sep 2016     Sep 2016     Mar 2015     Jan 2007   Jan 2007     Oct 2016     June 2017   July 2016   BaFin consultation on Circular on bank regulatory  requirements for IT systems     HK SFC Circular on augmenting accountability of  senior management   HKMA Circular on the Cyber-security Fortification  Initiative  HK SFC Review of cyber-security of online and mobile  trading systems    India Non-Banking Financial Company - Account  Aggregators    Central Bank of Ireland Cross Industry Guidance on IT  and Cyber-security Risks    Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-defense  Management    Korea Electronic Financial Transactions Act and  Enforcement Decree  Korea Regulation on Supervision of Electronic  Financial Transactions    Malaysia Securities Commission Guidelines to enhance  cyber-resilience of the Capital Market    Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control  objectives and procedures for outsourced service  providers  MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing   MA Singapore   Oct 2015   MAS Circular on Technology risk and cyber-security  training for Board   4   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           INSTITUTION   DATE    NAME   MA Singapore   Aug 2015   MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions   MA Singapore   Mar 2014   MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management     UK FCA     Jul 2017   UK CMA   Mar 2017   UK Government   Dec 2016   Bank of England   2016   UK FCA & PRA   Jul 2015     US NIST   US SEC     Aug 2017   Aug 2017   US FFIEC   May 2017   NYDFS   Mar 2017   US NIST   Jan 2017   US FinCEN   Oct 2016   Oct 2016   Jun 2011   US Federal  Banking  Agencies  US FFIEC          UK FCA Consultation on extending Individual  Accountability regime (SMCR)  UK Open Banking Initiative   UK Government Cyber-security Regulation and  Incentives Review  UK CBEST Intelligence-led cyber security assessment  2.0  UK FCA Senior Managers and Certification Regime  (final rules)    US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework    US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk  Alert  FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool   New York cyber-security requirements for financial  services companies  US NIST draft updated Framework for Improving  Critical Infrastructure Cyber-security  US FinCEN Advisory on FIs obligations on cyber- related events and crimes  US Federal Banking Agencies ANPR for enhanced  cyber-security standards   FFIEC - Supplement to Authentication in an Internet  Banking Environment   5   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           TABLE 2.
List of Included Documents Applicable to the European Union    INSTITUTION   DATE    NAME   ECB   2017   ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017)   EU Parliament   May 2017   ESAs (EBA,  EIOPA, ESMA)  EC   ENISA   EC   EBA   EC   EC   EBA   ENISA   ENISA      Apr 2017   Mar 2017   Aug 2016   Jul 2016   Jun 2016   Apr 2016   Jan 2016   Dec 2014   Dec 2009   Dec 2009   EU Parliament Report on influence of technology on future  of financial sector  ESAs Report on main risks for the EU Financial System   EU Commission Consultation on the impact of FinTech   ENISA Strategies for Incident Response and Cyber Crisis  Cooperation  EU Directive on Security of Network and Information  Systems  EBA ICT risk guidelines   EU General Data Protection Regulation   EU Payment Services Directive 2   EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments   ENISA National Exercise Good Practice Guide   ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting   TABLE 3.
List of Included Documents Applicable to Multi-Jurisdictions   INSTITUTION   DATE    NAME   Financial Stability  Institute  IMF   Aug 2017   Aug 2017   FSI Insights on policy implementation No 2: Regulatory  approaches to enhance banks’ cyber-security frameworks  IMF Working Paper - Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and  Financial Stability   July/May/Apr 2017  SWIFT Customer Security Program   May 2017   Apr 2017   Feb 2017   Oct 2016   G7 CEG developing fundamental elements for effective  assessment of cyber-security  AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity   CPMI Report on distributed ledger technology in payment  clearing and settlement  G7 fundamental elements of cyber-security in the financial  sector  CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cyber-security   SWIFT   G7   AICPA   CPMI   G7   CPMI-IOSCO   Jun 2016   IOSCO   ISO/IEC   World Bank  Group  BCBS   AICPA      Apr 2016   Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts   Feb 2016   Sep 2011   Jun 2011   Apr 2010   ISO/IEC Standards on IT, Security Techniques, Information  Security Management Systems  World Bank Financial Infrastructure Series - General  Principles for Credit Reporting  BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational  Risk  AICPA SOC suite of Service Organization Standards and  Implementation Guidance   6   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           DIGEST DOCUMENTS (in reverse chronological order)         56.
ECB (SSM) Cyber Incident Reporting Framework (2017)    ECB is finalizing a reporting framework for significant cyber incidents which was piloted  in 2016, with plans to be rolled out to all significant institutions from the 19 euro area  countries  in    third  quarter  of  2017.
“The  reporting  framework  for  significant  cyber  incidents is designed to collect and store information on cybercrime incidents that have  an impact on significant institutions.
This will require incidents to be reported as soon as  the  banks  detect  them.
The  information  will  be  used  to  identify  and  monitor  trends  in  cyber incidents affecting significant institutions and will facilitate a fast reaction by the  ECB in the event that a major incident affects one or more significant banks...”   The pilot  exercise has  resulted in  improvements to  the framework including incident  definitions,  the reporting template, and the reporting instructions.
AU - Banking Exec Accountability & Related Measures Bill (Sep 2017)   Australian Treasury released a Banking Executive Accountability and Related Measures  amendment bill for consultation.
The BEAR is a strengthened responsibility and accountability framework  for  the  most  senior  and  influential  directors  and  executives  in  authorized  deposit-taking  institutions (ADI) groups It requires them to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity  and  to  ensure  the  business  activities  for  which  they  are  responsible  are  carried  out  effectively.” The BEAR provisions are due to apply from 1 July 2018.
US NIST Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (Aug 2017)   The US National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)’s  National  Initiative for  Cybersecurity  Education  (NICE)  Cybersecurity  Workforce  Framework  aims  to  provide  organizations  with  a  common  vocabulary  when  describing  the  role,  area  of  specialty,  category  of  work,  and  the  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  (KSA)  of  cybersecurity  professionals.
US SEC Cybersecurity Examination Initiative Risk Alert (Aug 2017)   The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)’s Office of Compliance Inspections  and  Examinations  (OCIE)  published  its  Risk  Alert  on  its  findings  from  Cybersecurity  Examinations  (Cybersecurity  2  Initiative),  as  part  of  its  Cybersecurity  Examination  Initiative  announced  in  2014  after  its  Cybersecurity  Roundtable.
7   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           The newly published Risk Alert reported mixed progress of the regulated entities.
It noted:  The  examinations  focused  on  the  firms’  written  policies  and  procedures  regarding  cybersecurity,  including  validating  and  testing  that  such  policies  and  procedures  were  implemented  and  followed.
In  addition,  the  staff  sought  to  better  understand  how  firms  managed  their  cybersecurity  preparedness  by  focusing  on  the  following  areas:  (1)  governance and risk assessment; (2) access rights and controls; (3) data loss prevention;  (4) vendor management; (5) training; and (6) incident response.
The Risk Alert announcing the OCIE Cybersecurity Initiative noted that the initiative is  designed  to  assess  cybersecurity  preparedness  in  the  securities  industry  and  to  obtain  information about the industry’s recent experiences with certain types of cyber threats.
As  part of this initiative, OCIE will conduct examinations of more than 50 registered broker- dealers  and  registered  investment  advisers  focused  on  the  following:  the  entity’s  cybersecurity governance, identification and assessment of cybersecurity risks, protection  of  networks  and  information,  risks  associated  with  remote  customer  access  and  funds  transfer  requests,  risks  associated  with  vendors  and  other  third  parties,  detection  of  unauthorized activity, and experiences with certain cybersecurity threats.
FSI  Insights:  Regulatory  approaches  to  enhance  banks’  cyber-security   frameworks (Aug 2017)    “FSI Insights are written by members of the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for  International Settlements, often in collaboration with staff from supervisory agencies and  central  banks.
The  papers  aim  to  contribute  to  international  discussions  on  a  range  of  policy  issues  and  implementation  challenges  faced  by  financial  sector  authorities.
The  views expressed in the FSI Insights are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect  the views of their respective institutions.”    In this FSI Insights on policy implementation No 2:  after a discussion on the question of  “developing  specific  regulations  for  cyber-risk”,  the  authors  introduce  “existing  key  regulatory requirements relating to cyber-risk” and “supervisory frameworks and tools”,  to then make their “observations about the implementation of cyber-risk regulations by  the banking industry”, finally closing with “some policy considerations”.
IMF WP- Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability (Aug 2017)   “Working Paper - Cyber Risk, Market Failures, and Financial Stability Abstract: Cyber- attacks  on  financial  institutions  and  financial  market  infrastructures  are  becoming  more  common  and  more  sophisticated.
Risk  awareness  has  been  increasing,  firms  actively  manage cyber risk and invest in cybersecurity, and to some extent transfer and pool their  risks through cyber liability insurance policies.
This paper considers the properties of cyber  risk,  discusses  why  the  private  market  can  fail  to  provide  the  socially  optimal  level  of  cybersecurity, and explore how systemic cyber risk interacts with other financial stability  risks.
Furthermore, this study examines the current regulatory frameworks and supervisory  approaches, and identifies information asymmetries and other inefficiencies that hamper  the  detection  and  management  of  systemic  cyber  risk.
The  paper  concludes  discussing   8   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           policy measures that can increase the resilience of the financial system to systemic cyber  risk.”   50.
SWIFT Customer Security Program (Jul/ May /April 2017)   As  part  of  its  roll  out  of  the  SWIFT  Customer  Security  Programme  (CSP)  requirement  announced in September 2016, SWIFT launched the  KYC Registry Security  Attestation  Application  (KYC-SA)  –  “a  central  application  for  users  to  self-attest  their  level  of  compliance  with  SWIFT’s  Customer  Security  Controls  Framework.
The  KYC-SA  application also enables users to securely exchange their security status information with  selected counterparties, supporting cyber risk management, transparency and business due  diligence.”   In  April  and  May,  SWIFT  issued  its  new  mandatory  Customer  Security  Controls  Framework and published further details  of the related attestation  policy  and process  as  announced in September 2016 in the SWIFT Customer Security Controls Policy document.
SWIFT’s Customer Security Controls Framework is presented via three objectives (Secure  your  Environment,  Know  and  Limit  Access,  and  Detect  and  Respond),  eight  principles  within those objectives, and 27 (16 mandatory and 11 advisory) controls organized under  those  principles.
These  controls  are  intended  to  help  customers  to  safeguard  their  local  environments and reinforce the security of the global financial community.
Customers  will  be  required  to  provide  an  annual  self-attestation  against  the  mandatory  controls from Q2 2017, by December 31 2017.
As from January  2019 onwards, SWIFT’s reporting right will also cover users that have failed to self-attest  full compliance with  all mandatory security  controls  in  a timely manner or that connect  through  a  non-compliant  service  provider.
Also  in  May,  it  launched  the  SWIFT  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centre,  SWIFT  ISAC, global portal, a key part of its Customer Security Program to facilitate information  sharing among its community.
This information includes malware details such as file hashes and YARA rules,  Indicators of Compromise, as well as details on the Modus Operandi used by the cyber- criminals.
The information, which is particularly relevant to SWIFT customers, can also  be downloaded as PDF reports or as machine-readable files in OpenIOC format, an XML- based file format that is commonly used by the cyber-security industry.”   There  had  been  multiple  incidents  involving  fraudulent  transfers  through  the  SWIFT  messaging  system,  although  incidents  stemmed  from  breaches  within  locally  managed  infrastructure at the customer level and not that of SWIFT’s own network or software.
9   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           49.
UK FCA Consultation - Individual Accountability Regime (Jul 2017)   The  FCA  commenced  a  consultation  period  for  CP17/25:  Individual  accountability  -  extending the Senior Managers and Certification Regime to all FCA firms.
“The  Senior  Managers  and  Certification  Regime  (SM&CR)  currently  applies  to  deposit  takers and, following the Bank of England and Financial Services Act 2016, is now being  extended to FCA solo-regulated firms.
It replaces the current Approved Persons Regime,  changing how individuals working in financial services are regulated...
This consultation  paper  sets  out  our  proposed  approach  to  the  extension  of  the  SM&CR  as  well  as  some  minor proposals relating to the existing banking regime.”   (See UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (final rules) (Jul 2015)   48.
Singapore Association of Banks’ Guidelines on control objectives and procedures   for outsourced service providers (Jun 2017)   The Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) published the version 1.1 of its “Guidelines  on control objectives and procedures for outsourced service providers” based on the MAS  Guidelines on Outsourcing (issued on 27 July 2016) and industry feedback.
In July 2015,  it had first issued the earlier version 1.0 of the  Issuance of initial Guidelines on control  objectives and procedures for outsourced service providers”   “...the Association of Banks in Singapore (“ABS”) has established these Guidelines on  Control Objectives and Procedures for the FIs’ Outsourced Service Providers (“OSPs”)  operating in Singapore.
These Guidelines form the minimum/baseline controls that OSPs  which  wish  to  service  the  FIs  should  have  in  place.
However,  FIs  with  specific  needs  should  continue  to  liaise  with  their  OSPs  on  a  bilateral  basis  to  impose  any  additional  specific requirements...   By complying with the Guidelines, OSPs can assure the FIs that their controls are designed  and operating effectively to meet the control objectives that are relevant in the provision  of the outsourced services.
The law applies to everyone who operates networks in  the  PRC  and  will  affect  multinational  corporations.
The  Cyberspace  Administration  of  China (CAC) has issued a series of regulations implementing the law.
The public has been   10   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           asked for comments on other proposed implementing rules, including measures affecting  the transfer of personal data outside the PRC.
G7 - fundamental elements for effective cybersecurity assessment (May 2017)   The  G7  Communique  reflected  the  discussions  on  cyber-security  at  the  G7  Meeting  of  Finance Ministers and Central Banks’ Governors in Bari, Italy May 12-13, 2017.
On top of highlighting the importance of developing “common and shared practices to help  timely detection of vulnerabilities in the financial system” they raised the need for current  assessment approaches to be “enhanced and be complemented by practices that are tailored  to  bolster  cyber  resilience,  including  regular  cyber  exercises  and  simulations  as  well  as  consideration of how to most effectively leverage penetration tests” in response to rapidly  evolving nature of cyber risks.
Most importantly, the G7 Cyber Expert Group (G7 CEG) was mandated to develop a set  of  high  level  and  non-binding  fundamental  elements  for  effective  assessment  of  cybersecurity by October 2017.
They also specified the following areas for future further work:   “...task the G7 CEG to  advance work on the third-party  risks and the coordination with  other critical sectors....   ...encourage international coordination and knowledge sharing.
...explore other issues of interest related with cybersecurity as directed and prioritised by  G7 Finance Ministers and Central Banks Governors.
...call on the International Organizations and governmental institutions in partnership with  the private sector to enhance sharing of cybersecurity information.
Sharing national experiences  and best practices among all stakeholders on optimal cybersecurity legislation or relevant  regulatory initiatives would be highly beneficial.”   The  communique  also  informed  that  the  G7  is  following  the  development  of  a  cyber  insurance  market  and  the  ongoing  work  by  OECD,  notably  its  report  Supporting  an  Effective Cyber Insurance Market.
EU Report on influence of tech on future of financial sector (May 2017)   The EU Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON) published a  Report on the influence of technology on the future of the financial sector.
The report calls  on  the  EU  Commission  to  develop  an  action  plan  to  enable  new  and  innovative  technologies to develop in the framework of the Capital Markets Union and Digital Single  Market.
The report outlines key priorities such as:   11   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           •  cyber-security and data protection;   •   interoperability and passporting of fintech services within the EU;   •  providing a level playing field for traditional companies and start-ups; and   •  controlled experimentation with new technologies and fostering financial education   and IT skills.
FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (May 2017)   The US Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) members published  an updated Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (CAT), originally released in 2015 (see 2015  FAQs).
The  CAT  remains  “a  voluntary  tool  that  institution  management  may  use  to  determine the institution’s inherent risk and cybersecurity preparedness.”   From its Overview: “The content of the Assessment is consistent with the principles of the  FFIEC Information Technology Examination Handbook (IT Handbook) and the National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  Cybersecurity  Framework,  as  well  as  industry  accepted  cybersecurity  practices.
The  Assessment  provides  institutions  with  a  repeatable and measurable process to inform management of their institution’s risks and  cybersecurity preparedness.”   The Assessment consists of two parts: Inherent Risk Profile and Cybersecurity Maturity.
The  Inherent  Risk  Profile  identifies  the  institution’s  inherent  risk  before  implementing  controls.
The Cybersecurity Maturity includes domains, assessment factors, components,  and  individual  declarative  statements  across  five  maturity  levels  to  identify  specific  controls and practices that are in place.
While management can determine the institution’s  maturity  level  in  each  domain,  the  Assessment  is  not  designed  to  identify  an  overall  cybersecurity maturity level.
To  complete  the  Assessment,  management  first  assesses  the  institution’s  inherent  risk  profile based on five categories:   •  Technologies and Connection Types   •  Delivery Channels   •  Online/Mobile Products and Technology Services   •  Organizational Characteristics   •  External Threats   Management then evaluates the institution’s Cybersecurity Maturity level for each of five  domains:   •  Cyber Risk Management and Oversight   •  Threat Intelligence and Collaboration   •  Cybersecurity Controls   •  External Dependency Management   •  Cyber Incident Management and Resilience   12   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           The  Council  consists  of the  principals  of  the  following:  The  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve System, Federal  Deposit  Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union  Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Consumer Financial Protection  Bureau, and State Liaison Committee.
The Report highlights among others the rising operational risks related to information and  communication technologies that are increasingly requiring supervisory attention.
Fast technological change is expected to have a significant impact on the existing business  models of financial institutions over time.
The ESAs are responding to cyber-and IT-related risks by, e.g., drafting Guidelines on ICT  risk  assessment  for  supervisors,  assessing  cyber-security  capabilities  of  central  counterparties (CCPs) and assessing the potential accumulation of risk at insurers deriving  from newly developed cyber-security coverages.
The report focuses on continued challenges highlighted in the August 2016 report, but also  highlights  information  and  communication technologies (ICT), including cyber-risks.
AICPA SOC for Cybersecurity (Apr 2017)   The American  Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) finalized the  guidance  for Systems and Organization Controls (SOC) for Cybersecurity.
“In  recognition  of  the  needs  of  management  and  boards  of  directors  of  diverse  organizations, and for the benefit of the public interest,  the American  Institute of CPAs  (AICPA) has developed a cybersecurity risk management reporting framework.
Using it,  organizations can communicate pertinent  information regarding their cybersecurity risk- management  efforts and  educate stakeholders  about  the systems,  processes and  controls  they have in  place to  detect,  prevent  and respond to  breaches.
The reporting framework  also  enables  a  CPA  to  examine  and  report  on  the  management-prepared  cybersecurity  information,  thereby  increasing  the  confidence  that  stakeholders  may  place  on  an  organization’s initiatives.
other words, this provides clear guidance for CPAs to provide  assurance on cybersecurity.”   13   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           “The AICPA determined that the entity reporting framework should be developed first....
The AICPA is in the process of revising the SOC 2 R guide for service organizations.
Once  that project has been completed, the AICPA will develop a new supply-chain/vendor-risk  management guide to address the supply-chain level.”   41.
NY cyber-security requirements for financial services companies (Mar 2017)   The  new  Requirements  on  cyber-security  from  the  New  York  Department  of  Financial  Services (NY DFS) took effect on 1 March 2017.
The  regulation  requires  banks,  insurance  companies,  and  other  financial  services  institutions regulated by the NYDFS to establish and maintain a  cyber-security program  designed to protect customer information as well as the information technology systems of  these  regulated  entities.
The  proposed  requirements  for  regulated  financial  institutions  include, among others:   •  Establishment of a cyber-security program;   •  Adoption of a written cyber-security policy;   •  Designation of a Chief Information Security Officer responsible for implementing,   overseeing and enforcing the new program and its policy;   •  Annual penetration testing and bi-annual vulnerability  assessments of an entity’s   information system;   •  Maintenance of audit trails to detect and respond to Cyber-security events;   •  Limitation and regular review of user access privileges;   •  Encryption of Non-public information;   •  Establishment of an incident response plan;   •  Establishment of security policy for third party service provider.
This  regulation  requires  each  company  to  assess  its  specific  risk  profile  and  design  a  program that addresses its risks in a robust fashion.
Senior management must take this issue  seriously  and  be  responsible  for  the  organization’s  cybersecurity  program  and  file  an  annual  certification  confirming  compliance  with  these  regulations.
A  regulated  entity’s  cybersecurity program must ensure the safety and soundness of the institution and protect  its customers.
EU Commission Consultation on the impact of FinTech (Mar 2017)   The EU Commission (EC) launched a  Consultation on technology and its impact on the  European financial services sector as part of its consumer financial services action plan.
The consultation is structured along four policy objectives:   •  Fostering access to financial services for consumers and businesses;   •  Bringing down operational costs and increasing efficiency for the industry;   14   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           •  Making the single market more competitive by lowering barriers to entry; and   •  Balancing greater data sharing and transparency with data security and protection   needs.
The last of the four areas notes: “... important questions about personal data processing,  data management policies, data standardization, data sharing, security and ability to access  and  supervise  data  from  (licensed)  providers  of  financial  services  should  move  to  the  forefront of the policy agenda for FinTech.
Mismanagement in these important areas can  cause loss of trust and disruption in the market that would require policy intervention.”   The consultation aims to gather information on the impact of innovative technology on the  financial sector to aid the EC in developing its policy approach and to help assess whether  the regulatory and supervisory framework promotes technological innovation.
BaFin Consultation on bank regulatory reqs for IT systems (Mar 2017)   The  German  Federal  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (BaFin)  published  (in  German  language) a Draft Circular “Banking Supervision Requirements for IT” (BAIT).
The  draft  specifies  BaFin’s  minimum  requirements  for  risk  management  (MaRisk)  with  respect to the security of information technology.
It highlights the IT security requirements  imposed by BaFin and the Bundesbank on institutions.
Furthermore, the circular helps increase institutions’ awareness of IT risks, including the  risks from third-party providers.
The CMA will require the biggest  UK retail banks, to open access to transaction data by January 13, 2018, coinciding with  the EU Payment Systems Directive 2.
In early 2016, the Open Banking Working Group (OBWG) established by the UK Treasury,  published a manual, the Open Banking Standard, setting out a detailed framework of how  Open Banking Standard could be designed and delivered, with a time table for achieving  this.
The Open Banking Initiative website explains that its “delivery is split between March  2017 and January 2018, with March 2017 being focused on Open Data, making available  information on ATMs, Branches, Personal Current Accounts, Business Current Accounts  (for SMEs) & SME Unsecured  Lending and Commercial Credit Cards.
January 2018 is  aligned  to  the  upcoming  European  Regulation  (Payment  Services  Directive  2),  where  authorized third parties can be given consent by the account holder to access their Bank  accounts to extract statement information and to initiate payments, without having to use   15   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           the Banks Online services.
It is envisaged that this capability will then lead to far reaching  innovative services being created by new entrants and technology companies.”   The  OBWG  includes  nine  Banks  mandated  by  the  CMA  (Allied  Irish  Bank,  Bank  of  Ireland,  Barclays,  Danske,  HSBC,  Lloyds  Banking  Group,  Nationwide,  RBS  Group,  Santander), as well as Challenger Banks, Fintechs, Third Parties, Consumer Groups and  other parties to define and develop the required Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs),  security and messaging standards that underpin Open Banking.
CPMI report - DLT in payment clearing/settlement (Feb 2017)   The BIS Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) published a Report  on distributed ledger technology (DLT) in payment clearing and settlement.
Distributed  ledgers,  also  known  as  blockchains,  are  ledgers  of  electronic  transactions  maintained by a shared network of participants and not by a centralised entity.
The  report  provides  an  analytical  framework  for  central  banks  and  other  authorities  to  review and analyse the use of this technology for payment, clearing, and settlement.
The  objective of the framework is to help understand the uses of DLT and, in doing so, identify  both the opportunities and challenges associated with this technology.
The framework presents the technology’s potential to provide operational efficiencies and  to make financial markets more robust and resilient.
It  highlights  that  work  is  still  needed  to  ensure  that  the  legal  underpinnings  of  DLT  arrangements  are  sound,  governance  structures  are  robust,  technology  solutions  meet  industry  needs,  and  that  appropriate  data  controls  are  in  place  and  satisfy  regulatory  requirements.
US NIST draft updated Cybersecurity Framework (Jan 2017)   The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) issued in January 2017 a  draft update to the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity—also  known as the Cybersecurity Framework.
Providing new details on managing cyber-supply  chain risks, clarifying key terms, and introducing measurement methods for cyber-security.
The  updated  framework  aims  to  further  develop  NIST’s  voluntary  guidance  to  organizations on reducing cybersecurity risks.
The Cyber-Security Framework was published in February 2014 following a collaborative  process  involving  industry,  academia  and  government  agencies,  as  directed  by  a  presidential executive order.
The original goal was to develop a voluntary framework to  help organizations manage cybersecurity risk in the nation’s critical infrastructure, such as  bridges and the electric power grid, but the framework has been widely adopted by many  types of organizations across the country and around the world.
16   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           The 2017 draft, Version 1.1 incorporates feedback since the release of framework version  1.0, and integrates comments from the December 2015 Request for Information as well as  comments  from  attendees  at  the  Cyber-security  Framework  Workshop  2016  held  at  the  NIST campus in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
During 2016, as part of the Government’s 1.9 billion pounds strategy to protect the UK in  cyber-space,  the  Department  for  Digital,  Culture,  Media  &  Sport  (DCMS)  conducted  a  review to consider whether there is a need for additional regulation or incentives to boost  cyber-risk  management  across  the  wider  economy.
The  review  was  conducted  in  close  consultation  with  a  wide  range  of  businesses,  industry  partners  and  stakeholders,  and  gathered evidence from a broad range of sources.
“The review shows that there is a strong justification for regulation to secure personal data,  as  there  is  a  clear  public  interest  in  protecting  citizens  from  crime  and  other  harm...  Government will therefore seek to improve cyber-risk management in the wider economy  through  its  implementation  of  the  forthcoming  General  Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR).
The breach reporting requirements and fines that can be issued under GDPR will  represent a significant call to action.
These will be supplemented by a number of measures  to more clearly link data protection with cyber-security, including through closer working  between  the  Information  Commissioner’s  Office  and  the  new  National  Cyber-Security  Centre.”   34.
HK SFC Circular on augmenting accountability of senior mgmt (Dec 2016)   HK  Securities  and  Futures  Commission  (SFC)  issued  a  Circular  on  enhancing  the  accountability regime for senior management of licensed companies.
The circular specifies  definition  of  senior  management  and  their  regulatory  obligations  and  potential  legal  liabilities.
HKMA circular on Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative (Dec 2016)   The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  issued  in  December  2016  a  circular  to  authorized institutions to inform them of the implementation details of the Cybersecurity  Fortification Initiative (CFI).
The CFI consists of three pillars:   • Pillar 1: Cyber-Resilience Assessment Framework (C-RAF):   The C-RAF is a tool to help authorized institutions evaluate their cyber resilience.
The assessment comprises three stages:   17   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           –  Inherent Risk Assessment – This facilitates an AI to assess its level of inherent  cyber-security  risk  and  categorize  it  into  “low”,  “medium”  or  “high”  in  accordance with the outcome of the assessment;   –  Maturity  Assessment  –  This  assists  an  AI  in  determining  whether  the  actual  level  of  its  cyber-resilience  is  commensurate  with  that  of  its  inherent  risk.
The HKMA will adopt a phased approach to the implementation of the C-RAF as  follows:   –  the first phase will cover around 30 authorized institutions including all major  retail banks, selected global banks and a few smaller authorized institutions –  the HKMA will inform these authorized institutions individually;   –  the  expected  timeline  for  completing  the  C-RAF  assessment  under  the  first  phase  is  end-September  2017  for  inherent  risk  assessment  and  maturity  assessment, and end-June 2018 for iCAST (if applicable); and   –  depending  on  industry  feedback  and  the  experience  gathered  from  the  first  phase,  the  second  phase  will  cover  all  the  remaining  authorized  institutions.
Although authorized institutions covered  in  the  second  phase  are  given  a  longer  timeframe  for  implementation,  they  should familiarize themselves with the C-RAF and take steps to strengthen their  cyber-resilience at an early stage where necessary.
•  Pillar 2: Professional Development Programme (PDP):   The PDP, rolled out in December 2016, seeks to provide a local certification scheme  and training program for cybersecurity professionals.
At the request of the industry,  the  HKMA  has  adopted  a  list  of  professional  qualifications,  recommended  by  an  expert panel,  which are  equivalent  to  the certification provided under the PDP.
•  Pillar 3: Cyber-Intelligence Sharing Platform (CISP):   18   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           The HKMA noted that all banks are expected to join the Cyber Intelligence Sharing  Platform.
Banks were advised to start to make the necessary preparations including  system changes at an early stage.
The CISP is ready for access by banks with effect from December 2016.
G7 Fundamental Elements of Cybersecurity for Financial Sector (Oct 2016)   The  G7  published  its  fundamental  elements  of  cybersecurity  for  the  financial  sector  to  “serve  as  the  building  blocks  upon  which  an  entity  can  design  and  implement  its  cybersecurity  strategy  and  operating  framework,  informed  by  its  approach  to  risk  management and culture.
Cybersecurity  Strategy  and  Framework:  Establish  and  maintain  a  cybersecurity  strategy and framework tailored to specific cyber risks and appropriately informed  by international, national, and industry standards and guidelines.
Governance:  Define  and  facilitate  performance  of  roles  and  responsibilities  for  personnel  implementing,  managing,  and  overseeing  the  effectiveness  of  the  cybersecurity  strategy  and  framework  to  ensure  accountability;  and  provide  adequate resources, appropriate authority, and access to the governing authority;   3.
Risk  and  Control  Assessment:  Identify  functions,  activities,  products,  and  services—including  interconnections,  dependencies,  and  third  parties—prioritize  their  relative  importance,  and  assess  their  respective  cyber  risks.
Identify  and  implement  controls—including  systems,  policies,  procedures,  and  training—to  protect against and manage those risks within the tolerance set by the governing  authority;   4.
Monitoring:  Establish  systematic  monitoring  processes  to  rapidly  detect  cyber  incidents  and  periodically  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  identified  controls,  including through network monitoring, testing, audits, and exercises;   5.
Response: Timely (a) assess the nature, scope, and impact of a cyber incident; (b)  contain  the  incident  and  mitigate  its  impact;  (c)  notify  internal  and  external  stakeholders (such as law enforcement, regulators, and other public authorities, as  well as shareholders, third-party service providers, and customers as appropriate);  and (d) coordinate joint response activities as needed;   6.
Recovery:  Resume  operations  responsibly,  while  allowing  for  continued  remediation,  including  by  (a)  eliminating  harmful  remnants  of  the  incident;  (b)  restoring systems and data to normal and confirming normal state; (c) identifying  and  mitigating  all  vulnerabilities  remediating   that  were  exploited;   (d)   19   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           vulnerabilities to  prevent similar incidents; and (e) communicating  appropriately  internally and externally;   7.
Information  Sharing:  Engage  in  the  timely  sharing  of  reliable,  actionable  cybersecurity  information  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders  (including  entities and public authorities within and outside the financial sector) on threats,  vulnerabilities,  incidents,  and  responses  to  enhance  defenses,  limit  damage,  increase situational awareness, and broaden learning;   8.
Continuous Learning: Review the cybersecurity strategy and framework regularly  and when events warrant—including its governance, risk and control assessment,  monitoring, response, recovery, and information sharing components—to address  changes  in  cyber  risks,  allocate  resources,  identify  and  remediate  gaps,  and  incorporate lessons learned.
US FinCEN Advisory on FIs obligations on cyber-related events (Oct 2016)   On 25 October 2016, the US Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (Fin-CEN)  issued an Advisory to assist financial institutions in understanding their Bank Secrecy Act  (BSA)  obligations  regarding  cyber-events  and  cyber-enabled  crime.
This  advisory  also  highlights  how  BSA  reporting  helps  U.S.  authorities  combat  cyber  events  and  cyber- enabled crime.
Through this advisory FinCEN advises financial institutions on:   •  Reporting  cyber-enabled  crime  and  cyber-events  through  Suspicious  Activity   Reports (SARs);   •   Including relevant and available cyber-related information (e.g., Internet Protocol  (IP)  addresses  with  timestamps,  virtual-wallet  information,  device  identifiers)  in  SARs;   •  Collaborating  between  BSA/Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  units  and  inhouse   cyber-security units to identify suspicious activity; and   •  Sharing  information,  including  cyber-related  information,  among  financial  institutions to guard against and report money laundering, terrorism financing, and  cyber-enabled crime.
US FBAs ANPR for enhanced cybersecurity standards (Oct 2016)   On 19 October 2016, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (the  Federal  Banking  Agencies)  issued  an  Advanced  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking  to  establish enhanced cyber-security standards.
The proposed rules would apply to large institutions subject to the agencies’ jurisdiction,  including:   20   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           •  US  bank  holding  companies  with  total  consolidated  assets  of  USD  50  billion  or   more;   •  banks with total consolidated assets of USD 50 billion or more;   •   the US operations of foreign banking organizations with total US assets of USD 50  billion or more, and   •  nonbank financial companies supervised by the Federal Reserve per the DoddFrank   Act.
While the ANPR is based on some existing regulatory guidance, it also adds some new and  more stringent requirements to covered entities.
For example, it requires a very short two- hour timeframe to recover critical systems from cyber-events.
Improvements are proposed  in the following areas:   Incident responses and cyber-resilience;   •  •  Cyber-risk governance;  •  Cyber-risk management;  •   Internal and external dependency management.
Comments received are accessible here.
of online & mobile trading systems (Oct 2016)   The Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) launched a Review of cyber- security,  compliance  and  resilience  of  brokers’  internet/mobile  trading  systems.
This  initiative  follows  several  reports  from  securities  brokers  that  the  security  of  some  customers’ online and mobile trading accounts has been compromised and unauthorized  securities trading transactions have been conducted through these accounts.
Cybersecurity management is a priority for the SFC’s supervision of licensed corporations.
Licensed corporations should critically review and enhance their controls to combat cyber- attacks.
This would involve:   •  Strengthening  threat,  intelligence  and  vulnerability  management  to  pro-actively   identify and remediate cyber-security vulnerabilities;   •   Implementing  reliable  preventive,  detective  and  monitoring  measures  to  protect  sensitive information and trading systems;   •  Being vigilant in monitoring unusual or questionable logins/transactions in client   accounts;   •   Implementing  effective  user authentication and  access  controls  to  deter  potential  hacking attempts; and   •  Establishing an effective contingency plan which covers, among others, possible   cyber-attack scenarios where trade and position data are impacted.
21   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           Examples of good practices observed in the market place include (i) implementing client  data encryption; (ii) putting in place controls to detect internet protocol (IP) ranges used by  clients and abnormal buy/sell transactions; (iii) implementing two factor authentications in  conjunction with strong password requirements for client’s logon; and (iv) sending timely  trade confirmation to clients via SMS.
A combination of these measures enables brokers  spot suspicious activities and mitigate against hacking risks.
Where the security of accounts  is  compromised,  early  detection  enables  brokers  to  send  alert  to  clients  to  stop  further  unauthorized trading.
The SFC review has three components:   •   surveying a mix of small to medium sized brokers to assess relevant cybersecurity  features of brokers’ internet and mobile trading systems;   •  onsite inspections of selected brokers for an in-depth review of their information  technology  and  other  related  management  controls  and  an  assessment  of  their  design and effectiveness in preventing and detecting cyber-attacks; and   •  benchmarking  the  SFC’s  regulatory  requirements  and  market  practice  in  Hong  Kong against other major financial services regulators and other relevant  market  practices  overseas  and  locally.
MY SC Guidelines to Enhance Cyber resilience of Capital Mkt (Oct 2016)   Malaysia’s  Securities  Commission  (SC)  published  on  October  2016  new  Guidelines  on  Management of Cyber-risk to enhance cyber-resilience of the capital market by requiring  capital market entities to establish and implement effective governance measures to counter  cyber-risk and protect investors.
The Guidelines, among other requirements, clearly stipulate the roles and responsibilities  of the board and senior management in building cyber-resilience of a capital market entity.
The entity is required to identify a responsible person to be accountable for the effective  management  of  cyber-risk.
The  involvement  of  the  board  and  senior  management  is  deemed important to ensure that the capital market entity puts adequate focus on cyber-risk  issues, determines risk tolerance and priorities, and allocates sufficient resources to cyber- risk.
The Guidelines require regulated entities to have in place a risk management framework to  minimize cyber-threats, implement adequate measures to identify potential vulnerabilities  in their operating environment and ensure timely response and recovery in the event of a  cyber-breach.
Regulated  entities  are  also  required  to  report  cyber-incidents  to  the  SC  to  enhance  industry’s awareness on, and preparedness in dealing with, cyber-risk.
22   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           These Guidelines are to be implemented in phases for entities based on, among others, size,  nature of activities, and market share.
UK CBEST Intelligence-Led Vulnerability Testing 2.0 (2016)   The  Bank  of  England’s  Sector  Cyber-Team  (SCT)  published  version  2.0  of  its  CBEST  “framework for intelligence-led penetration testing of systemically critical organizations”  for the CBEST engagement participants and service providers.
The  CBEST  framework  was  first  launched  in  June  2014  by  UK  Financial  Authorities,  headed by the Bank of England at the recommendation of the Financial Policy Committee  (FPC), which is “charged with taking action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view  to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK financial system.”   CBEST  is  a  voluntary  cyber  vulnerability  assessment  program  made  available  to  core  firms/FMIs of the UK financial system.
The assessment operates within a framework and  includes  a  set  of  Key  Performance  Indicators  (KPIs)  for  1)  threat  intelligence  and  2)  intrusion detection and incident response.
Each include a section used by the BoE’s Sector  Cyber Team assessing “the provider’s ability to deliver CBEST services in accordance with  the framework agreement”, as well as a section conducted by the approved provider which  is  an  assessment  of  “the  client  firm’s  capability  surrounding  use  of  either  cyber  threat  intelligence, intrusion detection, or incident response.”   The completed KPIs, kept by the SCT, help inform the cybersecurity assessment for the  tested firm and an industry understanding of the financial sector cybersecurity capability  for the regulators as well as the UK Financial Policy Committee (FPC).
CBEST program has also brought forth new accreditation standards for threat intelligence  providers  and  penetration  testing  providers,  working  with  the  Council  for  Registered  Ethical Security Testers (CREST).
Its resource components include the following:   1.
Implementation Guide, which explains the key phases, activities, deliverables and  interactions involved in a CBEST assessment;   2.
Services Assessment Guide, which provides background information, in the form  of  a  set  of  assessment  criteria,  that  CBEST  participants  can  use  as  they  assess  prospective threat intelligence and penetration testing service providers approved  by the Council for Registered Ethical Security Testers (CREST); and   3.
Understanding Cyber Threat  Intelligence Operations, which defines best practice  standards for the production and consumption of threat intelligence... intended to  provide  the  CBEST  programme  with  a  foundation  for  defining  and  executing  intelligence-led  cyber  threat  vulnerability  tests  in  conjunction  with  accredited   23   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           providers  of  threat  intelligence  products  and  services.
After  establishing  some  important  terminology,  this  document  presents  an  overview  of  the  process  underpinning  a  best  practice  threat  intelligence  capability  and  the  organisation,  roles and skills required for running it.
IE CB Cross Industry Guidance on IT and Cybersecurity Risks (Sept 2016)   The Central Bank of Ireland issued in September 2016 a Guidance on IT and cybersecurity  governance and risk management for financial services firms.
The document sets out the Central Bank’s observations from supervisory work in this area  and outlines guidance reflecting “the current thinking as to good practices that regulated  firms should use to inform the development of effective IT and cybersecurity governance  and risk management frameworks.”   A major message is that the Boards and Senior Management of regulated firms are expected  to fully recognize their responsibilities for these issues and to put them among their top  priorities.
The guidance lists Central Bank expectations on key issues such as alignment of  IT and business strategy, outsourcing risk, change management, cyber-security, incident  response, disaster recovery and business continuity.
India Non-Banking Financial Company - Account Aggregators (Sep 2016)   The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  produced  final  Directions  providing  a  framework  for  the  registration and operation of “Account Aggregator” in India, requiring these operators to  register  and  be  regulated  by  the  RBI.
It  defines  “Account  Aggregators”  as  non-banking  financial  companies  that  will  collect  and  provide  information  on  a  customer’s  financial  assets, in a consolidated, organized and retrievable manner to the customer or any other  person  as  per  the  instructions  of  the  customer.
It  clearly  sets  out  Data  Security  requirements,  including prohibiting request or storing of customer credentials.
ENISA Strategies for Incident Response & Cyber Crisis Coop.
(Aug 2016)   This European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) document  is an input for the Network and Information Security (NIS) Platform for the discussion on  incident  response  and  cyber  crisis  coordination  (by  “WG2”  –  see  below).
The  notion  of  Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs) as key players in incident response  is introduced.
Descriptions of incident response mechanisms will be elaborated, taking into  account national-level cybersecurity strategies, cyber crisis coordination and management  covering both escalation and communication between CSIRTs and government bodies.
As part of the implementation of the cybersecurity Strategy of the EU, the NIS Platform  was created in 2013 to help European stakeholders carry out appropriate risk management,   24   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           establish  good  cybersecurity  policies  and  processes  and  further  adopt  standards  and  solutions that will improve the ability to create safer market conditions for the EU.
The expert work of the components of the NIS Platform was divided into Working Groups  (WGs), all dealing with their special field of expertise in cybersecurity:   •  WG1  on  risk  management,  including  information  assurance,  risks  metrics  and   awareness raising;   •  WG2  on  information  exchange  and  incident  coordination,  including  incident   reporting and risks metrics for the purpose of information exchange;   •  WG3 on secure ICT research and innovation.
Ongoing work by the WGs is a series of chapters to be adopted by the NIS Platform.
Organizational structures and requirements;  2.
Verification and auditing of requirements;  3.
Voluntary information sharing;  4.
(Optional) Incentives for the uptake of good cybersecurity practices;  (Optional) Recommendations on research challenges and opportunities.
MAS Guidelines on Outsourcing (Jul 2016)   “These  Guidelines  provide  guidance  on  sound  practices  on  risk  management  of  outsourcing  arrangements...  An  institution  should  ensure  that  outsourced  services  (whether provided by a service provider or its sub-contractor) continue to be managed as  if the services were still managed by the institution.”   After  describing  an  institution’s  expected  engagement  with  MAS  on  outsourcing  including notification to MAS of adverse developments, the Guideline goes through the  following areas of risk management practices which institutions are obliged to implement:  Responsibility of the Board and Senior Management; Evaluation of Risks; Assessment of  Service  Providers;  Outsourcing  Agreement;  Confidentiality  and  Security;  Business  Continuity Management; Monitoring and Control of Outsourcing  Arrangements; Audit  and  Inspection;  Outsourcing  Outside  Singapore;  Outsourcing  with  a  Group;  and  Outsourcing of Internal Audit to External Auditors.
Institutions should perform the necessary due diligence and apply sound  governance  and  risk  management  practices  articulated  in  this  set  of  guidelines  when  subscribing to CS....”     25   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           Its  Annexes  include  a  list  of  non-exhaustive  examples  of  outsourcing  arrangements  to  which  the  guidelines  apply  and  don’t  apply  are  shared,  a  guidance  in  assessing  the  materiality  of  an  outsourcing  arrangement,  and  a  template  for  a  register  of  outsource  entities of an institution to be maintained for submission to MAS, at least annually or upon  request.
The Guideline’s audit and inspection section specifies that “An institution’s outsourcing  arrangements should not interfere with the ability of the institution to effectively manage  its  business  activities  or  impede  MAS  in  carrying  out  its  supervisory  functions  and  objectives.”  This specifically includes, not only that the outsourcing agreements should  include clauses that  “allow the institution to conduct audits on the service provider and  its subcontractors, whether by its internal or external auditors, or by agents appointed by  the institution; and to obtain copies of any report and finding made on the service provider  and  its  sub-contractors,”,  but  that  which  also  “allow  MAS,  or  any  agent  appointed  by  MAS, where necessary or expedient, to exercise the contractual rights of the institution  to: (i) access and inspect the service provider and its sub-contractors, and obtain records  and documents, of transactions, and information of the institution given to, stored at or  processed by the service provider and its sub-contractors; and (ii) access any report and  finding made on the service provider and its sub-contractors, whether produced by the  service  provider’s  and  its  sub-contractors’  internal  or  external  auditors,  or  by  agents  appointed by the service provider and its sub-contractors, in relation to the outsourcing  arrangement.”      22.
EU Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (Jul 2016)   This  EU  Directive  on  security  of  network  and  information  systems  sets  out  security  obligations for operators of essential services, including those in the banking and financial  sectors, and for digital service providers, such as online marketplaces, search engines and  cloud services.
Member States will be required to designate a national authority for dealing with cyber- threats and to develop a national cyber-strategy among others.
National Frameworks on the security of Network and Information Systems: “... lists  the different entities and legislative frameworks that each Member State will have to set  up in order to comply with the Directive.
Each MS needs to adopt a national NIS strategy;  designate one or more national competent authorities, as well as a single point of contact  for cross-border cooperation; and set up at least one Computer Security Incident Response  Team (CSIRT).
Cooperation:  “...  defines  two  groups  meant  to  improve  NIS-related  cooperation  between MS.
The first is the Cooperation Network, composed of representatives of MS,  the Commission, and ENISA.
This group is meant to focus on strategic issues.
The second   26   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           group is the CSIRT Network, composed of representatives of MS’ CSIRT and CERT-EU,  with the Commission as observer and ENISA as Secretary and active support.”   IV.
Security  of  the  Network  and  Information  Systems  of  Operators  of  Essential  Ser- vices: “... defines security requirements for and duties of operators of essential services.
These services are described in Annex 2 of the Directive.”   V.  Security of the Network and Information Systems of Digital Service Providers: “...  defines security requirements for and duties of digital service providers.
These providers  are described in Annex 3 of the Directive”   Standardization  and  Voluntary  Notification:  “...encourages  the  use  of  EU  or   VI.
international standards” and discusses handling of voluntary notifications.
EBA ICT risk guidelines (Jun 2016; May 2017 finalized)   The EBA finalized its Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review  and Evaluation process (SREP)    The EBA launched a consultation on its draft Guidelines on the assessment of information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  risk  in  the  context  of  the  supervisory  review  and  evaluation process (SREP).
The requirements to assess ICT risks consist of:   •   •   •   ICT governance (risks at senior management level and management body level);   ICT strategy and its alignment with an institution’s business strategy; and   ICT risk exposures and controls.
These  Guidelines  build  on  existing  references  to  ICT  risk  in  the  EBA  SREP  guidelines  providing the scope and methodology for the assessment of ICT risk within an institution  and are structured around three main parts:   •   setting the context and scope of the ensuing assessment;   •  addressing what competent authorities should expect to see about management of  ICT risks at senior management level and management body level, as well as the  assessment  of  an  institution’s  ICT  strategy  and  its  alignment  with  the  business  strategy; and   27   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           •  covering  the  assessment  of  the  institution’s  ICT  risk  exposures  and  the   effectiveness of controls.
CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cybersecurity (Jun 2016)   The  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  and  the  International  Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have published a  Guidance on cyber- security which highlights the following points:   •  Sound cyber-governance is key.
Board and senior management attention is critical   to a successful cyber-resilience strategy;   •  The ability to resume operations quickly and safely after a successful cyberattack   is paramount;   •  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (FMI)  should  make  use  of  good-quality  threat   intelligence and rigorous testing;   •  FMIs  should  aim  to  instill  a  culture  of  cyber-risk  awareness  and  demonstrate  ongoing  re-evaluation  and  improvement  of  their  cyber-resilience  at  every  level  within the organization;   •  Cyber-resilience cannot be achieved by an FMI alone; it is a collective endeavor of   the whole ecosystem.
Report on IOSCO’s Cyber Risk Coordination Efforts (Apr 2016)   This report, covers the main regulatory issues and challenges related to cyber security for  relevant  segments  of  securities  markets.
For  IOSCO  member  organizations,  the  report  provides  an  overview  of  some  of  the  different  regulatory  approaches  related  to  cybersecurity that  IOSCO members have implemented thus  far, to  serve as reference of  potential tools available to regulators as they consider appropriate policy  responses.
For  market participants, the report outlines various plans and measures participants have put in  place to enhance cyber security in terms of identification, protection, detection, response  and recovery.
The report results from a board-level coordination effort led by the Quebec AMF (Autorit ́e  des march ́e s financiers) with assistance of the China Securities Regulatory Commission  and the Monetary Authority of Singapore, bringing together the contribution of relevant  IOSCO Policy committees and related stakeholders.
28   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           18.
The  new  EU  Regulation  repeals  the  Data  Protection  Directive of 1995 and replaces local laws for data protection, bringing a single standard  among all EU member states.
Some  important  highlights  of  the  regulation  include  the  following  issues  of  scope:  1)  responsibility  of  data  protection,  including  demonstration  of  compliance  (accountability  principle), now extends to data processor and not just the data controller (i.e.
a supervisor  can supervise processors directly as well); 2) scope of the law follows the data – GDPR is  applicable to entities outside the EU if they are servicing EU member states; 3) includes  not  just  direct  personal  data  but  any  derived  data  that  can  be  either  by  itself  or  in  combination with other data be identified back to an individual.
•  Elevation of importance of data protection through imposing principles of   “data protection by design” and “data protection by default.”   •  Required maintenance of a record of all processing activities   •  Data breach notification to the supervisory authority within 72 hours (and to the  individuals  in  cases  of  high  risk)  unless  it  can  “demonstrate  that  the  breach  is  unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons.”   •  Security measures, such as encryption and pseudonymisation, to be taken based on   risks for the individuals’ data compromise.
ISO/IEC - IT, Security Techniques, InfoSec Management Systems (Feb 2016)   The  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  and  the  International  Electrotechnical  Commission  (IEC)  maintain  an  expert  committee  dedicated  to  the  development  of  international  management  systems  standards  for  information  security,  otherwise  known  as  the  Information  Security  Management  System  (ISMS)  family  of  standards.
Using the ISMS family of standards, organizations can develop and implement  a  framework  for  managing  the  security  of  their  information  assets  including  financial   29   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           information, intellectual property, and employee details, or information entrusted to them  by  customers  or  third  parties.
These  standards  can  also  be  used  to  prepare  for  an  independent assessment of their ISMS applied to the protection of information.
The ISMS  family consists of the following International Standards:   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   •   ISO/IEC  27000,  Information  security  management  systems  -  Overview  and  vocabulary   ISO/IEC 27001, Information security management systems - Requirements   ISO/IEC 27002, Code of practice for information security controls   ISO/IEC  27003,  Information  security  management  system  implementation  guidance   ISO/IEC 27004, Information security management - Measurement   ISO/IEC 27005, Information security risk management   ISO/IEC  27006,  Requirements  for  bodies  providing  audit  and  certification  of  information security management systems   ISO/IEC 27007, Guidelines for information security management systems auditing   ISO/IEC TR 27008, Guidelines for auditors on information security controls   ISO/IEC 27009, Sector-specific application of ISO/IEC 27001 -Requirements   ISO/IEC  27010,  interorganizational communications   Information  security  management   for   inter-sector  and   ISO/IEC  telecommunications organizations based on ISO/IEC 27002   security  management   27011,   Information   guidelines   for   ISO/IEC 27013, Guidance on the integrated implementation of ISO/IEC 27001 and  ISO/IEC 20000-1   ISO/IEC 27014, Governance of information security   ISO/IEC  TR  27015,  Information  security  management  guidelines  for  financial  services   ISO/IEC TR 27016, Information security management - Organizational economics   ISO/IEC  27017,  Code  of  practice  for  information  security  controls  based  on  ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services   ISO/IEC  27018,  Code  of  practice  for  protection  of  personally  identifiable  information (PII) in public clouds acting as PII processors   30   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           •   ISO/IEC  27019,  Information  security  management  guidelines  based  on  ISO/IEC  27002 for process control systems specific to the energy utility industry   16.
EU Payment Services Directive 2 (Jan 2016)   The  Directive  (PSD2)  revises  the  PSD,  adopted  in  2007,  “provides  legal  foundation  for  further development of a better integrated internal market for electronic payments within  the EU”.
It takes into account new market entrants offering services, specifically “account  information services” (which allow a payment service user to have an overview of their  financial situation at any time) and “payment initiation services” (which allow consumers  to pay via credit transfer from accounts without intermediaries).
This is made possible as  banks  will  be  required  to  open  up  customer  data  via  a  standard  set  of  Application  Programming  Interfaces  (APIs).
It  enhances  consumer  rights,  including  removal  of  surcharges for use of credit or debit card, reduced liability for non-authorized payments,  and  unconditional  refund  right  for  euro  direct  debits.
It  enhances  to  role  of  the  EBA  to  develop  a  public  central  register  of  authorized  payment  institutions  undated  by  national  authorities,  to  resolve  disputes  from  national  authorities,  develop  regulatory  technical  standards  on  strong  customer  authentication  and  secure  communication  channels  for  all  payment service providers, and to develop cooperation and information exchange between  the supervisory authorities.
SRD  TR  03/2015  on  Technology  Risk and Cyber Security Training for Board establishes that the board of directors and the  senior management of a financial institution are responsible for the oversight of technology  risks and cyber security.
The Board needs to endorse the organization’s IT strategy and risk  tolerance, and ensure that management focus, expertise and resources are brought to bear.
The board also needs to ensure an appropriate accountability structure and organizational  risk  culture  is  in  place  to  support  effective  implementation  of  the  organization’s  cyber  resilience program.
MAS expects the Board to be regularly apprised on salient technology  and cyber  risk developments,  and the financial institution  should have a  comprehensive  technology risk and cybersecurity training program for the Board.
MAS Circular on Early Detection of Cyber Intrusions (Aug 2015)   The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Circular  No.
SRD  TR  01/2015  requires  that  financial institutions not only secure their perimeters from a potential breach, but also have  robust capabilities to promptly detect any cyber intrusions so as to enable swift containment  and  recovery.
It  considers  important  that  financial  institutions  maintain  a  keen  sense  of  situational  awareness  by  continuously  enhancing  their  technical  and  internal  control  processes  to  monitor  and  detect  intrusions  in  their  networks,  systems,  servers,  network  devices and endpoints.
31   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           13.
UK FCA/PRA Senior Managers and Certification Regime (Jul 2015)   The UK FCA published final rules for a new regulatory framework “Senior Managers and  Certification Regime (SMR)”, which replaced the Approved Persons Regime (APR) for  banks,  building  societies,  credit  unions  and  dual-regulated  (FCA  and  PRA  regulated)  investment firms, effective March 2016:   “While  the  Senior  Managers  Regime  will  ensure  that  senior  managers  can  be  held  accountable  for  any  misconduct  that  falls  within  their  areas  of  responsibilities,  the  new  Certification Regime and Conduct Rules aim to hold individuals working at all levels in  banking to appropriate standards of conduct ...   •  The  Senior  Managers  Regime  focuses  on  individuals  who  hold  key  roles  and  responsibilities  in  relevant  firms.
Preparations  for  the  new  regime  will  involve  allocating  and  mapping  out  responsibilities  and  preparing  Statements  of  Responsibilities  for  individuals  carrying  out  Senior  Management  Functions  (SMFs).
While  individuals  who  fall  under  this  regime  will  continue  to  be  preapproved by regulators, firms will also be legally required to ensure that they  have procedures in place to assess their fitness and propriety before applying for  approval and at least annually afterwards.
These staff will not be preapproved by regulators  and  firms’  preparations  will  need  to  include  putting  in  place  procedures  for  assessing for themselves the fitness and propriety of staff, for which they will be  accountable to the regulators.
•  The Conduct Rules set out a basic standard for behavior that all those covered by  the new regimes will be expected meet.
Firms’ preparations will need to include  ensuring that staff who will be subject to the new rules are aware of the conduct  rules  and  how  they  apply  to  them.
Central Bank of Israel Directive on Cyber-Defense Management (Mar 2015)   In 2015, The Central  Bank of  Israel issued a  Directive on Cyber-Defense Management.
This  Directive  contains  regulatory  provisions  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Department’s  requirements and expectations regarding the management of cyberdefense.
The Directive  prescribes a structured but flexible framework for cyber-risk management, while allowing  the  banking  corporation  to  exercise  discretion  in  its  implementation.
Therefore,  the   32   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           Directive  defines  principles  for  cyber-defense,  rather  than  specifying  a  strict  “list  of  controls”.
ASIC’s Report on Cyber Resilience (Mar 2015)   This report by the Australian Securities & Investment Commission (ASIC) is intended to  help  regulated  entities  improve  their  cyber  resilience  by  increasing  awareness  of  cyber  risks,  encouraging  collaboration  between  industry  and  government,  and  identifying  opportunities to improve cyber resilience.
It also aims to identify how cyber risks should  be  addressed  as  part  of  current  legal  and  compliance  obligations  relevant  to  ASIC’s  jurisdiction.
EBA Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments (Dec 2014)   EBA’s Guidelines on Security of Internet Payments was published, with an implementation  date of 1 August 2015, with the substance as consulted, i.e.
a conversion of the original  SecuRe  Pay  recommendations.
The  implementation  of  any  potentially  more  stringent  requirements necessary under the Payment Systems Directive 2 was intended to occur at a  later stage, by the date set in the PSD 2.
General control and security environment: Governance; Risk Assessment; Incident   Monitoring and Reporting; Risk Control and Mitigation; and Traceability.
Specific  control  and  security  measures  for  internet  payments:  Initial  customer  identification,  information;  Strong  customer  authentication;  Enrolment  for,  and  provision of, authentication tools and/or software delivered to the customer; Log- in  attempts,  session  time  out,  validity  of  authentication;  Transaction  monitoring;  and Protection of sensitive payment data.
Customer  awareness,  education,  and  communication  including  Notifications,  setting  of  limits;  and  Customer  access  to  information  on  the  status  of  payment  initiation and execution.
MAS Notice on Technology Risk Management (Mar 2014)   Notice  CMG-N02  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  requires  regulated  financial  institutions  to:  a)  make  all  reasonable  effort  to  maintain  high  availability  for  critical systems; b) establish a recovery time objective of not more than 4 hours for each  critical system; c) notify the Authority as soon as possible, but not later than 1 hour, upon  the  discovery  of  a  relevant  incident;  d)  submit  within  14  days  a  root  cause  and  impact  analysis  report  to  the  Authority;  and  e)  implement  IT  controls  to  protect  customer  information from unauthorized access or disclosure.
This  Notice  applies  to  all:  (a)  approved  exchanges;  (b)  licensed  trade  repositories;  (c)  approved  clearing  houses;  (c)  recognized  clearing  houses  which  are  incorporated  in   33   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           Singapore;  (d)  holders  of  a  capital  markets  services  license;  (e)  recognized  market  operators which are incorporated in  Singapore; and (f) persons who are approved under  section  289  of  the  Act  to  act  as  a  trustee  of  a  collective  investment  scheme  which  is  authorized under section 286 of the Securities and Futures Act and constituted as a unit  trust.
It intends to provide an international agreed framework in the form  of international standards for credit reporting systems’ policy and oversight.
These principles are not intended for  use as a blueprint for the design or operation of any specific system, but rather suggest the  key characteristics that should be satisfied by different systems and the infrastructure used  to  support  them  to  achieve  a  stated  common  purpose,  namely  expanded  access  and  coverage, fair conditions, and safe and efficient service for borrowers and lenders.
Section  two  provides  a  brief  overview  of  the  market  for  credit  information  sharing  and  credit  reporting  activities  and  then  analyzes  in  some  detail  the  key  considerations  underlying  credit reporting.
BCBS Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk (Jun 2011)   These  Principles  for  the  Sound  Management  of  Operational  Risk  and  the  Role  of  Supervision updates and replaces the 2003 Sound Practices for the Management and   Supervision  of  Operational  Risk.
This  document  incorporates  the  evolution  of  sound  practice and details eleven principles of sound operational risk management covering (1)  governance, (2) risk management environment and (3) the role of disclosure.
It  covers  fundamental  principles  of  operational  risk  management:  first,  for  the  Board  of  Directors  to  establish  a  strong  risk  management  culture,  maintaining  a  framework  for  operational  risk  management  fully  integrated  into  the  bank’s  overall  risk  management  processes.
Under  Governance,  it  details  the  role  of  Board  of  Directors  and  Senior  Management.
Risk  Management  Environment  section  includes  risk  Identification  and  Assessment, regular Monitoring and Reporting, strong Control and Mitigation practices.
The principles also speak to Business Resiliency and Continuity plans, as well as public  disclosures to allow stakeholders’ assessment of operational risk management.
Of relevance to cyber issues is Technology Risk and Outsourcing, specifically that Senior  management  needs  to  ensure,  that  staff  responsible  for  managing  operational  risk  coordinate  and  communicate  effectively  with  those  responsible  for  outsourcing  arrangements.
The  Control  and  Mitigation  section  includes  the  requirement  to  have  an  integrated approach to identifying, measuring, monitoring and managing technology risks.
Further, it details that “the board and senior management are responsible for understanding   34   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           the operational risks associated with outsourcing arrangements and ensuring that effective  risk  management  policies  and  practices  are  in  place  to  manage  the  risk  in  outsourcing  activities” and delineates activities that outsourcing policies and risk management should  encompass.
FFIEC - Authentication in Internet Banking Environment, suppl.
(Jun 2011)   The  US  FFIEC  released  a  Supplementary  update  to  the  Authentication  in  an  Internet  Banking Environment  Guidance of 2005.
“The Supplement  reiterates and reinforces the  expectations  described  in  the  2005  Guidance  that  financial  institutions  should  perform  periodic  risk  assessments  considering  new  and  evolving  threats  to  online  accounts  and  adjust their customer authentication, layered security, and other controls as appropriate in  response to identified risks.
It establishes minimum control expectations for certain online  banking activities and identifies controls that are less effective in the current environment.
It also identifies certain specific minimum elements that should be part of an institution’s  customer  awareness  and  education  program.”  “Financial  institutions  should  use  this  guidance when evaluating and implementing authentication systems and practices whether  they are provided internally or by a service provider.
Although this guidance is focused on  the risks and risk management techniques associated with the Internet delivery channel, the  principles are applicable to all forms of electronic banking activities.”   New  guidance  took  effect  January  2012,  for  examiners  to  formally  assess  institutions  against these enhanced expectations.
AICPA suite of SOC & Implementation Guidance (Apr 2010)   System and Organization Controls (SOC) is a suite of service offerings (independent audit  reports) Certified Public Accountants may provide in connection with system level controls  of  a  service  organization  or  entity-level  controls  of  other  organizations.
They  are  independent  attestations  of  an  organization’s  operating  environment,  similar  to  the  ISO  certifications,  but  well-recognized  audit  regime  that  covers  both  financial  and  security  aspects.
The SOC report series include:   •  SOC 1: Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization;   •  SOC  2:  Reporting  on  Controls  at  a  Service  Organization  Relevant  to  Security,   Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy;   •  SOC  3:  Trust  Services  Principles,  Criteria,  and  Illustrations  for  Security,   Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy   4.
ENISA National Exercises Good Practice Guide (Dec 2009)   The European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) guide was  prepared “to assist authorities in Member States to better understand the complexities of  exercises  and  help  them  prepare  local  and  national  ones.
This  guide  was  prepared  by   35   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           interviewing experts on exercises throughout the EU and beyond with the aim to identify  good practices that were already applied and proved to be effective.”   “The  guide  examines  these  practices  by  first  giving  an  introduction  to  the  subject  of  exercises, then reviewing the life-cycle of an exercise (identifying, planning, conducting,  and evaluating) systematically.
Throughout the guide, good practices are highlighted for easy identification.”   3.
ENISA Good Practice Guide on Incident Reporting (Dec 2009)   Given strong commitment by the EU institutions and the Member States to the resilience  of  public  communications  networks,  ENISA  was  asked  to  help  Member  States  and  EU  institutions  to  identify  good  practices  in  incident  reporting  schemes.
This  document  addresses  many  of  the  issues  that  Member  States  will  face  as  they  debate,  take  stock,  establish, launch, develop and harmonize their incident reporting systems at national level.
The  report  discusses  schemes  for  reporting  incidents  that  may  harm  or  threaten  the  resilience  and  security  of  public  eCommunication  networks.
It  examines  the  whole  lifecycle  of  a  reporting  scheme,  from  the  first  steps  in  designing  the  scheme,  through  engaging  the  constituency’s  cooperation,  setting  the  reporting  procedures,  and  then  management and improvement of the scheme.
The Act (last amended May 2013) and Enforcement Decree (last amended March  2014) was for “ensuring the security and reliability of electronic financial transactions by  clarifying  their  legal  relations  and  to  promoting  financial  conveniences  for  people  and  developing the national economy by creating a foundation for the sound development of  electronic  financial  industry.”  It  provides  the  legal  grounds  for  the  financial  sector  regulators to conduct supervision and examination of financial institutions and electronic  financial business operators.
According to the Act and other related regulations, Financial  Institutions (FIs) should adopt comprehensive measures to better cope with cyber threats  and manage related risks.
on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions (Jan 2007)   South Korea’s Regulation on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions, frequently  amended latest being June 30, 2016, prescribes to the Financial Services Commission, as  the  body  delegated  in  the  Electronic  Financial  Transactions  Act,  the  matters  under  its  authority that are “required for securing the safety of the information technology sector of  an institution subject to examination by the Financial Supervisory Service under other Acts  and  subordinate  statutes.”  It  addresses  “Rights  and  Obligations  of  Parties  to  Electronic  Financial  Transactions”;  “Securing  the  Safety  of  Electronic  Financial  Transactions  and  Protecting Users”; “Licensing, Registration and Operation of Electronic Financial Affairs”;  and  “Supervision  of  Electronic  Financial  Affairs”.
It  includes  explanatory  Tables  on  “Standards  for  Computing  the  Number  of  IT  Personnel  and  Information  Protection  Personnel”;  “Standards  for  IT  Sector  and  Information  Protection  Budgets”;  “Specific  Limits  on  Use  of  Means  of  Electronic  Payment”;  “Prerequisites  for  Major  Investors”;   36   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest           “Financial Companies Subject to Evaluation of IT Sector Operation”; and “Types of Assets  with Low Investment Risk”.
37   Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity: A Regulatory Digest       New York’s Cybersecurity  Regulations for Financial  Institutions & Health Care  New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for  Financial Institutions A New Age of Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and  Demanding Leadership Accountability Authors:  Craig A. Newman Alejandro Cruz Kade Olsen Simone Silva-Arrindell Leigh Barnwell Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP  About the Publication:  This mini-treatise, New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions, A New Age of  Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Leadership Accountability, authored by  Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, and published by and available on Bloomberg Law provides  a general overview of the sweeping new cybersecurity regulation issued by the New York State  Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator, focusing on its  core rules and requirements.
This publication also provides practical guidance regarding issues that  affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the requirements of the regulation.
About Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice:  The Patterson Belknap Privacy and Data Security practice provides public and private organizations— including financial services firms, asset managers and funds, retailers, hospitality, media and  technology companies, manufacturers, insurance companies, tax-exempt organizations, and law  firms—with comprehensive services in this vital area.
The firm’s attorneys combine decades of  experience spanning from the public and private sectors, including experienced litigators, corporate  advisors and former federal prosecutors with deep experience in all aspects of privacy and data  security.
The group advises on a broad range of issues including prevention and compliance,  risk mitigation, data breach response, special board and committee representation, internal  investigations, and litigation.
Patterson Belknap also draws on valuable resources, including highly  experienced forensic consultants, security professionals, and crisis communications teams, who add  insight and value on key aspects of cybersecurity matters.
Patterson Belknap delivers a full range of services across approximately 20 practice groups in both  litigation and commercial law.
For more information, please visit www.pbwt.com.
About Craig Newman:  Craig A. Newman is a recognized leader in both complex financial litigation and global  cybersecurity.
With more than twenty years as a litigation partner and General Counsel at both  a multi-billion dollar international private equity firm and F500-owned media consortium, Craig  represents Fortune 500 companies, their boards and leadership teams.
In his cybersecurity work,  Craig represents clients in litigation, regulatory and governance matters, and the management  of risks associated with data security practices and policies including data breach preparedness  and response.
He chairs Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice and is a founding  contributor to the firm’s blog, www.DataSecurityLaw.com.
A former journalist, Craig appears regularly on national television  including CNBC, CNN and Bloomberg, discussing issues at the intersection of business, law,  cybersecurity and data privacy, and has written for The New York Times, The Washington Post, The  Wall Street Journal and Financial Times.
He was named as one of the National Law Journal’s 2015  “Cybersecurity & Data Privacy Trailblazers.”  About Bloomberg Law: Bloomberg Law helps legal professionals provide world-class counsel with access to actionable  legal intelligence in a business context.
Bloomberg Law delivers a unique combination of practical  guidance, comprehensive primary and secondary source material, trusted content from Bloomberg  BNA, news, time-saving practice tools, market data and business intelligence.
For more information,  visit www.bna.com/bloomberglaw.
Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security brings you streamlined access to the expertise of  Bloomberg BNA’s privacy and data security editorial team, contributing practitioners, and in-country  experts together with unmatched practice tools to help you quickly respond with confidence to  client inquiries.
In Practice tools include exemplar policies and provisions, checklists, and forms to facilitate your  drafting needs for privacy and data security tasks such as:          •  New York Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions Managing a Data Breach • Managing Privacy and Data Security Risk in Mergers • Designing a Privacy Policy • Cross-Border Data Transfer  2  Introduction  Cybersecurity is one of the most critical challenges facing our nation and our economy.
U.S. regulators on both the state and federal level are working to keep pace with the  challenges and risks posed by cybercrime.
On March 1, 2017, a sweeping new cybersecurity regulation was issued by the New     York State Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator.
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP is pleased to release “A New Age of Cybersecurity     Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Accountability.” Our publication provides a  general overview of this new regulation, focusing on its core rules and requirements.
We  also raise issues that affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the  requirements of the regulation.
Craig A. Newman   Partner & Chair, Data Security & Privacy  Practice Patterson Belknap Webb &  Tyler LLP  New York, New York  3  4  A new age of cybersecurity regulation:  Raising the bar and demanding accountabiltiy By Craig A. Newman, Alejandro Cruz, Kade Olsen, Simone Silva-Arrindell, and   Leigh Barnwell Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, New York*  I.
Introduction  On March 1, 2017, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a  new cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions, their information  technology systems, and their customers from cybercrime1.
This “first-in-the-nation regulation”  requires many of the more than 3,000 financial institutions, insurance companies, health  plans, charitable institutions, and other organizations regulated by DFS to take a fresh and  comprehensive look at their cybersecurity preparedness, governance, internal controls, and  defenses.
The regulation provides a basic framework within which organizations are required to develop  a comprehensive cybersecurity program best suited to address their specific risk profile.
Although the new regulation includes a degree of flexibility and bears some similarities to  guidelines and regulations issued by other regulatory bodies, it has 23 different sections and  is far more detailed and accountability oriented than most other comparable data security  regimes.
Significantly, in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory standards,  the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership accountable by requiring an  annual compliance certificate signed by a senior officer or board member.
And prompt implementation is   ________________________________________________________________________ * Craig A. Newman, a partner in the New York office of Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice.
The information presented here is for general informational purposes only and should not be construed as specific legal advice.
The information is also  summary in nature.
Please refer to the New York Department of Financial Services “Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies” for a full  statement of the regulation and applicable requirements.
1 Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies,  2 23 NYCRR 500.01(c).
5  required.
As the regulation states, “[i]t is critical for all regulated institutions ... to move  swiftly and urgently to adopt a cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00.
Notwithstanding  the mandate to act quickly, the complexity of the new regulation means that affected  organizations will need to proceed methodically to ensure compliance with the regulation,  and should consider appropriately documenting their decision-making process at key  junctures.
Corporate Governance  The DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at the top of an organization.
According to the regulation, senior management “must take [cybersecurity issues] seriously  and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00.
That responsibility starts with the organization’s “Cybersecurity Policy.” According to the new  regulation, each covered entity must implement and maintain a written policy laying out  its policies and procedures for the protection of its information systems and any nonpublic  information3 stored on those systems.
The policy must address, at a  minimum, data governance, access controls, disaster recovery planning, performance  planning, network security, consumer data privacy, third-party management, and incident  response.
Critically, the policy must be approved by the organization’s board or a senior officer.
The  regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee thereof,” or a  “Senior Officer” approve the policy.
An organization must also certify in  writing annually to the DFS that its cybersecurity program complies with the regulation.
________________________________________________________________________ 3 The regulation expressly defines nonpublic information.
First, such information includes any business-related information that, if  tampered with or disclosed, would cause a material adverse impact to the business.
Second, it includes any information that can be used to identify an  individual, “in combination with any one or more of the following elements”: (i) social security number; (ii) driver’s license or similar number; (iii) account or  credit card number; (iv) security code or password that would permit access to an individual’s financial account; or (v) biometric records.
Finally, it includes  any information (except for age or gender) created or derived by a health care provider related to: (i) any mental condition; (ii) the provision of any health  care; and (iii) the payment for health care.
6        Patterson Belknap Commentary   No prior state or federal regulations have come close to requiring this level of  accountability from an organization’s directors or senior management.
Accountability  of this nature also raises the prospect of potential liability at the top of an organization.
Covered entities will need to promptly develop procedures for educating and  updating senior management and/or board members regarding their responsibilities  under the new regulation.
Covered entities should also consider reviewing relevant insurance policies, including  directors and officers (D&O) coverage, to account for the new layer of potential liability  imposed by the DFS regulation.
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Designation  Covered entities must designate a “qualified individual” to serve as a Chief Information  Security Officer (CISO).
The CISO is responsible for overseeing,  implementing, and enforcing the covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy.
Covered  entities may employ a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but each covered  entity electing to do so must:       •  retain responsibility for compliance with the CISO requirements; •  designate a senior member of its personnel to oversee the third-party service   provider; and      •  require the third-party service provider to maintain a cybersecurity program that   meets the DFS’s regulations.
The CISO’s responsibilities are substantial and require communication with senior  management and the board of directors (or a subcommittee of the board).
The board report, “to the extent applicable,” must include the following:  •  an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the covered entity’s   information systems;  • exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures; • identification of cyber risks; • an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness; • proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and • a summary of material cybersecurity events.
7  In addition to reporting internally, the CISO must report to the DFS Superintendent upon  request.
Given the CISO’s significant and overall responsibilities for cybersecurity, some smaller covered  entities—depending on the circumstances—may wish to consider retaining an experienced and  qualified third-party service provider to serve as the CISO.
Patterson Belknap Commentary    Given the scope of the CISO’s responsibilities under the regulation, covered entities  should consider a comprehensive policy governing the CISO’s role within an  organization.
Such a policy should be reviewed and updated as needed, based on DFS  commentary, enforcement expectations, and other pertinent developments.
Organizations have latitude in designating a CISO from within or outside of the  organization, as covered entities may use the services of a third party to fill this role.
Both  options may present potential challenges, and a careful assessment of the risks and  benefits of each option should be done before deciding the course of action best suited  to the organization’s resources and risk profile.
Implementation  A.
Risk Assessment, Cybersecurity Program, and Cybersecurity Policy  Three overarching requirements of the regulation will drive its implementation: the Risk  Assessment, the Cybersecurity Program, and the Cybersecurity Policy.
The regulation requires covered entities to develop a Cybersecurity Program (23 NYCRR  500.02) and Cybersecurity Policy (23 NYCRR 500.03) that comply with DFS requirements.
According to the regulation, the central factor in developing both the Cybersecurity Program  and Cybersecurity Policy is the Risk Assessment (23 NYCRR 500.09).
The Risk Assessment  must consider the “particular risks” to a company’s business “sufficient to inform the design  of the cybersecurity program required.” 23 NYCRR 500.09(a).
Risk Assessments must be  performed periodically and “updated as reasonably necessary ... to respond to technological  developments and evolving threats.” Id.
From a compliance standpoint, the outcome of these  periodic Risk Assessments may serve to refine some covered entities’ obligations under the  regulation (especially as firms become more cyber-mature), as many requirements apply only to  “the extent applicable” based on the Risk Assessment.
8  Risk Assessments, which must be carried out “in accordance with written policies and  procedures,” 23 NYCRR 500.09(b), shall be documented and must include the following: (1)  criteria for the evaluation and categorization of identified cybersecurity risks or threats facing  the organization; (2) criteria for the assessment of “confidentiality, integrity, security and  availability” of the organization’s information systems and nonpublic information (as defined  in the regulation), including existing controls in the context of identified risks; (3) requirements  describing how identified risks are either mitigated or accepted and how the organization’s  Cybersecurity Program will address those risks.
Every covered entity must then develop a Cybersecurity Program that addresses each of the  applicable DFS requirements.
The Cybersecurity Program “shall be based on the Covered  Entity’s Risk Assessment” and must be “designed to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and  availability” of its information systems.
Notably, the Cybersecurity Program  is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document.
At a minimum, the Cybersecurity Program must do six things: (1) identify  internal and external cyber risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of  policies and procedures to protect information systems and nonpublic information; (3) detect  cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect, and mitigate the effects of cybersecurity events;  (5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory reporting requirements.
Finally, as discussed above, a covered entity must create a Cybersecurity Policy.
The Cybersecurity Policy must also be based on the organization’s Risk Assessment  and should address the following fourteen specific areas (some of which overlap with the  regulation’s stand-alone requirements) to “the extent applicable”:   • information security; • data governance and classification; • asset inventory and device management; • access controls and identity management; • business continuity and disaster recovery planning and resources; • systems operations and availability concerns; • systems and network security; • systems and network monitoring; • systems and application development and quality assurance;  9  • physical security and environmental controls; • customer data privacy; • vendor and third party service provider; • risk assessment; and • incident response.
Day-To-Day Requirements  The regulation also contains a series of detailed day-to-day requirements—ranging from  access controls to employee training—that covered institutions must integrate into their overall  Cybersecurity Policy, “to the extent applicable” to their operations.
Data Governance and Classification  Generally speaking, data classification and data mapping are considered initial steps in  developing a Cybersecurity Policy.
Organizations must identify how they collect, store, and  transmit sensitive data and nonpublic information.
The Cybersecurity Policy should therefore  articulate a process for identifying and categorizing different types of sensitive information  within an organization.
While covered entities may identify additional categories of sensitive information to be  protected, the DFS regulation identifies three categories of nonpublic information that must  be protected (23 NYCRR 500.01(g)):  •  business-related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized disclosure of   which would cause a material adverse impact to the business;   •  information about an individual that—because of name, number, personal mark, or   other identifier—can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or  more of the following data elements: social security number; driver’s license number  or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security code, access code or  password that would permit access to a financial account; or biometric records; and •   information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or the   individual’s family or household.
In addition to data classification, covered entities are required to establish a data governance  policy.
The regulation, however, does not provide guidance as to the  specific requirements of such a policy.
When sensitive information is collected, shared, and accessed across different business  units of a covered entity, the Cybersecurity Policy should coordinate security activities  and controls between and among the relevant departments.
Covered entities are required to protect sensitive information at all stages of its life  within the organization: its creation or collection, its day-to-day use and storage,  its transmission inside and outside the organization, and ultimately its deletion,  destruction, and disposal.
Access Controls and Identity Management   Access controls and identity management go hand in hand with data governance and  information security.
As part of their Cybersecurity Policy, covered entities should create  a framework for managing the electronic identities of those who have access to the  organization’s information systems and their corresponding access privileges for various  categories of data.
The regulation specifically requires companies to “limit user access  privileges” to systems that “provide access to Nonpublic Information,” and those privileges  must be reviewed and modified on a regular basis.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Developing access controls is ancillary to other DFS requirements—including  requirements governing network and physical security, vendor data security, and multi- factor authentication.
Each covered entity must “periodically review” the access privileges of its employees.
At a minimum, companies should consider reviewing an employee’s access privileges  when he or she changes positions, but covered entities should consider going further  depending on the circumstances.
For example, periodic reviews and reconciliations  could provide opportunities to clean-up and refine access privileges based on routine  changes in personnel and company structure.
Systems and Network Security   As part of the Cybersecurity Program, covered entities should create policies regarding the  security of their internal networks.
In particular, companies should  consider how their electronic systems connect with third parties or other external entities and  develop policies for managing the security of those external network connections.
This will be  especially important for covered entities with network connections to third-party vendors and  contractors, which we discuss below.
The Cybersecurity Policy should also incorporate procedures for regular internal systems and  network monitoring, as appropriate, to assess the capacity and performance of the systems  and network, as well as compliance with security protocols.
Physical Security and Environmental Controls  The Cybersecurity Policy must address physical security for the information systems  infrastructure.
Covered entities must also specify environmental controls that will ensure the  integrity and continued availability of the data in the event of man-made or natural disasters  or other potential disruptions.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Organizations should consider developing a comprehensive protocol for controlling  access to their most critical information systems considering, among other factors, the  firm’s overall risk profile, its physical storage of (and use of safeguards for) sensitive  information, and its access limitations for relevant personnel.
This is another area where an organization might benefit from a periodic and  documented review to ensure that access controls remain current.
Systems Operations and Availability   The Cybersecurity Policy must also address the availability of information systems.
12        Patterson Belknap Commentary   Network capacity, performance, and availability constraints are clearly of concern to  DFS.
Systems and Application Development and Quality Assurance   Entities must ensure that their information systems, applications, and security programs work  as designed and developed to address vulnerabilities.
To that end,  covered entities must prepare “written procedures, guidelines and standards” to ensure  “secure development practices” for in-house applications and systems and “procedures for  evaluating, assessing or testing” externally developed applications and systems.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   The procedures, guidelines, and standards for system and application security must  be assessed and updated by the CISO “as necessary.” 23 NYCRR 500.08(b).
Given the  “as necessary” language, organizations should consider reviewing the security of their  applications and systems on a routine basis, subject to their particular risk profile and  other relevant circumstances.
At a  minimum, a covered entity must implement, “to the extent applicable and based on its Risk  Assessment,” an audit trail system that tracks and maintains data “to reconstruct material  financial transactions sufficient to support normal operations and obligations,” as well as to  detect and respond to cybersecurity events.
There are, however, limits on the data retention required by the regulation.
Covered entities  must implement policies and procedures for the timely destruction of nonpublic data that is  “no longer necessary for business operations or for other legitimate business purposes of the  Covered Entity.” 23 NYCRR 500.13.
Covered entities may retain data or information when it is  otherwise required by law or regulation “or where targeted disposal is not reasonably feasible  due to the manner in which the information is maintained.” Id.
13           Patterson Belknap Commentary   The audit-trail requirement is significant.
Organizations must maintain audit trails  that allow for the reconstruction of financial transactions sufficient to support normal  operations, and designed to detect and respond to cybersecurity events.
Limiting Access to Nonpublic Information   A significant portion of the new regulation is dedicated to protecting and limiting access to  nonpublic information.
As an initial matter, covered entities must “limit user access privileges  to Information Systems” that provide access to nonpublic information.
This  requirement dovetails with the regulation’s access-control requirements discussed above.
In addition to limiting access, covered entities must also implement heightened  authentication requirements for access to nonpublic information as well as to other  sensitive data, systems, and interfaces.
“Based on its Risk Assessment,” a covered entity  must use “effective controls, which may include Multi-Factor Authentication or Risk-Based  Authentication,” to protect against unauthorized access to nonpublic information.
For access to internal systems through an external network, covered entities are  required to use multi-factor authentication unless “the Covered Entity’s CISO has approved in  writing the use of reasonably equivalent or more secure access controls.” Id.
This requirement  represents a level of regulatory granularity uncommon in the cybersecurity context.
Multi-Factor Authentication: The DFS defines multi-factor authentication (23 NYCRR 500.01(f))  as authentication through at least two of the following types of factors:   • knowledge factors, such as passwords; or • possession factors, such as a physical token or a text message; or • inherence factors, including biometric characteristics.
Risk-Based Authentication: The DFS defines risk-based authentication as a system of  authentication that detects anomalies or changes in the normal use patterns of a person  and requires additional verification of the person’s identity when deviations are detected.
For example, a risk-based authentication system would detect when a user  attempts to enter his account from a new computer for the first time and would then require  the user to answer additional security questions before gaining access.
Encryption: Covered entities must also develop “controls” to protect nonpublic information  in transit and at rest.
The “default” measure to protect such information  is encryption.
If encrypting nonpublic information is not feasible, covered entities may use  “alternative compensating controls” to secure the information with the review and approval  of the CISO.
If an entity chooses to use “alternative compensating  controls” rather than encryption, “the feasibility of encryption and effectiveness of the  compensating controls shall be reviewed by the CISO at least annually.” 23 NYCRR 500.15(b).
Patterson Belknap Commentary   These requirements are substantial and highly detailed.
The requirement to encrypt or  otherwise secure nonpublic information both at rest and while in transit may be overly  burdensome or difficult to satisfy from a business or operational perspective.
In such cases, “alternative compensating controls” are permitted, but the regulation  does not provide further detail or definition of “alternative compensating controls.”  Given that, covered entities considering alternatives to encryption may be well-advised  to consider the level of protection required for nonpublic information as part of their  Risk Assessment.
Each covered entity must employ sufficient dedicated cybersecurity personnel to  manage its cybersecurity risks and “to perform or oversee the performance” of the covered  entity’s “core cybersecurity functions.” 23 NYCRR 500.10(a).
Those personnel must also receive  sufficient training to “address relevant cybersecurity risks” and “maintain current knowledge of  changing cybersecurity threats and countermeasures.” Id.
The regulation’s training requirements are not limited to cybersecurity personnel.
A covered  entity must “provide for regular cybersecurity awareness training” for “all personnel,” and  that training must be “updated to reflect risks” identified in the Risk Assessment.
15        Patterson Belknap Commentary   The regulation provides that “all” personnel must receive cybersecurity training.
C. Periodic Cyber Risk Assessments  The DFS regulation also requires covered entities to assess and periodically reassess their  cybersecurity systems.
In addition to the Risk Assessment, the new regulation calls for three  different types of regular assessments:  •  Penetration and Vulnerability Testing: A covered entity must establish programs for   “monitoring and testing, developed in accordance” with its Risk Assessment, to assess  the “effectiveness” of its Cybersecurity Program.
Continuous Monitoring: A company may deploy “effective continuous monitoring”   (23 NYCRR 500.05), which is not defined in the regulation, and may need to be  gleaned from industry standards and practices, as well as the company’s own Risk  Assessment.
If an organization follows this approach, it must  conduct penetration testing annually and vulnerability testing biannually.
Penetration testing is defined as “a test methodology in which assessors   attempt to circumvent or defeat the security features of an Information  System.” 23 NYCRR 500.01(h).
“Vulnerability assessment” is not defined by the DFS and will likely need to be   defined with reference to industry standards and practices.
•  Third-Party Assessments: Periodically, a covered entity must assess the cybersecurity   practices of any third parties that have access to the organization’s network or  nonpublic information.
The regulation does not define the  scope of this assessment, but as a practical matter, this mandate may, depending on  the circumstances, apply to payroll and human resource vendors, IT and data-hosting  consultants, cloud service providers, and other vendors, consultants, and law firms.
16  •  Application Security Assessments: Periodically, the CISO must review, assess, and  update procedures and guidelines concerning the security of information system  applications.
Under the regulation, each organization’s  Cybersecurity Program must include written procedures, guidelines, and standards to  ensure the secure use of internally developed applications.
Organizations must also  assess and test the security of any externally developed applications that they utilize.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Because the DFS has not defined “vulnerability assessments” or “third-party  assessments,” covered entities may in appropriate cases consider the practices of other  peer organizations and relevant industry standards as well as their own risk profile  when developing such tests.
D. Incident Response Plan   As mentioned above, as part of its Cybersecurity Policy and Program, each covered entity  must develop an “incident response plan.” 23 NYCRR 500.16.
The purpose of the plan,  according to the DFS, is to ensure that the organization is prepared to “promptly respond to,  and recover from, any Cybersecurity Event affecting the confidentiality, integrity or availability  of the Covered Entity’s Information Systems or the continuing functionality of any aspect of  the Covered Entity’s business.” Id.
The regulation identifies a number of areas that the incident  response plan must address:  • the internal processes for responding to a cybersecurity event; • the goals of the incident response plan; • the definition of clear roles, responsibilities, and levels of decision-making authority; • external and internal communications and information sharing; •  remediation of any identified weaknesses in the company’s information systems and   associate controls;  • documentation and reporting of cybersecurity events; and •  the evaluation and revision of the organization’s response plan following a    cybersecurity event.
17             Patterson Belknap Commentary   The DFS regulation itself does not prescribe particular language or details that must be  included in an incident response plan.
Other governmental agencies have provided  guidance that could be informative.
For example, the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST) framework suggests that organizations predetermine their  communication guidelines with “outside parties, such as incident response teams,  law enforcement, the media, vendors, and victim organizations.4” NIST also strongly  encourages organizations to develop written procedures for prioritizing the handling  of individual incidents, including functional and informational factors and detailing  recoverability from an incident5.
Commentators also encourage organizations to “train,  practice, and run simulated breaches to develop response ‘muscle memory.’”6    Written policies and procedures for responding to a breach may also provide  contemporaneous documentation of readiness, which may be useful for purposes of  DFS reviews and in potential litigation or inquiries arising from a breach.
E. Third-Party Information Security Policy   The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but  also requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s IT network  or nonpublic information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards.
Specifically, the regulation sets out detailed data security rules and protocols that regulated  institutions must impose on all of their vendors and business partners.
The DFS’s focus on third parties connected to covered entities is likely a  response to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years— in addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving cyber  vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks.
________________________________________________________________________ 4 National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide (2012), page 2, available at   http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-61r2.pdf.
18  Under the regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement written policies  and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or nonpublic information that can be  accessed by their vendors.
At a minimum, these policies must identify the risks arising from  third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on third-party vendors, and create a due- diligence process for evaluating vendors.
Moreover, organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or  contractual protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” 23 NYCRR 500.11(b).
To “the  extent applicable,” those guidelines must address:  •  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or nonpublic   information (§500.11(b)(1));   •  use of encryption of all nonpublic information—both “in transit and at rest” (§500.11(b)  (2));   •  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a breach or   potential cyber-related event (§500.11(b)(3)); and  •  representations and warranties from third-party provider addressing cybersecurity   and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s information systems and  nonpublic information (§500.11(b)(4)).
In practice, compliance with this aspect of the regulation will require far more than simply  “checking the boxes.” Business partners for all covered entities may be required to reconsider  their own cybersecurity policies and practices and retool them to comply with the regulation.
Patterson Belknap Commentary      For most organizations, this requirement will be substantial.
An April 2015 report by  the DFS found that only 46% of surveyed institutions conduct “pre-contract on-site  assessments of at least high-risk third-party vendors.” And 44% of those organizations  do not require third-party vendors to guarantee that their data and products are free of  viruses.
Similarly, only half of the surveyed institutions require indemnification clauses  for information security failures in their agreements with third-party vendors.
Servs., “Update on Cyber Security in the Banking Sector: Third Party Service Providers” (April 2015), page 3, available at http:// www.dfs.ny.gov/reportpub/dfs_rpt_tpvendor_042015.pdf.
At the same time, a broader third-party vendor  program should be contemplated, including, when appropriate, vendor diligence  procedures, standard terms and conditions, and provisions requiring prompt notice in  the event a vendor suffers a data security incident that might affect the covered entity’s  nonpublic information or network.
Additional Requirements  A.
Regulatory Reporting  Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS regulation imposes  a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity event, as defined by the  regulation.
Within 72 hours “from a determination” that a cybersecurity  event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the event.
A cybersecurity event is  “material” if it fits within the following categories:  •  a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self-  regulatory agency (§500.17(a)(1)); or  •  a cybersecurity event that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any   material part of the normal operation(s)” of the covered entity (§500.17(a)(2)).
In addition to reporting cybersecurity events, organizations must certify compliance with  the DFS regulation on an annual basis.
20           Patterson Belknap Commentary   The DFS’s reporting requirements are, without question, regulatory “firsts” that go  beyond regulatory reporting requirements under federal or state laws.
When a cybersecurity event or other triggering circumstance occurs, covered entities  now must not only determine whether reporting is required by a federal or state  regulator, but must also evaluate whether the event has a “reasonable likelihood of  materially harming” the organization’s operations.
The  following types of entities can expect some relief from the regulation’s strict requirements.
•  Companies with less than $5 million in gross revenue in New York (in each of the   preceding three years), less than $10 million in year-end total assets from all operations,  or fewer than ten employees in New York (including independent contractors) are  exempt from a number of the regulation’s provisions.
•  Companies that do not have information systems and access to nonpublic information  are exempt from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements.
•  Captive insurance companies—both pure and group captive insurers—are also exempt   from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements.
•  Finally, charitable annuity societies, risk retention groups not charted in New York, and   Rule 125 certified and accredited reinsurers are exempt from the regulation in its entirety.
The first three exempt groups must “file a Notice of Exemption” within thirty days of the  “determination that the Covered Entity is exempt.” 23 NYCRR 500.19(e).
In the event that  any Covered Entity, “as of its most recent fiscal year end, ceases to qualify for an exemption,  such Covered Entity shall have 180 days from such fiscal year” to comply with “all applicable  requirements” of the regulation.
Transition Period Timeline  Although the regulation is phased in over a two-year period, most of the requirements  must be in place within 180 days.
This will require many of the covered institutions to re- examine their overall approach to cybersecurity and determine whether it aligns with the new  regulation.
We will monitor pertinent developments as institutions roll out their compliance  programs and issue regular updates to this publication.
Reproduced with permission from Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security,   http://www.bna.com/bloomberg-law-privacy-data-security/.
22  Privacy Law WatchTM  March 21, 2017 Insurance  Dueling Cybersecurity Regulations for Health Care:   HHS Meets New York State  NY Cybersecurity Reg  New York’s new cybersecurity regulation will regulate the data security practices of health- care insurers with a set of rules that are the most comprehensive in the U.S.
These rules  will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their  cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines, the author  writes.
By Craig A. Newman  Craig A. Newman is a partner at Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP in New York and  chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice.
Data security regulation for health-care insurers that operate in New York just got more  complicated.
For years, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for  Civil Rights—the industry’s primary data security regulator—has zealously policed the  health care field.
In fact, so far in 2017, the agency has already brought four data security  enforcement actions.
The most recent was the February 2017 $5.5 million settlement with  Memorial Healthcare System—matching the largest civil monetary fine ever imposed  against a single organization—because of weak internal controls that permitted employees  to improperly access more than 100,000 patient records.
Earlier this month, New York’s top banking  and insurance regulator threw down the proverbial gauntlet—or, perhaps more of a  sledgehammer— with its new cybersecurity regulation which has broad implications  for health-care insurers that operate in New York.
The regulation will force health-care  insurers to navigate a minefield of new and far more exacting technical, legal and  governance requirements than the industry specific regulations already in place including  those under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the  Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 (HITECH).
The New York rules just took effect on March 1 and will phase in over two years but many   23  detailed requirements must be put in place within the first 180 days.
This will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their  cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines.
Background: The New York Regulation  On March 1, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a “first  in the nation” cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions and  insurance companies, their information technology systems, and their customers from  cybercrime.
The HIPAA Security Rule already  requires that they maintain data security programs that are reasonable in view of their  scale, complexity and resources but does not dictate particular measures that must be  undertaken.
The New York regulation takes a starkly different approach with its matrix  of specific risk-based governance, process and technical requirements.
Although the  new regulation includes a degree of flexibility to fit each institution’s risk profile, it has  23 different sections and is far more detailed and accountability-oriented than other  data security regimes.
And in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory  norms, the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership responsible for  compliance by requiring the filing of an annual compliance certificate attesting to an  institution’s adherence to the regulation.
The New York regulation requires, in general, that DFS-regulated health-care insurers  have state-approved plans in place to protect their businesses, information systems  and the personal information of their customers.
The rules require that each health-care  insurer start by conducting a “risk assessment” to drive the scope of the organization’s  overall cybersecurity program.
The cybersecurity program must be “designed to ensure  the confidentiality, integrity and availability” of its information systems.
Notably, the  cybersecurity program is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document but rather  the underlying system, process and procedures by which a covered entity ensures its  compliance with the DFS regulation.
At a minimum, the cybersecurity program must do six things: (1) identify internal and  external cybersecurity risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of   24  policies and procedures to protect information systems and non-public information;  (3) detect cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect and mitigate the effects of  cybersecurity events; (5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory  reporting requirements.
Beyond the cybersecurity program, there is a laundry list of additional requirements  ranging from the development and implementation of a 14-point cybersecurity policy  to employee training, board and senior leadership engagement to highly technical  requirements like encryption, access controls and different types of internal monitoring or  vulnerability assessments.
In a clear departure from existing data security regulatory norms, the new regulation holds  an institution’s senior leadership responsible for compliance for DFS-regulated health- care insurers, the new rules present a regulatory scheme—and regulatory expectations— that impose new obligations and new approaches to data security.
Here is a brief look at  several of these important new requirements:   Accountability: Cyber Czar and Corporate Leadership  Unlike existing health-care data security regulation, the New York rules are based on  a foundation of corporate accountability.
In the first instance, the New York regulation  requires the designation of a “qualified individual” to serve as a chief information security  officer (CISO).
The CISO is responsible for overseeing, implementing and enforcing the  covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy.
Covered entities have the option of  engaging a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but retain responsibility for  compliance with the CISO requirements and must appoint a senior employee to oversee  the third-party service provider.
Not surprisingly, the CISO’s responsibilities are substantial including delivering a bi- annual report to the board or equivalent governing body that covers, “to the extent  applicable,” the following:     •   an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the covered   entity’s information systems;              • exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures;  • identification of cybersecurity risks;  • an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness;  • proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and  • a summary of material cybersecurity events.
Beyond the CISO’s role, the DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at  the top of an organization.
According to the regulation, senior management “must take”   25  cybersecurity issues “seriously and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity  program.” That responsibility starts with review of the organization’s cybersecurity  policy.
The regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee  of the board of directors, or a “senior officer” approve the policy.
The chairperson of the  board of directors or a senior officer must also certify in writing to DFS annually that the  organization’s cybersecurity program complies with the regulation.
New York Regulation Far Broader Than HIPAA  And, the New York regulation covers far more sensitive information than under HIPAA.
The  HIPAA Privacy Rule covers individually identifiable health information—called protected  health information (PHI), and is subject to certain general data security safeguards.
The  HIPAA Security Rule protects a subset of that information—individually identifiable health  information a covered entity creates, receives, maintains or transmits in electronic form  (called e-PHI).
By contrast, the New York regulation protects three different categories of  sensitive information—only the last category of which directly overlaps with PHI or e-PHI:     •  business related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized   disclosure of which would cause a material adverse impact to the business;   •  information about an individual which because of name, number, personal mark   or other identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with  any one or more of the following data elements: social security number; drivers’  license number or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security  code, access code or password that would permit access to a financial account;  or biometric records; and   •  information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or         the individual’s family or household.
The New York rules also apply to the security of “information systems” generally.
This  means that DFS-regulated health-care insurers will need to broaden their approach to  cybersecurity protection to include these new elements not already covered by existing  federal health-care regulation.
Substantial Obligations on Third-Party Vendors  The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but also  requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s information  technology network or non-public information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards.
Under HIPAA, covered health-care entities must bind third parties that will receive  protected health-care information to comply with HIPAA’s requirements in a “Business  Associate Agreement.” Such agreements may identify specific data security protocols that   26  must be followed, but technical requirements are not mandated.
By contrast, the New York regulation sets out data security rules and protocols that  regulated institutions must impose on their vendors and business partners.
The  regulation’s focus on third-parties connected to covered entities is likely DFS’s response  to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years—in  addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving  cybersecurity vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks.
The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than under  the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Under the New York regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement  written policies and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or non-public  information that can be accessed by their vendors.
At a minimum, these policies must  identify the risks arising from third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on the  third-party vendors, and create a due-diligence process for evaluating vendors.
Moreover,  organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or contractual  protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” To “the extent applicable,” those  guidelines must address:   •  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or  non-public information;  • use of encryption of all non-public information—both “in transit and at rest”; •  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a  breach or potential cybersecurity-related event; and  • representations and warranties from the third-party provider addressing its  cybersecurity and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s  information systems and non-public information.
Regulatory Notice Provisions Far Different  The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than  under HIPAA.
Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS  regulation imposes a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity  event, as defined by the regulation.
Within 72 hours “from a determination” that  such a cybersecurity event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the  event.
A cybersecurity event is “material” if it falls in the following categories:   27  • a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self- regulatory agency; or  • a cybersecurity even that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any material  part of the normal operation(s)” of the Covered Entity.
Under HIPAA’s Breach Notification Rule, institutions must report the breach of unsecured  health information to the HHS without reasonable delay but in no event later than 60-days  after discovery of the breach, or, if affecting fewer than 500 individuals, within 60 days of  the end of the calendar year in which the breach occurred.
Conclusion  The New York regulation isn’t likely to be the last word on data security for the industry.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners is considering a model law that  each state could adopt—outlining how insurers must safeguard consumer information and  respond in the event of a data security incident.
The model law was unveiled last year but  has undergone revisions in response to criticisms raised by the industry and consumer  groups.
For health-care insurers already subject to extensive federal data security regulation, the  New York cyber regulation imposes additional—and sweeping—burdens and requirements.
No other data security regulation has demanded this combination of accountability,  senior leadership engagement and across-the-board detail.
•  Practical guidance, tools, news and analytics  •  Legal and business insights  •  The only legal resource for trusted BNA content & Bloomberg News  •  Unlimited research at an all-inclusive price  Learn more about Bloomberg Law   at bna.com/bloomberglaw    ©2017 The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.  0317-JO23379            C YBER AND F INANCIAL SERVICE INDUSTRIES  Public  regulation  and  business  cyber  compliance  to  improve  resilience  towards blockchains disruptor risks    Camille Madec – Msc in Management  June 2016          Introduction	    How Blockchain redefines cyber security: a brief overview	     Examples	   of	   blockchain	   business	   opportunities	    Blockchain	   and	   cyber	   security	   risks	     Blockchain regulatory framework and legal challenges	     Cyber	   security	   and	   New	   Technology	   European	   legal	   framework	    Blockchain	   governance	   and	   regulation	   challenges	     New York’s Cybersecurity  Regulations for Financial  Institutions & Health Care  New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for  Financial Institutions A New Age of Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and  Demanding Leadership Accountability Authors:  Craig A. Newman Alejandro Cruz Kade Olsen Simone Silva-Arrindell Leigh Barnwell Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP  About the Publication:  This mini-treatise, New York’s Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions, A New Age of  Cybersecurity Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Leadership Accountability, authored by  Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, and published by and available on Bloomberg Law provides  a general overview of the sweeping new cybersecurity regulation issued by the New York State  Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator, focusing on its  core rules and requirements.
This publication also provides practical guidance regarding issues that  affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the requirements of the regulation.
About Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice:  The Patterson Belknap Privacy and Data Security practice provides public and private organizations— including financial services firms, asset managers and funds, retailers, hospitality, media and  technology companies, manufacturers, insurance companies, tax-exempt organizations, and law  firms—with comprehensive services in this vital area.
The firm’s attorneys combine decades of  experience spanning from the public and private sectors, including experienced litigators, corporate  advisors and former federal prosecutors with deep experience in all aspects of privacy and data  security.
The group advises on a broad range of issues including prevention and compliance,  risk mitigation, data breach response, special board and committee representation, internal  investigations, and litigation.
Patterson Belknap also draws on valuable resources, including highly  experienced forensic consultants, security professionals, and crisis communications teams, who add  insight and value on key aspects of cybersecurity matters.
Patterson Belknap delivers a full range of services across approximately 20 practice groups in both  litigation and commercial law.
For more information, please visit www.pbwt.com.
About Craig Newman:  Craig A. Newman is a recognized leader in both complex financial litigation and global  cybersecurity.
With more than twenty years as a litigation partner and General Counsel at both  a multi-billion dollar international private equity firm and F500-owned media consortium, Craig  represents Fortune 500 companies, their boards and leadership teams.
In his cybersecurity work,  Craig represents clients in litigation, regulatory and governance matters, and the management  of risks associated with data security practices and policies including data breach preparedness  and response.
He chairs Patterson Belknap’s Privacy and Data Security Practice and is a founding  contributor to the firm’s blog, www.DataSecurityLaw.com.
A former journalist, Craig appears regularly on national television  including CNBC, CNN and Bloomberg, discussing issues at the intersection of business, law,  cybersecurity and data privacy, and has written for The New York Times, The Washington Post, The  Wall Street Journal and Financial Times.
He was named as one of the National Law Journal’s 2015  “Cybersecurity & Data Privacy Trailblazers.”  About Bloomberg Law: Bloomberg Law helps legal professionals provide world-class counsel with access to actionable  legal intelligence in a business context.
Bloomberg Law delivers a unique combination of practical  guidance, comprehensive primary and secondary source material, trusted content from Bloomberg  BNA, news, time-saving practice tools, market data and business intelligence.
For more information,  visit www.bna.com/bloomberglaw.
Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security brings you streamlined access to the expertise of  Bloomberg BNA’s privacy and data security editorial team, contributing practitioners, and in-country  experts together with unmatched practice tools to help you quickly respond with confidence to  client inquiries.
In Practice tools include exemplar policies and provisions, checklists, and forms to facilitate your  drafting needs for privacy and data security tasks such as:          •  New York Cybersecurity Regulation for Financial Institutions Managing a Data Breach • Managing Privacy and Data Security Risk in Mergers • Designing a Privacy Policy • Cross-Border Data Transfer  2  Introduction  Cybersecurity is one of the most critical challenges facing our nation and our economy.
U.S. regulators on both the state and federal level are working to keep pace with the  challenges and risks posed by cybercrime.
On March 1, 2017, a sweeping new cybersecurity regulation was issued by the New     York State Department of Financial Services, the state’s top banking and insurance regulator.
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP is pleased to release “A New Age of Cybersecurity     Regulation: Raising the Bar and Demanding Accountability.” Our publication provides a  general overview of this new regulation, focusing on its core rules and requirements.
We  also raise issues that affected institutions might want to consider as they implement the  requirements of the regulation.
Craig A. Newman   Partner & Chair, Data Security & Privacy  Practice Patterson Belknap Webb &  Tyler LLP  New York, New York  3  4  A new age of cybersecurity regulation:  Raising the bar and demanding accountabiltiy By Craig A. Newman, Alejandro Cruz, Kade Olsen, Simone Silva-Arrindell, and   Leigh Barnwell Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, New York*  I.
Introduction  On March 1, 2017, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a  new cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions, their information  technology systems, and their customers from cybercrime1.
This “first-in-the-nation regulation”  requires many of the more than 3,000 financial institutions, insurance companies, health  plans, charitable institutions, and other organizations regulated by DFS to take a fresh and  comprehensive look at their cybersecurity preparedness, governance, internal controls, and  defenses.
The regulation provides a basic framework within which organizations are required to develop  a comprehensive cybersecurity program best suited to address their specific risk profile.
Although the new regulation includes a degree of flexibility and bears some similarities to  guidelines and regulations issued by other regulatory bodies, it has 23 different sections and  is far more detailed and accountability oriented than most other comparable data security  regimes.
Significantly, in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory standards,  the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership accountable by requiring an  annual compliance certificate signed by a senior officer or board member.
And prompt implementation is   ________________________________________________________________________ * Craig A. Newman, a partner in the New York office of Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP, chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice.
The information presented here is for general informational purposes only and should not be construed as specific legal advice.
The information is also  summary in nature.
Please refer to the New York Department of Financial Services “Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies” for a full  statement of the regulation and applicable requirements.
1 Cybersecurity Requirements for Financial Services Companies,  2 23 NYCRR 500.01(c).
5  required.
As the regulation states, “[i]t is critical for all regulated institutions ... to move  swiftly and urgently to adopt a cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00.
Notwithstanding  the mandate to act quickly, the complexity of the new regulation means that affected  organizations will need to proceed methodically to ensure compliance with the regulation,  and should consider appropriately documenting their decision-making process at key  junctures.
Corporate Governance  The DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at the top of an organization.
According to the regulation, senior management “must take [cybersecurity issues] seriously  and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity program.” 23 NYCRR 500.00.
That responsibility starts with the organization’s “Cybersecurity Policy.” According to the new  regulation, each covered entity must implement and maintain a written policy laying out  its policies and procedures for the protection of its information systems and any nonpublic  information3 stored on those systems.
The policy must address, at a  minimum, data governance, access controls, disaster recovery planning, performance  planning, network security, consumer data privacy, third-party management, and incident  response.
Critically, the policy must be approved by the organization’s board or a senior officer.
The  regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee thereof,” or a  “Senior Officer” approve the policy.
An organization must also certify in  writing annually to the DFS that its cybersecurity program complies with the regulation.
________________________________________________________________________ 3 The regulation expressly defines nonpublic information.
First, such information includes any business-related information that, if  tampered with or disclosed, would cause a material adverse impact to the business.
Second, it includes any information that can be used to identify an  individual, “in combination with any one or more of the following elements”: (i) social security number; (ii) driver’s license or similar number; (iii) account or  credit card number; (iv) security code or password that would permit access to an individual’s financial account; or (v) biometric records.
Finally, it includes  any information (except for age or gender) created or derived by a health care provider related to: (i) any mental condition; (ii) the provision of any health  care; and (iii) the payment for health care.
6        Patterson Belknap Commentary   No prior state or federal regulations have come close to requiring this level of  accountability from an organization’s directors or senior management.
Accountability  of this nature also raises the prospect of potential liability at the top of an organization.
Covered entities will need to promptly develop procedures for educating and  updating senior management and/or board members regarding their responsibilities  under the new regulation.
Covered entities should also consider reviewing relevant insurance policies, including  directors and officers (D&O) coverage, to account for the new layer of potential liability  imposed by the DFS regulation.
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Designation  Covered entities must designate a “qualified individual” to serve as a Chief Information  Security Officer (CISO).
The CISO is responsible for overseeing,  implementing, and enforcing the covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy.
Covered  entities may employ a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but each covered  entity electing to do so must:       •  retain responsibility for compliance with the CISO requirements; •  designate a senior member of its personnel to oversee the third-party service   provider; and      •  require the third-party service provider to maintain a cybersecurity program that   meets the DFS’s regulations.
The CISO’s responsibilities are substantial and require communication with senior  management and the board of directors (or a subcommittee of the board).
The board report, “to the extent applicable,” must include the following:  •  an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the covered entity’s   information systems;  • exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures; • identification of cyber risks; • an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness; • proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and • a summary of material cybersecurity events.
7  In addition to reporting internally, the CISO must report to the DFS Superintendent upon  request.
Given the CISO’s significant and overall responsibilities for cybersecurity, some smaller covered  entities—depending on the circumstances—may wish to consider retaining an experienced and  qualified third-party service provider to serve as the CISO.
Patterson Belknap Commentary    Given the scope of the CISO’s responsibilities under the regulation, covered entities  should consider a comprehensive policy governing the CISO’s role within an  organization.
Such a policy should be reviewed and updated as needed, based on DFS  commentary, enforcement expectations, and other pertinent developments.
Organizations have latitude in designating a CISO from within or outside of the  organization, as covered entities may use the services of a third party to fill this role.
Both  options may present potential challenges, and a careful assessment of the risks and  benefits of each option should be done before deciding the course of action best suited  to the organization’s resources and risk profile.
Implementation  A.
Risk Assessment, Cybersecurity Program, and Cybersecurity Policy  Three overarching requirements of the regulation will drive its implementation: the Risk  Assessment, the Cybersecurity Program, and the Cybersecurity Policy.
The regulation requires covered entities to develop a Cybersecurity Program (23 NYCRR  500.02) and Cybersecurity Policy (23 NYCRR 500.03) that comply with DFS requirements.
According to the regulation, the central factor in developing both the Cybersecurity Program  and Cybersecurity Policy is the Risk Assessment (23 NYCRR 500.09).
The Risk Assessment  must consider the “particular risks” to a company’s business “sufficient to inform the design  of the cybersecurity program required.” 23 NYCRR 500.09(a).
Risk Assessments must be  performed periodically and “updated as reasonably necessary ... to respond to technological  developments and evolving threats.” Id.
From a compliance standpoint, the outcome of these  periodic Risk Assessments may serve to refine some covered entities’ obligations under the  regulation (especially as firms become more cyber-mature), as many requirements apply only to  “the extent applicable” based on the Risk Assessment.
8  Risk Assessments, which must be carried out “in accordance with written policies and  procedures,” 23 NYCRR 500.09(b), shall be documented and must include the following: (1)  criteria for the evaluation and categorization of identified cybersecurity risks or threats facing  the organization; (2) criteria for the assessment of “confidentiality, integrity, security and  availability” of the organization’s information systems and nonpublic information (as defined  in the regulation), including existing controls in the context of identified risks; (3) requirements  describing how identified risks are either mitigated or accepted and how the organization’s  Cybersecurity Program will address those risks.
Every covered entity must then develop a Cybersecurity Program that addresses each of the  applicable DFS requirements.
The Cybersecurity Program “shall be based on the Covered  Entity’s Risk Assessment” and must be “designed to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and  availability” of its information systems.
Notably, the Cybersecurity Program  is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document.
At a minimum, the Cybersecurity Program must do six things: (1) identify  internal and external cyber risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of  policies and procedures to protect information systems and nonpublic information; (3) detect  cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect, and mitigate the effects of cybersecurity events;  (5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory reporting requirements.
Finally, as discussed above, a covered entity must create a Cybersecurity Policy.
The Cybersecurity Policy must also be based on the organization’s Risk Assessment  and should address the following fourteen specific areas (some of which overlap with the  regulation’s stand-alone requirements) to “the extent applicable”:   • information security; • data governance and classification; • asset inventory and device management; • access controls and identity management; • business continuity and disaster recovery planning and resources; • systems operations and availability concerns; • systems and network security; • systems and network monitoring; • systems and application development and quality assurance;  9  • physical security and environmental controls; • customer data privacy; • vendor and third party service provider; • risk assessment; and • incident response.
Day-To-Day Requirements  The regulation also contains a series of detailed day-to-day requirements—ranging from  access controls to employee training—that covered institutions must integrate into their overall  Cybersecurity Policy, “to the extent applicable” to their operations.
Data Governance and Classification  Generally speaking, data classification and data mapping are considered initial steps in  developing a Cybersecurity Policy.
Organizations must identify how they collect, store, and  transmit sensitive data and nonpublic information.
The Cybersecurity Policy should therefore  articulate a process for identifying and categorizing different types of sensitive information  within an organization.
While covered entities may identify additional categories of sensitive information to be  protected, the DFS regulation identifies three categories of nonpublic information that must  be protected (23 NYCRR 500.01(g)):  •  business-related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized disclosure of   which would cause a material adverse impact to the business;   •  information about an individual that—because of name, number, personal mark, or   other identifier—can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or  more of the following data elements: social security number; driver’s license number  or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security code, access code or  password that would permit access to a financial account; or biometric records; and •   information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or the   individual’s family or household.
In addition to data classification, covered entities are required to establish a data governance  policy.
The regulation, however, does not provide guidance as to the  specific requirements of such a policy.
When sensitive information is collected, shared, and accessed across different business  units of a covered entity, the Cybersecurity Policy should coordinate security activities  and controls between and among the relevant departments.
Covered entities are required to protect sensitive information at all stages of its life  within the organization: its creation or collection, its day-to-day use and storage,  its transmission inside and outside the organization, and ultimately its deletion,  destruction, and disposal.
Access Controls and Identity Management   Access controls and identity management go hand in hand with data governance and  information security.
As part of their Cybersecurity Policy, covered entities should create  a framework for managing the electronic identities of those who have access to the  organization’s information systems and their corresponding access privileges for various  categories of data.
The regulation specifically requires companies to “limit user access  privileges” to systems that “provide access to Nonpublic Information,” and those privileges  must be reviewed and modified on a regular basis.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Developing access controls is ancillary to other DFS requirements—including  requirements governing network and physical security, vendor data security, and multi- factor authentication.
Each covered entity must “periodically review” the access privileges of its employees.
At a minimum, companies should consider reviewing an employee’s access privileges  when he or she changes positions, but covered entities should consider going further  depending on the circumstances.
For example, periodic reviews and reconciliations  could provide opportunities to clean-up and refine access privileges based on routine  changes in personnel and company structure.
Systems and Network Security   As part of the Cybersecurity Program, covered entities should create policies regarding the  security of their internal networks.
In particular, companies should  consider how their electronic systems connect with third parties or other external entities and  develop policies for managing the security of those external network connections.
This will be  especially important for covered entities with network connections to third-party vendors and  contractors, which we discuss below.
The Cybersecurity Policy should also incorporate procedures for regular internal systems and  network monitoring, as appropriate, to assess the capacity and performance of the systems  and network, as well as compliance with security protocols.
Physical Security and Environmental Controls  The Cybersecurity Policy must address physical security for the information systems  infrastructure.
Covered entities must also specify environmental controls that will ensure the  integrity and continued availability of the data in the event of man-made or natural disasters  or other potential disruptions.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Organizations should consider developing a comprehensive protocol for controlling  access to their most critical information systems considering, among other factors, the  firm’s overall risk profile, its physical storage of (and use of safeguards for) sensitive  information, and its access limitations for relevant personnel.
This is another area where an organization might benefit from a periodic and  documented review to ensure that access controls remain current.
Systems Operations and Availability   The Cybersecurity Policy must also address the availability of information systems.
12        Patterson Belknap Commentary   Network capacity, performance, and availability constraints are clearly of concern to  DFS.
Systems and Application Development and Quality Assurance   Entities must ensure that their information systems, applications, and security programs work  as designed and developed to address vulnerabilities.
To that end,  covered entities must prepare “written procedures, guidelines and standards” to ensure  “secure development practices” for in-house applications and systems and “procedures for  evaluating, assessing or testing” externally developed applications and systems.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   The procedures, guidelines, and standards for system and application security must  be assessed and updated by the CISO “as necessary.” 23 NYCRR 500.08(b).
Given the  “as necessary” language, organizations should consider reviewing the security of their  applications and systems on a routine basis, subject to their particular risk profile and  other relevant circumstances.
At a  minimum, a covered entity must implement, “to the extent applicable and based on its Risk  Assessment,” an audit trail system that tracks and maintains data “to reconstruct material  financial transactions sufficient to support normal operations and obligations,” as well as to  detect and respond to cybersecurity events.
There are, however, limits on the data retention required by the regulation.
Covered entities  must implement policies and procedures for the timely destruction of nonpublic data that is  “no longer necessary for business operations or for other legitimate business purposes of the  Covered Entity.” 23 NYCRR 500.13.
Covered entities may retain data or information when it is  otherwise required by law or regulation “or where targeted disposal is not reasonably feasible  due to the manner in which the information is maintained.” Id.
13           Patterson Belknap Commentary   The audit-trail requirement is significant.
Organizations must maintain audit trails  that allow for the reconstruction of financial transactions sufficient to support normal  operations, and designed to detect and respond to cybersecurity events.
Limiting Access to Nonpublic Information   A significant portion of the new regulation is dedicated to protecting and limiting access to  nonpublic information.
As an initial matter, covered entities must “limit user access privileges  to Information Systems” that provide access to nonpublic information.
This  requirement dovetails with the regulation’s access-control requirements discussed above.
In addition to limiting access, covered entities must also implement heightened  authentication requirements for access to nonpublic information as well as to other  sensitive data, systems, and interfaces.
“Based on its Risk Assessment,” a covered entity  must use “effective controls, which may include Multi-Factor Authentication or Risk-Based  Authentication,” to protect against unauthorized access to nonpublic information.
For access to internal systems through an external network, covered entities are  required to use multi-factor authentication unless “the Covered Entity’s CISO has approved in  writing the use of reasonably equivalent or more secure access controls.” Id.
This requirement  represents a level of regulatory granularity uncommon in the cybersecurity context.
Multi-Factor Authentication: The DFS defines multi-factor authentication (23 NYCRR 500.01(f))  as authentication through at least two of the following types of factors:   • knowledge factors, such as passwords; or • possession factors, such as a physical token or a text message; or • inherence factors, including biometric characteristics.
Risk-Based Authentication: The DFS defines risk-based authentication as a system of  authentication that detects anomalies or changes in the normal use patterns of a person  and requires additional verification of the person’s identity when deviations are detected.
For example, a risk-based authentication system would detect when a user  attempts to enter his account from a new computer for the first time and would then require  the user to answer additional security questions before gaining access.
Encryption: Covered entities must also develop “controls” to protect nonpublic information  in transit and at rest.
The “default” measure to protect such information  is encryption.
If encrypting nonpublic information is not feasible, covered entities may use  “alternative compensating controls” to secure the information with the review and approval  of the CISO.
If an entity chooses to use “alternative compensating  controls” rather than encryption, “the feasibility of encryption and effectiveness of the  compensating controls shall be reviewed by the CISO at least annually.” 23 NYCRR 500.15(b).
Patterson Belknap Commentary   These requirements are substantial and highly detailed.
The requirement to encrypt or  otherwise secure nonpublic information both at rest and while in transit may be overly  burdensome or difficult to satisfy from a business or operational perspective.
In such cases, “alternative compensating controls” are permitted, but the regulation  does not provide further detail or definition of “alternative compensating controls.”  Given that, covered entities considering alternatives to encryption may be well-advised  to consider the level of protection required for nonpublic information as part of their  Risk Assessment.
Each covered entity must employ sufficient dedicated cybersecurity personnel to  manage its cybersecurity risks and “to perform or oversee the performance” of the covered  entity’s “core cybersecurity functions.” 23 NYCRR 500.10(a).
Those personnel must also receive  sufficient training to “address relevant cybersecurity risks” and “maintain current knowledge of  changing cybersecurity threats and countermeasures.” Id.
The regulation’s training requirements are not limited to cybersecurity personnel.
A covered  entity must “provide for regular cybersecurity awareness training” for “all personnel,” and  that training must be “updated to reflect risks” identified in the Risk Assessment.
15        Patterson Belknap Commentary   The regulation provides that “all” personnel must receive cybersecurity training.
C. Periodic Cyber Risk Assessments  The DFS regulation also requires covered entities to assess and periodically reassess their  cybersecurity systems.
In addition to the Risk Assessment, the new regulation calls for three  different types of regular assessments:  •  Penetration and Vulnerability Testing: A covered entity must establish programs for   “monitoring and testing, developed in accordance” with its Risk Assessment, to assess  the “effectiveness” of its Cybersecurity Program.
Continuous Monitoring: A company may deploy “effective continuous monitoring”   (23 NYCRR 500.05), which is not defined in the regulation, and may need to be  gleaned from industry standards and practices, as well as the company’s own Risk  Assessment.
If an organization follows this approach, it must  conduct penetration testing annually and vulnerability testing biannually.
Penetration testing is defined as “a test methodology in which assessors   attempt to circumvent or defeat the security features of an Information  System.” 23 NYCRR 500.01(h).
“Vulnerability assessment” is not defined by the DFS and will likely need to be   defined with reference to industry standards and practices.
•  Third-Party Assessments: Periodically, a covered entity must assess the cybersecurity   practices of any third parties that have access to the organization’s network or  nonpublic information.
The regulation does not define the  scope of this assessment, but as a practical matter, this mandate may, depending on  the circumstances, apply to payroll and human resource vendors, IT and data-hosting  consultants, cloud service providers, and other vendors, consultants, and law firms.
16  •  Application Security Assessments: Periodically, the CISO must review, assess, and  update procedures and guidelines concerning the security of information system  applications.
Under the regulation, each organization’s  Cybersecurity Program must include written procedures, guidelines, and standards to  ensure the secure use of internally developed applications.
Organizations must also  assess and test the security of any externally developed applications that they utilize.
Patterson Belknap Commentary   Because the DFS has not defined “vulnerability assessments” or “third-party  assessments,” covered entities may in appropriate cases consider the practices of other  peer organizations and relevant industry standards as well as their own risk profile  when developing such tests.
D. Incident Response Plan   As mentioned above, as part of its Cybersecurity Policy and Program, each covered entity  must develop an “incident response plan.” 23 NYCRR 500.16.
The purpose of the plan,  according to the DFS, is to ensure that the organization is prepared to “promptly respond to,  and recover from, any Cybersecurity Event affecting the confidentiality, integrity or availability  of the Covered Entity’s Information Systems or the continuing functionality of any aspect of  the Covered Entity’s business.” Id.
The regulation identifies a number of areas that the incident  response plan must address:  • the internal processes for responding to a cybersecurity event; • the goals of the incident response plan; • the definition of clear roles, responsibilities, and levels of decision-making authority; • external and internal communications and information sharing; •  remediation of any identified weaknesses in the company’s information systems and   associate controls;  • documentation and reporting of cybersecurity events; and •  the evaluation and revision of the organization’s response plan following a    cybersecurity event.
17             Patterson Belknap Commentary   The DFS regulation itself does not prescribe particular language or details that must be  included in an incident response plan.
Other governmental agencies have provided  guidance that could be informative.
For example, the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST) framework suggests that organizations predetermine their  communication guidelines with “outside parties, such as incident response teams,  law enforcement, the media, vendors, and victim organizations.4” NIST also strongly  encourages organizations to develop written procedures for prioritizing the handling  of individual incidents, including functional and informational factors and detailing  recoverability from an incident5.
Commentators also encourage organizations to “train,  practice, and run simulated breaches to develop response ‘muscle memory.’”6    Written policies and procedures for responding to a breach may also provide  contemporaneous documentation of readiness, which may be useful for purposes of  DFS reviews and in potential litigation or inquiries arising from a breach.
E. Third-Party Information Security Policy   The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but  also requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s IT network  or nonpublic information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards.
Specifically, the regulation sets out detailed data security rules and protocols that regulated  institutions must impose on all of their vendors and business partners.
The DFS’s focus on third parties connected to covered entities is likely a  response to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years— in addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving cyber  vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks.
________________________________________________________________________ 4 National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide (2012), page 2, available at   http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-61r2.pdf.
18  Under the regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement written policies  and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or nonpublic information that can be  accessed by their vendors.
At a minimum, these policies must identify the risks arising from  third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on third-party vendors, and create a due- diligence process for evaluating vendors.
Moreover, organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or  contractual protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” 23 NYCRR 500.11(b).
To “the  extent applicable,” those guidelines must address:  •  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or nonpublic   information (§500.11(b)(1));   •  use of encryption of all nonpublic information—both “in transit and at rest” (§500.11(b)  (2));   •  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a breach or   potential cyber-related event (§500.11(b)(3)); and  •  representations and warranties from third-party provider addressing cybersecurity   and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s information systems and  nonpublic information (§500.11(b)(4)).
In practice, compliance with this aspect of the regulation will require far more than simply  “checking the boxes.” Business partners for all covered entities may be required to reconsider  their own cybersecurity policies and practices and retool them to comply with the regulation.
Patterson Belknap Commentary      For most organizations, this requirement will be substantial.
An April 2015 report by  the DFS found that only 46% of surveyed institutions conduct “pre-contract on-site  assessments of at least high-risk third-party vendors.” And 44% of those organizations  do not require third-party vendors to guarantee that their data and products are free of  viruses.
Similarly, only half of the surveyed institutions require indemnification clauses  for information security failures in their agreements with third-party vendors.
Servs., “Update on Cyber Security in the Banking Sector: Third Party Service Providers” (April 2015), page 3, available at http:// www.dfs.ny.gov/reportpub/dfs_rpt_tpvendor_042015.pdf.
At the same time, a broader third-party vendor  program should be contemplated, including, when appropriate, vendor diligence  procedures, standard terms and conditions, and provisions requiring prompt notice in  the event a vendor suffers a data security incident that might affect the covered entity’s  nonpublic information or network.
Additional Requirements  A.
Regulatory Reporting  Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS regulation imposes  a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity event, as defined by the  regulation.
Within 72 hours “from a determination” that a cybersecurity  event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the event.
A cybersecurity event is  “material” if it fits within the following categories:  •  a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self-  regulatory agency (§500.17(a)(1)); or  •  a cybersecurity event that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any   material part of the normal operation(s)” of the covered entity (§500.17(a)(2)).
In addition to reporting cybersecurity events, organizations must certify compliance with  the DFS regulation on an annual basis.
20           Patterson Belknap Commentary   The DFS’s reporting requirements are, without question, regulatory “firsts” that go  beyond regulatory reporting requirements under federal or state laws.
When a cybersecurity event or other triggering circumstance occurs, covered entities  now must not only determine whether reporting is required by a federal or state  regulator, but must also evaluate whether the event has a “reasonable likelihood of  materially harming” the organization’s operations.
The  following types of entities can expect some relief from the regulation’s strict requirements.
•  Companies with less than $5 million in gross revenue in New York (in each of the   preceding three years), less than $10 million in year-end total assets from all operations,  or fewer than ten employees in New York (including independent contractors) are  exempt from a number of the regulation’s provisions.
•  Companies that do not have information systems and access to nonpublic information  are exempt from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements.
•  Captive insurance companies—both pure and group captive insurers—are also exempt   from all but the “Risk Assessment” and “Data Retention” requirements.
•  Finally, charitable annuity societies, risk retention groups not charted in New York, and   Rule 125 certified and accredited reinsurers are exempt from the regulation in its entirety.
The first three exempt groups must “file a Notice of Exemption” within thirty days of the  “determination that the Covered Entity is exempt.” 23 NYCRR 500.19(e).
In the event that  any Covered Entity, “as of its most recent fiscal year end, ceases to qualify for an exemption,  such Covered Entity shall have 180 days from such fiscal year” to comply with “all applicable  requirements” of the regulation.
Transition Period Timeline  Although the regulation is phased in over a two-year period, most of the requirements  must be in place within 180 days.
This will require many of the covered institutions to re- examine their overall approach to cybersecurity and determine whether it aligns with the new  regulation.
We will monitor pertinent developments as institutions roll out their compliance  programs and issue regular updates to this publication.
Reproduced with permission from Bloomberg Law: Privacy & Data Security,   http://www.bna.com/bloomberg-law-privacy-data-security/.
22  Privacy Law WatchTM  March 21, 2017 Insurance  Dueling Cybersecurity Regulations for Health Care:   HHS Meets New York State  NY Cybersecurity Reg  New York’s new cybersecurity regulation will regulate the data security practices of health- care insurers with a set of rules that are the most comprehensive in the U.S.
These rules  will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their  cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines, the author  writes.
By Craig A. Newman  Craig A. Newman is a partner at Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP in New York and  chairs the firm’s Privacy and Data Security Practice.
Data security regulation for health-care insurers that operate in New York just got more  complicated.
For years, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for  Civil Rights—the industry’s primary data security regulator—has zealously policed the  health care field.
In fact, so far in 2017, the agency has already brought four data security  enforcement actions.
The most recent was the February 2017 $5.5 million settlement with  Memorial Healthcare System—matching the largest civil monetary fine ever imposed  against a single organization—because of weak internal controls that permitted employees  to improperly access more than 100,000 patient records.
Earlier this month, New York’s top banking  and insurance regulator threw down the proverbial gauntlet—or, perhaps more of a  sledgehammer— with its new cybersecurity regulation which has broad implications  for health-care insurers that operate in New York.
The regulation will force health-care  insurers to navigate a minefield of new and far more exacting technical, legal and  governance requirements than the industry specific regulations already in place including  those under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the  Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 (HITECH).
The New York rules just took effect on March 1 and will phase in over two years but many   23  detailed requirements must be put in place within the first 180 days.
This will require many health-care insurers to take a fresh and comprehensive look at their  cybersecurity programs, governance and defenses to meet the deadlines.
Background: The New York Regulation  On March 1, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a “first  in the nation” cybersecurity regulation designed to protect financial institutions and  insurance companies, their information technology systems, and their customers from  cybercrime.
The HIPAA Security Rule already  requires that they maintain data security programs that are reasonable in view of their  scale, complexity and resources but does not dictate particular measures that must be  undertaken.
The New York regulation takes a starkly different approach with its matrix  of specific risk-based governance, process and technical requirements.
Although the  new regulation includes a degree of flexibility to fit each institution’s risk profile, it has  23 different sections and is far more detailed and accountability-oriented than other  data security regimes.
And in a clear departure from existing data security regulatory  norms, the new DFS regulation holds an institution’s senior leadership responsible for  compliance by requiring the filing of an annual compliance certificate attesting to an  institution’s adherence to the regulation.
The New York regulation requires, in general, that DFS-regulated health-care insurers  have state-approved plans in place to protect their businesses, information systems  and the personal information of their customers.
The rules require that each health-care  insurer start by conducting a “risk assessment” to drive the scope of the organization’s  overall cybersecurity program.
The cybersecurity program must be “designed to ensure  the confidentiality, integrity and availability” of its information systems.
Notably, the  cybersecurity program is not necessarily a written, stand-alone document but rather  the underlying system, process and procedures by which a covered entity ensures its  compliance with the DFS regulation.
At a minimum, the cybersecurity program must do six things: (1) identify internal and  external cybersecurity risks; (2) use defensive infrastructure and the implementation of   24  policies and procedures to protect information systems and non-public information;  (3) detect cybersecurity events; (4) respond to, detect and mitigate the effects of  cybersecurity events; (5) recover from cybersecurity events; and (6) fulfill regulatory  reporting requirements.
Beyond the cybersecurity program, there is a laundry list of additional requirements  ranging from the development and implementation of a 14-point cybersecurity policy  to employee training, board and senior leadership engagement to highly technical  requirements like encryption, access controls and different types of internal monitoring or  vulnerability assessments.
In a clear departure from existing data security regulatory norms, the new regulation holds  an institution’s senior leadership responsible for compliance for DFS-regulated health- care insurers, the new rules present a regulatory scheme—and regulatory expectations— that impose new obligations and new approaches to data security.
Here is a brief look at  several of these important new requirements:   Accountability: Cyber Czar and Corporate Leadership  Unlike existing health-care data security regulation, the New York rules are based on  a foundation of corporate accountability.
In the first instance, the New York regulation  requires the designation of a “qualified individual” to serve as a chief information security  officer (CISO).
The CISO is responsible for overseeing, implementing and enforcing the  covered entity’s cybersecurity program and policy.
Covered entities have the option of  engaging a third-party service provider to serve as the CISO, but retain responsibility for  compliance with the CISO requirements and must appoint a senior employee to oversee  the third-party service provider.
Not surprisingly, the CISO’s responsibilities are substantial including delivering a bi- annual report to the board or equivalent governing body that covers, “to the extent  applicable,” the following:     •   an assessment of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the covered   entity’s information systems;              • exceptions to the covered entity’s cybersecurity policies and procedures;  • identification of cybersecurity risks;  • an assessment of the cybersecurity program’s effectiveness;  • proposed steps to remedy inadequacies in the cybersecurity program; and  • a summary of material cybersecurity events.
Beyond the CISO’s role, the DFS regulation requires engagement and accountability at  the top of an organization.
According to the regulation, senior management “must take”   25  cybersecurity issues “seriously and be responsible for an organization’s cybersecurity  program.” That responsibility starts with review of the organization’s cybersecurity  policy.
The regulation requires that the board of directors, an “appropriate committee  of the board of directors, or a “senior officer” approve the policy.
The chairperson of the  board of directors or a senior officer must also certify in writing to DFS annually that the  organization’s cybersecurity program complies with the regulation.
New York Regulation Far Broader Than HIPAA  And, the New York regulation covers far more sensitive information than under HIPAA.
The  HIPAA Privacy Rule covers individually identifiable health information—called protected  health information (PHI), and is subject to certain general data security safeguards.
The  HIPAA Security Rule protects a subset of that information—individually identifiable health  information a covered entity creates, receives, maintains or transmits in electronic form  (called e-PHI).
By contrast, the New York regulation protects three different categories of  sensitive information—only the last category of which directly overlaps with PHI or e-PHI:     •  business related information, the tampering with which or unauthorized   disclosure of which would cause a material adverse impact to the business;   •  information about an individual which because of name, number, personal mark   or other identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with  any one or more of the following data elements: social security number; drivers’  license number or identification; account number (credit or debit); any security  code, access code or password that would permit access to a financial account;  or biometric records; and   •  information about the mental, physical, or behavioral health of an individual or         the individual’s family or household.
The New York rules also apply to the security of “information systems” generally.
This  means that DFS-regulated health-care insurers will need to broaden their approach to  cybersecurity protection to include these new elements not already covered by existing  federal health-care regulation.
Substantial Obligations on Third-Party Vendors  The new regulation not only contains extensive requirements for covered entities, but also  requires third-party vendors with access to a DFS-regulated organization’s information  technology network or non-public information to meet minimum cybersecurity standards.
Under HIPAA, covered health-care entities must bind third parties that will receive  protected health-care information to comply with HIPAA’s requirements in a “Business  Associate Agreement.” Such agreements may identify specific data security protocols that   26  must be followed, but technical requirements are not mandated.
By contrast, the New York regulation sets out data security rules and protocols that  regulated institutions must impose on their vendors and business partners.
The  regulation’s focus on third-parties connected to covered entities is likely DFS’s response  to the massive data breaches that have grabbed headlines over the past few years—in  addition to numerous related class action lawsuits and derivative demands—involving  cybersecurity vulnerabilities of vendors with access to company networks.
The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than under  the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Under the New York regulation, covered entities are required to develop and implement  written policies and procedures to ensure the security of any IT systems or non-public  information that can be accessed by their vendors.
At a minimum, these policies must  identify the risks arising from third-party access, impose cybersecurity standards on the  third-party vendors, and create a due-diligence process for evaluating vendors.
Moreover,  organizations must establish “relevant guidelines for due diligence and/or contractual  protections relating to Third Party Service Providers.” To “the extent applicable,” those  guidelines must address:   •  use of multi-factor authentication to limit access to sensitive IT systems or  non-public information;  • use of encryption of all non-public information—both “in transit and at rest”; •  notice from the third-party provider to the regulated entity in the event of a  breach or potential cybersecurity-related event; and  • representations and warranties from the third-party provider addressing its  cybersecurity and policies that relate to the security of the covered entity’s  information systems and non-public information.
Regulatory Notice Provisions Far Different  The reporting requirements under the New York regulation are also far stricter than  under HIPAA.
Unique among state and federal breach reporting laws, the new DFS  regulation imposes a mandatory notification process for any “material” cybersecurity  event, as defined by the regulation.
Within 72 hours “from a determination” that  such a cybersecurity event occurred, a covered entity must inform the DFS of the  event.
A cybersecurity event is “material” if it falls in the following categories:   27  • a cybersecurity event for which notice is required to any other government or self- regulatory agency; or  • a cybersecurity even that has a “reasonable likelihood of materially harming any material  part of the normal operation(s)” of the Covered Entity.
Under HIPAA’s Breach Notification Rule, institutions must report the breach of unsecured  health information to the HHS without reasonable delay but in no event later than 60-days  after discovery of the breach, or, if affecting fewer than 500 individuals, within 60 days of  the end of the calendar year in which the breach occurred.
Conclusion  The New York regulation isn’t likely to be the last word on data security for the industry.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners is considering a model law that  each state could adopt—outlining how insurers must safeguard consumer information and  respond in the event of a data security incident.
The model law was unveiled last year but  has undergone revisions in response to criticisms raised by the industry and consumer  groups.
For health-care insurers already subject to extensive federal data security regulation, the  New York cyber regulation imposes additional—and sweeping—burdens and requirements.
No other data security regulation has demanded this combination of accountability,  senior leadership engagement and across-the-board detail.
•  Practical guidance, tools, news and analytics  •  Legal and business insights  •  The only legal resource for trusted BNA content & Bloomberg News  •  Unlimited research at an all-inclusive price  Learn more about Bloomberg Law   at bna.com/bloomberglaw    ©2017 The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.  0317-JO23379 	    9	    9	    9	     How financial industry can step forward on the issue: compliance to  strengthen cyber resilience	     Cyber	   resilience	   as	   a	   competitive	   advantage	    Cyber	   compliance	   road	   map	                           	     	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     	     Introduction   In  order  to  stay  competitive,  financial  industry  must  seize  the  opportunities  of  the on-going technological disruption, and particularly with the recent so-called  blockchain  innovation  when  some  argue  that  this  new  technology  has  the  potential to replace banks as financial intermediaries for transfer and exchanges  of  money.
In  this  transitional  context,  financial  sector  could  face  new  cyber- security  risks,  with  sophisticated  attacks,  which  eventually  call  for  a  renewed  regulation  framework.
Here  the  financial  sector  means  banks,  insurers,  asset  managers, and advisory firms.
Blockchain can be defined as “a peer-to-peer operated public digital ledger that  records  all  transactions  executed  for  a  particular  asset  (...)  “The  Blockchain  maintains this record across a network of computers, and anyone on the network  can  access  the  ledger.
Blockchain  is  ‘decentralised’  meaning  people  on  the  network  maintain  the  ledger,  requiring  no  central  or  third  party  intermediary  involvement.”  “Users  known  as  ‘miners’  use  specialised  software  to  look  for  these time stamped ‘blocks’, verify their accuracy using a special algorithm, and  add the block to the chain.
The chain maintains chronological order for all blocks  added because of these time-stamps.” 1    Hence, Blockchain, well known through the so-called bit coin, could open much  more  perspective  and  should  guaranty  security  and  the  validation  of  all  the  exchange of data.
In  addition  to  open  room  for  new  business  opportunities,  this  new  technology  could  disrupt  the  legal  conception  of  privacy,  intellectual  property  right,  and  presents some issues regarding financial institution accountability given the new  associated risks.
As a consequence while financial institutions have been under strengths by the  new  regulatory  requirements  in  the  aftermath  of  the  2008  financial  crisis,  they  might  see  their  accountability  rises  again  to  address  cybersecurity  risks  and  associated prejudices related to blockchain innovation.
Cyber  security  is  a  burning  issue  in  the  international  agenda.
The  G7  made  cyber-security a priority and have established the “G7 Principles and Actions on  Cyber”2.
This issue is also considered in Asia, for instance, a new Cyber-security  Act will be tabled in the Singapore Parliament next year that will also “empower  the Singapore Cyber Security Agency to manage cyber incidents and raise the  standard of cybersecurity providers in Singapore.”3    	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	    	     1 Piper Alderman, « Blockchain –emerging legal issues », Lexology, Global, october 12 2015,  http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95  2 http://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000160279.pdf  3 http://globalcompliancenews.com/new-cybersecurity-laws-in-the-works- 20160601/?utm_source=wysija&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weeklynewsletter   2	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     international   regulators  are  particularly  vigilant  as     More  over,  regard  technological  innovations.
Regulators  such  as  the  SFC 5 in  Hong  Kong,  AMF  in  France  and  FCA  in  the  UK,  have  established  new  Fin-tech  contact  points  in  order  to  work  with  financial  institutions  to  address  those  issues.
On  the  other  hand,  they  started  to  fine  financial  institutions  for  misrepresentation  of  data  security  practices.
For  instance,  the  SEC  has  fined  $1M  Morgan  Stanley6 in  order  to  “settle  charges  related to its failures to protect customer information, some of which was hacked  and offered for sale online”.
As  a  consequence,  given  the  current  development  we  cannot  exclude  the  risk  that  financial  institutions  could  eventually  be  fined  in  the  future  for  eventual  impact on customers given cyber security attacks related to blockchain.
This  paper  explains  how  business  compliance  to  new  cyber  regulatory  framework  is  a  strategic  issue  for  financial  institutions.
It  then  finally  supports  the  hypothesis  of  cyber  compliance as a corporate competitive advantage and maps out some elements  of potential recommendations to strengthen cybersecurity resilience.
This  paper  comes  from  my  participation  of  the  management  course  “Applied  Cybersecurity  Strategy  for  Managers”.
The  course  aimed  to  provide  an  understanding of information security challenges and overview of strategic best  practices regarding governance and crisis management.
I  thank  for  the  information and knowledge shared that particularly have inspired this work.
4 http://www.eba.europa.eu/-/eba-seeks-views-on-the-use-of-consumer-data-by-financial-institutions  5 http://www.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/news-and-announcements/news/doc?refNo=16PR19  6 http://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2016-112.html   3	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     How Blockchain redefines cyber security: a brief overview   	     Examples	   of	   blockchain	   business	   opportunities	   	      Blockchain  is  the  technology  many  believe  will  be  the  key  to  the  future  of  banking.
The digitalisation of financial service opens room for new opportunity  such as to propose new kind of consumer’s experience as well as the use of new  technologies  and  improve  business  data  analysis.
7  The  ACPR,  the  French  banking  and  insurance  regulatory  authority,  has  recently  classified  the  opportunities and risks linked to the Fintech8 such as the new services for uses,  better resilience versus the difficulty to establish effective supervision, the risks  of  regulation  dumping  and  regarding  clients  interest  protection  such  as  data  misuse and security.
In  that  context,  blockchain  is  a  true  financial  service  disruption,  according  to  Piper  Alderman  “Blockchain  can  perform  the  intermediating  function  in  a  cheaper and more secure way, and disrupt the role of Banks.”9 According to the  lawyer Alain Bensoussan10, blockchain allows decentralization, anonymity as well  as security, traceability and reduces costs.
They are  currently  working  on  blockchain  project  with  financial  innovation  firm,  R3  CEV.
The  objective  is  that  the  project  delivers  a  “more  efficient  and  cost-effective  international  settlement  network  and  possibly  eliminate  the  need  to  rely  on  central  bank”11.
R3  CEV  has  announced  that  40  peer  banks,  including  HSBC,  Citigroup, and BNP Paribas, started an initiative to test new kind of transaction  through blockchain.
This consortium is the most important ever organized to test  this new technology.
Another example of blockchain’s smart output is the so-called “smart contract”  this innovation would allow automatic execution for standardized contracts such  as loans or corporate issuance of bonds, without central compensation.
Other major areas  for  applying  blockchain  technology  include:  smart  assets,  clearing  and  settlement, payments, digital identity.
11 11 Piper Alderman, « Blockchain –emerging legal issues », Lexology, Global, october 12 2015,   http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95	    	     4	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     Another  example  is  the  new  cryptographic  decentralized  money,  Elthereum,  is  the second cryptographic money after Bitcoin.
According  to  FTI  consulting 12  recent  study  “UK  banking  and  investment  institutions  are  most  knowledgeable  about  bitcoin  technology  blochain”,  the  study,  which  targeted  772  respondents  in  the  banking  and  investment  sector  from the UK, Germany, South Africa, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and the  US,  found  almost  two-thirds  of  respondents  were  aware  of  blockchain  technology and a quarter is knowledgeable about it.
Blockchain	   and	   cyber	   security	   risks	   	      There  is  no  consensus  about  whether  blockchain  could  increase  cyber  security  risks.
The degree of security of the network could possibly determine the  “the  speed  and  extent  of  acceptance  of  blockchain  technology  within  the  global  financial services community.“13     In  March  2015,  Interpol  conducted  a  research14 to  identify  new  cyber  threats  unleashed by blockchain.
This  could  affect  ‘cyber  hygiene’  as  well  as  the  sharing  of  child  sexual  abuse  images  where  the  blockchain  could  become  a  safe  haven  for  hosting  such  data.”  Further,  according  to  the  research,  “it  could  also  enable  crime  scenarios  in  the  future  such as the deployment of modular malware, a reshaping of the distribution of  zero-day  attacks,  as  well  as  the  creation  of  illegal  underground  marketplaces  dealing in private keys which would allow access to this data.” Has a conclusion,  INTERPOL  communicated  about  its  challenge  to  “spread  awareness  amongst   the public and law enforcement”.
Secondly, banks represent a key sector for national security.
Lastly,  data  protection  is  a  key  challenge  given  financial  security  legal  requirements.
Hunton   &   12 City Am – Article 07/03/2016   13   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	    	    	     Williams   “Blockchain,   cybersecurity   and   global   finance”   https://www.hunton.com/files/News/289469d8-826a-4f2b-ae48- df04b4c0acae/Presentation/NewsAttachment/3abe4d02-0d61-4276-9831-ea3ce3f225f9/blockchain- cybersecurity-and-global-finance.pdf  14 « INTERPOL cybe research identifies malware threat to virtual currencies » 26 march 2015  http://www.interpol.int/News-and-media/News/2015/N2015-033   5	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     Fraud  is  the  majority  of  cyber  incident  in  Financial  sector  today  (extortion,  identity  theft  and  other  kind  of  crimes  targeting  individual  customers  or  employees15.
This can of scenario would be  very  costly,  for  instance,  the  IFM  has  estimated  the  planned  shutdown  of  the  Greek economy to represents 7% of Greek GDP16    Further more, the risks are very high given that cyber crime motivation varies a  lot (spying, terrorism, hacktivism, enrichment).
In case or cyber attacks, financial  institutions face specific risks such as: operational, reputation, criminal litigation,  fines from regulators, eventual client losses and financial losses.
Therefore, financial institutions Corporate Security Department have to foresee  new cyber risk that could threaten their firms in case of blockchain development.
This  is  even  more  essential  as  the  regulatory  and  legal  framework  addressing  blockchain  is  under  development  and  not  established  so  far.
Hence,  financial  institutions  cannot  anticipate  what  would  exactly  be  their  degree  of  accountability in case of cyber attacks related to blockchain.
Blockchain regulatory framework and legal challenges     Cyber	   security	   and	   New	   Technology	   European	   legal	   framework	   	      In  Europe,  there  is  already  a  legal  framework  aimed  to  address  cyber-security  risks.
The  European  directive  for  network  and  information  security  has  implemented  a  cyber-security  strategy  for  member  states  with  the  legal  obligation to adopt a security strategy and create a national authority in charge  of  those  issues  with  sufficient  resources.
Particularly,  this  authority  should  be  notified for every security incident.
There  is  a  specific  European  regulatory  authority  for  personal  data  protection,  and  every  Member  States  has  established  a  national   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	    	     15  « Cyber and the City, Making the UK financial and professional services sector more resilient to cyber  attack » May 2016.
16 Idem    6	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     regulator  in  charge  of  those  issues.
These  legal  requirements  were  also  supposed to increase consumers’ trust in online services.
Fintech, that integrated the market through online payment service, have been  regulated  with  the  directive  related  to  payment  service  (DSP  2)  defining  new  rules to protect consumers while implementing a biding legal framework.
The  general  trend  is  that  those  legal  obligations  tend  to  increase  legal  requirement and strengthen sanctions.
What is more, personal accountability for  managers tends to be increased.
It  is  possible  that  existing  legal  frameworks  are  insufficient,  and  that  new  regulations would need to be developed.
Blockchain	   governance	   and	   regulation	   challenges	   	      While Fintech had integrated the payment market through online payment with  a specific European legislation, the is now legal recognition of virtual money and  no specific reglementation dedicated to blockchain given the few application of  this technology today.
As we focus on cyber security attacks we will not pursue a  deep  dive  in  legal  issues  regarding  smart  contracts,  intellectual  property  right  but rather privacy and decentralized organization accountability 17.
On the one hand, blockchain innovation presents legal issues that will need to  be  addressed  in  order  to  establish  who  is  responsible  in  case  of  cyber  risks  hypothesis particularly because “management” is conducted automatically with  blockchain.
On  the  other  hand,  as  Blockchain  is  not  yet  a  mainstream  technology, the regulation needs to be balanced in order to foster innovation.
According  to  Pascal  Bouvier,  “the  legal  framework  is  incompatible  with  a  technology  where  unknown  actors  would  settle  transactions,  where  the  transaction settled would represent a security exogenous to the technology and  where the technology could not deliver 100% of ownership”18.
The recognition of this new technology is very new.
The  French  Parliament had also organized a conference about the subject last spring, which  stresses that the subject made its entrance in the political agenda.
reader-card	    	     17  Piper  Alderman,  « Blockchain  –emerging  http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e5a942e-94ea-4891-a07c-a9d96343dc95  18 Pascal  Bouvier,  “Distributed  Ledgers  Part  II:  Clearing,  Settlements  &  Legal  frameworks”  10  août  2015  :  https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/distributed-ledgers-part-ii-clearing-settlements-pascal-bouvier-cfa?trk=mp-  issues »,  Lexology,  Global,  october  12  2015,   legal   7	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	       Existing  regulatory  frameworks  will  also  need  to  evolve  to  address  issues  of  taxation,  national  security,  and  money  laundering  since  Blockchain  can  seamlessly  facilitate  cross-border  transfers.
Hence,  another  difficulty  will  be  related  to  the  international  dimension  of  blockchain  that  makes  hard  to  implement  a  national  regulation.
As  regard  cyber  security  risks,  on  of  the  core  legal  challenge  will  be  the  accountability  issue.
According to Hubert  de Vauplane19, “the more the Blockchain is open and public, less the Blockchain  is governed”, “while in a private Blockchain, the governance is managed by the  institution” as regard“ access conditions, working, secyrity and legal approval of  transactions”.
Unlike  public  blockchain,  the  private  blockchain  -  even  though  grounded  in  a  public  source  code - is protected by intellectual property rights in favour of the organism that  manages it, but still exposed to cyber security risks.
Moreover,  a  new  contractual  documentation  provided  by  financial  institutions  and  disclosure  duty  could  be  necessary  when  consumers  may  simply  not  understand  the  information  on  how  their  data  may  be  used  through  this  new  technology.
Lastly, even though government claims to give priority to the offensive against  cyber criminals, with for example in the UK the recent creation of the National  Cyber  Security  Centre;  regulators  will  probably  face  difficulties  to  implement  those  sanctions.
Further  more,  it  will  be  hard  to  quantify  the  prejudice  and  to  make  an  exact  assessment  of  reputational  damages  and  information losses.
Therefore, financial institution will probably be accountable  towards customers as regard eventual cyber security failures.
Indeed, Cyber  security  issues could be a new area of claim in the future years.
19	   	   Hubert	   de	   Vauplane,	   la	   Blockchain	   et	   la	   loi,	   Alternatives	   économiques	   (14	   février	   2016)	   http://alternatives-­- economiques.fr/blogs/vauplane/	   	    	    8	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	        financial   How  compliance to strengthen cyber resilience    industry  can  step   forward  on   the   issue:   Cyber	   resilience	   as	   a	   competitive	   advantage	   	     	    	     	     The  introduction  of  Blockchain  innovations  in  Financial  institutions  business  model  makes  necessary  to  redefine  the  problem  of  cyber  security  in  those  groups,  as  the  threats  could  be  different  or  new.
Indeed,  with  blockchain  new  information technology systems failures could appear.
Even  though  blockchain  legal  framework  is  not  yet  established  neither  at  the  international or European level, financial institutions could anticipate compliance  challenges in order to strengthen blockchain cyber resilience.
A dedicated cyber  security  road  map  could  be  a  competitive  advantage  for  firms  that  aim  to  integrate blockchain innovations in their business models by creating high entry  barriers with high security standards.
During  10  May  2016  City  Week  Conference,  Will  Brandon  Chief  Information  Security  Officer  of  the  Bank  of  England  had  stressed  some  of  key  priorities  regarding  cyber  security  plan  such  as  “culture  training”,    “leadership  from  the  top (and not just from the IT department)”, to conclude “that will mean, among  other things, clear policies and standards, good management information, and a  sensible approach to compliance”.
Cyber	   compliance	   road	   map	   	     Freshfields Partner Klaus Beucher, who advises multinationals on cyber security  issues,  says  there  is  a  set  of  steps  that  companies  must  take  to  protect  themselves with:      •  Risk assessment: map the data, look at technical infrastructure, to look at  everything  from  IP  protection  to  the  obligation  under  data  privacy  and  employment law   •  Ensure you have effective data governance policies in place  •  Draw up a crisis plan and practise it  •  Finally,  all  should  be  done  in  partnership  with  the  board  in  order  to   determine who is accountable for data security      	     9	     CYBER AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  Cyber compliance to improve resilience towards blockchains disruptor risks	     In  My  2016,  TheCityUK  made  a  study  “Cyber  and  the  City”  with  recommendation to improve financial sector cyber attack resilience20.
According  to  John  McFarlane,  Barclays  Chairman,  a  “systemic  risk”  is  upon  financial  institutions as cyber crime is a real danger.Among the key recommendations of  the “board cyber check-list” were :      •  “The main cyber thrats he firm have been identified and sized  •  “There  is  an  action  plan  to  improve  defence  and  response  to  these   threats”   •  “Data assets are mapped and actions to secure them are clear”  •  “Supplier,  customer,  employee  and  infrastructure  cyber  risks  are  being   managed”   •  “The plan includes independent testing against a recognised framework”  •  “The  risk  appetite  statement  provides  control  of  cyber  concentration   risk”   •  “Insurance has been tested for its cyber coverage and counter-party risk”  •  “Preparations have been made to respond to a successful attack”  •  “Cyber insights are being shared and gained from peers”  •  “Regular  Board  review  material  is  provided  to  confirm  status  on  the   above”             Hence, the methodolgy to strengthen compliance and cyber resilience seems to  be  well  established  and  consensual.
However,  even  if  firms  are  aware  of  the  cyber  threat,  actions  against  it  are  still  in  progress.
Hence  the  so  colled  blockchain business revolution for Financial Institution will need to be developed  through  compliance  framework  in  order  to  broaden  and  redefine  actions  to  avoid new cyber security risks.
20	   « Cyber and the City, Making the UK financial and professional services sector more resilient to cyber  attack » May 2016.