  

CEROW AGENCY, INC.  

CYBERSECURITY 

POLICY 

 
 
 
 
 
 

DATE UPDATED 

07/26/17 

 
 

 

                  

V 

                                                  Template provided by our association:  

  DOCUMENT DEFINITIONS 

”Policy” refers to the Information Security Policy. 

”Agency” refers to Cerow Agency, Inc. 

”Clients” refers to the Agency’s clients, former & prospective clients. 

 ”Information System” means a discrete set of electronic information resources organized for the collection, 
processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination or disposition of electronic information, as well as any 
specialized system such as industrial/process controls systems, telephone switching and private branch 
exchange systems, and environmental control systems. 

”Nonpublic Information” shall mean all electronic information that is not Publicly Available Information and 
is:  

1.  Business related information of a Covered Entity the tampering with which, or unauthorized disclosure, 

access or use of which, would cause a material adverse impact to the business, operations or security of 
the Covered Entity;  

2.  Any information concerning an individual which because of name, number, personal mark, or other 

identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or more of the following data 
elements: (i) social security number, (ii) drivers' license number or non-driver identification card number, 
(iii) account number, credit or debit card number, (iv) any security code, access code or password that 
would permit access to an individual's financial account, or (v) biometric records;  

3.  Any information or data, except age or gender, in any form or medium created by or derived from a health 

care provider or an individual and that relates to (i) the past, present or future physical, mental or 
behavioral health or condition of any individual or a member of the individual's family, (ii) the provision of 
health care to any individual, or (iii) payment for the provision of health care to any individual.  

”Passwords” refers to a string of characters that, when possible, is at least 8 characters long and contains at 
least three of the following: upper case letter, lower case letter, a number, a special character (%, &, #, etc.). 

”Person” means any individual or non-governmental entity, including but not limited to any non-governmental 
partnership, corporation, branch, agency or association. 

”Third Party Servicer Providers” refers to a person that is not an affiliate of the Agency that provides 
services to the Agency and maintains, processes or is otherwise permitted access to Nonpublic Information 
through its provision of services to the Agency. 
 

 

 

 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   2 

  INFORMATION SECURITY 

This Policy for Cerow Agency, Inc. (herein after referred to as “Agency”) is intended to create effective 
administrative, technical, electronic and physical protections to safeguard the personal information of the 
Agency’s Clients and employees, the Agency’s proprietary and confidential information, the physical security of 
our premises, and the integrity of our electronic systems so that they are best positioned to function smoothly 
without interruption.   

This Policy sets forth the Agency’s procedures for electronic and physical methods of accessing, collecting, 
storing, using, transmitting, destroying, and protecting Nonpublic Information of Clients, the Agency and/or 
Agency employees and also the use of the Agency’s Systems by Agency employees and any authorized third 
parties, as deemed appropriate and/or required by applicable laws and regulations. 

In formulating and implementing this Policy, we have:  

1. 

Identified reasonably foreseeable internal and external risks to Agency’s security, confidentiality and/or 
integrity of electronic, paper or other records containing Private Information 

2.  Assessed the likelihood and potential danger of these threats, taking into consideration the sensitivity of 

the Nonpublic Information 

3.  Evaluated the sufficiency of existing Agency policies, procedures, and other safeguards in place to 

minimize those risks 

4.  Designed and implemented an approach that puts safeguards in place to minimize those risks, consistent 

with the requirements of applicable laws/regulations  
Included regular monitoring of the effectiveness of those safeguards 

5. 

All security measures contained in this Policy shall be reviewed and re-evaluated annually or when there is a 
change in applicable laws or regulations or in the business activities of Agency.  The Agency reserves the right to 
modify this Policy at any time, with or without prior notice. 

 

  EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY 

It shall be the responsibility of each Agency employee to carefully read, understand and adhere to this Policy. 
Each employee with access to Nonpublic Information shall receive training as necessary on this Policy. 

 

 

 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   3 

  INFORMATION SECURITY COORDINATOR 

The Agency has designated Catherine Hungerford as the “Information Security Coordinator” to oversee 
implementation of this Policy.  

The Information Security Coordinator will be responsible for: 

Initial implementation and maintaining responsibility for implementation of this Policy; 

1. 
2.  Appropriate testing and evaluation of this Policy’s safeguards; 
3.  Reviewing the security measures in this Policy annually or when there is a change in applicable laws or 

regulations or in business activities of Agency; and 

4.  Conducting training as necessary for all Agency employees with access to Nonpublic Information. 
5. 

Implementing policies and procedures to ensure the security of Information Systems and Nonpublic 
Information that are accessible to, or held by, Third Party Service Providers 

 

  DATA GOVERNANCE & CLASSIFICATION 

SPECIAL PROTECTION FOR NONPUBLIC INFORMATION 

Nonpublic Information is to be accorded the highest level of confidentiality by the Agency and employees.    

Examples of Nonpublic Information include, but are not limited to - first name and last name, or first initial and last 
name, and any one or more of the following: 

1.  Social Security number 
2.  Driver's license number, passport number, or state-issued identification card number  
3.  Financial account number, or credit or debit card number, with or without any required security code, 

access code, personal identification number or password 

4.  Personal or protected health information 
5.  Biometric records 

The information listed in 1-4 above, even if it is not connected with a name, should each be treated as Nonpublic 
Information.  

 

 

 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   4 

WHERE NONPUBLIC INFORMATION IS STORED 

The Agency and its employees recognize that the Agency possesses Nonpublic Information in the following 
places, whether in the Agency’s premises or off site, and whether created or maintained by Agency or third 
parties on behalf of Agency: 

1.  Hard copy and electronic files on Clients and employees, located at desks, in file drawers, storage areas 

and on the Agency’s Systems 

2.  Personnel files, Form I-9s, benefits information, payroll information, and direct deposit information for 

employees wherever located, including but not limited to hard copies at desks, in file drawers and other 
storage areas, and in electronic form on the Agency’s Systems 

3.  Off-site back-ups, in any form 
4.  Third Party Service Providers entrusted with Nonpublic Information from the Agency 

This Policy is intended to protect Nonpublic Information possessed by the Agency from unauthorized access, 
dissemination and/or use.  

Nonpublic Information may not be disseminated, communicated or stored on or through any social media 
websites or services, at any time or for any reason.  

Employees will adhere to the Agency document retention schedule and requirements. When it is appropriate to 
destroy Agency records, paper and electronic records containing Nonpublic Information must be destroyed in a 
manner in which they cannot be read or reconstructed.  

Unless otherwise directed by the Information Security Coordinator, a commercial shredding company will be used 
to destroy paper documents.  When computers, digital copiers, scanners and/or printers with electronic storage 
capacity, or portable electronic devices and media are discarded, such disposal should be coordinated with the 
Information Security Coordinator, and care needs to be taken to ensure that the hard drives or other storage 
media are destroyed in a manner that all data becomes unreadable. 

 

 

  ASSET INVENTORY & DEVICE MANAGEMENT 

1.  Employees should keep mobile electronic communications devices (such as PDAs, smart phones, etc.) 

with access to Nonpublic Information in their possession or in a secured location at all times, and 
Employees will not share passwords or other access information with others. 

2.  Employees will not put any Agency data on thumb drives, laptops or other portable media, drives and 

devices unless authorized by the Agency.  If so authorized, the thumb drives, laptops or other portable 
media, drives and devices should be password-protected and encrypted, and the portable mobile 
electronic communications devices and laptops should be password-protected and encrypted. 

3.  Employees that no longer work for the Agency must:  (1) return to Agency all Agency information 

(including, but not limited to, any Nonpublic Information) in any form, whether stored on computers, 
laptops, portable devices, electronic media, or in files, records, work papers, cloud- or web-based storage, 
etc.; (2) return all keys, IDs, access codes and/or badges; and (3) not access Nonpublic Agency 
information (including, but not limited to, any Private Information).   
In accordance with the Agency’s human resources manual, access by the former employee to Agency 
email and voice mail accounts can be immediately disabled and access transferred to other Agency staff 
to assure a continuity of work, and inactivated when determined appropriate by Agency. 

4. 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   5 

5.  Employees are required to report all actual or potential unauthorized access to, use of or disclosure of 

Nonpublic Information to the Information Security Coordinator. 

  

  ACCESS CONTROLS & IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 

INTERNAL CONTROLS 

1.  Agency computers will require a user ID and password and Agency mobile devices should require a 

password (and be encrypted, if reasonably feasible).  Employee log-ins and passwords should be 
appropriately strong (with the minimum number of characters and other elements required by the 
Agency’s Systems).   

2.  Electronic files containing Nonpublic Information will not be left accessible to others, such as on 

computers or portable storage devices accessible (e.g., computer screens must be locked when an 
employee using such files leaves his or her computer, even briefly).  Paper and electronic files must not 
be removed from the Agency premises or accessed remotely unless specific authorization has been 
provided in advance, and then, the security of that Nonpublic Information must be maintained. 

3.  Employees are expected to log off or lock their computers when they leave them unattended (such as 

when on breaks, at lunch, in a meeting or out of the office).  The Agency will implement controls to 
terminate computer sessions and/or lock computers after a predetermined time of inactivity (e.g., 10 
minutes). 

4.  Employees should not open any email attachment, link, or application where the employee does not 

reasonably believe the information expected to be accessed is from a trustworthy source.  Employees will 
not use Agency equipment to access any application or software not approved by the Agency.  

5.  To combat internal risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic 

Information, the following measures will be taken: 

6.  The Agency will retain only the last four digits of credit card numbers and will not retain bank routing 

numbers, personal bank account numbers and checks, and all credit- and banking-related information not 
retained will be destroyed in accordance with applicable law and Agency-designated business practices.    

EXTERNAL CONTROLS 

In addition to the measures taken to combat internal risks, the following measures will be taken to minimize 
external risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic Information: 

1.  Visitors to the Agency will be escorted within the office and will not have access to Agency computers or 
property that may contain Nonpublic Information.  Guests’ wireless access should be fire-walled off from 
the Agency’s Systems. 

2.  The Agency will maintain security measures so that its wireless networks cannot be accessed remotely by 

the public. 

3.  Servers and other equipment at the Agency’s premises containing Nonpublic Information will be 

maintained in a secure location.  

 

 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   6 

  SYSTEMS & NETWORK SECURITY,  

          OPERATIONS & AVAILABILITY  

1.  The Agency will employ an email filter (hardware, software, or third-party provided) that works to restrict 

and eliminate viruses, spyware and other malware before getting to Agency desktop and portable 
computers.  

2.  The Agency will maintain up-to-date network and firewall protection and operating system security 

patches on its Systems, servers and desktop and laptop computers, as well as other security measures 
deemed appropriate.   

3.  The Agency will maintain security software, which includes malware protection with up-to-date patches 

and virus definitions, on its Systems and its servers, desktop and laptop computers, and all mobile 
devices, which is updated as frequently as possible, but at least daily.  

4.  All back-ups will be password-protected and encrypted and kept in a secured location off site. 
5.  Agency employees should use care in communications (e.g., outgoing email and attachments) to ensure: 
first, that the Nonpublic Information needs to be sent by email and, if so, that it is transmitted using secure 
email in accordance with Agency policy.   

6.  The Agency will create a secure SSL tunnel between its website and the consumer before allowing the 

consumer to enter any Nonpublic Information or to enter a password.   

7.  When an employee accesses Agency Systems and/or Nonpublic Information from a remote location, the 

Agency’s secure SSL connection must be used (such as Virtual Private Network (VPN), GoToMyPC, 
LogMeIn).   

8.  Employees should not access Agency Systems or Nonpublic Information using non-Agency equipment 

(e.g., a home computer) unless authorized by the Agency and provided with appropriate firewalls and 
virus protection, and done through the Agency’s secure SSL connection.  Employees will not store any 
Nonpublic Information on any non-Agency equipment.  

 

 

 

  SYSTEMS & NETWORK MONITORING 

1.  The Agency will monitor its Systems and equipment for any act or attempt, successful or unsuccessful, to 

gain unauthorized access to, disrupt or misuse an Information System or information stored on such 
Information System, including but not limited to implementing hardware, software and/or procedural 
mechanisms to record and report activity for the Systems and equipment. 

2.  The Agency will exercise due diligence in making sure third-party service providers that are provided 

Nonpublic Information have the requisite security controls and written policy in place, provide the Agency 
a written commitment to safeguard and store Nonpublic Information with at least the same level of 
security controls as the Agency maintains (as outlined in this Policy), and advise the Agency as to any 
actual, suspected or potential breaches of Private Information.   

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   7 

  BUSINESS CONTINUITY & DISASTER RECOVERY 

IF A BREACH OF NONPUBLIC INFORMATION (CYBERSECURITY EVENT) OCCURS OR IS SUSPECTED 

A security breach occurs when there is an unauthorized acquisition, dissemination, use or loss of Nonpublic 
Information.  Each employee shall be responsible for notifying the Information Security Coordinator whenever he 
or she learns that there has been or may have been a security breach that may have compromised Nonpublic 
Information or other Agency information about Clients, employees or Agency business.   

The Agency will take the following actions in the event of a security breach: 

a.  assess the security breach 
b.  consult counsel 
c. 
d.  notify the carriers whose policyholders insured through the Agency may have been affected by 

review the requirements of the applicable state laws and regulations  

the event 

e.  notify the carrier for the Agency’s cybersecurity coverage 
f.  notify individuals, regulatory and law enforcement authorities (if and as required and further as 

deemed appropriate by Agency management) 
take and document corrective actions to contain and control the problem   
identify who will address any media inquiries  

g. 
h. 
i.  draft the content of all communications regarding the event for potentially affected individuals and, 

if appropriate, the public   

 

 

 

 Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   8 

