Information 
Technology 
Cyber 
Security 
Policy 

(Insert Name of 
Organization) 

(Insert Date) 

 
 
 

 

SAMPLE 

TEMPLATE 

Organizations are encouraged to 
develop  their  own  policy  and 
procedures  from  the  information 
enclosed.    Please  feel  free  to 
change  any  portion  of 
this 
document  to  meet  your  specific 
needs. 
 
The  information  provided  is  just 
one  example  and  should  not 
preclude  any  organization  from 
other sources. 

(NAME OF ORGANIZATION HERE) 

POLICY MANUAL 

CYBER SECURITY POLICY 

(Signature Line) 

 

Effective Date: (Insert Date) 

 
Subject: 
 
Approved:  
 

1  DEFINITION 
The use of the term “company” is in reverence to the following organization: (Insert 
Organization Name). 

INTRODUCTION 

2 
This Cyber Security Policy is a formal set of rules by which those people who are given access to 
company technology and information assets must abide.   
 
The Cyber Security Policy serves several purposes. The main purpose is to inform company 
users: employees, contractors and other authorized users of their obligatory requirements for 
protecting the technology and information assets of the company.  The Cyber Security Policy 
describes the technology and information assets that we must protect and identifies many of 
the threats to those assets. 
 
The Cyber Security Policy also describes the user’s responsibilities and privileges. What is 
considered acceptable use? What are the rules regarding Internet access? The policy answers 
these questions, describes user limitations and informs users there will be penalties for 
violation of the policy. This document also contains procedures for responding to incidents that 
threaten the security of the company computer systems and network. 

3  WHAT ARE WE PROTECTING 
It is the obligation of all users of the company systems to protect the technology and 
information assets of the company.  This information must be protected from unauthorized 
access, theft and destruction. The technology and information assets of the company are made 
up of the following components: 
 

  Computer hardware, CPU, disc, Email, web, application servers, PC systems, application 

software, system software, etc. 

  System Software including: operating systems, database management systems, and 

backup and restore software, communications protocols, and so forth. 

  Application Software: used by the various departments within the company.  This 

includes custom written software applications, and commercial off the shelf software 
packages. 

Version Date 
 

Page 1 

  Communications Network hardware and software including: routers, routing tables, 

hubs, modems, multiplexers, switches, firewalls, private lines, and associated network 
management software and tools. 

 

3.1  Classification of Information 
User information found in computer system files and databases shall be classified as either 
confidential or non-confidential. The company shall classify the information controlled by them. 
The (company designee) is required to review and approve the classification of the information 
and determine the appropriate level of security to best protect it. Furthermore, the (company 
designee) shall classify information controlled by units not administered by a (company 
designee). 
 

3.2  Classification of Computer Systems 
 
Security Level 
RED 

Description 
This system contains confidential 
information – information that 
cannot be revealed to personnel 
outside of the company.  Even 
within the company, access to this 
information is provided on a “need 
to know” basis. 

Example 
Server containing confidential data 
and other department information 
on databases.  Network routers and 
firewalls containing confidential 
routing tables and security 
information. 

 

The system provides mission-critical 
services vital to the operation of the 
business.  Failure of this system may 
have life threatening consequences 
and/or an adverse financial impact 
on the business of the company. 
This system does not contain 
confidential information or perform 
critical services, but it provides the 
ability to access RED systems 
through the network. 
This system is not externally 
accessible. It is on an isolated LAN 
segment, unable to access RED or 
GREEN systems.  It does not contain 
sensitive information or perform 
critical services. 
This system is externally accessible.  
It is isolated from RED or GREEN 
systems by a firewall.  While it 
performs important services, it does 
not contain confidential 
information. 

 

User department PCs used to access 
Server and application(s).  
Management workstations used by 
systems and network 
administrators. 
A test system used by system 
designers and programmers to 
develop new computer systems. 

A public Web server with non-
sensitive information. 

Page 2 

GREEN 

WHITE 

BLACK 

 
 

Version Date 
 

3.3  Local Area Network (LAN) Classifications 
A LAN will be classified by the systems directly connected to it. For example, if a LAN contains 
just one RED system and all network users will be subject to the same restrictions as RED 
systems users. A LAN will assume the Security Classification of the highest level systems 
attached to it. 

4  DEFINITIONS 
 
Externally accessible to public.  The system may be accessed via the Internet by persons 
outside of the company without a logon id or password. The system may be accessed via dial-
up connection without providing a logon id or password. It is possible to “ping” the system from 
the Internet. The system may or may not be behind a firewall. A public Web Server is an 
example of this type of system. 
 
Non-Public, Externally accessible.  Users of the system must have a valid logon id and 
password. The system must have at least one level of firewall protection between its network 
and the Internet. The system may be accessed via the Internet or the private Intranet. A private 
FTP server used to exchange files with business partners is an example of this type of system. 
 
Internally accessible only.  Users of the system must have a valid logon id and password. The 
system must have at least two levels of firewall protection between its network and the 
Internet. The system is not visible to Internet users. It may have a private Internet (non-
translated) address and it does not respond to a “ping” from the Internet. A private intranet 
Web Server is an example of this type of system. 
 
Chief Information Officer.  The Director of the Department of Information Technology (IT) shall 
serve as the Chief Information Officer. 
 
Security Administrator.  An employee of IT shall be designated as the Security Administrator for 
the company. 
 
5  Threats to Security 
 
5.1  Employees 
One of the biggest security threats is employees.  They may do damage to your systems either 
through incompetence or on purpose.  You have to layer your security to compensate for that 
as well.  You mitigate this by doing the following. 
 

  Only give out appropriate rights to systems. Limit access to only business hours.   
  Don’t share accounts to access systems.  Never share your login information with co-

workers. 

  When employees are separated or disciplined, you remove or limit access to systems. 
  Advanced – Keep detailed system logs on all computer activity. 
  Physically secure computer assets, so that only staff with appropriate need can access. 

Version Date 
 

Page 3 

 
5.2  Amateur Hackers and Vandals.  
These people are the most common type of attackers on the Internet.  The probability of attack 
is extremely high and there is also likely to be a large number of attacks. These are usually 
crimes of opportunity.  These amateur hackers are scanning the Internet and looking for well 
known security holes that have not been plugged.  Web servers and electronic mail are their 
favorite targets.  Once they find a weakness they will exploit it to plant viruses, Trojan horses, 
or use the resources of your system for their own means.  If they do not find an obvious 
weakness they are likely to move on to an easier target.  

5.3  Criminal Hackers and Saboteurs. 
The probability of this type of attack is low, but not entirely unlikely given the amount of 
sensitive information contained in databases.  The skill of these attackers is medium to high as 
they are likely to be trained in the use of the latest hacker tools.  The attacks are well planned 
and are based on any weaknesses discovered that will allow a foothold into the network. 

6  User Responsibilities 
This section establishes usage policy for the computer systems, networks and information 
resources of the office.  It pertains to all employees and contractors who use the computer 
systems, networks, and information resources as business partners, and individuals who are 
granted access to the network for the business purposes of the company. 

6.1  Acceptable Use 
User accounts on company computer systems are to be used only for business of the company 
and not to be used for personal activities.  Unauthorized use of the system may be in violation 
of the law, constitutes theft and can be punishable by law.  Therefore, unauthorized use of the 
company computing system and facilities may constitute grounds for either civil or criminal 
prosecution. 
 
Users are personally responsible for protecting all confidential information used and/or stored 
on their accounts.  This includes their logon IDs and passwords. Furthermore they are 
prohibited from making unauthorized copies of such confidential information and/or 
distributing it to unauthorized persons outside of the company. 
 
Users shall not purposely engage in activity with the intent to: harass other users; degrade the 
performance of the system; divert system resources to their own use; or gain access to 
company systems for which they do not have authorization.  
 
Users shall not attach unauthorized devices on their PCs or workstations, unless they have 
received specific authorization from the employees’ manager and/or the company IT designee. 
Users shall not download unauthorized software from the Internet onto their PCs or 
workstations. 
 
Users are required to report any weaknesses in the company computer security, any incidents 
of misuse or violation of this policy to their immediate supervisor. 

Version Date 
 

Page 4 

6.2  Use of the Internet 
The company will provide Internet access to employees and contractors who are connected to 
the internal network and who has a business need for this access.  Employees and contractors 
must obtain permission from their supervisor and file a request with the Security Administrator. 
 
The Internet is a business tool for the company.  It is to be used for business-related purposes 
such as: communicating via electronic mail with suppliers and business partners, obtaining 
useful business information and relevant technical and business topics.   
 
The Internet service may not be used for transmitting, retrieving or storing any communications 
of a discriminatory or harassing nature or which are derogatory to any individual or group, 
obscene or pornographic, or defamatory or threatening in nature for “chain letters” or any 
other purpose which is illegal or for personal gain. 

6.3  User Classification 
All users are expected to have knowledge of these security policies and are required to report 
violations to the Security Administrator.  Furthermore, all users must conform to the 
Acceptable Use Policy defined in this document. The company has established the following 
user groups and defined the access privileges and responsibilities: 
 
 
User Category 
Department Users (Employees) 

System Administrators 

Security Administrator 

Systems Analyst/Programmer 

Contractors/Consultants 

Privileges & Responsibilities 
Access to application and databases as 
required for job function. (RED and/or GREEN 
cleared) 
Access to computer systems, routers, hubs, 
and other infrastructure technology required 
for job function. Access to confidential 
information on a “need to know” basis only. 
Highest level of security clearance. Allowed 
access to all computer systems, databases, 
firewalls, and network devices as required for 
job function. 
Access to applications and databases as 
required for specific job function.  Not 
authorized to access routers, firewalls, or 
other network devices. 
Access to applications and databases as 
required for specific job functions. Access to 
routers and firewall only if required for job 
function. Knowledge of security policies. 
Access to company information and systems 
must be approved in writing by the company 
director/CEO. 
 

Version Date 
 

Page 5 

Other Agencies and Business Partners 

General Public 

Access allowed to selected applications only 
when contract or inter-agency access 
agreement is in place or required by 
applicable laws. 
Access is limited to applications running on 
public Web servers. The general public will not 
be allowed to access confidential information. 

6.4  Monitoring Use of Computer Systems 
The company has the right and capability to monitor electronic information created and/or 
communicated by persons using company computer systems and networks, including e-mail 
messages and usage of the Internet.  It is not the company policy or intent to continuously 
monitor all computer usage by employees or other users of the company computer systems 
and network.  However, users of the systems should be aware that the company may monitor 
usage, including, but not limited to, patterns of usage of the Internet (e.g. site accessed, on-line 
length, time of day access), and employees’ electronic files and messages to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the Internet and other electronic communications are being used in 
compliance with the law and with company policy. 

7  Access Control 
A fundamental component of our Cyber Security Policy is controlling access to the critical 
information resources that require protection from unauthorized disclosure or modification.  
The fundamental meaning of access control is that permissions are assigned to individuals or 
systems that are authorized to access specific resources.  Access controls exist at various layers 
of the system, including the network.  Access control is implemented by logon ID and password.  
At the application and database level, other access control methods can be implemented to 
further restrict access.  The application and database systems can limit the number of 
applications and databases available to users based on their job requirements. 

7.1  User System and Network Access – Normal User Identification 
All users will be required to have a unique logon ID and password for access to systems.  The 
user’s password should be kept confidential and MUST NOT be shared with management & 
supervisory personnel and/or any other employee whatsoever. All users must comply with the 
following rules regarding the creation and maintenance of passwords: 
 

  Password must not be found in any English or foreign dictionary.  That is, do not use any 

common name, noun, verb, adverb, or adjective.  These can be easily cracked using 
standard “hacker tools”. 

  Passwords should not be posted on or near computer terminals or otherwise be readily 

accessible in the area of the terminal. 

  Password must be changed every (# of days).   
  User accounts will be frozen after (# of days) failed logon attempts. 
  Logon IDs and passwords will be suspended after (# of days) days without use.  

 

Version Date 
 

Page 6 

Users are not allowed to access password files on any network infrastructure component. 
Password files on servers will be monitored for access by unauthorized users.  Copying, reading, 
deleting or modifying a password file on any computer system is prohibited. 
 
Users will not be allowed to logon as a System Administrator. Users who need this level of 
access to production systems must request a Special Access account as outlined elsewhere in 
this document. 
 
Employee Logon IDs and passwords will be deactivated as soon as possible if the employee is 
terminated, fired, suspended, placed on leave, or otherwise leaves the employment of the 
company office. 
 
Supervisors / Managers shall immediately and directly contact the company IT Manager to 
report change in employee status that requires terminating or modifying employee logon 
access privileges. 
 
Employees who forget their password must call the IT department to get a new password 
assigned to their account.  The employee must identify himself/herself by (e.g. employee 
number) to the IT department. 
 
Employees will be responsible for all transactions occurring during Logon sessions initiated by 
use of the employee’s password and ID.  Employees shall not logon to a computer and then 
allow another individual to use the computer or otherwise share access to the computer 
systems. 

7.2  System Administrator Access 
System Administrators, network administrators, and security administrators will have (type of 
access) access to host systems, routers, hubs, and firewalls as required to fulfill the duties of 
their job. 
 
All system administrator passwords will be DELETED immediately after any employee who has 
access to such passwords is terminated, fired, or otherwise leaves the employment of the 
company. 

7.3  Special Access 
Special access accounts are provided to individuals requiring temporary system administrator 
privileges in order to perform their job.  These accounts are monitored by the company and 
require the permission of the user’s company IT Manager.  Monitoring of the special access 
accounts is done by entering the users into a specific area and periodically generating reports 
to management.  The reports will show who currently has a special access account, for what 
reason, and when it will expire.  Special accounts will expire in (X # of) days and will not be 
automatically renewed without written permission. 

Version Date 
 

Page 7 

7.4  Connecting to Third-Party Networks 
This policy is established to ensure a secure method of connectivity provided between the 
company and all third-part companies and other entities required to electronically exchange 
information with company. 
 
“Third-party” refers to vendors, consultants and business partners doing business with 
company, and other partners that have a need to exchange information with the company.  
Third-party network connections are to be used only by the employees of the third-party, only 
for the business purposes of the company.  The third-party company will ensure that only 
authorized users will be allowed to access information on the company network.  The third-
party will not allow Internet traffic or other private network traffic to flow into the network.  A 
third-party network connection is defined as one of the following connectivity options: 
 

  A network connection will terminate on a (to be specified) and the third-party will be 

subject to standard company authentication rules. 
 

This policy applies to all third-party connection requests and any existing third-party 
connections.  In cases where the existing third-party network connections do not meet the 
requirements outlined in this document, they will be re-designed as needed. 
 
All requests for third-party connections must be made by submitting a written request and be 
approved by the company. 

7.5  Connecting Devices to the Network 
Only authorized devices may be connected to the company network(s).  Authorized devices 
include PCs and workstations owned by company that comply with the configuration guidelines 
of the company.  Other authorized devices include network infrastructure devices used for 
network management and monitoring. 
 
Users shall not attach to the network: non-company computers that are not authorized, owned 
and/or controlled by company.  Users are specifically prohibited from attaching (specify) to the 
company network.  
 
NOTE: Users are not authorized to attach any device that would alter the topology 
characteristics of the Network or any unauthorized storage devices, e.g. thumb drives and 
writable CD’s. 

7.6  Remote Access 
Only authorized persons may remotely access the company network. Remote access is provided 
to those employees, contractors and business partners of the company that have a legitimate 
business need to exchange information, copy files or programs, or access computer 
applications.  Authorized connection can be remote PC to the network or a remote network to 
company network connection.  The only acceptable method of remotely connecting into the 
internal network is using a secure ID. 

Version Date 
 

Page 8 

7.7  Unauthorized Remote Access 
The attachment of (e.g. hubs) to a user’s PC or workstation that is connected to the company 
LAN is not allowed without the written permission of the company. Additionally, users may not 
install personal software designed to provide remote control of the PC or workstation. This type 
of remote access bypasses the authorized highly secure methods of remote access and poses a 
threat to the security of the entire network. 

8  Penalty for Security Violation 
The company takes the issue of security seriously.  Those people who use the technology and 
information resources of company must be aware that they can be disciplined if they violate 
this policy.  Upon violation of this policy, an employee of company may be subject to 
discipline up to and including discharge.  The specific discipline imposed will be determined by 
a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the nature and severity of the violation of the 
Cyber Security Policy, prior violations of the policy committed by the individual, state and 
federal laws and all other relevant information.  Discipline which may be taken against an 
employee shall be administrated in accordance with any appropriate rules or policies and the 
company Policy Manual. 
 
In a case where the accused person is not an employee of company the matter shall be 
submitted to the (company designee).  The (company designee) may refer the information to 
law enforcement agencies and/or prosecutors for consideration as to whether criminal charges 
should be filed against the alleged violator(s). 

9  Security Incident Handling Procedures 
This section provides some policy guidelines and procedures for handling security incidents.  
The term “security incident” is defined as any irregular or adverse event that threatens the 
security, integrity, or availability of the information resources on any part of the company 
network.  Some examples of security incidents are: 

 

Illegal access of a company computer system.  For example, a hacker logs onto a 
production server and copies the password file. 

  Damage to a company computer system or network caused by illegal access.  Releasing 

a virus or worm would be an example. 

  Denial of service attack against a company web server.  For example, a hacker initiates a 

flood of packets against a Web server designed to cause the system to crash. 

  Malicious use of system resources to launch an attack against other computer outside of 

the company network.  For example, the system administrator notices a connection to 
an unknown network and a strange process accumulating a lot of server time. 

Employees, who believe their terminal or computer systems have been subjected to a security 
incident, or has otherwise been improperly accessed or used, should report the situation to 
their (company designee) immediately.  The employee shall not turn off the computer or delete 
suspicious files.  Leaving the computer in the condition it was in when the security incident was 
discovered will assist in identifying the source of the problem and in determining the steps that 
should be taken to remedy the problem. 

Version Date 
 

Page 9 

