A  Crazy  Cyber  World:  Construction  of  a  Composite  Index  for  Measuring 
Child Online Protection (COP) 

Ada S. Peter, PhD ada_peter@biari.brown.edu;  ada.peter@covenantuniversity.edu.ng;  
Tolu Kayode-Adedeji kehinde.kayode-adedeji@covenantuniversity.edu.ng; 
tolulopekayodeadedeji@gmail.com   
 
Covenant University, Ota Ogun State Nigeria 
Word count: 5070 
Presented at the 66th International Communication Association Conference (ICA), Fukuoka Japan, 
2016. 
 
 

Abstract 

On  17th  November  2010,  the  international  telecommunications  union  (ITU)  launched  a  new 
Child Online Protection (COP) phase.  Years after setting up these guidelines, it is important to 
develop a composite measure that provides an intuitive understanding of the gaps in child online 
protection  system,  creates  cross  national  comparisons  for  advocacy  and  action.  The  enquiry 
proposes an objective assessment of where each country stands in child online protection across 
four  critical  priority  areas.  These  areas  include:  nationally  recognized  child  online  protection 
strategy/ legislations; Collaboration, cooperation and partnerships; information sharing/reporting 
mechanism; and capacity building/institutional support. The four areas are reflected in the Child 
Online Protection Index (COPI) structure which comprises four sub-indexes. Each sub index is 
in turn measured by five categorical indicators. The indicators are derived or adapted from key 
institutions active in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child 
online safety issues. 

 

Introduction 

The International Telecommunications Union (ITU), a lead facilitator for World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS) action line C5 for assisting stakeholders in building confidence and 
security  in  the  use  of  ICTs  at  national,  regional  and  international  levels,  and  a  team  of 
contributing authors from institutions active in the information and communications technologies 
(ICT)  sector  and  in  child  online  safety  issues  (including  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition  on 
Internet  Safety  (CHIS),  Child Helpline  International  (CHI),  International Centre  for Missing  & 
Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice 
Research Institute (UNICRI), prepared action guidelines for key actors in child online protection 
(ITU, 2009).  

By the 17th November 2010, the ITU launched a new Child Online Protection (COP) phase.  The 
new phase aimed to encourage the development of national COP centers, awareness campaigns 
and community forums to create a safe environment for young users of the Internet. The launch 
of COP initiative is not unlikely related to the addictive use of the internet even among children. 
As at 2009, over 60 percent of children and  young people at least use chat rooms daily and 75 
percent of these children online are willing to share personal information about themselves and 
their family in exchange for goods and services. Statistically, 20 percent of these children have 
been identified to be targets of predators each year (ITU, 2009). 

Over half a decade after setting up such guidelines, it is pertinent to measure the performance of 
member states based on their subscribed obligations to protect and realize the rights of children 
online  as  laid  out  in  the  UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child,  adopted  by  UN  General 
Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20 
November  1989  and  the  World  Summit  on  Information 
Society (WSIS).  

However,  to  the  best  of  the  researchers’  knowledge,  there  is  no  existing  composite  indicator 
exclusively measuring the performance of member states on the seven critical constructs of child 
online protection. A child online protection (COP) composite index is crucial because it provides 
an evidence-based approach to policy debates on child online protection, provides an instrument 
that  directly and promptly identifies  needs and gaps in child protection systems and  creates a 
tool for cross-national  comparisons for advocacy,  funding purposes and illustration of complex 
and  sometimes  elusive  issues  surrounding  child  online  protection..  Composite  indicators  (CIs) 
which  compare  country  performance  are  increasingly  recognized  as  a  useful  tool  in  policy 
analysis and public communication. 

Thus the objective of this study is to construct a composite measure which provides an intuitive 
understanding of the gaps in child online protection system, creates cross national comparisons 
for  advocacy  and  action  and  explores,  clarifies  and  summarizes  in  a  simple  manner,  the 
complexities and multi-dimensional issues surrounding the child online protection. This makes it 
possible  for  global  and  local  stakeholders  to  get  a  tractable  and  representative  sense  of  the 
prevailing situation of child online protection in a given country as it stands in comparison with 
others.  More  so,  converting  child  online  protection  from  being  largely  a  catchphrase  to  a 
measurable  term,  can  spur  fruitful  process  of  dialogue  over  policy  development  and  policy 
implementation.  In  the  long-term,  the  commitment  to  regularly  produce  and  update  the 
quantitative  ratings  of  various  countries  based  on  child  online  protection  may  facilitate 
communication with ordinary citizens including stakeholders in countries with both high and low 
internet penetration.  

 

 
Conceptual Framework 

The  adoption  of  the  Rio  de  Janeiro  Declaration/Call  for  Action  to  Prevent  and  Stop  Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and  Adolescents at the 3rd World  Congress 
Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and  Adolescents, 
in  November,  2008  is  partly  an  evidence  of  the 
global  recognition  of  the  critical  importance  of  child  online  protection  in  the  era  of  massively-
available  broadband  Internet.  The  Rio  de  Janeiro  Declaration  and  other  considerable  body  of 
international  laws  and  instruments  including  the  UN  convention  on  the  rights  of  the  child, 
mandates global action to protect children both generally, and also specifically in relation to the 
internet.  

against 

the 

While  specific  approaches  to  child  protection  vary  by  jurisdiction,  efforts  to  date  to  protect 
children  online  have  focused  on  four  key  actors  namely  Government/Policymakers,  Industry, 
Parents/Guardians/ Educators and Children.  For instance, specific guidelines were prepared for 
these  four  key  actors  by  the  International  Telecommunications  Union  (ITU)  and  a  team  of 
contributing  authors  from  leading  institutions  active  in  the  information  and  communications 
technologies  (ICT)  sector  and  in  child  online  safety  issues  such  as  Children’s  Charities’ 
Coalition on Internet Safety (CHIS), Child Helpline International (CHI), International Centre for 
Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and 
Justice Research Institute (UNICRI).  

The  four  key  actors  were  framed  in  the  following  ways.  Government  actors  refers  to  national 
governments and policy making institution that are member states with subscribed obligations to 
protect and realize the rights of children as laid out in the UN Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, adopted by UN General Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20  November  1989  and 
the 
World  Summit  on  Information  Society  (WSIS).  The  industry  captures  companies  that  are 
developing or providing new technology products and services.  Parents, guardians and educators 
captures  all  individuals  in  these  category  including  organizations  such  as  schools,  public 
libraries, health centers, shopping malls and major retail centers since they all provide accessible 
venues for the presentation of safety information.  

The guidelines developed for these key actors address issues facing all persons under the age of 
18 in all parts of the world since the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child defines a child as 
being any person under the age of 18. The UN convention on the rights of the child also applies 
to  every  child  without  discrimination,  whatever  their  ethnicity,  gender,  religion,  language, 
abilities or any other status and places key importance on parents, caregivers, governments and 
service providers 

Hence  the  COPI  framework  is  based  the  UNHR  Optional  Protocol  to  the  Conventions  of  the 
Rights  of  the  Child,  the  Child  Pact  Coalition  for  Child  Protection,  the  ITU  National 
Cybersecurity  Strategy  Guide  Framework/Country  Profiles  and    the  Child  Online  Protection 
(COP) guideline for key actors prepared by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) 
and institutions active in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in 
child  online  safety  issues  such  as  Children’s  Charities’  Coalition  on  Internet  Safety  (CHIS), 

Child  Helpline  International  (CHI),  International  Centre  for  Missing  &  Exploited  Children 
(ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice  Research  Institute 
(UNICRI). 

 From  the  existing  framework,  the  study  identified  seven  critical  pillars  necessary  for  the 
protection of the child online and enabling the safeties of the child. These critical pillars include 
declaration of a national child online protection strategy and policies, availability of information 
sharing  and  reporting  mechanism  between  actors,  availability  of  technical  tools  for  children  to 
stay safer, public education/awareness and capacity building on child abusive materials.  

National  strategy  for  COP:  The  national  child  online  protection  strategy  describes  the  the 
possession, production and distribution of  child abuse materials (CAM) in each of the countries 
understudy  and  outlines  the necessary steps, programs, initiatives and  other strategic plans  that 
must  be  implemented  to  address  the  the  demand  for  CAM.  Ideally,  it  captures  outlawing 
“grooming”  or  other  forms  of  remote  enticement  of  legal  minors  into  inappropriate  sexual 
contact  or  sexual  activity;  outlawing  the  possession,  production  and  distribution  of  CAM, 
irrespective  of  the  intent  to  distribute;  taking  additional  steps to  disrupt  or  reduce  the  traffic  in 
CAM,  for  example  by  establishing  a  national  hotline  and  by  deploying  measures  which  will 
block access to web sites and Usenet Newsgroups known to contain or advertise the availability 
of CAM. An actionable national child online protection strategy recognizes the need to commit 
limited  resources  (e.g.,  political  will,  money,  time,  and  people)  as  well  as  providing  long  term 
support for victims. 

Information sharing and reporting mechanism 

Information  sharing  enables  the  exchange  of  actionable  intelligence/information  between 
government and all key actors. Individual nations are expected to employ cross-sector and cross- 
stakeholder  coordination  mechanisms  to  address  critical  interdependencies,  including  incident 
situational awareness and cross- sector and cross-stakeholder incident management. Ideally each 
nation should have a strong in rapid assistance mechanisms such as a  “Notice and Takedown” 
regime which allows ISPs, ESPs, domain registrars and web hosts to close an offending site or 
cancel an email account upon request 

 Legislations, regulations and policies 

This concept captures the existence of specific legislations that criminalize CAM which includes 
offences  specific  to  the  use  of  technology  and  the  Internet  as  it  relates  to  CAM.  Ideally  the 
legislations  should  also  make  provisions  in  the  law  for  a  greater  commitment  of  resources  in 
order to enforce these specific laws and for  training 
law 
enforcement officials who will invariably be challenged to keep up with the use of technology by 
offenders. The adopted legislations should clearly and precisely define a child and CAM; create 
criminal  offences  and  penalties  for  CAM  possession,  manufacture,  distribution  and/or 
accomplices of same. 

judicial,  prosecutorial  and 

for 

Collaborations,  cooperation,  and  partnerships:  This  refers  to  officially  recognized  local  and 
international public and private sector partnerships; inter alia, information exchange, creation of 
knowledge, sharing of best practices, assistance in developing multi-stakeholder  and provisions 
of bilateral mutual legal assistance treaties or multilateral conventions. 

Technical Measures and Standards: This captures access to technical tools for children to stay 
safer E.g. child safety soft wares, age verification, filtering programs, parental control tools, age-
differentiated  experiences  with  password-protected  content,  block/allow  lists,  purchase/time 
controls, opt-out functions, filtering and moderating. 

Public education and Awareness: this pillar captures evidence of established Public Education 
and  Awareness  Activities  by  government  and  industry,  existence  and  publication  of  codes  of 
good  practice  for  all  relevant  stakeholders,  evidence  of  customer  education  on  how  to  manage 
concerns relating to internet. 

 

Method of computation and structure of the Child Online Protection Index 
(COPI) 

In  accordance  with  previous  work  in  the  field  of  child  online  protection,  the  Child  Online 
Protection  Index  (COPI)  is  essentially  a  composite  indicator,  aggregating  39  indicators  within 
seven  sub-indexes  for  an  objective  assessment  of  where  each  country  stands  in  child  online 
protection across seven critical priority areas.  

To  construct  the  sub-index,  the  study  simply  adapts  elements  that  appear  at  least  in  two  of  all 
four  ITU  COP  initiatives  and  guidelines  for  key  actors  and  in  at  least  two  of  the  following 
frameworks:  ITU’s  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  Guide  Framework/Country  Profiles,  the 
UNHR Optional Protocol to the Conventions of the Rights of the Child the Child Pact Coalition 
for Child Protection, the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children (ICMEC) annual 
reports  on  “Child  Pornography:  Model  Legislation  &  Global  Review,  Children’s  Charities’ 
Coalition on Internet Safety (CHIS), Child Helpline International (CHI), International Centre for 
Missing  &  Exploited  Children  (ICMEC),  Interpol  and  United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and 
Justice Research Institute (UNICRI).  

Then  the  indicators  were  derived  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  relevance  of  each  indicator  to 
contributing to the main objectives/framework of each sub-index and data availability/quality.  

Accordingly,  COPI  implements  an  objective  assessment  of  where  each  country  stands  in  child 
online  protection  across  four  critical  priority  actors  and  seven  pillars.  The  actors  include 
government/ policy makers, industry, parents/guardian/ educators and children while the pillars 
include  nationally  recognized  child  online  protection  strategy;  legislations,  policies  and 
regulations;  collaboration,  cooperation  and  partnerships;  technical  measures;  information 

sharing/reporting  mechanism;  public  education  and  awareness;  capacity  building/  institutional 
support,.  These  seven  pillars  are  reflected  in  the  COPI  structure  which  comprises  seven  sub-
indexes measured by 39 categorical indicators. See table 1 for detailed description. 

For the purpose of collecting data, the COPI uses the multiple questioning approach  which are 
categorical  only  at  the  indicator  level.    For  instance,  to  objectively  explore  and  assess  where  a 
country stands in child online protection across the seven areas the seven areas are converted to 
the following questions (referred to as sub index). 

a.  Is there a well-articulated and operational national child online protection strategy? 
b.  What is the nature of legislative provisions for COP in each country 
c.  What technical measures and standards exist in the country? 
d.  Has  the  country  ratified  or  acceded  to  cooperation,  collaborations,  international  treaties 

and or multilateral conventions to combat child abusive materials (CAM)? 

e.  Is  there  an  information  sharing  and  reporting  mechanisms  between  the  government  and 

industry? 

f.  What  are the established  capacity building,  public education and awareness  activities to 

protect children from CAM? 

Afterwards,  each  of  the  above  sub-index  are  examined  in  details  by  transforming  the 
individual indicators to questions like the examples below 

a.  Existence of a national strategy for child online protection the sub-index is measured 

with the following  items: 

1.  Is there an officially recognized national child online safety strategy that captures multi-
stakeholders  interest  and  identifies  the  need  to  commit  limited  resources  (e.g.,  political 
will, money, time, and people)? 

2.   Is the Strategy operational? Have commercial-sector entities affected by and responsible 

for implementation of the plan been identified? 

3.  Does  the  COP  strategy  include  law  enforcement  crime  prevention  strategies,  school-
based and social programs, and awareness strategies especially on the criminality of the 
production, possession or distribution of CAM? 

4.  Does the COP strategy include long term support for victims? 
5.  Is a percentage of the national GDP dedicated to child online protection? 
6.  Is there an officially  recognized agency  responsible for implementing the national  COP 

strategy, roadmap and policy? 

7.  Are  there  officially  and  nationally  recognized24  hours/7  days  a  week)  national  hotlines 

and reporting requirements?  

8.  Is  there  a  nationally  recognized  outlaw  on  “grooming”  or  other  forms  of  remote 

enticement of legal minors into inappropriate sexual contact or sexual activity? 

 

b.  Legislations,  Policies  and  regulations:  The  following  questions  explore  the  area  in 

greater detail.   

1.  Is  there  an  existing  comprehensive  national  legal  framework  focusing  on  Online  Child 

Protection and signed into law by a president? 

 

2.  Does the existing legislation criminalize CAM? 
3.  Does  the  existing  legislation  make  provisions  in  the  law  for  a  greater  commitment  of 
resources  to  enforce  specific  COP  laws  and  train  judicial,  prosecutorial  and  law 
enforcement officials? 

4.  Does the existing legislation clearly define a ‘child’ and CAM? 
5.  Does the existing legislation create criminal offences and penalties for CAM possession, 

manufacture, distribution and/or accomplices of same? 

6.  Is there a well-established mutatis mutandi (body of laws which makes it clear that any 
and  every  crime  that  can  be  committed  against  a  child  in  the  real  world  can  also  be 
committed on the Internet or on any other electronic network? 

7.  Is there a well-articulated local  and cultural online data protection and privacy rules for 

legal minors? 

8.  Are there evidences of corresponding laws to treaty agreements with other countries?  

 

c.  Collaborations,  cooperation  and    partnerships:  The    following  items  examine  this 

concept 
1.  Is  there  an  evidence  of  commitments  to  bilateral  mutual  legal  assistance  treaties  or 

multilateral conventions? 

2.  Are there evidences of existence of a cross-sector and cross- stakeholder coordination 

mechanisms to address critical interdependencies on child online protection? 

3.  Are  there  evidences  of  existing  collaborations  between  government,  industry  and 
educators  to  build  parents’  abilities  to  support  and  speak  with  their  children  about 
being responsible digital citizens and ICT users? 

4.  Are there officially recognized public and private sector partnerships? 

 

d.  Information sharing and reporting mechanisms: The following questions explore the 

sub-index in greater detail.   

1.  Are  there  mechanisms  (reporting  schema,  technology,  etc.)  for  cross-sector  incident- 

information sharing, both operational (near-real-time) and forensic (post-facto)? 

2.  Is there a “Notice and Takedown” regime that allows ISPs, ESPs, domain  registrars and 

web hosts to close an offending site or cancel an email account upon request? 

3.  Is there established and widely promoted means for reporting illegal content found on the 

Internet e.g. a national hotline? 

4.  Are there reporting mechanisms for online predatory behaviour (OPB)? 

 
 

e.  Technical  measures  and  standards:  This  sub-index  is  explored  in  greater  detail  by 

addressing the following  questions: 

1.  An  existing  access  to  technical  tools  for  children  to  stay  safer?  E.g.  child  safety  soft 
wares,  age  verification,  filtering  programs,  parental  control  tools,  age-differentiated 
experiences  with  password-protected  content,  block/allow  lists,  purchase/time  controls, 
opt-out functions, filtering and moderating? 

2.  Are there articulate findings on child rights impacts on different age groups as a result of 
company  operations  and  the  design,  development  and  introduction  of  products  and 
services – as well as opportunities to support children’s rights online? 

3.  Are  there  national  policies  mandating  other  actors  to  formulate  policies  that  protect  the 

child online? 

4.  Are  there  technical  and  training  support  partnerships  between  the  public  and  private 

sectors? 

5.  Is there an officially recognized assurance and monitoring like those -based on the Plan-

Do-Check-Act (PDCA) model? 

 

f.  Education and awareness: The following items examine this sub-index in greater detail 
1.  Are there established Public Education and Awareness Activities? 
2.  Have codes of good practice for all relevant stakeholders been formulated and published 

via various forms of media? 

3.  Are  existing  public  education  efforts  educating  customers  on  how  to  manage  concerns 
relating to  Internet usage – including spam, data theft and inappropriate contact such as 
bullying and grooming? 

4.  Are the public education efforts describing what actions customers can take and how they 

can raise concerns on inappropriate use? 

5.  Are  the  public  education  mechanisms  educating  parents  on  how  to  become  involved  in 
their  children’s  ICT  activities,  particularly  those  of  younger  children,  for  example, 
providing  parents  with  the  ability  to  review  children’s  privacy  settings  and  with 
information on age verification? 

6.  Are  there  provisions  of  local  materials  for  use  in  schools  and  homes  to  educate  and 
enhance children’s use of information and communication technologies and help children 
develop critical thinking that enables them to behave safely and responsibly when using 
ICT services? 
 

g.  Capacity building: The  following items examine this sub-index  
1.  Is  there  an  officially  recognized  national  or  sector-specific  research  and  development 

(R&D)?  

2.  Is there a well-established process for training of law enforcement officials investigating 

Internet for CAM?  

3.  Is  there  access  to  appropriate  forensic  facilities  to  enable  law  enforcement  officials  to 

extract and interpret relevant digital data? 

4.  Are there officially recognized national or sector-specific university/ professional training 
programs/degree  in  child  online  protection/information  security  or  similar  program  for 
online  child  protection  standards,  best  practices  and  guidelines  to  secure  technical 
standards? 

5.  Is  there  an  annual  child  online  protection  report,  threat  assessment  of  security  and 

protection defying CAM? 

 

Another  consideration  in  the  construction  of  the  COPI  is  the  assignment  of  weights  to  the 
indicators  in  order  to  produce  the  final  index.  The  COPI  adopts  the  multiple  questioning 
approach. That is each sub-index was measured through another 4-8 sets questions (also referred 
to  as  items  or  indicators).    For  each  of  the  items  measuring  a  sub-  index,  the  highest  possible 
score is the division of 1 by the total number items measuring that sub-index. For instance, there 
are 8 items measuring the legislation sub index, thus the highest possible score for each indicator 
measuring  legislation  is  calculated  as  1÷8  (1  divided  by  8)  =  0.125.  Reason  is  that  COPI 
distributes  equal  weights  among  the  seven  sub-indexes  and  among  the  indicators  in  each  sub 
index.  Equal  weighting  means  that  each  item  of  data  used  by  an  index  is  averaged  in  order  to 
produce a final score. Thus, in the case of the legislation sub-index, 0.125 is the highest possible 
score for each indicator which indicates existence, 50 percent of 0.125 (0.0625) may be allotted 
to  brewing  efforts  to  establish  the  item  while  and  0  will  be  assigned  to  none  existence  of  the 
item.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  sum  of  items  measuring  each  sub-index,  such  as  legislation,  the 
highest  possible  score  is  1  and  the  lowest  possible  score  is  zero  (zero  at  each  sub-index  level 
indicates insignificant performance for the country).  

Summarily,  all  the  indicators  shown  in  table  1  are  measured  on  a  scale  of  0  -  1,  were  0 
corresponds to non-existence (or non- availability) and 1 to best possible outcome. However, 50 
percent  of the highest  possible score for each indicator may be assigned to  that indicator if the 
data shows efforts towards establishing the best possible outcome. 

In the case of the sum of all sub-indexes, the highest possible score is 7 indicating stiff resistance 
against child abusive materials  and insistent protection of the child online. The lowest  possible 
score  zero  at  this  level  indicates  compromise  of  a  child’s  safety  online  and  high  exposure  of 
children in such country to CAM.  

Calculating final score 

The  final  computation  of  the  COPI  is  based  on  successive  aggregation  of  scores;  from  the 
indicator  level  (i.e.  the  most  disaggregated  level)  to  the  COPI  score  (i.e.  the  highest  level). 
Unless  otherwise  noted,  arithmetic  mean  may  be  used  to  aggregate  individual  indicators  under 
each sub index and also for higher aggregation levels (sub-indexes). Hence, the final COPI score 
of  each  nation  is  a  simple  average  of  the  seven  composing  sub  index  scores,  while  each  sub 
index’s score is a simple average of those of the composing indicators. In doing this, we assume 

that  all  Index  sub-indexes  give  a  similar  contribution  to  a  national  child  online  protection 
endeavor  

The  highest  possible  average  score  7  indicates  national  stiff  resistance  and  insistent  protection 
against  child  abusive  materials  (CAM).  The  lowest  possible  score  zero  at  this  level  indicates 
excessive  compromise  of  a  child’s  safety  online  and  exposure  of  children  in  such  country  to 
CAM. However average scores below 3.5 indicates feeble and jerry-built attempts to protect the 
child online and average scores above 3.5 but below 5 indicates robust and creditable efforts to 
protect the child online. 

Throughout  the  use  of  the  instrument,  scores  in  the  various  dimensions  can  be  reported  with  a 
precision of three decimal points. 

It is important however to state that another phase of this study accounts for series of diagnostic 
tests  to  demonstrate  the  robustness  of  the  new  measure  and  assess  the  degree  of  construct 
validity. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Table 1 Structure of the Child Online Protection Index 

S/N 
1. 

Sub index 

  Declaration  of a 
national strategy 
for child online 

protection 

Indicators 

Weights 

Few Data Sources 

Primary sources: 

field survey, content 
analysis of selected 

internet-related 
national and  

company policies and 

internet related 

regulatory 

organizations 

Secondary sources: 
National data sets on 

child online 

protection; (ITU) 

National Cybersecurity 

Strategy Guide 

Framework/Country 

Profiles;  

The International 

Centre for Missing & 

Exploited Children 
(ICMEC) annual 
reports on “Child 

Pornography: Model 
Legislation & Global 

Review  

  Existence of an officially 
recognized and operational 
national child online safety 
strategy that captures multi-
stakeholders interest and 

identifies the need to commit 

limited resources (e.g., political 
will, money, time, and people) 
Identification of  commercial-
sector entities affected by and 
responsible for implementation 

 

of the plan  
 

  Evidence that COP strategy 
includes law enforcement 
crime prevention strategies, 

school-based and social 
programs, and awareness 
strategies especially on the 

criminality of the production, 
possession or distribution of 

CAM 

  Evidence that the strategy 

includes long term support for 

victims 

  Existing percentage of national 
GDP dedicated to child online 
protection? 
 
 

  Evidence of an officially and 

nationally recognized24 

hours/7 days a week) national 

hotlines and reporting 

requirements  

 

  Evidence of national of outlaw 
on “grooming” or other forms 
of remote enticement of legal 

minors into inappropriate 
sexual contact or sexual 

activity. 

 
  An officially recognized 
agency responsible for 

implementing the national COP 

strategy, roadmap and policy 

 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 

 
2. 

 

 

Legislations, 
regulations, 

policies  

 

 
 

3. 

  Collaborations, 
cooperation, and 

partnerships 

 

Primary sources: 

field survey, content 
analysis of selected 

internet related 

national/regulatory 
and company policies 

Secondary sources: 

National 

/international data 
sets on child online 
protection, (ITU) 

National Cybersecurity 

Strategy Guide 

Framework/Country 

Profiles;  The 

International Centre 

for Missing & 

Exploited Children 
(ICMEC) annual 
reports on “Child 

Pornography: Model 
Legislation & Global 

Review 

 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 1/8 

 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/8 

 

  Evidence of an existing 

comprehensive national legal 
framework focusing on Online 
Child Protection  passed and 
signed into law by a president 

 

  Evidence of  legislations that 

criminalize CAM 

  Evidence of legislations that 
make provisions in the law for 

a greater commitment of 

resources  to enforce specific 
COP laws and  train judicial, 

prosecutorial and law 
enforcement officials 

  Does existing legislation 
clearly define a ‘child’ and 

CAM? 

  An existing legislation that 
creates criminal offences and 
penalties for CAM possession, 

manufacture, distribution 

and/or accomplices of same? 

 

  An existing well-established 
mutatis mutandi (body of laws 
which makes it clear that any 
and every crime that can be 
committed against a child in 

the real world can also be 

committed on the Internet or on 

any other electronic network. 

 

  Evidences of corresponding 

laws to treaty agreements with 

other countries? 

 

  Evidence of 

1/4 

commitments to 
bilateral mutual legal 
assistance treaties or 
multilateral 
conventions? 

  Evidences of  cross-sector and 
cross- stakeholder coordination 
mechanisms to address critical 

interdependencies on child 

online protection 

  Evidences of existing 
collaborations between 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1/4 

 
 
 

1/4 

 

Primary sources: 

field survey, content 
analysis of selected 

internet related 

company policies and 

internet related 

regulatory 

organizations 

Secondary sources: 

National 

/international data 
sets on child online 
protection; (ITU) 

 

4. 

 

Information 
sharing and 
enforcement 
mechanism 

 
5. 

 

 

Technical 

Measures and 

Standards 

National Cybersecurity 

Strategy Guide 

Framework/Country 

Profiles 

Primary sources: 

field survey, content 
analysis of selected 

internet related 

company policies and 

internet related 

regulatory 

organizations 

Secondary sources: 
National data sets on 

child online 
protection,  

 

government, industry and 
educators to build parents’ 

abilities to support and speak 
with their children about being 
responsible digital citizens and 

ICT users  

  Existence of officially 
recognized public and private 

sector partnerships 

  Existence of mechanisms 

(reporting schema, technology, 
etc.) for cross-sector incident- 

information sharing, both 
operational (near-real-time) 

and forensic (post-facto) 

 

  Evidence of a “Notice and 

Takedown” regime to allow 
ISPs, ESPs, domain registrars 
and web hosts to close an 
offending site or cancel an 
email account upon request 
 
 

  An evidence of an established 
and widely promoted means for 
reporting illegal content found 
on the Internet e.g. a national 

hotline 

 

  Existing evidence of reporting 

mechanism for online 

predatory behaviour (OPB) 

 
 

a.  An existing access to technical 
tools for children to stay safer? 
E.g. child safety soft wares, age 
verification, filtering programs, 

parental control tools, age-

differentiated experiences with 

password-protected content, 

block/allow lists, purchase/time 

controls, opt-out functions, 
filtering and moderating. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/4 

1/4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/4 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1/4 

 
 
 
 
 

1/4 

 

1/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

b.  Existing articulate findings on 

1/5 

child rights impacts on 

different age groups as a result 
of company operations and the 

design, development and 

introduction of products and 

services – as well as 

opportunities to support 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6. 

  Public Education 
and Awareness 

 

children’s rights online 

 

c.  Evidences of child protection 
national policy for other actors 

policy formulations and 

commitments (e.g., human 

rights, privacy, marketing and 
relevant codes of conduct).  

 

 
 

1/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 

d.  Evidence of technical and 

1/5 

training support partnerships 
between the public and private 

sectors  

 

 
 
 
 

e.  An officially recognized 

1/5 

assurance and monitoring like 

using the ISO/IEC 27001-
based Plan-Do-Check-Act 

(PDCA) model 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Evidences of established Public 

1/6  

Education and Awareness 

Activities by government and 

industry 

  Evidence of creating national 
awareness on the criminality of 
the production, possession or 

distribution of CAM 

 

  Existence and publication of 
codes of good practice for all 

relevant stakeholders  

 
  Evidence of customer 
education on how to manage 
concerns relating to Internet 
usage – including spam, data 
theft and inappropriate contact 
such as bullying and grooming 

–  

.  

  Evidence of parent public 

education on how to become 

involved in their children’s ICT 
activities, particularly those of 
younger children, for example, 

providing parents with the 
ability to review children’s 
privacy settings and with 

information on age verification. 
 

  Existing provision of local 

 
 
 
 

1/6 

 
 
 

1/6 

 
 
 

1/6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/6 

Primary sources: 

field survey, content 
analysis of selected 

internet related 

company policies and 

internet related 

regulatory 

organizations 

Secondary sources: 
national data sets on 

child online 
protection,  

materials for use in schools and 
homes to educate and enhance 
children’s use of information 
and communication 
technologies and help children 
develop critical thinking that 
enables them to behave safely 
and responsibly when using 
ICT services 

 

  An officially recognized 
national or sector-specific child 
online protection research and 

development (R&D) 
programs/projects at 

universities with a dedicated 

percentage of GDP or 
Government Project. 

 
 
 

  An officially recognized 
national or sector-specific 

university/ professional 

training programs/degree child 
online standards, best practices 

and guidelines to secure 

technical standards 

 

 

1/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Evidence of a well-established 

1/5 

process for training of law 

enforcement officials 

investigating Internet for 

CAM?  

  Existing access to appropriate 
forensic facilities to enable law 
enforcement officials to extract 

and interpret relevant digital 

data 

  Evidence of an annual child 

online protection report, threat 

assessment of security and 
protection defying CAM  

 
 
 
 

1/5 

 
 
 

           
         1/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7. 

 

Capacity 
Building 

 

 

 

 

Conclusion 

It  suffices  to  state  that  COPI  only  seeks  to  measure  the  existence  of  each  indicator  in  each 
country  and  thus  ranking  should  be  based  on  existence  not  the  quality  or  effectiveness  of  such 
indicators to protecting children online in  any nation.  Nonetheless,  examining the effectiveness 
of these efforts may be an important gap for subsequent studies. 

More so, the seven pillars outlined above do not constitute the only means of dividing the broad 
construct of child online protection, but one that is conceptually coherent and in accordance with 
previous work in the field 

 

References 

International  Telecommunication  Union.  (2009).  The  ICT  Development  Index.  Measuring  the 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-

society.  Geneva. 

information 
D/Statistics/Documents/publications/mis2009/MIS2009_w5.pdf 

Retrieved 

from 

United Nations Human Right (2000) UNHR Optional Protocol to the conventions of the rights of 
the child. Retrieved from www.ohchr.org/EN/professionalinterest/Pages/OPACCRC.aspx 

International  Telecommunication  Union.  (2016)  Child  online  protection.  Retrieved  from 

www.itu.int/en/cop/Pages/defaault.aspx 

Wamala,  F. 

(2011) 

ITU  National  Cyber 

security 

strategy  guide. 

International  

Telecommunication 
D/cyb/cybersecurity/docs/ITUNationalCybersecuritystrategyGuide.pdf 

Retrieved 

Union. 

from 

www.itu.int/ITU-

International  Telecommunication  Union  (2010).  Child  Online  Protection  statistical  framework 
and  indicators.  Retrieved  from  www.itu.int/dms-pub/itu-d/opb/ind/D-IND-COP.01-11-
2010-PDF-E.pdf 

International  Telecommunication  Union  (2009)  Guidelines  for  Policy  Makers  on  Child  Online 
https://www.itu.int/en/cop/Documents/guidelines-

Retrieved 

from 

Protection. 
policy%20makers-e.pdf 

International  Telecommunication  Union  (2014)  Guidelines  for  Industry  on  Child  Online 
from 

Protection. 
https://www.itu.int/en/cop/Documents/bD_Broch_INDUSTRY_0909.pdf 

Retrieved 

Dasuki,  M., 

S., 

(2014)  National 

Cybersecurity 

Policy. 

Retrieved 

from  

https://cert.gov.ng/images/uploads/NATIONAL_CYBESECURITY_POLICY.pdf 

International  Telecommunication  Union.  (2009)The  World  in  2009:  ICT  facts  and  figures. 

Retrieved from https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/material/Telecom09_flyer.pdf 

 

