CYBERSECURITY: DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Joeli R. Field 

INTL604 Interagency Operations 

American Military University 

September 18, 2010 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

INTRODUCTION 

2 

 

 

 

The  cyber  threat  is  one  of  the  most  serious  economic  and  national  security 

challenges we face as a nation. 

- Barack Obama, President of the United States of America (Schmidt 2010, 1) 

 

Both  the  public  and  private  sectors  rely  on  cyberspace  for  everyday  communication. 

Whether  for  professional  services,  safeguarding  of  classified  federal  information  or  personal 

correspondence,  the  Internet  and  computer  networks  are  vital  to  American  infrastructure. 

Protection  of  this  cyber  infrastructure  is  defined  as  cybersecurity  (Aitoro  2010).  For  clarity 

purposes,  several  terms  regarding  cybersecurity  will  be  defined.  In  this  paper,  cyberwarfare 

refers  to  an  intentional  computer-based  attack  from  one  State  on  another  to  cause  real-world 

harm (Vijayan 2010). Cyber-espionage is an attempt to steal sensitive digital information from a 

government  or  network  (Harris  2010).  Cybercrime  is  any  type  of  theft  in  which  a  computer  or 

network has been used to commission the crime (Aitoro 2010). 

 

The  problem  with  any  of  these  defined  cyber  threats  is  that  with  the  vast  number  of 

Internet and network users, it is hard to identify who the threat is or where it is based. Various 

government  agencies  have  developed  their  own  methods  for  dealing  with  cybersecurity,  but  a 

collective  effort  to  protect  the  nation‟s  infrastructure  is  a  relatively  new  idea.  Successful 

interagency  operations  have  occurred  for  kinetic  threats  facing  the  nation,  but  the  non-kinetic 

cyber arena has federal agencies mismanaging resources and duplicating efforts to protect their 

own infrastructure. 

 

3 

 

The general research question proposed in this paper is: Why is cybersecurity important 

to  national  security?  The  specific  research  question  is:  How  can  the  U.S.  government  most 

effectively manage cybersecurity responsibility among federal agencies? It is important that this 

topic  is  studied  because  as  the  Internet  grows,  so  will  the  vulnerability  of  American 

infrastructure  to  cyber  threats.  For  brevity  purposes,  this  paper  will  not  discuss  who  is 

responsible  for  defending  the  public  arena  or  private  sector,  but  will  focus  on  cybersecurity 

responsibility  within  federal  agencies.  This  paper  consists  of  a  review  of  literature  available 

regarding  cybersecurity  responsibility,  followed  by  an  analysis  and  examination  of  three 

proposals  in  which  the  U.S.  government  could  most  effectively  manage  cybersecurity 

responsibility concerning the protection of American infrastructure. 

 

 

 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

 

Credibility of Cyber Threats 

The majority of existing literature about cybersecurity states that cyber threats should be 

a  credible  concern  for  the  U.S.  government.  Several  government  officials,  including  former 

Director  of  the  CIA  and  Retired  General  Michael  Hayden;  recently  appointed  cybersecurity 

policy  official  Howard  Schmidt;  U.S.  Cyber  Command  Commander  General  Keith  Alexander; 

and U.S. President Barack Obama have publicly acknowledged the importance of cybersecurity 

and the impact that a major cyber attack could have on the economy and the United States as a 

whole.  The  Internet  is  an  “open  playground”  where  anyone  could  fall  victim  to  cybercrime 

(Aitoro  2010,  1).  Though  the  government  is  on  board  and  actively  promoting  cybersecurity, 

 

4 

some technology experts think the government is merely blowing it out of proportion to scare the 

public  and  reel  them  into  a  financial  scam.  Schneier  (2010),  a  security  technologist  and 

renowned  author  on  security  issues,  has  agreed  that  there  is  a  need  for  protection  against 

cybercrime and cyber-espionage, but that government officials over-exaggerate the severity of a 

pending cyberwar (Doesburg 2010).  

 

However, former national network hacker Marc Maiffret has admitted it is easy to hack 

into  government  networks  and  that  government  officials  have  reason  to  be  concerned.  He 

performed a penetration test on a city in California and was able to gain access to the city‟s water 

supply  within  two  hours  (Aitoro  2010).  Sabotage  of  a  basic  need  for  thousands  of  people  in  a 

matter of hours is not only a credible threat, but a serious one. This example, along with massive 

amounts  of  literature  addressing  the  credibility  of  cyber  threats,  regardless  of  extensive 

discussion or lack of suggested responses to those threats, further emphasizes the need to study 

who is responsible for defending the nation against these threats. 

 

 

 

Response Methods to Cyber Threats 

A  number  of  cyber  threats  exist,  but  according  to  Maiffret,  the  top  two  are  cybercrime 

and cyber-espionage (Aitoro 2010). This is not to say, however, that the U.S. government should 

not  be  prepared  for  much  worse.  There  are  discussions  throughout  literature  on  how  to  best 

approach cyber threats; whether offensive or defensive tactics are best; and whether proactive or 

reactive responses are most effective against credible cyber threats.  

 

All  networks  need  to  be  concerned  about  defensive  cybersecurity.  Max  Kelley,  former 

chief of security of  Facebook, suggests the reactive approach: focus less  on vulnerabilities  and 

 

5 

more on actual threats (Mohney 2010). The idea is to wait until something happens and then go 

after  the  bad  guy.  Though  easier  to  manage,  it  alone  would  not  protect  American  government 

infrastructure. In the example of a breach of the city water supply, reaction to excessive amounts 

of chlorine could mean death for thousands of victims. Other defensive mechanisms would need 

to be in place.  

 

The  National  Security  Council‟s  Cybersecurity  Web  site  has  posted  on  its  main  page 

President Barack Obama‟s May 2009 discussion of cyber threats and what the government must 

do in  response to  the threats: defensively improve resilience to  cyber incidents  and offensively 

reduce the number of cyber threats. Hayden agrees that the approach to cybersecurity needs to be 

offensive (Goodin 2010, Schmidt 2010). An offensive approach would mean more responsibility. 

However,  federal  agencies  are  already  having  troubles  merely  defending  themselves  against 

cyber  threats.  Each  agency  could  not  be  expected  to  pursue  offensive  cybersecurity  as  well. 

Therein lies the question of cybersecurity responsibility. 

 

 

 

Who is Responsible: Lack of Leadership and Clearly Defined Roles 

On May 29, 2009, President Obama called for the President‟s Cyberspace Policy Review 

–  a  60-day  review  of  cybersecurity  policies  and  procedures  led  by  the  Government 

Accountability  Office  (GAO).  The  president  also  addressed  a  near-term  action  plan  with  10 

national  objectives  regarding  cybersecurity.  Two  of  those  objectives  discussed  cybersecurity 

responsibility:  No.  1  to  appoint  a  cybersecurity  policy  official  and  No.  5  to  have  interagency 

coordination  to  define  unified  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  GAO  released  the  report  with  its 

findings in late 2009. The two most relevant findings regarding cybersecurity responsibility were 

 

6 

a lack of leadership and a lack of clearly defined roles for the federal agencies. As a result, the 

GAO recommended that a coordinating official be appointed and how s/he should function with 

interagency  coordination  (7).  The  GAO  report  identified  the  issues  with  cybersecurity  and 

provided  recommendations.  This  method  was  effective,  as  the  government  took  the  report 

seriously and successfully appointed a cybersecurity policy official, Howard Schmidt. As stated 

in  a  follow-up  report  by  the  coordinator  himself,  Schmidt  (2010)  readdressed  the  issues 

identified by the Cyberspace Policy Review and what progress had been made. 

 

The  initial  GAO  report  also  recommended  that  organizations  continue  with  their 

operational roles, but follow the coordinating official‟s guidance in response to a cyber incident 

(8).  This  is  a  good  thought,  but  cyber  threats  are  non-kinetic  and  unlike  other  threats  the  U.S. 

government has faced. Hayden states that the Defense Department‟s approach to kinetic warfare 

does not  work in  the cyber arena (Vijayan 2010). The main problem  is  that  the location of the 

threat  and  the  person  behind  the  threat  cannot  always  be  identified;  therefore  it  is  difficult  to 

determine which agency is responsible for each incident. Lines would be crossed, there would be 

duplication  of  effort  and  no  information  sharing  or  communication.  Because  of  these  issues, 

there needs to be clearly defined roles for each government agency for cybersecurity. 

 

 

 

Summary and Research Hypothesis 

Cybersecurity  is  a  priority  for  the  U.S.  government  as  a  whole.  Several  government 

agencies have already established proactive and responsive methods of cybersecurity to protect 

their networks against potential cyber threats. Despite the appointment of a cybersecurity official 

and  declaration  of  national  objectives  towards  a  near-term  cybersecurity  action  plan,  however, 

 

7 

the U.S. government is  not prepared to defend its networks should a severe cyber threat  ensue, 

due  to  ill  cooperation  between  and  duplication  of  effort  by  federal  agencies.  Available 

cybersecurity literature – specifically the GAO report – provides extensive information regarding 

cybersecurity,  its  importance,  and  ways  the  government  can  better  defend  itself  against  cyber 

criminals.  It  does  not,  however,  specifically  state  how  federal  agencies  should  divide 

responsibility for this defense. 

 

The  hypothesis  for  this  study  is  if  the  U.S.  government  does  not  create  a  new  agency 

responsibility  for  cybersecurity,  then  a  credible  cyber  threat  will  have  a  severe  effect  on 

American  infrastructure.  Three  possible  solutions  to  how  the  U.S.  government  could  most 

effectively manage responsibility of cybersecurity between the federal agencies will be explored 

in  this  paper.  The  U.S.  government  could  keep  its  current  infrastructure  as  is,  reorganize  the 

infrastructure of the existing federal agencies or create a new cybersecurity agency. According to 

Maiffret,  the  question  of  a  cyber  attack  on  major  infrastructure  in  the  United  States  is  not  a 

matter of if, but when (Aitoro 2010), therefore it is important for the government to decide who 

will be responsible for defending the nation‟s infrastructure against cyber threats. 

 

 

 

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 

Schmidt  says  the  government  is  working  together  better  now  than  ever  before.  His 

priorities  are  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  in  cyberspace,  implement  secure  access  and  improve 

information  sharing  and  communication  with  industries  and  the  private-sector  (Miller  2010). 

Despite the government working better, changes need to be made within the federal government 

in order for cybersecurity to be effective. Three different alternatives will be explored in this next 

 

section:  keeping  the  current  infrastructure,  reorganizing  the  current  infrastructure  or  creating  a 

new cybersecurity agency altogether. Each section will include an explanation of the alternative, 

the pros and cons of the alternative and what is needed for that alternative to be successful. 

8 

 

 

 

Keeping Current Infrastructure 

The  first  alternative  for  the  federal  government  to  consider  is  keeping  the  current 

infrastructure. Currently, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is  the main authority of 

cybersecurity (Leithauser 2010). There are 17 infrastructure sectors, each of which has a federal 

agency responsible for chairing a council knowledgeable about its specific sector. Cybersecurity 

is not treated as a separate issue. Each agency is left to defend themselves against cyber threats 

and  can  use  whatever  strategy  works  best  for  them  (Harknett  2009).  Schmidt,  the  national 

cybersecurity  coordinator,  merely  serves  as  an  advisor.  He  can  make  suggestions  and  provide 

advice,  but  has  no  authority  over  any  of  the  organizations;  each  organization  has  its  own 

leadership. 

 

The pros of this alternative are scarce. One can argue that because these organizations are 

already  established,  they  can  better  manage  cybersecurity  internally.  However,  a  stronger 

argument  can  be  made  against  that  claim.  Unfortunately,  what  is  currently  in  place  is  not 

defensively  effective  against  cyber  threats  and  there  are  no  pros  to  continuing  with  the  current 

infrastructure.  

 

The cons for this alternative are cultural biases and gaps, lack of coordination, absence of 

leadership and low priority of cybersecurity. First, organizations are already established and set 

in  their  ways.  They  are  not  designed  to  defend  against  a  cyber  threat  and  are  unlikely  to  alter 

 

9 

their  structure  or  the  way  that  they  operate  to  do  so.  Second,  every  organization  is  in  it  for 

themselves. They want to protect their own network and are not concerned with protecting other 

networks. Therefore, there is a lack of coordination between agencies. Third, there is an absence 

of cybersecurity leadership within each organization and the United States in general. The GAO 

(2009) states, “Leadership accountability must extend throughout the federal government” (10). 

Despite the cybersecurity coordinator attempting to advise all agencies, there is a duplication of 

effort and poor resource management. Last and most important, cybersecurity is not a priority in 

individual agencies. Agencies were created to accomplish their own mission, so cybersecurity is 

on the back burner. It is not budgeted for, and despite attempts to change this, money alone will 

not solve this problem.  

 

The 2009 GAO Report identifies problems with the current infrastructure and the federal 

government is finally starting to make changes recommended by the GAO. Though progress is 

not moving very quickly, it is being made. In order for the current infrastructure to be successful, 

organizations need to improve communication with each other and share information. The GAO 

(2009) clearly states, “Independent efforts will not be sufficient” (7). Roles and responsibilities 

need to be assigned to eliminate duplication of effort. Most importantly, cybersecurity needs to 

be  made  a  priority  within  federal  agencies.  Secondary  efforts  and  poor  budgeting  of 

cybersecurity defense will not protect government agencies and their networks. This alternative 

could  be  successful,  but  government  agencies  need  to  work  together  and  make  cybersecurity  a 

priority by budgeting and appointing leadership within their own organization. 

 

 

 

 

10 

 

 

 

Reorganization of Infrastructure 

There are several ways to reorganize the current infrastructure to  better protect the U.S. 

government from cyber threats. The 2010 Protecting Cyberspace as a National Asset Act (2010) 

recommends that the U.S. government establish a cybersecurity office in the White House (13). 

The reorganization in this section will discuss the establishment of a cybersecurity office in the 

White House in concert with the transfer of authority from DHS to the cybersecurity coordinator, 

and  the  appointment  of  a  cybersecurity  official  within  each  organization  to  report  to  the 

coordinator. 

 

The  pros  of  this  alternative  include  meeting  the  cyber  needs  of  each  organization; 

centralized  effort;  coordinator  and  agency  accountability;  and  making  cybersecurity  a  priority 

within federal agencies. First, this alternative meets the defensive network needs of each agency. 

People within an agency know their organization better than anyone outside of it. They know the 

agency‟s vulnerabilities and how to best protect the agency. An external leader does not have the 

insider‟s perspective necessary for defense of an organization‟s network. The appointment of an 

official within each organization ensures that each organization is  equally represented. Second, 

centralized authority ensures better flow of information, ease of communication and consistency 

with  cyber  defense  across  the  government  agencies.  It  also  eliminates  duplication  of  effort. 

Third,  this  alternative  keeps  the  coordinator  and  all  agencies  accountable  for  cybersecurity 

defense.  By  giving  the  cybersecurity  coordinator  authority,  he  can  hold  the  organizations 

accountable.  By  appointing  officials  within  each  organization,  they  can  hold  the  coordinator 

 

11 

accountable. This mutual accountability gives hope that cybersecurity can be made a priority for 

federal agencies. 

 

Along  with  the  pros  of  this  alternative  are  four  cons:  time,  internal  experts,  conflict  of 

leadership and budgeting. First, it will take years for a successful program to develop. People and 

agencies are already established and set in their ways. The appointment of a new official within 

each  organization  could  take  some  getting  used  to.  Second,  each  agency  may  not  have  a 

cybersecurity  expert.  An  external  body  would  not  be  as  effective  as  someone  appointed  from 

within  an  organization.  Third,  there  could  be  a  conflict  of  leadership.  The  officials  in  the 

agencies would have two bosses – the cybersecurity coordinator and the head of their respective 

organization.  This  could  cause  confusion  of  authority.  Finally,  it  may  be  difficult  for  each 

official  to  convince  their  organization  that  cybersecurity  is  a  priority;  more  of  that  agency‟s 

budget will need to be dedicated to defend their networks against cyber attacks. Unfortunately, 

one individual may not be able to affect an entire organization. 

 

In order for reorganization to be successful, officials will need to be taken seriously, be 

able  to  influence  their  respective  organization  and  receive  appointment  from  the  president.  If 

agencies  do  not  take  their  officials  seriously,  then  cybersecurity  will  not  be  made  a  priority. 

Additionally, if officials are not influential, they may not be able to affect budgeting within their 

organization. A presidential appointment of officials would state to the organizations, the nation 

and the world that the United States acknowledges cybersecurity as a credible issue and places 

defense against cyber threats as a top priority. 

 

 

12 

Creation of New Cybersecurity Agency 

 

 

The National Security Act of 1947 and Homeland Security Act of 2002 both created new 

agencies  within  the  federal  government:  the  Air  Force,  National  Security  Council,  Central 

Intelligence Agency and Department of Defense were created in 1947, and DHS was created in 

2002  (Harknett  2009).  In  these  instances,  the  federal  agencies  were  revised  quickly  after  their 

creation to better meet mission requirements and justify their existence. Following this historical 

trend,  the  Cybersecurity  Act  of  2009  could  create  a  new  federal  agency  dedicated  to 

cybersecurity. The final alternative is creating a new agency responsible for defending all federal 

networks against cyber threats. With the creation of a new agency, the cybersecurity coordinator 

will  remain  in  place  and  become  the  director  of  the  new  agency.  This  individual  will  have 

authority over all issues in the cybersecurity realm and will report directly to the president. 

 

There are many pros to this alternative, including establishing cybersecurity as a priority; 

clearly  defined  roles  and  responsibilities;  and  offensive  cybersecurity.  Currently,  each 

organization  compiles  the  resources  they  can  to  defend  themselves  against  cyber  threats.  Their 

primary mission is unrelated to cybersecurity. The creation of a new agency will emphasize the 

importance of making cybersecurity a priority. A centralized agency dedicated to cybersecurity 

will  allow  for  all  funding,  personnel,  efforts,  etc.,  to  be  focused  on  cybersecurity  defense. 

Cybersecurity  will  no  longer  be  a  burden  or  secondary  objective  to  federal  organizations. 

Second, a new agency will allow for clearly defined roles and responsibilities. It will eliminate 

the  confusion  of  who  is  in  charge  and  who  is  responsible  for  what.  There  will  be  centralized 

authority,  centralized  decision  making  and  no  duplication  of  effort.  Third,  with  solid  cyber 

defense in place, the U.S. government can finally take offensive cybersecurity seriously. Unlike 

 

13 

already-established  agencies,  old  positions  within  the  agency  will  not  have  to  incorporate  new 

threats; the cyber threat will dictate the roles and responsibilities of the new organization. Once a 

strong  defense  is  formed,  the  new  agency  can  begin  to  focus  on  an  offensive  strategy  – 

something that cannot be considered by the other two alternatives. 

 

There are a few cons to the option of creating a new agency, including cultural bias, time 

and  initial  vulnerability.  First,  when  a  new  agency  is  created  from  multiple  agencies,  cultures 

will  be  carried  over  from  other  organizations.  It  could  take  years  for  a  new  cyber  agency  to 

develop a culture and strong sense of a mission of its own (Builder 1989). Second, it will take a 

significant  amount  of  time  to  become  an  effective  and  efficient  organization.  It  will  also  take 

time for the rest of the federal government to welcome the new organization into the community 

of  agencies.  Finally,  because  of  the  amount  of  time  it  would  take  for  the  new  organization  to 

become  effective,  there  will  most  likely  be  an  initial  vulnerability  period  which  may  make  the 

nation even more susceptible to attack. 

 

In  order  for  a  new  agency  to  be  successful,  it  needs  to  have  clearly  defined  roles  and 

responsibilities,  extensive  preparation  and  establishment  before  acknowledgment.  First,  the 

agency will need to have clearly defined roles within the organization itself as well as its roles 

and relationships with other federal agencies. It  will have to be very clear what cyber authority 

and  responsibility  will  be  transferred  from  current  organizations  to  the  new  one.  Second,  there 

will  need  to  be  extensive  preparation  and  consideration  put  into  creating  a  new  agency.  The 

cybersecurity  coordinator  and  future  director  of  the  new  agency  will  need  to  decide  specifics 

regarding logistics, organization and management. The new cybersecurity agency will also need 

a  clear  mission  and  vision  to  establish  an  identity  and  separate  itself  from  all  other  federal 

agencies.  Finally,  to  prevent  a  prolonged  vulnerability  period,  the  new  agency  will  need  to  be 

 

established  and  functioning  properly  before  it  is  acknowledged  by  the  U.S.  government.  All 

entities  need  to  be  in  place  before  the  president  announces  the  future  creation  of  a  new 

cybersecurity agency. If not, the United States will become susceptible to a major cyber incident.  

14 

 

Best Alternative 

 

 

The  first  alternative  is  the  most  unlikely  to  be  successful  because  the  current 

infrastructure  is  not  effective  against  cyber  threats.  Cyber  infiltration  has  already  troubled  the 

U.S.  government  and  will  continue  to  do  so  if  changes  to  government  infrastructure  are  not 

made.  The  purpose  of  the  Cybersecurity  Policy  Review  was  to  make  changes  to  the  way  the 

federal  government  addresses  cybersecurity.  Because  of  cultural  differences  and  duplication  of 

effort, it is not ideal to keep the current infrastructure. 

 

The  second  alternative  is  more  likely  than  the  first  because  change  within  the  federal 

government  has  already  begun.  Centralized  and  concentrated  cybersecurity  effort,  coordinator 

and  agency  accountability  and  prioritization  of  cybersecurity  are  positive  characteristics  of 

reorganization  that  will  make  cyber  defense  more  effective  than  the  current  infrastructure. 

Reorganizing  the  current  infrastructure  shows  more  promise  than  keeping  the  current 

infrastructure, but both of these alternatives focus merely on cyber defense. Cyber defense may 

be the top priority now, but cyber offense must also be considered for the future.  

 

The creation of a new agency dedicated to cybersecurity is the only alternative that can 

even  consider  cyber  offense.  This  alternative  encompasses  the  positive  characteristics  of 

reorganization  with  the  added  benefit  of  future  considerations  of  offensive  cybersecurity.  The 

potential for offensive strategy, centralized authority and cyber defense efforts, and prioritization 

 

of cybersecurity make the creation of a new federal agency the best alternative for the future of 

cybersecurity in the United States. 

15 

 

 

 

 

CONCLUSION 

Cybersecurity  is  a  growing  interest  of  the  U.S.  government  because  of  its  current 

vulnerability  to  cyber  infiltration.  To  protect  itself  from  cyber  threats,  the  federal  government 

can  consider  three  alternatives:  keep  its  current  infrastructure,  reorganize  its  current 

infrastructure, or create a new federal agency dedicated to cybersecurity. These three alternatives 

have many overlapping themes. All three recognize the need for leadership, clearly defined roles 

and  responsibilities,  centralized  coordination,  centralized  efforts,  and  the  need  to  make 

cybersecurity  a  priority.  Regardless  of  which  alternative  the  government  chooses,  it  will  take 

time  for  the  cyber  program  to  develop  and  become  fully  operational  and  effective  (Harknett 

2009). The federal government had great momentum after the release of the Cybersecurity Policy 

Review, but has since slowed down (Cheek 2010). If things do not change, the United States will 

remain  vulnerable  to  cyber  infiltration.  It  is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  a  major  cyber  attack 

ensues. How the government prepares now will determine how secure it will be. 

 

16 

REFERENCES 

 

Aitoro, Jill R. 2010. “Roles and responsibilities key to making cybersecurity work. NextGov, 

August 19, 2010, http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100819_3485.php (accessed 
September 16, 2010).  

 
Aitoro, Jill R. 2010. Successful attack on nation‟s infrastructure is „when,‟ not „if‟. NextGov, 
August 6, 2010, http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100806_9847.php (accessed 
September 2, 2010). 

 
Builder, C.H. 1989. The Masks of War. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 
Cheek, Michael W. 2010. Heritage scholar: America needs clearer lines of authority in cyber. 

Cyber Policy, The New New Internet, August 27, 2010, 
http://www.thenewnewinternet.com/2010/08/27/heritage-scholar-america-needs-clearer-
lines-of-authority-in-cyber (accessed September 16, 2010). 

 
Doesburg, Anthony. 2010. Cyberwar? It‟s a phoney war, says IT expert. NZHerald, August 2, 

2010, http://www.nzherald.co.nz/business/news/article.cfm?c_id=3&objectid=10662313 
(accessed September 3, 2010). 

 
Goodin, Dan. 2010. Fog of cyberwar: internet always favors the offense. The Register, July 29th 

2010, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2010/07/29/internet_warfare_keynote/ (accessed 
September 4, 2010). 

 
Government Accountability Office. 2009. President‟s cyberspace policy review. 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_Review_final.pdf 
(accessed September 4, 2010). 

 
Harknett, Richard J. and James A. Stever. 2010. The cybersecurity triad: Government, private 
sector partners, and the engaged cybersecurity citizen.” Journal of Homeland Security 
and Emergency Management 6, no. 1 (2009), 
http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy1.apus.edu/ (accessed September 16, 2010). 

 
Harris, Shane. 2010. War of Words. NextGov, July 30, 2010. 

http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100730_1013.php (accessed September 2, 2010). 

 
Leithauser, Tom. 2010. OMB memo gives DHS authority over other agencies‟ cyber defenses.” 

Cybersecurity Policy Report, July 12, 2010, 
http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy1.apus.edu/ (accessed September 16, 2010). 

 
Miller, Jason. 2010. Schmidt says cyber coordination on upswing. Federal News Radio, August 
9, 2010, http://www.federalnewsradio.com/index.php?nid=110&sid=2022774 (accessed 
September 4, 2010). 

 

17 

 
Mohney, Doug. 2010. Ex-CSO of Facebook wants „cyber counterinsurgency‟ doctrine. DNS, 

July 30, 2010, http://dns.tmcnet.com/topics/internet-security/articles/93748-ex-cso-
facebook-wants-cyber-counterinsurgency-doctrine.htm (accessed September 3, 2010). 

 
Schmidt, Howard. 2010. Cybersecurity progress after President Obama‟s address. National 

Security Council, July 14, 2010, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/nsc/cybersecurity/progressreports/july201
0 (accessed September 4, 2010). 

 
Schmidt, Howard. 2010. Progress report on cybersecurity. The White House Blog, entry posted 

July 14, 2010, http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2010/07/14/progress-report-
cybersecurity?utm_source=related (accessed September 4, 2010). 

 
Schneier, Bruce. 2010. About Bruce Schneier. Schneier on Security, n.d., www.schneier.com 

(accessed September 4, 2010). 

 
U.S. Congress. Senate. Protecting Cyberspace as a National Asset Act of 2010. 11th Cong., 2d 

sess., 2010. 

 
Vijayan, Jaikumar. 2010. U.S. should seek world cooperation on cyber conflict, says ex-CIA 

Director. Computerworld.com, July 29, 2010, 
http://www.computerworld.com/article/9179873/U.S._should_seek_world_cooperation_o
n_cyber_conflict_says_ex_CIA_ director (accessed September 3, 2010). 

  

 

