Leadership and Responsibility
for Cybersecurity

Melissa E. Hathaway

According to Darwin, “it is not the most intellectual of the 
species that survives; it is not the strongest that survives; but 
the species that survives is the one that is able best to adapt 
and  adjust  to  the  changing  environment  in  which  it  finds 
itself.”1  We  have  certainly  adapted  to  the  Internet  and  the 
technology  that  underpins  it.  In  fact,  we  have  made  it  an 
integral part of just about everything in our life; and in many 
ways we take it for granted that it will always work twenty-four 
hours a day, seven days a week. There are approximately 2.5 
billion Internet users around the world of which nearly half 
are below the age of twenty-five.2 Yet, there is another set of 
actors that have adapted more successfully: criminals, spies, 
and some clever guys. Media headlines announce daily that 
our bank accounts are being robbed, our intellectual prop-
erty is being illegally copied, and our critical infrastructures 
are  penetrated  and  could  stop  working  at  any  moment. 
The very fabric that contributes to nearly 40 percent of the 
productivity growth of the global economy also facilitates an 
equally robust underground economy.3

These messages appear to fall on deaf ears as our corpo-
rate and political leaders continue to talk about the troubled 
environment,  yet  too  few  are  adapting  to  or  assuming  the 

Melissa  Hathaway 
is  President  of  Hatha-
way  Global  Strategies, 
LLC  and  former  Act-
ing  Senior  Direc-
tor 
for  Cyberspace, 
U.S.  National  Secu-
rity Council. Hathaway 
served  as  Cyber  Coor-
dination Executive and 
Director  of  the  Joint 
Interagency Cyber Task 
Force  in  the  Office 
of 
the  Director  of 
National  Intelligence. 
Previously,  Hathaway 
was  a  Principal  with 
Booz  Allen  &  Hamil-
ton, Inc.

[71]

LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY

responsibility for resolving it. Instead, 
our  leaders  appear  to  be  paralyzed  by 
the  prolonged  economic  recovery  and 
are in denial of the security needs of our 
infrastructures  and  enterprises.  Why? 
Because  of  the  difficulty  in  balancing 
parallel  demands:  economic  recovery 
and  growth  vis-à-vis  national  securi-
ty  and  infrastructure  protection.  This 
tension  is  further  exacerbated  by  the 
competition for resources, lagging pol-
icy implementation, and an ill-defined 
technology roadmap to address security 
shortfalls  as  we  adopt  and  embed  the 
next-generation  technology  into  our 
infrastructures and enterprises. 

Policy makers, legislators, and busi-
nessmen should assess the gap between 
the  current  defense  posture  and  our 
needed  front  line  defense  in  the  face 
of  an  increasingly  sophisticated  range 
of actors. This paper describes a series 
of  case  studies  that  highlight  the  lack 
of  attention  being  paid  to  this  seri-
ous problem and the subsequent policy 
and technology solutions that are being 
brought to bear to close the gap. 
Operation  Buckshot  Yankee. 
In  the  fall  of  2010,  Deputy  Secre-
tary  of  Defense  William  Lynn  stated 
that the Department of Defense (DoD) 
had  “suffered  a  significant  compro-
mise of its classified military computer 
networks.”4  The  penetration  occurred 
in  2008  and  was  delivered  via  trust-
ed  uniformed  military  personnel  who 
were using USB mass-storage devices to 
move  important  operational  informa-
tion between unclassified and classified 
systems  in  support  of  U.S.  Central 
Command’s  military  operations.  The 
devices  at  issue  contained  a  malicious 
computer code, which was able to pro-

[72]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs  

liferate  undetected  from  network  to 
network.  The  code  was  designed  to 
illegally  copy  information  and,  when 
possible,  transfer  it  to  servers  under 
foreign control. 

The DoD code-named the discovery 
of,  and  recovery  from,  this  incident 
“Operation  Buckshot  Yankee.”  Gov-
ernment  leaders  wanted  to  learn  the 
extent  of  the  penetration  and  whether 
the  networks  could  still  be  “trusted.” 
Thousands of man-hours were expend-
ed  to  hunt  and  isolate  the  infections. 
The  DoD  developed  and  deployed 
technology to detect and close commu-
nication channels, as well as to eradicate 
the  infections.  The  total  operational 
and  capital  cost  has  yet  to  be  publicly 
disclosed. 

From  a  policy  perspective,  the  Sec-
retary of Defense and the Chairman of 
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  announced  a 
temporary  abandonment  of  the  use  of 
portable  media/storage  devices.  This 
affected  department  performance, 
enterprise  agility,  and  for  some,  the 
ability to execute their missions. From 
a  technology  perspective,  it  required 
a  change  in  architecture.  Prior  to  this 
event,  the  DoD  focused  its  defensive 
posture  from  an  outside-in,  defense-
in-depth  strategy.  And  even  though 
in 2007, the Comprehensive National 
Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) articu-
lated  and  funded  defensive  programs 
along four attack vectors—insider access, 
proximity  access,  remote  access,  and 
supply  chain  access—the  DoD  had  not 
yet  implemented  technology  to  detect 
and  deny  tainted  technology  brought 
into  the  enterprise  by  way  of  trusted 
insiders.5  Operation  Buckshot  Yankee 
required the DoD to begin to configure 
its sensors to look for and alert anoma-

HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012

lous behavior inside its networks. It also 
required the DoD to implement a data 
loss prevention program to block illegal 
data loss.

The  DoD  continues  to  suffer  from 
more  than  6  million  probes  per  day 
with  an  untold  number  of  success-
ful intrusions against their unclassified 
networks.6 Who is being held account-
able for the DoD’s cyber posture? Is it 
the  DoD  Chief  Information  Officer, 
the  Director  of  the  Defense  Informa-
tion  Services  Agency,  or  the  Com-
mander  of  United  States  Cyber  Com-
mand?  Actually,  it  is  a  combination 
of  these  individuals  and  offices  and 
many  more.  Ultimately,  however,  the 
overall  defensive  posture  for  the  DoD 
rests in the hands and responsibility of 
the Secretary of Defense. And while he 
may  have  been  embarrassed  by  a  for-
eign  country  being  able  to  penetrate 
the  armor  of  the  classified  networks, 
neither the DoD nor any of its leaders 
appear to have suffered any real penal-
ties or repercussions. If we are to adapt 
and  adjust,  we  must  require  greater 
accountability and demand leaders who 
will take charge rather than sit back and 
react only when necessary. 
Certificate Authorities. In 2011, 
governments  and  corporations  alike 
observed  a  new  trend  that  threatened 
their  ability  to  trust  Internet  transac-
tions:  the  targeting,  penetration,  and 
compromise  of  companies  that  pro-
duce  security  products.  In  particular, 
the  weak  security  postures  of  certifi-
cate authorities, including Commodo, 
DigiNotar,  and  RSA,  were  exploited, 
causing  a  wave  of  other  crimes  and 
consequences.  Digital  certificates  rep-
resent  a  second  form  of  identity  to 

help  enhance  “trust”  for  financial  or 
other  private  Internet  transactions  by 
confirming  that  something  or  some-
one is genuine.7 These certificates have 
become the de-facto credential used for 
secure  online  communications  and 
sensitive  transactions,  such  as  online 
banking  or  accessing  corporate  email 
from a home computer.

In  March  2011,  RSA  informed  its 
customers  of  a  breach  of  its  corpo-
rate  network,  which  could  reduce  the 
effectiveness  of  its  SecurID  two-factor 
authentication  token.8  RSA’s  SecurID 
two-factor  authentication  system  is  a 
widely used digital certificate system for 
remote access logins to corporate net-
works  through  virtual  private  networks 
and  by  many  financial  institutions 
including  the  United  States  Federal 
Reserve Bank. On 21 May 2011, a lead-
ing U.S. defense contractor, Lockheed 
Martin,  had  its  networks  penetrated. 
The  perpetrators  used  duplicates  of 
RSA’s  SecurID  tokens  to  gain  access 
to Lockheed’s internal network.9 After 
this breach and several others resulting 
from the SecurID issue, RSA leadership 
stated  it  would  replace  tokens,  upon 
customer  request  but  not  necessarily 
free of charge.10

Another  certificate  authority  pro-
vider  was  penetrated  in  June  2011. 
DigiNotar’s  corporate  network  servers 
were successfully penetrated and hack-
ers  gained  administrative  rights  to  its 
system.  An  audit  was  ordered  by  its 
parent  company,  Vasco,  in  July  2011 
and  the  auditors  discovered  that  the 
cryptographic  keys  had  been  compro-
mised  and  rogue  certificates  had  been 
issued.11  The  Dutch  government  was 
among DigiNotar’s key customers. 

These  compromises  represent  “a 

[73]

LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY

threat  to  one  of  the  most  fundamen-
tal  technologies  used  to  secure  online 
communications and sensitive transac-
tions.”12  The impact of these events is 
multifold.  First,  it  calls  into  question 
the  validity  of  two-factor  authentica-
tion.  Clearly,  the  cryptographic  keys 
can  be  compromised  and  therefore, 
whoever  has  the  “keys  to  the  king-
dom”  can  impersonate  something  or 
someone  and  compromise  the  integ-
rity of that remote transaction. Second, 
these companies sell security; it is their 
brand. If a security company is unwill-
ing  to  invest  in  its  own  security,  then 
why  should  others  invest  in  theirs? 
Finally,  the  incidents  caused  harm. 
DigiNotar  closed  its  doors  after  filing 
bankruptcy, and RSA suffered a loss of 
nearly  $66  million  and  a  diminished 
reputation.13  One  could  even  debate 
whether  RSA’s  lack  of  full  disclosure 
of the extent of their breach and com-
promise  of  their  product’s  integrity 
could lead to actions being filed against 
them—either  by  customers  or  govern-
ment  investigators.  Time  will  tell  what 

the basic investment required to secure 
their  own  infrastructures  and  enter-
prises.  They  are  not  even  implement-
ing  the  minimal  information  security 
procedures  and  controls  outlined  in 
the Consensus Audit Guidelines or the 
National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology  (NIST)  800-53,  Recom-
mended  Security  Controls  for  Federal 
Information  Systems  and  Organiza-
tions.14  Security  vendors  should  use 
these  available  resources  and  imple-
ment a policy that recognizes that some 
data  should  not  be  accessible  via  the 
Internet  and  publicly  acknowledge  the 
need  for  and  implement  better  infor-
mation security controls.

From a technology perspective, these 
companies  have  discovered  that  they 
need  to  install  new  technologies  and 
employ more vigilant processes in their 
enterprises to detect anomalous behav-
ior  and  continuously  monitor  their 
enterprises  for  good  and  bad  activ-
ity.  Additionally,  given  that  the  key 
authentication  technology  used  today 
has  been  compromised,  it  is  necessary 

The lack of corporate leadership and accountability 
for these events demonstrate that other market levers 
may be needed.

the true cost of these intrusions will be 
to  the  certificate  authorities  and  their 
customers. 

From a policy perspective, certificate 
authorities  in  particular  and  security 
vendors in general need to get back to 
security basics. The very enterprises that 
make a profit on their customers’ inse-
curity are insecure themselves. They are 
failing to lead by example by not making 

to  move  toward  the  research,  design, 
and employment of multiple chains of 
trust  for  devices,  users,  services,  and 
data sources for all transactions.

Furthermore,  the  lack  of  corporate 
leadership and accountability for these 
events  demonstrate  that  other  market 
levers may be needed to get the atten-
tion  of  the  Chief  Executive  Officers 
and  Boards  of  Directors.  In  Octo-

[74]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs  

HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012

ber  2011,  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  (SEC)  issued  a  notice  to 
industry  regarding  cybersecurity,  con-
firming that cyber risk and cyber intru-
sion events must be reported to the SEC 
and disclosed to the investing public as 
risks.15  If  the  SEC  doesn’t  hold  RSA 
accountable,  will  its  shareholders  and 
customers do so? It is actions like these 
that  will  get  the  attention  of  corpo-
rate leadership and thereby focus their 
attention on adapting to address cyber 
risks.
Cloud-based  Architectures. 
According  to  the  NIST,  “Cloud  com-
puting  is  a  model  for  enabling  conve-
nient,  on-demand  network  access  to  a 
shared pool of configurable computing 
resources [e.g., networks, servers, stor-
age, applications, and services] that can 
be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service 
provider interaction.”16 The networked 
environment is often measured by one 
of  three  attributes:  its  ability  to  deliv-
er  or  make  information  available,  its 
ability  to  preserve  its  confidentiality, 
and  its  ability  to  protect  its  integrity. 
Cloud computing is attractive to many 
businesses  and  governments  because  it 
promises to make information available 
to  its  customers  anywhere  and  at  any 
time.  But  the  other  two  cornerstones 
of  information  security—integrity  and 
confidentiality—are  not  readily  com-
manded by the cloud environment. An 
October 2010 report on cloud security 
from  Forrester  Research,  a  consulting 
and research firm, states that security is 
the single biggest barrier to broad cloud 
adoption.17

Citizens around the world are begin-
ning  to  experience  some  of  the  chal-

lenges  with  cloud-based  services.  In 
October  2011,  Research  in  Motion’s 
(RIM)  Blackberry  services  suffered  a 
three-day  outage  due  to  a  core  switch 
error  in  RIM’s  infrastructure.  As  a 
result,  BlackBerry  users  in  Europe, 
the  Middle  East,  Africa,  India,  Brazil, 
Chile,  and  Argentina  had  limited  or 
no access to email, web services, and in 
some  cases  voice  services.18  The  prob-
lem  cascaded  when  the  backup  system, 
according to RIM’s co-CEO Mike Laz-
aridis, “did not work the way we intend-
ed.”19  For  a  company  whose  reliability 
had  consistently  helped  it  maintain  a 
strong  customer  base,  RIM’s  service 
outage  shook  customer  confidence.20 
RIM  didn’t  deliver  on  its  promise  to 
provide  reliable,  real-time  communi-
cations  around  the  world,  and  cus-
tomers  lost  confidence  in  the  product 
and  service.  For  shareholders,  RIM’s 
domination of the corporate and gov-
ernment  mobile  IT  market  share  was 
jeopardized.  This  service  outage  left 
room for the iPhone, Android, Galaxy, 
and  others  to  take  market  share  and 
capture displeased customers. 

From  a  policy  perspective,  it  high-
lighted the need to have disaster recov-
ery  mechanisms  in  place.  If  you  were 
a  customer  of  RIM,  it  highlighted  the 
gap in continuity of business operations 
and the fact that RIM could not deliver 
on its service level agreements. The tan-
gible  and  intangible  costs  are  immea-
surable.  From  a  technology  point  of 
view, it demonstrated the fragility of the 
cloud  and  the  need  to  test  technology 
prior to embedding it into core opera-
tions. It also showed the need for those 
who  promise  a  24/7  service  to  have  a 
graceful degrading architecture so that 
customers do not suffer from a lack of 

[75]

LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY

quality or continuity of service. 

RIM  is  not  the  only  company  to 
have  suffered  from  cloud  computing 
issues.  Recently,  LinkedIn,  e-Harmo-
ny, Yahoo!, and other social network-
ing sites disclosed that their systems had 
been  breached  and  their  customers’ 
passwords and other personal identifi-
able information had been stolen. Data 
breaches  have  serious  consequences—
according  to  a  recent  report,  “victims 
of  data  breaches  are  9.5  times  more 
likely  to  be  a  victim  of  identity  fraud 
than  consumers  who  did  not  receive 
such a data breach letter.”21

In 1994, Citibank suffered from one 
of  the  first  data  breaches  that  resulted 
in loss of funds. It also resulted in the 
creation  of  a  new  corporate  position, 
the Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO). Many corporations, especially 
those selling information services, have 
personnel  responsible  for  the  secu-
rity  of  their  infrastructure  and  service 
offering.  LinkedIn,  whose  June  2012 
data  breach  affected  nearly  6.5  mil-
lion  customers,  had  neither  a  Chief 
Information Officer nor a CISO. In a 
focused  inquiry  of  this  gap,  the  com-
pany stated that they have a person who 
is  responsible  for  the  functions  of  a 
CISO.22  Yet,  LinkedIn  apparently  was 
not taking the appropriate measures to 
secure customer information until after 
the  breach,  according  to  their  corpo-
rate  blog,  when  they  instituted  addi-
tional or “enhanced” security measures 
by  adding  a  layer  of  technical  protec-
tion.23 It remains unclear whether they 
will appoint an executive who is focused 
on protecting the corporation’s infra-
structure and customer data. 

Furthermore, for LinkedIn and oth-
ers, an apology may not be sufficient for 

its  customers  or  the  government.  The 
Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC), 
which  has  filed  suits  in  the  past  for 
failure  to  protect  consumers’  personal 
information, is exercising its consumer 
protection and e-commerce authorities 
to ensure that “companies live up to the 
promises  they  make  about  privacy  and 
data security.”24 Today, LinkedIn faces 
at least one class action suit for failure 
to properly safeguard its users’ digitally 
stored  information.  Again,  whether  it 
is  government  or  private  actors,  we 
are  witnessing  reactions  to  failures  in 
leadership. Ultimately, we need proac-
tive leaders to drive change and address 
cyber risk early. 
Weapons  and  the  Internet. 
Critical  infrastructures  deliver  essen-
tial  services  like  water,  electricity,  oil 
and  gas,  and  sewage,  requiring  certain 
components  to  be  able  to  deliver  the 
product  (e.g.,  electricity)  to  the  cus-
tomer  (e.g.,  business  or  household). 
These infrastructures are comprised of 
many  computer,  controller,  and  net-
work  communications  components.  A 
supervisory  control  and  data  acqui-
sition  system  (SCADA)  or  industrial 
control  system  (ICS)  is  at  the  heart  of 
the  functionality  of  this  ecosystem,  as 
it monitors and controls processes and 
flows of information. 

Over  the  last  decade,  industry  has 
increased  connections  between  infor-
mation  technology  and  control  system 
networks  to  reduce  cost  and  increase 
efficiency  of 
systems.  Executives 
acknowledge that such connections cre-
ate  security  issues  because  they  have 
chosen  to  shift  their  operations  from 
once isolated systems to open protocols 
where  individuals  and  computers  can 

[76]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs  

HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012

gain access to remote sites through the 
use  of  modems,  wireless,  private  and 
public networks, all of which are facili-
tated by the Internet. 

industrial control computers that were 
wide  open  to  exploitation  and  digital 
sabotage.28

From  a  policy  perspective,  enter-
The  Stuxnet  worm  infected  more 
prises  that  are  dependent  on  control 
than sixty thousand computers around 
systems  are  forced  to  conduct  vulner-
the  world  and  was  “designed  to  pen-
ability assessments and review their risk 
etrate and establish control over remote 
management controls (e.g., risk regis-
systems  in  a  quasi-autonomous  fash-
ter)  due  to  the  potential  issues  related 
ion.”25 Its use resulted in the degrada-
to worms, such as Flame and Stuxnet.29   
tion  and  ultimate  shut  down  of  Iran’s 
The  worry  is  that  the  malware  could 
nuclear  facility  in  Natanz.  The  source 
deliberately or inadvertently shut down 
code  was  analyzed  around  the  world, 
infrastructures  and/or  operations. 
replicated  (e.g.,  Flame  and  DuQu), 
These  same  enterprises  also  have  to 
The deployment of Stuxnet raises a new set of ques-
tions and...even more concerns about the future of 
the Internet and Internet-based infrastructures.

proliferated,  and  has  been  traded  on 
the black market. In fact, security offi-
cials worry that this worm will be used 
again to attack other critical infrastruc-
tures  that  rely  on  computers  and  have 
the same security flaws.26

Finding the ICS vulnerabilities does 
not require a strong industrial base or 
well-financed  operations—even  a  kid 
could  do  it.  As  a  young  explorer  of 
the Internet, a teenage computer pro-
grammer named John Matherly devel-
oped  an  Internet  mapping  tool  called 
Shodan. By combining a search engine, 
Google Maps, and his understanding of 
the Internet, he was able to locate thou-
sands  of  Internet  connected  devices 
based  on  city,  country,  latitude/longi-
tude, hostname, operating system, and 
IP.27  He  gave  this  tool  to  his  friends, 
and  they  quickly  realized  they  were 
able  to  access  uncounted  numbers  of 

review, create, or update their disaster 
recovery  plans.  Architecturally,  tech-
nology  needs  to  be  inserted  into  the 
enterprise  to  detect  any  changes  in 
the “state” of the system. For example, 
electric utilities and grid operators can 
use the Cyber Security Self-Evaluation 
Survey  Tool,  developed  by  the  United 
States Department of Energy to “iden-
tify  opportunities  to  further  develop 
their  own  cyber  security  capabilities,” 
by  considering  “a  series  of  questions 
that focus on areas including situational 
awareness  and  threat  and  vulnerability 
management.”30

The  deployment  of  Stuxnet  raises 
a  new  set  of  questions  and  for  many, 
even more concerns about the future of 
the Internet and Internet-based infra-
structures.  Did  the  decision-makers 
who decided to use Stuxnet consider the 
consequences  of  proliferation  of  the 

[77]

LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY

capability and potential re-use or retal-
iatory deployment of a similar weapon? 
Or were they seduced by the technology 
and  ability  to  deliver  it  stealthily  over 
the  Internet?  Did  they  review  their 
infrastructure’s own vulnerabilities and 
determine  that  the  offensive  use  out-
weighed  the  risk  and  consequences  of 
domestic  infrastructure  outage?  Was 
there even a responsible debate?
Conclusion.  Leaders—both  in  gov-
ernment and business—are expected to 
be  responsible  and  address  key  prob-
lems. The inescapable conclusion from 
the  examples  discussed  in  this  paper, 
however, is that our leaders are failing 
in  their  duties  by  not  acting  quick-
ly  enough,  and  are  instead  being  out 
maneuvered  and  outwitted  by  those 
who  intend  harm.  The  examples  in 
this  paper  show  a  reactive  approach 
to  change,  whether  in  the  DoD  after 
Operation Buckshot Yankee, with RSA 

and  other  certificate  authorities  that 
suffered  critical  breaches,  RIM’s  crip-
pling  service  outage,  or  the  Stuxnet 
worm  infecting  critical  infrastructures 
around  the  world.  Denials,  apologies, 
or  reactive  change  will  not  solve  the 
problem, nor will continued study and 
debate  on  potential  legislative  changes 
or government oversight. 

Darwin  taught  that  to  survive  one 
must  adapt  and  adjust  to  a  changing 
environment.  As  the  world  contin-
ues  to  progress  digitally,  real  leader-
ship  requires  adopting  and  embed-
ding  sometimes-costly  security  solu-
tions into our core infrastructures and 
enterprises and stop leaving the security 
of companies, governments, and indi-
viduals to chance.31 Leaders in govern-
ment  and  business  must  work  proac-
tively to finally take steps to adapt and 
adjust to where the cyber environment 
already  has  evolved,  and  if  they  don’t, 
they must be held accountable.

[78]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs  

HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012

NOTES

1  Charles  Darwin,  On the Origin of Species  (London: 

John Murray, 1859).

2 International Telecommunications Union, “The 
World  in  2011:  ICT  Facts  and  Figures,”  Internet, 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/
ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf.

3 Jesus Rodriguez and Diego Martinez, “The Role 
of ICT in the Economic Growth and Productivity of 
Andalucia,” European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Insti-
tute for Prospective Technological Studies (2007): 11, Internet, 
http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/eur22781en.pdf.

4 William J. Lynn III, “Defending a New Domain: 
The  Pentagon’s  Cyberstratgy,”  Foreign Affairs  (Septem-
ber/October  2010),  Internet,  http://www.foreignaf-
fairs.com/articles/66552/william-j-lynn-iii/defend-
ing-a-new-domain.

5  Insider  Access:  Unauthorized  use  or  access  to 
information,  systems,  and  networks  by  otherwise 
trusted  agents  (employees).  The  White  House,  “The 
Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative,” 
(August 2009), Internet, http://www.whitehouse.gov/
cybersecurity/comprehensive-national-cybersecurity-
initiative. See also, Melissa E. Hathaway, “Examining 
the Homeland Security Impact of the Obama Admin-
istration’s  Cybersecurity  Proposal,”  (Statement  for 
the  Record  House  of  Representatives  Committee  on 
Homeland  Security,  Sub-Committee  on  Cyberse-
curity,  Infrastructure  Protection  and  Security  Tech-
nologies, 24 June 2011).

6 Probe: Any attempt to gather information about 
an automated information system or its on-line users.
Computer  intrusion:  An  incident  of  unauthorized 
access to data or an automated information system.
Keith  Alexander,  “Testimony,”  (Statement  for  the 
House of Representatives Committee on Armed Ser-
vices, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, 20 March 
2012).

7  Certificate  Authorities  issue  secure  socket  layer 
(SSL)  certificates  that  help  encrypt  and  authenticate 
websites and other online services.

8  EMC  Corporation,  “8K  Report  for  the  Secu-
rities  and  Exchange  Commission,”  (filed  17  March 
2011).

9 Jeffrey Carr, “An Open Source Analysis Of The 
Lockheed Martin Network Breach,” Digital Dao Blog, (31 
May  2011),  http://jeffreycarr.blogspot.com/2011/05/
open-source-analysis-of-lockheed-martin.html.

10 Arthur W. Coviello, Jr., “Open Letter to RSA 
Customers,” (March 2011), Internet, http://www.rsa.
com/node.aspx?id=3872. See also, Kim Zetter, “RSA 
Agrees  to  Replace  Security  Tokens  After  Admitting 
Compromise,”  Wired  Magazine,  (7  June  2011),  Inter-
net,  http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/06/rsa-
replaces-securid-tokens/.

11 Fox-IT, “Interim Report: DigiNotar Certificate 
Authority  breach  “Operation  Black  Tulip,”  (5  Sep-
tember 2011): 5.

12  Symantec  Corporation,  “Symantec  Internet 

Security Threat Report: 2011 Trends,” (April 2012): 
13.

13 Arthur W. Coviello, Jr., “Written Testimony,” 
(For the United States House of Representatives, Per-
manent Select Committee on Intelligence, 4 October 
2011).

14 NIST develops and issues standards, guidelines, 
and  other  publications  to  assist  public  and  private 
institutions with managing cost effective programs to 
protect  their  information  and  information  systems. 
The  controls  outlined  in  the  800-53  document 
include a set of management, operational, and tech-
nical safeguards (or countermeasures) prescribed for 
an information system to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of the system and its infor-
mation.  The  CAG  outlines  best  practice  guidelines 
for computer security and recommends twenty secu-
rity controls that organizations should implement to 
block or mitigate known attacks. National Institute of 
Standards  and  Technology,  “Information  Security,” 
(August  2009).  SANS,  “Twenty  Critical  Security 
Controls for Effective Cyber Consensus Audit Guide-
lines,”  October  2011,  Internet,  http://www.sans.org/
critical-security-controls/cag3_1.pdf.

15  U.S.  Securities  Exchange  Commission,  “CF 
Disclosure  Guidance:  Topic  No.  2,  Cybersecurity,” 
(13 October 2011), http://www.sec.gov/divisions/cor-
pfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.  Public  com-
panies  have  existing  obligations  to  disclose  material 
risks and events on their public filings. A risk or event 
is  material  if  it  is  important  for  the  average  inves-
tor  to  know  before  making  an  investment  decision. 
Material  risks  can  include  cyber  risks  and  material 
events can include cyber breaches, including the theft 
of  intellectual  property/trade  secrets,  penetrations 
which compromise operational integrity, etc. See also, 
Melissa  Hathaway,  “Creating  the  Demand  Curve  for 
Cybersecurity,”  Georgetown  Journal  of  International  Affairs. 
Special Issue: International Engagement on Cyber, (Winter 2011): 
165. While RSA disclosed the incident with the SEC, 
it claimed that the event was not material in nature.

16 Peter Mell and Tim Grance, “The NIST Defi-
nition of Cloud Computing,” (Version 15   October 
2009),  Internet,  http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/
cloud-computing/cloud-def-v15.doc.

17 Jonathan Penn, “Security and the Cloud: Look-
ing At The Opportunity Beyond The Obstacle,” For-
rester Report, (October 2010).

18 Charles Arthur. “BlackBerry users revolt against 
RIM as disruption spreads,” The Guardian, (11 October 
2011),  Internet,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/technol-
ogy/2011/oct/11/blackberry-users-revolt-against-rim.
19 Julianne Pepitone. “BlackBerry service restored 
after worst outage ever,” CNN Money Tech, (13 October 
2011),  Internet,  http://money.cnn.com/2011/10/13/
technology/blackberry_outage/index.htm.

20  The  fact  that  it  occurred  the  same  week  that 
Apple  was  launching  its  iPhone  4S  further  compli-

[79]

LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY

cated its situation, as RIM has struggled to keep up in 
the smartphone and tablet markets.

21  Javelin  Strategy  &  Research,  “2012  Identity 
Fraud Report: Social Media and Mobile Forming the 
New  Fraud  Frontier,”  Internet,  https://www.javelin-
strategy.com/brochure/239.

22  Eric  Chabrow,  “LinkedIn  Has  Neither  CIO 
nor CISO,” Data Breach Today, (8 June 2012), Internet, 
http://www.databreachtoday.com/blogs/linkedin-has-
neither-cio-nor-ciso-p-1289.

23  Vincente  Silveira,  “Taking  Steps  to  Protect 
Our Members,” LinkedIn Blog, (7 June 2012), Internet, 
http://blog.linkedin.com/2012/06/07/taking-steps-
to-protect-our-members/.

24 Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Files Com-
plaint Against Wyndham Hotels for failure to Protect 
Consumers’ Personal Information,” (26 June 2012), 
Internet,  http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/06/wyndham.
shtm.

25 James P. Farwell and Rafal Rohozinski, “Stux-
net and the Future of Cyber War,” Survival 53, no. 1 
(February–March 2011): 24.

26 Stewart Meagher, “Stuxnet worm hits the black 
market,”  THINQ.  (25  November  2010),  Internet, 
http://www.thinq.co.uk/2010/11/25/stuxnet-worm-
hits-black-market/.

27 See Shodan software at: http://www.shodanhq.

com

28  Robert  O’Harrow  Jr.,  “Cyber  search  engine 
Shodan  exposes  industrial  control  systems  to  new 

risks,”  The  Washington  Post,  3  June  2012,  Internet, 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/cyber-
search-engine-exposes-vulnerabilities/2012/06/03/
gJQAIK9KCV_story.html.

29  A  worm  is  a  destructive  program  that  repli-
cates  itself  throughout  a  single  computer  or  across  a 
network,  both  wired  and  wireless.  It  can  do  damage 
by  sheer  reproduction,  consuming  internal  disk  and 
memory  resources  within  a  single  computer  or  by 
exhausting  network  bandwidth.  It  can  also  deposit  a 
Trojan that turns a computer into a zombie for spam 
and other malicious purposes. Very often, the terms 
“worm” and “virus” are used synonymously; however, 
worm implies an automatic method for reproducing 
itself  in  other  computers.  “Worm  Definition,”  PC 
Magazine, Internet, http://www.pcmag.com/encyclope-
dia_term/0,2542,t%3Dworm&i%3D54874,00.asp.

30 AOL Energy, “How Good is Your Security? A 
New DOE Tool Will Help You Find Out,” (10 July 
2012),  Internet,  http://energy.aol.com/2012/07/10/
how-good-is-your-security-a-new-doe-tool-will-
help-you-find-out/.

31  Jack  Goldsmith  and  Melissa  Hathaway,  “The 
Cybersecurity  Changes  We  Need,”  The  Washington  Post, 
(29  May  2010),  Internet,  http://www.washington-
post.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/05/28/
AR2010052803698.html.

[80]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs  

