 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY 

 

 

United States Government Cybersecurity 

Relationships 

MARK D. YOUNG

* 

“Securing our networks is a team sport.” 
General Keith B. Alexander, USA 
Director, National Security Agency 
Commander, United States Cyber Command 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The  United  States  federal  government  must  strengthen  its 
 
relationships  to  better  design,  build,  manage,  and  defend  the 
information  infrastructure  on  which  American  society  and  security 
now  depends.  Our  lives  are  now  inextricably  tied  to  the  information 
that surrounds us. We use an ever-expanding set of devices to access 
this information and to create order from the chaotic jumble of facts, 
figures, downloads, and databases that confront us in our professional 
and our personal lives.  
The  overwhelming  nature  of  the  information  age  also  challenges 
 
traditional governance structures. The federal government finds itself 
managing  its  interactions  with  data  that  is  growing  at  a  significant 

 
 

 
 

* Executive Director, Directorate of Plans and Policy, United States Cyber Command. The 
views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy 
or position of the Department of Defense or any part of the U.S. Government. This article is 
derived entirely from open source material and contains no classified information. It is 
intended to depict the enduring complexity and range of issues and relationships entailed 
in organizing cyber security policy and implementation at the federal level, even though the 
lapse of time between writing and publication will undoubtedly render certain specific 
details obsolete. 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

relationships  are  necessary 

for 

Strong  operational 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

278 
 
rate.  It  is  responsible  for  creating,  managing,  and  securing  a  large 
portion  of  the  terabytes  of  information  needed  to  ensure  national 
security, maintain diplomatic relationships with other nations, collect 
taxes,  provide  benefits,  enforce  laws,  and  the  myriad  other  duties 
needed for a population of more than 312 million people. Information 
networks, data storage, and management systems play a role in every 
function  of  today’s  federal  government.  Driven  by  the  financial  and 
access benefits of information technology, the federal government has 
become  as  reliant  on  information  systems  as  the  U.S.  population,  if 
not more so.  
 
Because of this reliance on computers for governance, the federal 
government  must  ensure  that  U.S.  information  systems  are  resilient 
against mechanical breakdown and protected against a wide variety of 
mischief-makers  who  seek  to  disable  information  networks,  whether 
for the mere challenge of the exercise, or for more nefarious purposes.  
 
the 
management  and  protection  of  federal  networks  because  no  single 
federal branch, department, or agency has the authority or resources 
to operate and defend the interconnected systems needed to perform 
government  functions.  Just  as  different  elements  of  the  government 
designed and built information systems for their particular needs, the 
authorities  over  these  networks  have  evolved  without  conscious 
design  or  structure.  The  major  player  in  government  information 
technology is not the government at all—it is the operators of the large 
capacity  fiber-optic  networks  over which  the  majority  of  federal  data 
flows: private sector Internet service providers. 
 
These  private  sector  entities  have  invested  in  infrastructure 
improvements  and  technology  development  at  a  rate  with  which  the 
federal government cannot compete. After years of relatively generous 
federal spending, the budget horizon looks ominous. According to the 
Congressional  Budget  Office,“[t]he  budget  deficit  in  fiscal  year  2011 
will  total  nearly  $1.3  trillion.”1  With  significant  federal  budget 
reductions,  government  departments  and  agencies  that  do  not 
maintain strong operational relationships  with government  and non-
governmental  partners  will  be  overwhelmed  by  resource  constraints, 
will  mismanage  the  operation  and  protection  of  their  networks,  and 
will put other systems at risk because of the interconnected nature of 
information systems.  

 
 

 
 

1 The History and Drivers of our Nation’s Debt and Its Threats: Hearing Before the Joint 
Select Comm. on Deficit Reduction, 112th Cong. 56 (2011) (prepared statement of Douglas 
W. Elmendorf, Director, Congressional Budget Office) (At 8.5 % of GDP, this year’s deficit 
will be the third-largest shortfall in the past sixty-five years, exceeded only by those in 
2009 (at 10.0 %) and 2010 (at 8.9 %)). 

 

279 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
 
Funding  constraints  are  one  reason  for  strong  cyber  operational 
relationships, but the  need  for visibility  into  the health  and  status  of 
government  networks  is  another.  Multiple  federal  systems  may  be 
linked  together,  but  only  the  department,  agency,  or  private  sector 
owner  has  the  ability  to  monitor,  identify,  and  understand  the 
performance  of 
their  respective  networks.  Shared  situational 
awareness  enables  the  rapid  identification  of  malicious  activity  or 
unauthorized  access  across  all  systems.  A  threat  to  a  small  private 
sector  Internet  service  provider  may  also  become  a  threat  to  large 
federal entities because of the nature of the Internet. A threat to one is 
now  a  threat  to  all.  Without  trusted  operational  cyber-relationships 
within  the  federal  government  and  between  the  government  and 
private  sector,  adequate  cyber  threat  information  sharing  will  not 
happen.  
 
Even  with  robust  operational  relationships,  a  detrimental  cyber 
event  may  still  occur.  If  a  cyber  event  disrupts  the  provision  of 
government  services  to  the  U.S.  population,  these  functions  must  be 
restored and the loss of connectivity mitigated as quickly as possible. 
Hurricane  Katrina  provided  dramatic  lessons  of  the  importance  of 
interagency  coordination  and  operational  relationships  during  crises 
that  cause  widespread  chaos,  destruction,  and  communication 
outages. The weaker the relationships among federal departments and 
agencies  and  between  the  government  and  the  private  sector,  the 
longer  mitigation  will  take,  and  the  more  the  problems  will  be 
widespread. 
 
 A  natural  disaster  or  mechanical  failure  may  challenge  the 
government’s  cyber  coordination  abilities,  but  a  traditional  military 
crisis would rapidly overwhelm an unprepared government. Although 
it  is  unlikely  that  a  cyber  attack  would  stand  alone  as  a  single 
adversarial action against the United States, the speed and distributed 
nature of such an attack would require close coordination between the 
public  and  private  sectors,  and  within  the  national  security 
bureaucracy.  It  is  likely  that  information  network  capabilities  would 
be used to nullify the conventional advantage of the U.S. military. The 
unique  characteristics  of  cyber  attacks2 
require  operational 

 
 

 
 

2 See Jonathan Masters, Confronting the Cyber Threat, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS 
(2011), available at http://www.cfr.org/technology-and-foreign-policy/confronting- 
cyber-threat/p15577. First, they are often asymmetric, meaning that actors with limited 
financial or technical resources have the capability to compromise high-value targets. 
Second, offense has the advantage in the digital realm. The web's collaborative nature 
means openness is prioritized over security. This design feature ensures cyber defenses lag 
behind offensive methods. Finally, investigations into cyber attacks suffer from a so-called 
attribution problem.  

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

280 
 
relationships  that  are  agile,  innovative,  and  do  not  only  respond  to 
threats  quickly,  but  also  anticipate  potential  adversarial  actions  and 
coordinate  responses  before  U.S.  national  interests  are  damaged  or 
destroyed.  
 
Close  federal  cyber  relationships  are  necessary  because  of  the 
limited  cyber  authorities  of  each  department  and  agency,  the  limited 
resources  available  to  these  departments  and  agencies  to  operate 
independent  networks,  the  need  for  shared  informational  awareness, 
and the need for coordinated responses to foreign cyber threats. This 
article  characterizes  the  operational  relationships  among  federal 
government  organizations  with  significant  cyber  security  roles.  It 
describes  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  those  relationships  and 
makes  recommendations  as  to  how  to  improve  the  cooperation  and 
collaboration  within  the  federal  government.  The  relationships 
between  the  public  sector  and  the  private  sector  are  then  examined 
with  descriptions  of  their  strengths  and  weakness.  The  article 
concludes  with  recommendations  for  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of 
these relationships.  

II. FEDERAL INTERAGENCY CYBERSECURITY  

OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 

 
The  Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO)  has  regularly 
designated  federal  information  security  as  a  high-risk  area  since 
1997.3 High-risk designations are for programs that are determined to 
have  serious  weaknesses,  while  involving  significant  resources  and 
providing important public services. According to GAO:  

Executive  branch  agencies,  in  particular  DHS,  also 
need to improve their capacity to protect against cyber 
threats  by,  among  other  things,  advancing  cyber 
analysis  and  warning  capabilities,  acquiring  sufficient 
analytical  and 
technical  capabilities,  developing 
strategies  for  hiring  and  retaining  highly  qualified 
cyber  analysts,  and  strengthening  the  effectiveness  of 
the public-private sector partnerships in securing cyber 
critical infrastructure.4 

 
 

 
 

3 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-11-278, REPORT TO CONGRESS HIGH RISK 
SERIES: AN UPDATE 101 (2011), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11278.pdf. 

4 Id. at 102.  

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

281 

The  departments  with  the  largest  cybersecurity  budgets  are  the 
departments of Defense and Homeland Security. “For fiscal year 2012, 
the  two  [departments]  requested  a  combined  $3.4  billion  in  cyber-
related  funds  (yet  to  be  approved).”5  The  cooperation  between  these 
departments  was  formalized  in  a  memorandum  of  agreement  in 
September  2010  permitting  the  exchange  of  personnel  to  facilitate 
communication  of  each  department’s  priorities  and 
improve 
information  sharing.6  Relationships  between  the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Investigation  and  the  private  sector  have  also  improved  with  the 
establishment  of  the  National  Cyber  Investigative  Joint  Task  Force, 
which aims to “coordinate, integrate, and share information related to 
all  domestic  cyber  threat  investigations.”7  The  task  force  includes 
eighteen  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  organizations  working  to 
anticipate  and  prevent  future  cyber  exploitations  and  to  investigate 
the sources of illicit network activities. However, despite this progress, 
there  are  a  number  of  challenges  to  effective  federal  interagency 
operational relationships in cybersecurity. 

A. CHALLENGES TO FEDERAL OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 

 
First, the federal government is very large. With a total budget of 
over  $3.5  trillion  in  2010,  the  federal  government  dwarfs  the  size  of 
any  private  sector  organization.  According  to  the  Bureau  of  Labor 
Statistics,  the  federal  government  is  the  largest  employer  in  United 
States.8 It is divided into three branches with unequal percentages of 
the  federal  workforce.  The 
legislative  branch  is  the  smallest, 
employing  approximately  one  percent  of  the  federal  workforce.  The 
judicial  branch  is  next,  employing  two  percent.  Far  outpacing  the 
other  branches,  the  executive  branch  employs  approximately  ninety-
seven  percent  of  the  federal  civilian  workforce  (excluding  Postal 

 
 

 
 

5 Masters, supra note 2. 

6 See Memorandum of Agreement Between the Dep’t of Homeland Sec. and the Dep’t of 
Def. Regarding Cybersecurity (Sept. 27, 2010), available at 
http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/20101013-dod-dhs-cyber-moa.pdf. 

7 See National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force, FED. BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, 
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/cyber/ncijtf (last visited Feb. 17, 2012). 

8 BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS, U.S. DEP’T OF LABOR, CAREER GUIDE TO INDUSTRIES, 2010-
11 EDITION, available at http://www.bls.gov/oco/cg/cgs041.htm (last visited Mar. 28, 
2012) (The federal government employs approximately two million people). 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

282 
 
Service  workers).9  Each  of  the  federal  branches,  departments,  and 
agencies  has  at  least  one  network  it  uses  to  communicate  and  to 
execute its responsibilities.  
Second, exact statistics on how many networks are operated by the 
 
federal  departments  are  difficult  to  find.10  This  makes  knowing  how 
many  connections  exist  between  the  Internet  and  government 
networks difficult to estimate. The Department of Homeland Security 
oversees the management of an unknown number of civilian executive 
branch  networks.  The  Department  of  Defense  oversees 
the 
management  of  15,000  military  networks.11  The  number  of 
connections  between  different  networks  is  determined  by  the  nature 
of  the  network,  the  transactions  supported  by  the  network,  the  in-
house  applications  on  different  networks,  and  data-flow  efficiencies. 
Thus,  there  may  be  a  single  connection  or  multiple  connections 
between  any  two  individual  networks.  Under  the  Trusted  Internet 
Connections  initiative  announced  in  November  2007,  the  Office  of 
Management  and  Budget  sought  to  standardize  and  secure  links 
between 
individual  federal  networks  and  external,  non-federal 
networks—including  the  Internet.12  In  January  2008,  the  number  of 
these  connections  was  reported  to  be  more  than  4,300.13  If  each  of 
these  connections  is  estimated  to  be  associated  with  only  ten 
networks—a  conservatively  low  number—then  the  department  would 
be  responsible  for  operating  and  defending  more  than  43,000 
networks.  

 
 

 
 

9 Id. 

10 A network is the entire infrastructure, organization, personnel, and components for the 
collection, processing, storage, transmission, display, dissemination, and disposition of 
information. This is an adaptation of the definition provided by the Department of 
Defense. JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF, DEP’T OF DEFENSE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DICTIONARY 
OF MILITARY AND ASSOCIATED TERMS 161, JP 1-02 (2012), available at 
http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp1_02.pdf (defining information system). 

11 William J. Lynn III, Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon’s Cyberstrategy, FOREIGN 
AFF., Sept./Oct. 2010, at 98.  

12 See Memorandum from Clay Johnson III, Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Executive Office of 
the President, to the Heads of Executive Dep'ts & Agencies, (Nov. 20, 2007), available at 
http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/omb/memoranda/fy2008/m08-05.pdf. 

13 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., TRUSTED INTERNET CONNECTIONS (TIC) INITIATIVE: 
STATEMENT OF CAPABILITY EVALUATION REPORT 2 (2008) available at 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/egov_docs/2008_TIC_SOC_
EvaluationReport.pdf. 

 

2012] 
 
 
The  Department  of  Defense  has  described  in  great  detail  the 
information  systems  for  which  it  is  responsible.  According  to  the 
former Deputy Secretary of Defense: 

YOUNG 

283 

Information  technology  enables  almost  everything  the 
U.S.  military  does: 
logistical  support  and  global 
command  and  control of  forces, real-time  provision  of 
intelligence, and remote operations. Every one of these 
functions  depends  heavily  on  the  military's  global 
communications  backbone,  which  consists  of  15,000 
networks  and  seven  million  computing  devices  across 
hundreds  of  installations  in  dozens  of  countries.  More 
than  90,000  people  work  full  time  to  maintain  it.  In 
less  than  a  generation,  information  technology  in  the 
military  has  evolved  from  an  administrative  tool  for 
enhancing  office  productivity  into  a  national  strategic 
asset  in  its  own  right.  The  U.S.  government's  digital 
infrastructure  now  gives  the  United  States  critical 
advantages  over  any  adversary,  but  its  reliance  on 
computer networks also potentially enables adversaries 
to gain valuable intelligence about U.S. capabilities and 
operations,  to  impede  the  United  States'  conventional 
military forces, and to disrupt the U.S. economy.14 

The  U.S.  government  remains  configured  in  an  Industrial  Age 
structure.  There  have  been  incremental  advancements  in  the  use  of 
information technology, but these changes have been institutionalized 
in  isolated  contexts  without  regard  for  the  benefits  of  a  unifying 
strategic  vision.  Our  current  circumstances  present  evolving  and 
exponentially  increasing  cyber  threats  to  federal  systems,  including 
unauthorized access to personally identifiable information,15 data theft 
or  exploitation,  unauthorized  access  to  government  data,  and  cyber 
and financial crimes.  

 
 

 
 

14 Lynn, supra note 11, at 98.  

15 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-08-536 1, PRIVACY: ALTERNATIVES EXIST 
FOR ENHANCING PROTECTION OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION (2008), available 
at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08536.pdf (Personally identifiable information 
includes any information about an individual maintained by an agency, including (1) any 
information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such as name, 
Social Security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, or biometric 
records; and (2) any other information that is linked or linkable to an individual, such as 
medical, educational, financial, and employment information.).  

 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

[Vol. 8:2 

284 
 
 
Broad  changes  to  the  structures  within  federal  branches, 
departments,  and  agencies  are  unlikely.  In  order  to  maximize  the 
efficiencies  and  capability  of  individual  federal  systems,  strong 
operational  relationships  are  necessary.  The  government  has 
established  some  operational  relationships  among  federal  entities 
with  cybersecurity  responsibilities,  and  there  is  limited  effort  to 
improve  collaboration  and  information  sharing  with  the  private 
sector.  
 
Through  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  activities,  and  the 
knowledge needed to merely operate large information networks, the 
federal  government  has  extensive  data  about  the  status  of  individual 
networks,  malicious  activity  on  these  networks,  and  the  criminal 
activity  that  may  be  facilitated  through  these  networks.  Information 
sharing 
its  value  and  produce 
understanding.  After  the  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  the  9/11 
Commission  stated,  “[t]he  U.S.  government  has  access  to  a  vast 
amount  of  information.  When  databases  not  usually  thought  of  as 
‘intelligence,’  such  as  customs  or  immigration  information,  are 
included,  the  storehouse  is  immense.”16  The  same  may  be  said  for 
cyber  threat  information.  “The  biggest  impediment  to  all-source 
analysis—to a greater likelihood of connecting the dots—is the human 
or systemic resistance to sharing information.”17 
 
Anxiety over the loss of prosecutorial advantage, the compromise 
of intelligence sources and methods, and civil liability for the private 
sector  has  precluded  the  sharing  of  information  among  federal 
branches,  department,  and  agencies—and  between  the  government 
and the private sector.  

is  necessary  to  capitalize  on 

 

While  investment  banks,  defense  contractors,  and 
other  critical  infrastructure  owners  have  information 
about intrusions into their own systems and networks, 
they  fear  enforcement  actions  by  regulators,  suits  by 
plaintiffs’ lawyers, and criticism associated with public 
disclosure  of  security  failures.  Concerns  such  as  these 
make 
to  share 
information with the federal government. While federal 
agencies know that their networks should be protected 
in many of the same ways that private sector networks 

these  private  entities  reluctant 

 
 

 
 

16 NAT’L COMM’N ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE U.S., THE 9/11 COMMISSION REPORT 
416-17 (2004). 

17 Id. 

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

285 

are,  concerns—including  the  opposition  of  privacy 
advocates to technology that sniffs traffic in and out of 
government systems—have slowed progress.18 

 
Fear of the loss of departmental resources and authority, and the 
perceived  need  to  control  information  in  and  about  federal  agencies, 
encourages  unilateral  approaches  to  federal  network  operations  and 
defense. The Center of Strategic and International Studies reported on 
the unsatisfying progress in U.S. cybersecurity: 

Unsurprisingly,  protecting  “turf”  played  a  role  [in 
slowing  cybersecurity  progress].  Cyber  functions  are 
scattered  across  the  executive  branch.  Reorganization 
could mean that some offices would have to surrender 
control. The different offices argue that this would put 
important  equities  that  they  now  oversee  at  risk.  Turf 
concerns  intertwine  with  the  conceptual  dispute  over 
innovation, economics, and the nature of the Internet. 
little  interest  in 
The  cabinet  agencies  also  have 
supporting  a 
in 
cybersecurity, 
their 
independence.19 

stronger  White  House 
as 

it  would 

diminish 

role 

The incremental efforts made by the government are necessary but 
 
remain  insufficient,  particularly  when  cyber  threats  are  increasingly 
sophisticated  and  numerous,  and  when  it  is  likely  that  federal  funds 
will  be  significantly  reduced.  According 
former  Defense 
Department  official  Franklin  Kramer,  although  the  current  efforts  to 
improve 
integrated 
governmental strategy to meet that challenge has only begun and has 
yet fully to take shape.”20 Operational relationships are not yet mature 
enough  to  adequately  address  the  loss  of  resources,  the  loss  or 

federal  cybersecurity  are  welcome, 

“an 

to 

 
 

 
 

18 Gus P. Coldebella & Brian White, Foundational Questions Regarding the Federal Role in 
Cybersecurity, 4 J. OF NAT’L SECURITY L. AND POL'Y 233, 236-37 (2010). 

19 CTR. FOR STRATEGIC AND INT’L STUDIES, COMM’N ON CYBERSECURITY FOR THE 44TH 
PRESIDENCY, CYBERSECURITY TWO YEARS LATER 4 (2011), available at 
http://csis.org/files/publication/110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf. 

20 FRANKLIN D. KRAMER, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, CYBER SECURITY: AN INTEGRATED 
GOVERNMENTAL STRATEGY FOR PROGRESS (2010), available at 
http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/Cyber%20Security-
%20An%20Integrated%20Governmental%20Strategy%20for%20Progress.pdf. 

 

caused  by 

inadequate  network 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

286 
 
corruption  of  data,  or  the  unauthorized  access  to  national  security 
systems 
security  measures. 
Government  defense  contractors  continue  to  lose  terabytes  of  data, 
U.S.  critical  infrastructure  remains  unprotected,  and  operational 
relationships  are  not  strong  enough  to  engender  trust  among  federal 
organizations and between the public and private sectors. 
 
the 
cybersecurity  roles  and  missions  of  some  of  the  departments  and 
agencies  within 
their 
relationships  with  other  parts  of  the  government  will  be  followed  by 
recommendations as to how to improve these relationships for better 
cybersecurity for the United States.  

the  executive  branch.  Descriptions  of 

The  remaining  sections  of 

this  article  will  describe 

III. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

Established  by  the  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002,  the 
 
Department of Homeland Security assimilated more than twenty-two 
federal  agencies  to  better  protect  the  United  States  from  terrorism.21 
The department has multiple cybersecurity budget lines and activities. 
Two  of  the  most  active  organizations  within  DHS  reside  within  the 
National Protection and Programs Directorate.  
 
The Office of Infrastructure Protection coordinates terrorism risk-
reduction efforts for U.S. critical infrastructure.22 It requested $322.3 
million for fiscal year 2012 operations.23 Within this office is the Office 
of  Cybersecurity  and  Communications,  which  oversees  the  “security, 
resiliency,  and  reliability  of  the  nation’s  cyber  and  communications 
infrastructure.”24  The  department  requested  $614.2  million  in  fiscal 
year 2012 operations.25  

 
 

 
 

21 See Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296, § 101. In general, the primary 
mission of the Department is to (1) prevent terrorist attacks within the United States; (2) 
reduce the vulnerability of the United States to terrorism; and (3) minimize the damage, 
and assist in the recovery, from terrorist attacks that do occur within the United States. 

22 About the National Protection and Programs Directorate, DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC. 
(Aug. 26, 2011), http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/editorial_0794.shtm.  

23 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET JUSTIFICATION 1987 (2011), available 
at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/dhs-congressional-budget-justification-fy2012.pdf. 

24 KRAMER, supra note 20. 

25 Homeland Security Act of 2002, supra note 21. 

 

287 

Initiative 

to 

support 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
 
This  funding  and  probably  more,  is  meant  to  safeguard  domestic 
cyberspace. Other items within this budget include: $233.6 million to 
accelerate EINSTEIN 326 deployment to prevent and detect intrusions 
on  computer  systems,  and  to  upgrade  the  National  Cyber  Security 
Protection  System,  building  an  intrusion  detection  capability  and 
analysis  capabilities  to  protect  federal  networks;  $40.9  million  to 
support  the  department’s  efforts  to  strengthen  federal  network 
security of large and small agencies by conducting an estimated sixty-
six  network  assessments  to  improve  security  across  the  federal 
executive branch; $24.5 million to provide high-quality, cost-effective 
virtual  cybersecurity  education  and  training  to  develop  a  robust 
cybersecurity  workforce;  $1.3  million  to  enable  DHS  to  coordinate 
national  cybersecurity  operations  and 
interface  with  the  U.S. 
Department  of  Defense’s  (DoD)  National  Security  Agency  (NSA)  at 
Fort  Meade,  Maryland;  and  $18  million  for  the  Comprehensive 
research  and 
National  Cybersecurity 
development  projects 
the  nation’s 
cybersecurity.27  
 
The  department’s  budget  request  for  cybersecurity  activities  is 
large  because  DHS  has  such  broad  responsibilities  in  protecting  the 
nation’s cyber and critical infrastructure. The Secretary of Homeland 
Security is responsible for “coordinating the overall national effort to 
enhance the protection of the critical infrastructure and key resources 
of  the  United  States”  and  serves  “as  the  principal  federal  official  to 
lead,  integrate,  and  coordinate  implementation  of  efforts  among 
federal  departments  and  agencies,  State  and  local  governments,  and 
the  private  sector 
infrastructure  and  key 
resources.”28  Although  Homeland  Security  Presidential  Directive  7 
(HSPD  7)  acknowledges  that  other  departments  and  agencies  have 

focused  on  strengthening 

to  protect  critical 

 
 

 
 

26 See generally Gov’t Accountability Office, GAO-11-881, Department of Homeland 
Security: Progress Made and Work Remaining in Implementing Homeland Security 
Missions 10 Years after 9/11 136 (2011), available at 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11881.pdf. (EINSTEIN 3 is intended to be an intrusion 
prevention system that is to automatically detect and respond appropriately to cyber 
threats before harm is done.). 

27 See generally DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., FY 2012 BUDGET IN BRIEF 11-12 (2012), 
available at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/budget-bib-fy2012.pdf. 

28 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., HOMELAND SECURITY PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE 7 (2003) 
[hereinafter HSPD 7], available at 
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/laws/gc_1214597989952.shtm.  

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

288 
 
cybersecurity roles, the Department of Homeland Security is the “focal 
point for the security of cyberspace” for the federal government.29  
 
In its first Quadrennial Homeland Security review, DHS described 
its  mission to secure cyberspace by preventing malicious actors  from 
“effectively  exploit[ing]  cyberspace,  impair[ing]  its  safe  and  secure 
use,  or  attack[ing]  the  Nation’s  information  infrastructure.”30  To 
achieve  this  goal,  DHS  must  “[i]dentify  and  evaluate  the  most 
dangerous  threats  to  federal[,]civilian[,]  and  private-sector  networks 
and  the  Nation;"  “[p]rotect  and  make  resilient  information  systems, 
networks,  and  personal  and  sensitive  data;"  "[p]revent  cyber  crime 
and  other  malicious  uses  of  cyberspace;"  “[d]isrupt  the  criminal 
organizations  and  other  malicious  actors  engaged 
in  high-
consequence  or  wide-scale  cyber  crime;"  “[d]evelop  a  robust  public-
private  cyber  incident  response  capability;"  and  “[m]anage  cyber 
incidents  from  identification  to  resolution  in  a  rapid  and  replicable 
manner with prompt and appropriate action.”31 
 
To  manage  its  broad  role,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security 
has  developed  a  set  of  guiding  principles  to  focus  the  nation’s 
response  to  various  potential  events.  This  National  Response 
Framework32 contains multiple incident annexes that address “specific 
contingency  or  hazard  situations  or  an  element  of  an  incident 
requiring specialized application of the Framework.”33 
 
The  Cyber  Incident  Annex  describes  the  responsibilities  of 
different  governmental  groups  to  “prepare  for,  respond  to,  and 
recover  from  any  cyber-related  Incident  of  National  Significance 

 
 

 
 

29 Id. (“To the extent permitted by law, Federal departments and agencies with cyber 
expertise, including but not limited to the Departments of Justice, Commerce, the 
Treasury, Defense, Energy, and State, and the Central Intelligence Agency, will collaborate 
with and support the organization in accomplishing its mission.”). 

30 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., QUADRENNIAL HOMELAND SECURITY REVIEW 54 (2010), 
available at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/qhsr_report.pdf. 

31 Id. at 55-56. 

32 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., NATIONAL RESPONSE FRAMEWORK (2008), available at 
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrf-core.pdf. 

33 See FED. EMERGENCY MGMT. AGENCY, National Resource Center Incident Annexes, 
http://www.fema.gov/emergency/nrf/incidentannexes.htm (last visited Mar. 28, 2012) 
(The current annexes are: Biological Incident, Catastrophic Incident, Food and Agriculture 
Incident, Mass Evacuation, Nuclear/Radiological Incident, Cyber Incident, Terrorism 
Incident Law Enforcement and Investigation.). 

 

YOUNG 

289 

2012] 
 
impacting  critical  national  processes  and  the  national  economy.”34  A 
"cyber-related  Incident  of  National  Significance"  is  undefined,  but 
may  include  an  “organized  cyber  attack,”  a  widespread  computer 
virus,  a  “natural  disaster  with  significant  cyber  consequences,”  or 
other  incidents  “capable  of  causing  extensive  damage  to  critical 
infrastructure  of  key  assets.”35  The  Annex  outlines  the  roles  and 
responsibilities  of  federal  departments  categorized  as  "Coordinating 
Agencies, Cooperating Agencies, and Other Federal Entities."36 In the 
event  of  a  nationally  significant  cyber-related 
the 
Department  of  Defense,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security,  and 
the  Department  of  Justice  are  coordinating  agencies  and  the 
Departments  of  Commerce,  Energy,  Homeland  Security,  State, 
Transportation, and Treasury are all cooperating agencies.37 
 
In addition to the National Response Framework’s Cyber Incident 
Annex, DHS has drafted the National Cyber Incident Response Plan to 
establish the “framework for organizational roles, responsibilities, and 
actions  to  prepare  for,  respond  to,  and  begin  to  coordinate  recovery 
from  a  cyber  incident.”38  This  plan  is  intended  to  expand  upon  the 
information  within  the  NRF’s  Cyber  Incident  Annex.  This  plan  has 
been in coordination for more than eighteen months and has yet to be 
approved by the Executive Office of the President. 

incident, 

 
 

 
 

34 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., CYBER INCIDENT ANNEX CYB-2 (2004), available at 
http://www.learningservices.us/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrp_cyberincidentannex.pdf. 

35 Id. 

36 See generally FED. EMERGENCY MGMT. AGENCY, NATIONAL RESPONSE FRAMEWORK, 
EMERGENCY SUPPORT FUNCTION ANNEXES: INTRODUCTION (2008), available at 
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrf-annexes-all.pdf (Federal agencies 
designated as coordinating agencies are responsible for implementation of processes 
detailed in the annexes. Coordinating agencies support the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) incident management mission by providing the leadership, expertise, and 
authorities to implement critical and specific aspects of the response. In accordance with 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5, DHS retains responsibility for overall 
domestic incident management. (Sup i); Cooperating agencies are those entities that have 
specific expertise and capabilities to assist the coordinating agency in executing incident-
related tasks or processes. When the procedures within a Support Annex are needed to 
support elements of an incident, the coordinating agency will notify cooperating agencies 
of the circumstances (Sup ii).).  

37 The Intelligence Community, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and 
the Office of Management and Budget are also listed as cooperating agencies.  

38 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, INTERIM VERSION, 
1 (2010). 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

290 
 
  Despite  the  progress  made  by  DHS  with  the  as-yet-unapproved 
National  Cyber  Incident  Response  Plan  and  the  cyber  annex  to  the 
National Response Framework, the operational relationships between 
DHS  and  other 
remain 
underdeveloped.  DHS’s  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communications 
Integration  Center  (NCCIC)  does  not  detail  personnel  to  operations 
centers  maintained  by  the  Department  of  Defense.39  There  is  limited 
cooperative  training  between  the  DoD  and  DHS  for  cybersecurity 
personnel  and  there  is  limited  information  sharing  between  the  two 
departments,  despite  the  memorandum  of  agreement  signed  by  the 
secretaries of both departments.  

federal  departments  and  agencies 

DHS’s  National  Cyber  Security  Division  within  the  Office  of 
Cybersecurity  and  Communications  created  the  U.S.  Computer 
Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US-CERT)  in  2003  to  secure  federal 
information  networks  by  coordinating  the  “defense  against  and 
response to cyber attacks.”40 It is the federal government’s focal point 
for  interaction  with  executive  branch  and  nonfederal  entities  on 
computer  network  “analysis,  warning,  information  sharing,  major 
incident  response,  and  national-level  recovery  efforts.”  According  to 
the Government Accountability office: 

is 

aggregating 

charged  with 

[US-CERT] 
and 
disseminating  cybersecurity  information  to  improve 
warning  of  and  response  to  incidents,  increasing 
coordination  of 
reducing 
vulnerabilities, 
and 
protection.  In  addition,  the  organization  is  to  collect 
incident  reports  from  all  federal  agencies  and  assist 
agencies  in their incident  response efforts. It is also to 
accept  incident  reports  when  voluntarily  submitted  by 

enhancing  prevention 

response 

information, 

and 

 
 

 
 

39 National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) is a 24x7 
center responsible for the production of a common operating picture for cyber and 
communications across the federal, state, and local government, intelligence and law 
enforcement communities and the private sector. The NCCIC is operated within DHS’ 
Office of Cybersecurity and Communications, a component of the National Protection & 
Programs Directorate. About the National Cybersecurity and Communications 
Integration Center (NCCIC), DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., 
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1306334251555.e (last visited Mar. 28, 2012). 

40 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GEN., U.S. COMPUTER EMERGENCY 
READINESS TEAM MAKES PROGRESS IN SECURING CYBERSPACE, BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN 2 
(2010) [hereinafter GAO, CHALLENGES REMAIN], available at 
http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIG_10-94_Jun10.pdf. 

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

291 

other  public  and  private  entities  and  assist  them  in 
their response efforts, as requested.41 

  US-CERT is a federal entity independent from the more than 250 
global  emergency  teams  addressing  cyber  incidents,  including  the 
CERT®  Coordination  Center  (CERT/CC)  at  Carnegie  Mellon’s 
Software  Engineering  Institute.42  US-CERT  does  not  have  the 
statutory  or  regulatory  authority  to  enforce  compliance  with  its 
notices  for  mitigation of  cyber  threats.  Additionally,  according to  the 
DHS  Inspector  General,  “US-CERT  does  not  have  sufficient  staff  to 
perform its 24x7 operations as well as to analyze security information 
timely.”43  
 
Its  operational  relationships  with  federal  departments  and 
agencies  and  the  private  sector  is  hindered  because  of  inadequate 
information  sharing  based  on  security  classification,  network 
configuration,  and  training  issues.  Other  federal  agencies  claim  that 
US-CERT  is  “unable  to  share  near  real-time  data  and  classified  and 
detailed information to address security incidents.”44 Additionally, the 
different networks operated by other departments and the intelligence 
community challenge information sharing from US-CERT. Because of 
classification limitations, US-CERT is limited in the information it can 
post  to  its  portals.  Many  agencies  do  not  have  classified  networks  or 
secure facilities or personnel with the proper clearances to receive the 
information.  
  DHS  operational  relationships  would  be 
if  the 
department  had  a  strategy  to  achieve  its  cybersecurity  roles  and 
missions.  Other  departments  and  agencies  publish  strategies  to  help 
communicate  their  priorities  and  initiatives.  But  DHS’s  Office  of 
Cybersecurity  and  Communications  has  not  developed  “a  strategic 

improved 

 
 

 
 

41 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-08-588, CYBER ANALYSIS AND WARNING: DHS 
FACES CHALLENGES IN ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE NATIONAL CAPABILITY 14-15 
(2008), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08588.pdf. 

42 See About Us, US-CERT, http://www.us-cert.gov/aboutus.html (last visited Jan. 23, 
2012) (The first of these types of organizations was the CERT Coordination Center 
(CERT/CC), established at Carnegie Mellon University in 1988. When the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) created US-CERT, it called upon the CERT/CC to contribute 
expertise for protecting the nation's information infrastructure by coordinating defense 
against and response to cyber attacks. Through US-CERT, DHS and the CERT/CC work 
jointly on these activities.). 

43 GAO, CHALLENGES REMAIN, supra note 40, at 7. 

44 Id. at 12. 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

292 
 
implementation  plan  that  outlines  its  responsibilities  or  establishes 
specific  objectives  and  milestones  for  enhancing  cybersecurity  or 
protecting critical infrastructures.”45  
To improve the ability to work with other federal departments and 
 
agencies,  DHS  should  obtain  the  authority  to  enforce  guidance  from 
US-CERT,  recruit  and  retain  adequate  staff  to  fulfill  US-CERT’s 
mission,  and  establish  a  strategic  implementation  plan  documenting 
its  priorities  to  secure  federal  civilian  information  networks  and 
critical  infrastructures.  Combined  training  programs  with  other 
departments  and  agencies  would  also  help  build  operational 
relationships and camaraderie needed for effective communication. If 
implemented, these recommendations would put DHS on the road to 
improved  collaboration  and  better  information  sharing  with  other 
parts of the federal government.  

A. SECRET SERVICE 

  Reporting  directly  to  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security,  the 
Secret  Service  is  responsible  for  safeguarding  the  U.S.  financial 
infrastructure in order to “preserve the integrity of the economy, and 
to  protect  national  leaders,  visiting  heads  of  state  and  government, 
designated  sites  and  National  Special  Security  Events.”46  The  USA 
Patriot  Act  required  the  Secret  Service  to  establish  an  Electronic 
Crimes  Task  Force  in  order  to  prevent,  detect,  mitigate,  and 
investigate  attacks  on  U.S. 
critical 
infrastructures.  The  establishment  of  the  task  force  was  prescient 
considering  the  impact  on  the  Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average  after  a 
trading algorithm malfunctioned in May 201047 and the February 2011 
cyber attack against NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc. The NASDAQ attack 

systems  and 

financial 

 
 

 
 

45 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GEN., PLANNING, MANAGEMENT, AND 
SYSTEMS ISSUES HINDER DHS' EFFORTS TO PROTECT CYBERSPACE AND THE NATION'S CYBER 
INFRASTRUCTURE (Redacted) 9 (2011), available at 
http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIGr_11-89_Jun11.pdf. 

46 U.S. SECRET SERV., U.S. DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE 
STRATEGIC PLAN (FY 2008 - FY 2013) 2 (2008), available at 
http://www.secretservice.gov/usss_strategic_plan_2008_2013.pdf. 

47 See generally Alex Eichler, Lessons From the Algorithm-Fueled May 6 Flash Crash, THE 
ATLANTIC WIRE (October 4, 2010), http://www.theatlanticwire.com/business/2010/10/ 
lessons-from-the-algorithm-fueled-may-6-flash-crash/22813. 

 

YOUNG 

293 

2012] 
 
was serious enough to eventually involve the National Security Agency 
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.48 
 
The  popularity  and  proliferation  of  information  technology  has 
enabled  criminals  to  target  financial  systems,  “compelling  the 
involvement  of  the  Secret  Service  in  combating  cyber  crime.”49  The 
unauthorized  access 
into  NASDAQ  OMX—a  global  exchange 
company—resulted in the insertion of “suspicious files” onto NASDAQ 
servers.  Although  commodities  trading  systems  were  unaffected,  the 
intruders  accessed  cloud  applications  containing  data  stored  by  a 
significant number of Fortune 500 companies and providing access to 
“a rich mine of market-moving, inside information.”50 There is a clear 
role  for  a  strong  organizational  element  to  monitor  and  protect  U.S. 
financial  systems  against  cyber  criminals,  hackers,  and  state 
competitors.  
 
Also  within  the  Secret  Service  is  the  National  Threat  Assessment 
Center (NTAC), which provides assessments “within the Secret Service 
and  to  its  law  enforcement  and  public  safety  partners.”  This 
organization  researched  “illicit  insider  cyber  activity”  because  this 
type  of  activity  often  involves  criminal  activity  such  as  “financial 
fraud,  computer 
identity  theft,  and 
computer-based  attacks  on  the  nation's  financial,  banking  and 
telecommunications 
infrastructures.”51  Partnering  with  Carnegie 
Mellon  University's  CERT®  Coordination  Center,  NTAC  examined 
past  instances  in  which  current  or  former  employees  or  contractors 
harmed  their  organizations  “via  a  computer  or  system/network  for 
purposes  of  intellectual  property  theft,  fraud,  and  acts  of  sabotage.” 
NTAC’s  study  identified  physical,  social,  and  online  activity  that 
indicates  an  insider  threat.  The  report  identified  behaviors  in  the 

fraud,  electronic  crimes, 

 
 

 
 

48 See generally Uri Friedman, Why the Financial World Is Spooked by Nasdaq Cyber 
Attack, THE ATLANTIC WIRE (February 7, 2011), http://www.theatlanticwire.com/business/ 
2011/02/why-the-financial-world-is-spooked-by-nasdaq-cyber-attack/21203. 

49 About the U.S. Secret Service Electronic Crimes Task Forces, U.S. SECRET SERV., 
http://www.secretservice.gov/ectf_about.shtml (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

50 See generally Philip Stafford, Jeremy Grant and Telis Demos, Hacking Fears Raised by 
Nasdaq OMX Attack, FIN. TIMES, Feb. 7, 2011, available at 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/0638d37a-32fa-11e0-9a61-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz1Vh0lGhLQ (listing financial exchanges targeted for computer 
attacks since 1999).  

51 National Threat Assessment Center, U.S. SECRET SERV., 
http://www.secretservice.gov/ntac.shtml (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 
 

[Vol. 8:2 

information  technology  and 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

294 
 
banking  and  financial  sector,  the 
telecommunications sector, and the government sector.52  
 
The Secret Service has informational awareness into systems that 
might not be the traditional vectors of a cyber attack. Its relationships 
with  the  private  financial  sector  make  the  Secret  Service  the  best 
candidate  to  share  information  from  and  with  the  financial  services 
industry.  With  the  ability  to  deal  with  sensitive  and  classified 
information,  it  does  not  face  some  of  the  challenges  as  do  other 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  elements  such  as  US-CERT.  DHS 
should  better  leverage  the  Secret  Service  to  gain  better  visibility  into 
the status of network operations and malicious activity known by the 
financial industry. This  is  an example of a public-private partnership 
that  can  have  significant  results  with  little  budgetary  or  manpower 
investment.  

IV. JOINT COORDINATION ELEMENT 

 
In September 2010, the Department of Homeland Security and the 
Department  of  Defense  established  a  memorandum  of  agreement 
under  which  both  departments  will  “provide  personnel,  equipment, 
and  facilities  in  order  to  increase  interdepartmental  collaboration  in 
strategic  planning  for  the  nation's  cybersecurity,  mutual  support  for 
cybersecurity  capabilities  development,  and  synchronization  of 
current  operational 
activities.”53  The 
memorandum  established  a  Joint  Coordination  Element  to  improve 
“joint 
synchronization, 
requirement  translation,  and  other  DHS  mission  support  for 
homeland  security  for  cybersecurity”  under  the  direct  supervision  of 
the  [DHS]  Director,  Cybersecurity  Coordination.54  The  Joint 
Coordination  Element 
for  departmental 
collaboration, but remains understaffed and underutilized.  

cybersecurity  mission 

the  best  vehicle 

operational 

planning, 

coordination, 

is 

Testimony by Philip Reitinger, then the Deputy Undersecretary of 
the  National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate  before  the  Senate 
Homeland Security Committee, in May 2011 strongly implied that the 
Joint Coordination Element remained long on promises and short on 

 
 

 
 

52 See id. for the actual reports and findings.  

53 Memorandum of Agreement to Enhance Coordination to Secure America’s Cyber 
Networks, DEP'T OF HOMELAND SEC. (July 22, 2011), 
http://www.dhs.gov/files/publications/gc_1286986004190.shtm. 

54 DEP’T. OF DEF. AND DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., supra note 6. 

 

295 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
accomplishments.  He  stated  that,  while  the  DoD  had  “unparalleled 
technical  expertise  and  cyber  security  expertise  built  up  over  the 
course  of  years,”  DHS  has  expertise  in  the  interagency  process.55 
Reitinger  noted  that  DHS  will  be  developing  people  to  send  to  the 
National  Security  Agency’s  (NSA)  Threat  Operations  Center (NTOC). 
He  noted  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communications 
Integration  Center  (NCCIC)  will  accept  personnel  from  NSA  and  the 
United States Cyber Command, suggesting that individuals have yet to 
be  integrated  into  this  cyber  watch  center.  The  Joint  Coordination 
Element  thus remains  a promising collaborative concept  that  has  yet 
to be fully leveraged for the benefit of U.S. cybersecurity.  
The  interdepartmental  agreement  identified  an  often-overlooked 
 
element of cybersecurity: cyber acquisition. Given Moore’s Law56 and 
the  rapid  pace  of  technology  development,  traditional  federal 
acquisition  practices  are  insufficient.  The  inadequacy  of  DoD  cyber 
acquisition practices was noted in the National Defense Authorization 
Act  for  fiscal  year  2011.57  This  act  required  “a  strategy  to  provide  for 
the  rapid  acquisition  of  tools,  applications,  and  other  capabilities  for 
cyber  warfare  for  the  United  States  Cyber  Command  and  the  cyber 
operations components of the military departments.”58 The agreement 
between  the  two  departments  acknowledges  this  need  by  requiring 
DHS to send personnel to the National Security Agency to collaborate 
on acquisition and technology development. This is another promising 
initiative that has yet to produce any public result.  

The Joint Coordination Element  is a good first step for improved 
collaboration  and  a  strong  operational  relationship  between  the  two 
departments  with  the  largest  cyber-  responsibilities  and  the  largest 

 
 

 
 

55 Obama Administration Global Cybersecurity Plan: Hearing Before the Senate 
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, 112th Cong. (May 11, 2011), as 
seen on C-SPAN, available at http://c-spanarchives.org/videoLibrary/ 
clip.php?appid=600013415. 

56 See DOROTHY E. DENNING, INFORMATION WARFARE AND SECURITY 294-95 (1999) (For the 
past several decades, the number of transistors that can be placed on a single [micro 
processing] chip has approximately doubled every eighteen months owing to advances in 
manufacturing. The effect has been a corresponding doubling of processing speed in 
instructions per second and memory capacity in bytes per chip, with a factor of 100 
improvements every five years and a factor of 100 improvements every decade. This 
phenomenon is called Moore’s law, after the founder of and chairman of Intel, Gordon 
Moore, who first observed and posited it.). 

57 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011, Pub. L. No. 111-383, § 933.  

58 Id.  

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

296 
 
budgets.  To  realize  the  full  potential  of  the  JCE,  both  departments 
should  make  staffing  the  joint  organization  with  knowledgeable 
personnel  from  each  of  them  a  high  priority.  Both  departments  may 
consider  making  a  tour  in  the  JCE  a  requirement  for  selection  to 
particular  ranks  or  for  selection  for  particular  positions.  Both 
departments  should  consider  providing  more  public  information  on 
the status of the Joint Element. The memorandum of agreement was a 
visionary first step, but now comes the true test of the commitment to 
the operational relationship between the departments.  

V. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 

 
 “As  a  doctrinal  matter,  the  Pentagon  has  formally  recognized 
cyberspace as a new domain of warfare.”59 The 2011 National Military 
Strategy describes the department’s perspective on cyberspace: 

develop 

new 

cyber 

enable 

capabilities 

Cyberspace 
Combatant 
Commanders to operate effectively across all domains. 
Strategic  Command  and  Cyber  Command  will 
collaborate  with  U.S.  government  agencies,  non-
government entities, industry, and international actors 
to 
capabilities, 
organizations,  and  skills.  Should  a  large-scale  cyber 
intrusion  or  debilitating  cyber  attack  occur,  we  must 
provide a broad range of options to ensure our access 
and use of the cyberspace domain and hold malicious 
actors  accountable.  We  must  seek  executive  and 
Congressional  action  to  provide  new  authorities  to 
enable effective action in cyberspace.60 

norms, 

 
The Defense Department operates its own worldwide information 
network,  known  as  the  Global  Information  Grid  (GIG).  The  GIG  is  a 
“globally  interconnected,  end-to-end  set  of  information  capabilities 
for  collecting,  processing,  storing,  disseminating,  and  managing 
information  on  demand  to  warfighters,  policy  makers,  and  support 

 
 

 
 

59 Lynn, supra note 11, at 101. 

60 NATIONAL MILITARY STRATEGY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 2011: REDEFINING 
AMERICA’S MILITARY LEADERSHIP 10 (2011) (emphasis added), available at 
http://www.jcs.mil/content/files/2011-02/020811084800_2011_NMS_-
_08_FEB_2011.pdf. 

 

YOUNG 

297 

logistical 

support,  provide 

2012] 
 
personnel.”61  It  includes  networks  and  systems  that  are  government-
owned and leased from the private sector. Without these information 
networks, DoD would be unable to command and control its military 
forces,  provide 
intelligence  or 
communicate. 
  DoD  has  an  information  architecture  that  includes  “15,000 
networks  and  seven  million  computing  devices  across  hundreds  of 
installations  in  dozens  of  countries.”62  According  to  the  Unified 
Command  Plan—the  document  describing  the  responsibilities  of  the 
department’s  combatant  commands—U.S.  Strategic  Command  is 
responsible  for  coordinating  cyberspace  operational  planning  and 
directing  GIG  operations  and  defense.63  As  a  subordinate  unified 
command,64  United  States  Cyber  Command  was  established  in  2009 
to  organize,  plan,  and  conduct  activities  to  direct  the  operations  and 
defense of specified Department of Defense information networks; to, 
“when  directed, 
cyberspace 
operations” in order to enable actions in all domains; and to “ensure 
U.S.  and  allied  freedom  of  action  in  cyberspace,  while  denying  the 
same to our adversaries.”65  

full-spectrum  military 

conduct 

 
 

 
 

61 U.S. DEP’T OF DEF., DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DIRECTIVE 8000.01, MANAGEMENT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION ENTERPRISE 10 (2009), available at 
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/800001p.pdf. 

62 Lynn, supra note 11, at 98. 

63 See Unified Command Plan, U.S. DEP’T OF DEF., 
http://www.defense.gov/home/features/2009/0109_unifiedcommand (last updated Apr. 
27, 2011) (The Unified Command Plan is a key strategic document that establishes the 
missions, responsibilities, and geographic areas of responsibility for commanders of 
combatant commands. UCP 2011, signed by President Obama on April 6, 2011, assigns 
several new missions to the combatant commanders.). 

64 See U.S. DEP’T OF DEF., supra note 10 (A command established by commanders of 
unified commands, when so authorized by the Secretary of Defense through the Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to conduct operations on a continuing basis in accordance with 
the criteria set forth for unified commands. A subordinate unified command may be 
established on an area or functional basis. Commanders of subordinate unified commands 
have functions and responsibilities similar to those of the commanders of unified 
commands and exercise operational control of assigned commands and forces within the 
assigned operational area.). 

65 United States Cyber Command Fact Sheet, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND, 
http://www.stratcom.mil/factsheets/Cyber_Command (last visited Mar. 31, 2012). 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

298 
 
 
It  has  been  reported  that  the  Defense  budget  request  for 
cybersecurity  operations  is  $3.2  billion  for  fiscal  year  2012.66  This 
request  will  fund  improved  information  assurance  for  DoD  agencies 
and  “non-information  assurance  initiatives  that  are  critical  to  the 
department's  cyber  stance.”  This  large  funding  request  pays  for  DoD 
public  key  infrastructure,  communications  security,  military  cyber 
operations,  cyber  research  and  technology,  and  forensic  analysis 
conducted by the Defense Cyber Crime Center.67 
 
This impressive funding illustrates the priority the Department of 
Defense  places  on  cybersecurity.  This  effort  is  good  for  national 
security,  but  DoD  is  but  one  part  of  the  national  cybersecurity 
establishment.  The  federal  government  must  continue  to  improve 
internal government and external partner operational relationships to 
better  address  the  threats  and  consequences  of  cyber  conflict.  More 
importantly, the Defense Department must make its capabilities more 
available for the benefit of other federal departments and agencies.  
 
An  example  of  how  Defense  Department  capabilities  may  be 
applied outside of DoD agencies is the pilot program outlined by then 
Deputy Secretary of Defense William Lynn in June 2011. According to 
the American Forces Press Service, the Defense Industrial Base (DIB) 
Cyber  Pilot  involves  sharing  classified  threat  information  with 
participating  defense  contractors  or  with  the  companies’  Internet 
service  providers.68  According  to  Lynn,  “the  government  will  not 
monitor, 
intercept  or  store  any  private-sector  communications 
through the program.” The intelligence provided by DoD merely helps 
the DIB companies “to identify and stop malicious activity within their 
networks.”69 The Department of Homeland Security is a partner in the 
DIB Cyber Pilot. 
This  pilot  program  is  the  singular  example  of  how  DOD  cyber 
 
capabilities can assist organizations outside the Defense Department. 
It  is  admittedly  easier  for  the  department  to  work  with  the  defense 
industrial  base  companies  with  which  it  has  had  relationships  for 
decades  than  to  extend  its  protections  beyond  traditional  defense 

 
 

 
 

66 Aliya Sternstein, Pentagon Seeks $3.2 Billion for Revised Cyber Budget, NEXTGOV.COM 
(Mar.24, 2011), http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20110324_2474.php?oref=rss. 

67 Id. 

68 John D. Banusiewicz, Lynn Outlines New Cybersecurity Effort, AMERICAN FORCES PRESS 
SERV. (June 16, 2011), available at 
http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=64349. 

69 Id. 

 

299 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
contractors.  More  programs  like  the  DIB  Cyber  Pilot  should  be 
developed  to  leverage  the  experience  and  prior  investment  made  to 
mature  defense  cyber  capabilities.  Lynn  made  a  similar  claim  earlier 
this year stating that the “DIB Cyber Pilot could serve as an example of 
how  a 
larger  effort  aimed  at  protecting  the  nation’s  critical 
infrastructure—its power grid, transportation system, financial system 
and other components—might work.”70  
The  DIB  Cyber  Pilot  and  the  Joint  Coordination  Element  should 
 
inform  how  DoD  capabilities  can  be  leveraged  to  protect  networks 
beyond  its  own.  The  Department  of  Defense  exists  and  is  funded  to 
protect the United States and all of the country’s interests; it was not 
created  to  protect  itself.  The  debate  about  how  DoD  capabilities  can 
inform and assist non-DoD cybersecurity efforts should be conducted 
openly  and  frequently.  According  to  the  Center  for  Strategic  and 
International Studies, “an executive order or some other presidential 
document  to  guide  military  and  intelligence  activities  in  protecting 
critical infrastructure” would be the most visible and public statement 
of leveraging well-developed military capability to defend the nation’s 
networks. “Since any decision will require working with those outside 
the  government,  a highly-classified, un-releasable  document,  like  the 
2008  Comprehensive  National  Cyber  Initiative  (CNCI),  will  be 
inadequate.”71 
  Despite  DoD’s  recognized  technical  expertise,  the  general  public 
appears resistant to allowing DoD to protect the nation by defending 
non-DoD information networks.72 DoD has  an image problem. “Even 
if  existing  legal  authorities  allow  for  an  expanded  DoD  role  in 
defending  critical  infrastructure,  the  ‘perception  problem’  remains 
significant.”73  Those  resistant  to  a  larger  role  for  the  military  in 
protecting  civilian  networks  are  motivated  by  concerns  for  civil 
liberties and privacy.  
 
In a recent report, the CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 
44th Presidency noted, “We do not advocate changing  the traditional 

 
 

 
 

70 Id. 

71 CTR. FOR STRATEGIC AND INT’L STUDIES, supra note 19, at 10. 

72 See generally, Michael Hardy &John Zyskowski, DOD Cyber Defense Plan Draws Fire, 
FEDERAL COMPUTER WEEK (June 21, 2011), http://fcw.com/articles/2011/07/25/buzz-
cyber-defense-plan-panned.aspx; Declan McCullagh, U.S. Military Wants to “Protect” Key 
Civilian Networks, CNET NEWS (July 14, 2011), http://news.cnet.com/8301-31921_3-
20079500-281/u.s-military-wants-to-protect-key-civilian-networks. 

73 CTR. FOR STRATEGIC AND INT’L STUDIES, supra note 19, at 10. 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

300 
 
separation  that  exists  between  military  and  civilian  functions  but 
believe  that  the  administration  and  Congress  should  clarify  our 
policies  and  laws  to  allow  the  military  to  fulfill  its  traditional  role  in 
protecting  against  foreign  threats.  Finding  a  way  to  do  this  in 
partnership  with  DHS  and  the  private  sector  remains  a  fundamental 
challenge for cybersecurity policy.”74 The United States cannot afford 
the  resources  to  recreate  the  capabilities  that  have  already  been 
developed for the military.  
  DoD’s  approach  to  cybersecurity  is  appropriate,  but  weaknesses 
remain. These include the lack of an adequately trained and abundant 
cyber  workforce.  There  are  only  so  many  trained  cyber  professionals 
available for the federal government, and only some have gone to the 
better-resourced  Defense  Department.  The  military  has  a  maturing 
and  systemic  approach  to  developing  professional  specialties  in 
cybersecurity  disciplines  and  will  mature  training  to  produce  highly-
skilled  network  operators  to  defend  military  networks.  This  will 
contribute  to  the  comprehensive  cybersecurity  of  the  nation  if  these 
maturing  professionals  rotate  to  other  departments  and  agencies. 
DHS  has  far  fewer  analysts  and  cyber  professionals  with  the  same 
levels  of  security  clearance  as  held  by  DoD.  Without  more  cleared 
personnel,  information  sharing  between  DHS  and  DoD  is  limited. 
These 
illustrate  the  final  weakness  to  be  resolved  to 
operationalize  the  DHS-DoD  relationship—speed.  Without  a  faster 
mechanism 
information  and  make  decisions,  with 
appropriately  cleared  and  well-trained  personnel,  the  benefits  of  the 
DHS-DoD relationship will be lost.  
 
Beyond the need for larger numbers of skilled cybersecurity forces 
and  professionals,  the  Defense  Department  must  carefully  consider 
the  desire  to overly  classify  specific capabilities  and  strategies.  Cyber 
warfare planning would benefit if more operations could be discussed 
at  lower  levels  of  classification.  “While  there  are  good  reasons  to 
highly  classify  and  compartment  some  cyber  matters,  there  is  such 
significant  over-classification  and  compartmentation  that  planning 
and  operational  integration  is  (sic)  overly  difficult.”75  Some  of  this 
over-classification is based on the intelligence sources from which the 
Defense  establishment  learns  its  cyber  threat  information.  The 
method  by  which  the  intelligence  community  derives  this  threat 
intelligence is highly-classified, leading to a derivative classification of 
the cyber countermeasures or techniques. 

issues 

to  share 

 
 

 
 

74 Id. 

75 KRAMER, supra note 20, at 4.  

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

301 

A. UNITED STATES CYBER COMMAND 

  Within  the  Department  of  Defense  there  are  multiple  elements 
that participate in the department’s cyber policy or operations.76 This 
article  focuses  mainly  on  the  operational  military  cyber  element, 
United  States  Cyber  Command.  This  military  organization—
subordinate 
to  United  States  Strategic  Command77—“plans, 
coordinates,  integrates,  synchronizes,  and  conducts  activities  to: 
direct the operations and defense of specified Department of Defense 
information  networks  and;  prepare  to,  and  when  directed,  conduct 
full-spectrum  military  cyberspace  operations  in  order  to  enable 
actions  in  all  domains,  ensure  US/Allied  freedom  of  action  in 
cyberspace and deny the same to our adversaries.”78 
 
The  command  is  co-located  with  the  National  Security  Agency 
(NSA) at Fort George G. Meade, Maryland. The benefits of co-locating 
Cyber  Command  with  NSA  have  been  described  by  General  Keith 
Alexander, Commander of Cyber Command and the Director of NSA: 

[Former Secretary  of  Defense]  Gates  has  said  we  can’t 
afford  to  replicate  the  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars 
that  we’ve  put  into  NSA  to  build  another  architecture 
for  Cyber  Command  and  then  yet  others  for  different 
government  agencies.  Instead,  we  need  to  leverage 
existing investment and work collaboratively. NSA and 
Cyber  Command  have  separate  staffs  and  operate 
under different authorities. The capabilities of NSA and 
its  work 
intelligence  and 

the  signals 

force 

in 

 
 

 
 

76 Office of the Secretary of Defense (responsible for coordinating the memorandum of 
agreement with the Department of Homeland Security), Office of the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Cyber Policy (supports the “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy 
and Assistant Security Defense for Global Strategic Affairs by developing and overseeing 
the implementation cyber-related policies, strategies, and plans to promote stability in and 
ensure continued freedom of access to the global commons of space and cyber in order to 
achieve national security objectives.” See Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Cyber Policy, OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ASSISTANT SEC'Y OF DEF. FOR CYBER POL'Y, 
http://policy.defense.gov/gsa/cp/index.aspx (last visited Feb. 22, 2012). 

77 United States Strategic Command is responsible for nuclear capabilities, space 
operations, global missile defense, and global command, control, communications, 
computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. See About, U.S. STRATEGIC 
COMMAND, http://www.stratcom.mil/about (last visited Feb. 22, 2012). 

78 U.S. Cyber Command Public Affairs Fact Sheet, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND, 
http://www.stratcom.mil/factsheets/Cyber_Command (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

 

302 
 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

[Vol. 8:2 

information  assurance  fields  are  unsurpassed.  This 
intellectual  and  technical  capital  is  critical  to  U.S. 
government efforts in cyberspace. Cyber Command is a 
military command that draws its authorities from Title 
10, but it relies on the success of real-time intelligence, 
which is why the decision to collocate it with NSA was 
not only wise, but also an imperative.79  

 
Establishing  the  military  command  with  NSA  reflects  a  national 
security  compromise  between  capitalizing  on  NSA’s  technical 
resources, the need to centralize military cyber activities, and a desire 
to  “balance  legally-defined  mission  boundaries  between  the  civilian 
intelligence  community  and  the  military  defense  community.”80  The 
most notable difficulty with the co-location of the command and NSA 
is  the  distinction  between  the  military  Title  10  authority  of  the 
Commander  for  Cyber  Command  and  the  intelligence  Title  50 
authority  of  the  NSA  Director.81  Some  observers  appear  to  disregard 
the  potential  authority  conflicts  and  believe  that  Cyber  Command’s 
establishment  is  the  most  significant  improvement  for  federal 
cybersecurity.82 
 
The  benefits  of  interagency—or  at  least  multi-agency  advanced 
planning cannot be overstated. “Hurricane Katrina demonstrated how 
after-the-event  coordination  and  planning  was  both  untimely  and 
inadequate in dealing with the immediate aftermath of the disaster.”83 
Delays  in  interagency  management  can  have  significant  operational 
consequences  not  only  in  a  natural  disaster,  but  also  in  national 
security  scenarios.  Effective  coordination  between  Cyber  Command 
and NSA is necessary but not sufficient in the event of a national cyber 

 
 

 
 

79 Harrison Donnelly, Q&A: General Keith B. Alexander, MILITARY INFO. TECH. (2010), 
available at http://www.kmimediagroup.com/mit-home/288-mit-2010-volume-14-issue-
10-november/3650-qaa-general-keith-b-alexander.html. 

80 James Barkley, Kevin Campbell & Joseph Roybal, Interagency Coordination @ Net 
Speed: Recommendations to Maximize Interagency Coordination and Capabilities at U.S. 
Cybercom, May 23, 2010, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University 
(quoting RICHARD A. CLARK & ROBERT K. KNAKE, CYBER WAR 34–44 (2010)) (on file with 
the author).  

81 Id. Title 10 refers to that part of the United States Code governing the armed forces and 
Title 50 governs most intelligence operations.  

82 See Coldebella & White, supra note 18, at 4. 

83 Id. at 25.  

 

2012] 
 
emergency or attack. Cyber Command must provide a priori analysis 
to  the  national  security  community  about  the  resources  and 
manpower that are required to address a significant cyber event.  

YOUNG 

303 

B. DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY 

“national  nuclear 

capabilities—including 

 
The  Defense  Information  Systems  Agency  (DISA)  is  a  combat 
support  agency  providing  services  to  the  U.S.  military  and  its  allies 
with 
information  networks  and  global  communications.  DISA 
provides  “joint  and  coalition  enterprise  infrastructure,  information 
sharing  services,  and  command  and  control  that  enable  joint 
warfighting.”  Employing  more  than  7,300  civilian  and  military 
personnel,  the  agency  operates  and  maintains  military  networks  and 
integrated 
command 
capabilities.”84  It  is  responsible  for  the  “.mil”  network,  systems 
engineering,  and  interoperability  testing,  including  “electromagnetic 
spectrum  planning,  coordination,  deconfliction,  and  management 
services”  for  the  Defense  Department.85  DISA’s  appropriated  budget 
was over $2.5 billion for fiscal year 2011.86  
 
The  importance  of  DISA’s  contribution  to  U.S.  military  power  is 
often underestimated. An example of the important work done by the 
agency 
is  the  Network  Services  directorate.  This  organization 
“translates  customers'  long-haul  network  requirements  into  effective 
voice,  video  and  data  network  solutions;  leverages  proven  and 
emerging  technologies  to  ensure  joint  interoperability,  assured 
security  and  best  value;  evaluates  technical  operations;  and  resolves 
technical  support  issues  for  DoD's  long-haul  networks.”87  It  is  also 
responsible  for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  military’s 
unclassified network,88 the military secret  network,89 and the various 
military Network Operations Centers90 around the world.  

 
 

 
 

84 Agency Mission Essential Task List, DEF. INFO. SYS. AGENCY, 
http://www.disa.mil/about/ourwork.html (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

85 Id.  

86 Defense Information Systems Agency SNAPSHOT: A Summary of Facts and Figures, 
DEF. INFO. SYS. AGENCY (Apr. 2011), available at 
http://www.disa.mil/news/pressresources/agency_snapshot.pdf. 

87 DEF. INFO. SYS. AGENCY, http://www.disa.mil/ns/index.html (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

88 Network, Networking Technology, Data Communication Terms, Glossary and 
Dictionary: NIPRNET: Non-secure Internet Protocol Router Network, JAVVIN NETWORK 
 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

304 
 
  One of the priorities highlighted in the DISA Campaign Plan is the 
protection  of  “critical 
in  DISA  and  the  Global 
Information  Grid  (GIG).”91  Given  the  number  of  unauthorized 
intrusions  into  Defense  Department  networks,  protecting  military 
information  that  transits  on  military  networks  has  become  an 
operational  imperative.  According  to  DISA’s  Fiscal  Year  (FY)  2012 
Budget Estimates: 

infrastructure 

[Vol. 8:2 

current 

The 
environment  mandates 
comprehensive and integrated cyber protection for this 
infrastructure  to  ensure  the  DoD  has  protected 
information  on  protected  networks.  The  DISA  is 
conducting a massive effort to improve the security and 
defense  capabilities  of  our  military  networks.  These 
include:  improved  sensors  for  intrusion  detection  and 
reporting;  demilitarized 
security; 
filtering;  and  developing  proxys  to  protect  our  core 
network services from internet threats.92  

(DMZ) 

world 

zones 

                                                                                                                   
MANAGEMENT AND SECURITY, http://www.javvin.com/networkingterms/NIPRNET.html 
(last visited Apr. 1, 2012). 

89 Secret Internet Protocol Router Network: (SIPRNET Network Security Plan), 
http://www.docstoc.com/docs/14976132/Secret-Internet-Protocol-Router-Network (last 
visited Apr. 1, 2012). 

90 The Global Network Operations and Security Center (GNOSC) provides situational 
awareness of the myriad of networks, systems and applications that make up the Global 
Information Grid (GIG) and protect/defend that grid from potential cyber threats. 
Additionally, the GNOSC performs a Command Center function that provides a wide 
variety of support to the Defense Information Systems Agency’s (DISA) core mission areas. 

91 DEF. INFO. SYS. AGENCY, DISA CAMPAIGN PLAN 10 (2011-2012). The Global Information 
Grid is the terms once used to describe the globally interconnected, end-to-end set of 
information capabilities, and associated processes for collecting, processing, storing, 
disseminating, and managing information on demand to warfighters, policy makers, and 
support personnel. The Global Information Grid includes owned and leased 
communications and computing systems and services, software (including applications), 
data, security services, other associated services and National Security Systems. (See Joint 
Publication 1-02, 154). 

92 DEF. INFO. SYS. AGENCY, FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET ESTIMATES 207-08 (2012), available 
at http://comptroller.defense.gov/defbudget/fy2012/budget_justification/pdfs/ 
01_Operation_and_Maintenance/O_M_VOL_1_PARTS/O_M_VOL_1_BASE_PARTS/D
ISA_OP-5_FY_2012.pdf.  

 

305 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
An  examination  of  DISA’s  budget  request  yields  mixed  results  given 
the  importance  of  network  defense  in  a  time  of  growing  threats—
particularly  to  military  systems.  DISA  arranges  its  resources  into  six 
mission areas.93 The “GIG Network Operations and Defense” mission 
area covers the operation, protection, defense, and sustainment of the 
“enterprise  infrastructure  and  information  sharing  services  which 
enable  Command  and  Control.”94  Yet,  the  funding  for  this  mission 
area  has  been  reduced  from  $517  million  in  fiscal  year  2011  to  $445 
million in fiscal year 2012.95  
 
This  reduction  may  not  indicate  DISA’s  lack  of  prioritizing 
network security, as only two of the six operations funded under GIG 
Network Operations and Defense resource line were actually reduced. 
These  two  missions  are  to  ensure  “critical  mission  execution  in  the 
face  of  cyber  attacks”96  and  “develop  and  implement  Cybersecurity 
plans,  assessments,  and  strategies  .  .  .  .”97  It  is  significant  to  note, 
however,  that  DISA’s  funding  for  support  of  the  Defense  Industrial 
Base  (DIB)  grew  by  more  than  $5  million  from  FY11  to  FY12.  This 
activity  provides  “information  assurance/computer  network  defense 
support  to  the  DIB  through  rapid  dissemination  of  cyber  threat, 
vulnerability, and analysis information.”98 It is “devoted exclusively to 
cyber indications and warning, intrusion detection, incident  analysis, 
incident  response, information sharing/knowledge management, and 
planning.”99 
  DISA’s mission is clearly critical to the overall cybersecurity of the 
United  States.  Without  reliable  military  command  and  control  and 
communications  infrastructure,  the  ability  for  the  U.S.  to  use  its 
superior military force is diminished.  
 

 
 

 
 

93 Id. at 208. (Transition to Net Centric Environment, Eliminate Bandwidth Constraints, 
GIG Network Operations and Defense, Exploit the GIG for Improved Decision Making, 
Deliver Capabilities Effectively/Efficiently). 

94 Id. (emphasis added). 

95 Id. at 217. (emphasis added). 

96 Id. at 218. 

97 Id. at 219.  

98 Id. at 221. 

99 Id. 

 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

306 
 
VI. NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY AND THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY 

[Vol. 8:2 

 
As a member of the Intelligence Community, the National Security 
Agency  (NSA)  collects,  analyzes,  and  produces  “signals  intelligence 
information  and  data  for  foreign  intelligence  and  counterintelligence 
purposes  to  support  national  and  departmental  missions.”100  With 
respect  to  cybersecurity,  the  Director  of  NSA  is  also  the  National 
Manager  for  National  Security  Systems  and  responsible  to  the 
Secretary of Defense for the protection of national security systems.101  
 
There  has  always  been  tension  between  operational  combat 
commanders  and  the  intelligence  organizations  that  support  them. 
According to Michael Handel: 

Intelligence is of the utmost importance in war, but it is 
not  a  prerequisite  for  military  conflict  or  even  victory. 
The  best  intelligence  is  impotent  without  military 
strength,  while  military  strength  without  intelligence 
can  nevertheless  accomplish  its  objectives  though 
probably  at  a  higher  cost.  Consequently,  military 
organizations have traditionally viewed the operational 
branch,  the  fighting  forces,  as  their  central  concern  at 
all times.102  

  Military  commanders  demand  certainty  and  predictability. 
Intelligence  agencies  tend  to  deliver  uncertain  and  qualified 
judgments.  In  a  paper  concerning  the  Intelligence  Community’s 
performance  in  Afghanistan,  the  then-Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for 
Intelligence  for  the  International  Security  Assistance  Force  in 
Afghanistan  said  that  “because  the  United  States  has  focused  the 
overwhelming majority of collection efforts and analytical brainpower 
on insurgent groups, our intelligence apparatus still finds itself unable 
to answer fundamental questions about the environment in which we 
operate and the people we are trying to protect and persuade.”103  

 
 

 
 

100 Exec. Order No. 12333 (2008). 

101 See 40 U.S.C. § 11103. 

102 INTELLIGENCE AND MILITARY OPERATIONS 65-66 (Michael I. Handel ed., 1990). 

103 MAJOR GENERAL MICHAEL T. FLYNN, U.S.A., CAPTAIN MATT POTTINGER & PAUL D. 
BATCHELOR, FIXING INTEL: A BLUEPRINT FOR MAKING INTELLIGENCE RELEVANT IN 
AFGHANISTAN 4 (2010), available at http://www.cnas.org/files/documents/publications/ 
AfghanIntel_Flynn_Jan2010_code507_voices.pdf. 

 

YOUNG 

307 

it  also 

2012] 
 
 
Because NSA is an agency within the Department of Defense and 
because it is now co-located with a cyber combat command, there may 
be tensions between the operational priorities of Cyber Command and 
those of the NSA. Despite these potential tensions, as discussed above, 
there is great wisdom in co-locating Cyber Command with NSA. 
 
The  National  Security  Agency  is  the  world’s  preeminent  signals 
intelligence organization.104 Not only is it responsible for the collection 
and  analysis  of  foreign  diplomatic,  military,  and  commercial 
communications,  but 
is  charged  with  securing  U.S. 
communications  from  interception.  Part  of  the  agency’s  mission 
includes  enabling  “Computer  Network  Operations  (CNO)  in  order  to 
gain  a  decision  advantage  for  the  Nation  and  our  allies  under  all 
circumstances.”105  
 
An example of the cybersecurity benefits derived from NSA is the 
Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  EINSTEIN  program.  Under  this 
program, the Department of Homeland Security is partnering with an 
Internet service provider to test technology that detects unauthorized 
intrusions  into  government  computer  systems  using  capabilities 
developed by the National Security Agency.106 The automation of this 
malware detection is meant to prevent attacks before damage is done 
to federal information systems or data is stolen or manipulated within 
federal  databases.  “EINSTEIN  3's  predecessors  focused  on  intrusion 
detection, allowing analysts to scan records of connections to agencies’ 
systems  and  use  signatures  to  scan  network  traffic  for  cyber 
threats. EINSTEIN  3  would  add  the  ability  to  prevent  those 
intrusions.”107  This  effort  will  improve  DHS’s  information  sharing  by 
providing  an  automated  process  for  alerting  other  agencies  about 
network intrusions. 
As  illustrated  by  the  EINSTEIN  technology,  NSA  and  the 
 
intelligence community may have insight into the working of terrorist 
organizations  that  seek  to  damage  U.S.  interests  using  the  Internet. 

 
 

 
 

104 See generally JEFFREY T. RICHELSON, THE U.S. INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY 31 (4th ed., 
1999). (Signals intelligence includes communications intelligence and electronic 
intelligence). 

105 NAT’L SEC. AGENCY, NSA/CSS STRATEGY (2010), available at 
http://www.nsa.gov/about/_files/nsacss_strategy.pdf. 

106 Ben Bain, DHS Releases New Details on EINSTEIN 3 Intrusion Prevention Pilot, 
FEDERAL COMPUTER WEEK (Mar. 19, 2010), available at 
http://fcw.com/articles/2010/03/19/einstein-3-test-intrusion-prevention-system.aspx. 

107 Id.  

 

to 

is 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

308 
 
According 
the  Congressional  Research  Service,  “Terrorist 
organizations exploit the Internet medium to raise awareness for their 
cause,  to  spread  propaganda,  and  to  inspire  potential  operatives 
across  the  globe.  Websites  operated  by  terrorist  groups  can  contain 
graphic  images  of  supposed  successful  terrorist  attacks,  lists  and 
biographies of celebrated martyrs, and forums for discussing ideology 
and methodology.”108 The global reach and resident analytical skill of 
the 
intelligence  community—including  NSA—provides  enormous 
advantage to U.S. cybersecurity.  
  Under the National Cyber Incident Response Plan, the intelligence 
community 
tasked  with  providing  advanced  warning  and 
characterization of a cyber attack. In concert with the Department of 
Defense,  the  intelligence  community  will  “characterize  the  cyber 
threat  and  attribution  of  attacks  and  to  forestall  future  incidents.”109 
Intelligence  agencies  are  also  tasked  with  establishing  situational 
awareness with DHS and “other partners” and to share intelligence on 
threats in and from cyberspace with the private sector and “especially 
the critical infrastructure and key resources (CIKR) community.”110  
 
The  Department  of  Defense  and  the  intelligence  community 
operate under some distinct legal authorities however. This is  both a 
benefit and a liability in terms of cybersecurity. According to General 
Alexander, a cyberspace destructive attack “is coming, in my opinion. 
It  is  a  question  of  time.”  He  noted  that  the  timing  of  this  attack  is 
unknown  and  that  he  cannot  predict  if  this  event  will  be  against 
“commercial 
infrastructure,  government  networks  or  mobile 
platforms.”111 
 
A  cyber  conflict  may  be  inevitable,  but  the  Defense  Department 
does not possess the inherent legal authority or capacity to respond to 
all  cyber  threats  unilaterally.  As  with  a  natural  disaster,  timely  and 
effective  interagency  coordination  is  necessary  to  synchronize  and 

 
 

 
 

108 CATHERINE A. THEOHARY & JOHN ROLLINS, CONG. RES. SERV., R41674, TERRORIST USE 
OF THE INTERNET: INFORMATION OPERATIONS IN CYBERSPACE 3 (2011), available at 
http://www.carlisle.army.mil/dime/documents/Terroist%20Use%20of%20Internet%20I
O.pdf. 

109 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, E-1 (2010) 
[hereinafter NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN], available at 
http://www.federalnewsradio.com/pdfs/NCIRP_Interim_Version_September_2010.pdf.  

110 Id.  

111 Donna Miles, Alexander Cites Need for Greater Cyber Defenses, AMERICAN FORCES 
PRESS SERV., (Sept. 13, 2011), available at 
http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=65321. 

 

309 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
focus all instruments of national power against current and emerging 
cyber  threats.112  DoD  currently  has  no  authority  to  guard  networks 
other than the GIG. Yet, threats to the U.S. may pass through multiple 
other networks, foreign and domestic, before putting DoD at risk. NSA 
can  monitor  foreign  communications  outside  the  U.S.,  but  can  do 
nothing to mitigate a threat  it may see coming. Despite the technical 
brilliance resident at NSA, the agency and the intelligence community 
must  develop  close  relationships  with  the  Department  of  Homeland 
Security to execute a unified homeland defense strategy.  
 
Both  the  Defense  Department  and  the  intelligence  community 
must  protect  information  systems  that  are  required  to  perform  their 
missions. Both federal elements know how to detect cyber intrusions, 
protect  essential  networks,  and  respond  to  threats  to  U.S.  interests. 
According  to  Franklin  Kramer,  however,  “the  technical  solutions  for 
securing civilian infrastructure vulnerability and espionage are either 
not  available  or  not  well  understood.”113  Kramer  notes  that  the 
“creation  of  an  effective  technical  architecture  with  adequate 
situational  awareness,  resilience  and  interoperability  will  be  a 
significant challenge.”114  
 
The weakness of the intelligence community and NSA  is  cultural. 
The  multi-billion  dollar  intelligence  community  produces  the  most 
sensitive information available to the government and, therefore, has 
many  more  personnel  with  higher  security  clearances.  The  military’s 
average  clearance  level  is  still  higher  than  that  of  DHS,  but  it  still 
doesn’t match that of an intelligence agency. 

VII. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 

 
As  the  key  source  of  legal  guidance  within  the  executive  branch, 
the  Justice  Department  is  a  necessary  partner  in  U.S.  cybersecurity, 
especially  because  clear  laws  governing  some  unique  aspects  of 
cybersecurity  have  yet  to  be  written.  For  example,  determining  what 
actions  against  the  U.S.  justify  retaliation  is  a  question  that  the 
department  must  consider.  The  lack  of  cyber-experienced  attorneys 

 
 

 
 

112 James Barkley, Kevin Campbell, Joseph Roybal, Interagency Coordination @ Net 
Speed: Recommendations to Maximize Interagency Coordination and Capabilities (US 
CYBERCOM 26, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University) (on file with 
author). 

113 KRAMER, supra note 20, at 3. 

114 Id. 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

310 
 
challenges almost all branches of the department. Although there may 
be a sufficient number of attorneys with military experience, very few 
of  them  have  military  cyber  experience.  This  limits  their  ability  to 
provide  guidance  for  and  participate  in  discussions  of  cyber  conflict 
and the emerging authorities for cyber-operational relationships. The 
Justice  Department  will  have  to  explore,  debate,  and  determine 
adequate  legal  guidance  for  a  federal  government  that  relies  on 
information networks to provide for the U.S. population. 

A. FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 

Criminal  acts  in  U.S.  cyberspace  are  addressed  by  the  Federal 
 
Bureau of Investigation. Such acts may be politically motivated; more 
often,  crimes  such  as  fraud  or  the  theft  of  intellectual  property  are 
motivated  by  the  pursuit  of  illicit  profit.  Some  estimate  the  cost  of 
cyber crime to be in the hundreds of billions of dollars.115 Operational 
relationships  between  the  Departments  of  Homeland  Security, 
Defense,  and  Justice  are  critical  because  “there  is  not  necessarily  a 
bright line between national security and criminal objectives: the well-
known  [December  2009]  attack  on  Google  may  be  an  exemplar  of  a 
hybrid situation.”116 

IX. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 

A. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY 

 
The  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  is  a 
Department  of  Commerce  non-regulatory  agency  and  “provides 
standards  and  technology  to  protect  information  systems  against 
threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information 
and  services.”117  NIST’s  Computer  Security  Division  encourages 
“broad  sharing  of  information  security  tools  and  practices,”  and 
“provides  a  resource 
information  security  standards  and 
guidelines.”118  

for 

 
 

 
 

115 See generally NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, supra note 109. 

116 Id. 

117 Computer Security Resource Center, NAT’L INST. OF STANDARDS AND TECH., 
http://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/csrc.cfm (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

118 Id. 

 

YOUNG 

311 

fulfills 

the 

2012] 
 
  NIST’s  Computer  Security  Division 
institute’s 
responsibilities  under Title  III of  the  E-Government  Act,  entitled  the 
Federal  Information  Security  Management  Act  of  2002  (FISMA).119 
Under its FISMA authorities, the Computer Security Division drafted 
FISMA  compliance  guides,  “provided  specifications  for  minimum 
security  requirements  for  federal 
information 
systems,”  and  reviewed  “security  policies  and  technologies  from  the 
private  sector  and  national  security  systems  for  potential  federal 
agency use.”120 
  NIST has a vital role to play at the nexus of U.S. government and 
the private sector. By statute, “NIST is directed to offer support to the 
private  sector  for  the  development  of  precompetitive  generic 
technologies121 and the diffusion of government-developed innovation 
to  users  in  all  segments  of  the  American  economy.”122  Title  15  also 
directs NIST to “develop and test standard interfaces, communication 
protocols,  and  data 
related 
telecommunications systems,”123 to “study computer systems and their 
use to control machinery and processes,”124 and to “perform research 

information  and 

computer  and 

structures 

for 

 
 

 
 

119 FISMA the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires each 
federal agency to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security 
program. The law assigns specific responsibilities to agency heads, chief information 
officers, and Inspectors General. It also assigns OMB and the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) with responsibilities for oversight and guidance. The 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is responsible for overseeing agency information 
security policies and practices, including developing and overseeing guidance on 
information security and overseeing compliance. NIST is tasked with developing standards 
and guidance for implementation of FISMA requirements by federal agencies. (See U.S. 
GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-07-528, INFORMATION SECURITY: SELECTED 
DEPARTMENTS NEED TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES IN IMPLEMENTING STATUTORY 
REQUIREMENTS (2007)). 

120 The Computer Security Division Responds to the Federal Information Security 
Management Act of 2002, COMPUTER SCIENCE DIV., NAT’L INST. OF STANDARDS AND TECH., 
http://csrc.nist.gov/about/index.html (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

121 See generally WENDY H. SCHACHT, CONG. RES. SERV., CRS Report 95-36, THE ADVANCED 
TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM 2 (2005), available at 
http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/crs/95-36.pdf (high-risk [research] . . . past the 
basic research stage but not yet ready for commercialization). 

122 WENDY H. SCHACHT, CONG. RES. SERV. CRS 95-30, THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY: AN APPROPRIATIONS OVERVIEW 1 (2011), available at 
http://assets.opencrs.com/rpts/95-30_20110425.pdf; see also 15 U.S.C. §272(b)(1) (2010).  

123 15 U.S.C. § 272(c)(12). 

124 Id. at § 272(c)(13). 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

312 
 
to develop standards and test methods to advance the effective use of 
computers and related systems and to protect the information stored, 
processed, and transmitted by such systems and to provide advice in 
support  of  policies  affecting  Federal  computer  and  related 
telecommunications systems.”125 
 
FISMA  provides  government-wide  requirements  for  information 
security that supersede the Government Information Security Reform 
Act  and  the  Computer  Security  Act.  “Except  for  national  security 
systems  as  defined  by  FISMA,  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  is 
responsible  for  prescribing  standards  and  guidelines  pertaining  to 
Federal information systems on the basis of standards and guidelines 
developed by NIST.”126 
  NIST  and  the  National  Security  Agency  cooperatively  evaluate 
information  technology  conformance  with  international  standards 
under  the  National  Information  Assurance  Partnership  (NIAP).  This 
cooperative  effort  is  the  NIAP  Common  Criteria  Evaluation  and 
Validation  Scheme  for  IT  Security  (CCEVS).  It  is  a  public-private 
partnership  to  “help  consumers  select  commercial  off-the-shelf 
information  technology  (IT)  products  that  meet  their  security 
requirements  and  to  help  manufacturers  of  those  products  gain 
acceptance in the global marketplace.”127 
 
Although NIST is a vital player in the cybersecurity game, divided 
authorities may hobble the federal government’s ability to adequately 
secure  essential 
information  and  critical  U.S.  networks.  The 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  “working  with  [NIST]  and  [the 
Office of Management and Budget]—defends all ‘.gov’ space; and DoD 
defends  all  of  the 
intelligence 
networks.”128  No  federal  organization  helps  protect  commercial 
networks  “where  our  policy  is  to  rely  on  some  combination  of 
individual action, encouragement, leadership by example, and faith in 
market forces.”129 

‘.mil’  space 

for  military  and 

 
 

 
 

125 Id. at § 27(c)(14).  

126 WILLIAM C. BARKER, NAT’L INST. OF STANDARDS & TECH., GUIDELINE FOR IDENTIFYING AN 
INFORMATION SYSTEM AS A NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM 5 (2003), available at 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-59/SP800-59.pdf. 

127 Common Criteria Evaluation and Validation, NAT’L INFO. ASSURANCE P’SHIP, 
http://www.niap-ccevs.org/about (last visited Jan. 23, 2012). 

128 Coldebella & White, supra note 18, at 7. 

129 Id. 

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

313 

X. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Considerations  of  the  complexities  surrounding  the  cybersecurity 
of  legislative  branch  networks  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  article; 
however,  since  there  are  connections  between  the  networks  of  both 
branches,  a  few  issues  should  be  mentioned.  Given  the  complicated 
cybersecurity  relationships  within  the  executive  branch,  it  is  easy  to 
overlook  the  important  role  the  legislative  branch  plays  in  setting 
funding  and  policy  for  U.S.  cybersecurity.  According  to  Stephen 
Dycus: 

the 

lack 

Congress obviously cannot act alone to develop a cyber 
warfare  policy  for  the  United  States.  Its  members  and 
staff 
technical  expertise,  agility,  and 
organization to wield this  new, evolving weaponry. On 
the  other  hand,  Congress’s  job  in  our  constitutional 
system is to set national policy for the executive branch 
to  execute.  Especially  in  the  matter  of  cyber  warfare, 
where 
the  diplomatic  and  strategic  stakes  are 
potentially  as  high  as  they  are  in  any  kinetic  conflict, 
Congress  has  a  critical  role  to  play.  It  has  perspective 
gained  from  long  experience  in  foreign  affairs  and  a 
host of related issues, and it may be more responsive to 
the  popular  will.  The  solution  to  this  apparent 
conundrum  may  be  found  in  a  close  collaboration 
between  the  political  branches  in  the  planning  and 
implementation of rules for cyber warfare.130 

Professor Dycus makes the point that U.S. cyberspace actions are still 
governed by law. If the nation suffers a significant cyber event that is 
determined to be an armed attack under the United Nations Charter, 
the  “United  States’  laws  and  rules  must  govern  the  United  States’ 
response—and,  in  particular,  the  relationship  between  the  executive 
branch  and  the  Congress.  An  appropriate  declaratory  policy,  as  has 
been  used  with  respect  to  other  types  of  potentially  serious  attacks, 
could  help  create  a  common  executive  branch-congressional 
understanding.”131 

 
 

 
 

130 Stephen Dycus, Congress’s Role in Cyber Warfare, 4 J. NAT'L SECURITY L. & POL'Y 155 
(2010). 

131 KRAMER, supra note 20, at 2.  

 

314 
 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

[Vol. 8:2 

XI. NON-FEDERAL SECTOR CYBERSECURITY  

OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 

 
External  operational  relationships  are  more  relevant  and 
important  when  the  United  States  is  faced  with  a  potential  cyber 
conflict.  The  relationships  between  the  U.S.  government  and  the 
private  sector  are  critical  because  the  private  sector  is  more  likely  to 
notice a cyber attack before it affects U.S. systems. The majority of the 
systems  and  critical  infrastructure  on  which  the  federal  government 
relies  are  owned  and  operated  by  the  private  sector.  Ninety-eight 
percent  of  government  communications,  including  classified  data, 
travel over “civilian-owned-and-operated networks and systems.”132  
 
According  to  the  Intelligence  and  National  Security  Alliance,  the 
relationship between the private sector and the federal government is 
insufficient  to  secure  U.S.  critical  infrastructure.  Government  and 
private cybersecurity efforts remain uncoordinated, allowing malware 
to  spread  “undetected  to  any  location  benefiting  from  the  near 
absence of security between independent network owners. This lack of 
coordination  across  the  public  and  private  sector  leaves  the  user 
vulnerable  to  malevolent  behavior  that,  among  a  long  list  of 
possibilities,  can  invade  their  privacy,  steal  their  identities,  deny 
critical  services,  or  create  conditions  in  which  public  confidence  in 
governmental institutions is diminished.”133 
 
the 
government  and  commercial  sectors.  Multiple  advisory  committees 
and  partnerships  with  private  industry  are  involved  in  cybersecurity. 
The  bodies 
to  provide  stronger  public-private 
partnerships have been less than successful, however, because there is 
no  regulatory  structure  to  allow  adequate  operational  relationships 
between the public sector and federal departments and agencies. The 
Center for Strategy and International Studies points to DoD’s Defense 
Industrial Base Cyber Pilot  and the Enduring Security Framework as 
two of the few successful partnerships in government. Their success is 

There  are  evolving  efforts 

for  coordination  between 

that  attempt 

 
 

 
 

132 Eric Talbot Jensen, Cyber Warfare and Precautions Against the Effects of Attacks, 88 
TEX. L. REV. 1533, 1534 (2010) (quoting Michael McConnell, Former Dir. of Nat’l 
Intelligence, from his Keynote Address at the Texas Law Review Symposium: Law at the 
Intersection of National Security, Privacy, and Technology). 

133 INTELLIGENCE AND NAT’L SEC. ALLIANCE, ADDRESSING CYBER SECURITY THROUGH 
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP: AN ANALYSIS OF EXISTING MODELS (2009), available at 
http://www.insaonline.org/assets/files/CyberPaperNov09R3.pdf. 

 

315 

YOUNG 

2012] 
 
based on the “high-level participation by all parties and the existence 
of binding contractual relationships.”134 
 
The  private  sector  continues  to  struggle  with  the  costs  of 
improving  security  for  its  information  and  networks.  According  to 
Larry  Clinton  of  the  Internet  Security  Alliance,  “Many  companies 
don’t see an adequate [return on investment] to cyber investments.”135 
The 
lack  of  an  adequate  business  case  to  encourage  greater 
cybersecurity  creates  regulatory  dilemmas.  Melissa  Hathaway136  has 
offered  three  options  for  steepening  the  “demand  curve  for 
cybersecurity.”137  She  recommends  that  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  propose  a  rule  governing  the  thresholds  of  information 
security risk. This would demonstrate the SEC’s interest in corporate 
information on company information security safeguards.138  
 
Second,  Hathaway  recommends  the  Federal  Communications 
Commission  require  the  “core  telecommunications  providers  and 
[internet  service  providers]…shoulder  more  of  the  burden  of 
protecting  our  infrastructure.”  The  private  sector  often  tells  the 
government that private firms are better positioned than government 
agencies  to detect and mitigate cyber threats. If this  is the case, then 
the  government  should  endorse  the  cyber  capabilities  of  the  private 
sector  and  capitalize  on  the  “unparalleled  visibility  into  global 
networks” of the ISPs.139  

 
 

 
 

134 Coldebella & White, supra note 18, at 4. 

135 Examining the Homeland Security Impact of the Obama Administration’s 
Cybersecurity Proposal: Hearing Before H. Subcomm. on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure 
Protection, and Sec. Technologies, 112th Cong. (2011) (testimony of Larry Clinton, 
President & CEO, Internet Security Alliance), available at http://homeland.house.gov/ 
sites/homeland.house.gov/files/Testimony%20Clinton%20Amended.pdf. 

136 President of Hathaway Global Strategies and senior adviser at the Harvard Kennedy 
School's Belfer Center led President Obama's Cyberspace Policy Review as National 
Security Council acting senior director for cyberspace. Hathaway also led the development 
of the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative in the Bush White House.  

137 See generally MELISSA HATHAWAY, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, ISSUE BRIEF: CREATING THE 
DEMAND CURVE FOR CYBERSECURITY (2010), available at http://www.acus.org/files/ 
publication_pdfs/403/121610_ACUS_Hathaway_CyberDemand.pdf. 

138 MELISSA HATHAWAY, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, ISSUE BRIEF: CREATING THE DEMAND CURVE 
FOR CYBERSECURITY 2 (2010), available at http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/ 
403/121610_ACUS_Hathaway_CyberDemand.pdf. 

139 Id. at 1. 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

316 
 
 
Third, the Federal Trade Commission has appropriate authority to 
“protect  and  educate  consumers  and  businesses  on  the  fundamental 
importance  of  good  information-security  practices.”140  Through  the 
application of a warning banner or notice message, online consumers 
can  be  informed  of  the  risk  they  are  assuming  by  conducting  e-
transactions.  These  banners  are  comparable  “to  the  warning  labels 
found on tobacco and alcohol products, telling consumers they can be 
hazardous to their health.”141 
 
In  October  2011,  the  SEC  issued  guidance  essentially  adopting 
Hathaway’s  recommendations.  The  new  regulation  requires  public 
companies  to  report  “significant  instances  of  cybertheft  or  attack,  or 
even when they are at material risk of such an event.”142 

A. THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY  

AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR 

The  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002  assigned  the  following 

 
responsibilities for the protection of critical infrastructure to DHS: 

  developing  a  comprehensive  national  plan  for 
resources  and  critical 

securing 
infrastructures of the United States;  

the  key 

 

recommending  measures  to  protect  the  key 
resources  and  critical  infrastructures  of  the 
United  States 
in  coordination  with  other 
groups; and  

 

 
 

 
 

140 Id. at 5. 

141 Id. 

142 Ellen Nakashima & David S. Hilzenrath, Cybersecurity: SEC Outlines Requirement 
That Companies Report Cyber Theft and Attack, WASH. POST, Oct. 14, 2011, 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/cybersecurity-sec-outlines-
requirement-that-companies-report-data-breaches/2011/10/14/gIQArGjskL_story.html; 
see also DIV. OF CORP. FIN., SEC. AND EXCHANGE COMM’N, CF DISCLOSURE GUIDANCE: TOPIC 
NO. 2 CYBERSECURITY (2011), available at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.  

 

2012] 
 

YOUNG 

317 

  disseminating,  as  appropriate,  information  to 
the  deterrence,  prevention,  and 
terrorist 

assist 
preemption  of  or 
attacks.143  

in 

response 

to 

DHS  communicates  with  the  private  sector  primarily  through  the 
Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centers  (ISACs).  In  1998, 
Presidential  Decision  Directive  63  called  for  the  establishment  of 
ISACs as means to assist with the protection of critical infrastructure. 
Yet,  “[f]requent  reliance  on  cooperative  councils,  like  the  ISACs,  has 
produced little more than the repetitive refrain that government can’t 
share  intelligence  with  the  private  sector  and  the  private  sector  sees 
little to gain by sharing with the government.”144 
 
The  strength of DHS’s relationship with  the private  sector  is  that 
DHS  has  provided  a  venue  to  share  information,  which  is  necessary 
but not sufficient. The weaknesses of this approach, however, is that it 
is  voluntary  and  there  is  no  cost  to  not  participating.  Private  sector 
motivation for sharing information with the government is reduced by 
the monetary risk of releasing proprietary information to competitors 
and the potential liability of releasing customer date, if sued. There is 
also the “FOIA” risk. Private sector firms are not subject  to Freedom 
of  Information  Act  (FOIA)  requests  for  information,  but  under  the 
current  legal  regime  any  information  provided  to  the  government,  if 
not  subject  to  a  FOIA  exemption—national  security,  for  example—
could be released to the public.  
  Within  DHS,  the  National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate 
oversees  the  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  for  Cybersecurity  and 
Communications.  The  office  uses  three  divisions145  to  “prevent  or 
minimize  disruptions  to  [U.S.]  critical  information  infrastructure  in 
order  to  protect  the  public,  economy,  government  services,  and  the 
overall security of the United States.” The CS&C Office seeks to reduce 

 
 

 
 

143 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-10-628 , CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROTECTION: KEY PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CYBER EXPECTATIONS NEED TO BE CONSISTENTLY 
ADDRESSED 7 (2010), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10628.pdf. 

144 Paul Rosenzweig, The Organization of the United States Government and Private 
Sector for Achieving Cyber Deterrence, in DETERRING CYBER ATTACKS: INFORMING 
STRATEGIES AND DEVELOPING OPTIONS FOR U.S. POLICY 244, 266 (2010). 

145 See National Communications System, NAT’L CYBER SECURITY DIV. OFFICE OF 
EMERGENCY COMMC’S, http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1185202475883.shtm 
(last visited Feb. 2, 2012) (The three divisions are the National Communications System, 
the National Cyber Security Division, and the Office of Emergency Communications.). 

 

[Vol. 8:2 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

318 
 
cyber  vulnerabilities,  guard  against  cyber  intrusions,  and  anticipate 
potential threats.146 
  However, according to a DHS Inspector General Report from June 
2011,  CS&C  has  not  adequately  addressed  cybersecurity  risks.  The 
office  has  yet  to  craft  a  strategic  implementation  plan  to  address  the 
recommendations 
to  Secure 
Cyberspace,147  or  to  accomplish  the  objectives  established  by  the 
National  Infrastructure  Protection  Plan  or  the  Comprehensive 
National  Cyber  Security  Initiative.  According  to  the  IG,  “Although 
progress has been made in building relationships with the public and 
private  sectors,  raising  cybersecurity  awareness,  and  implementing 
education  and  outreach  programs,  much  work  remains  to  protect 
cyberspace 
from 
vulnerabilities and exploits.”148 

the  National  Strategy 

critical 

infrastructures 

from 

and 

the  Nation’s 

B. THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND THE DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL BASE 

 
The  Defense  Department  has  its  own  relationships  with  a  small 
portion  of  the  private  sector  known  as  the  Defense  Industrial  Base. 
This effort provides expertise to defense contractors who have “opted-
in”  to  the  program.  “Through  a  public-private  partnership  called  the 
Enduring  Security  Framework (ESF), the chief  executive officers  and 
chief technology officers of major information technology and defense 

 
 

 
 

146 Office of Cybersecurity and Communications, U.S. DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., 
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1185202475883.shtm (last visited Jan. 23, 
2012). 

147 See THE NATIONAL STRATEGY TO SECURE CYBERSPACE (2003), available at 
http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/cyberspace_strategy.pdf. The National Strategy to 
Secure Cyberspace outlined a framework for both organizing and prioritizing efforts. It 
provides direction to the federal government departments and agencies that have roles in 
cyberspace security. It also identifies steps that state and local governments, private 
companies and organizations, and individual Americans can take to improve our collective 
cybersecurity. The Strategy highlights the role of public-private engagement. The 
document provides a framework for the contributions that we all can make to secure our 
parts of cyberspace. The dynamics of cyberspace will require adjustments and amendments 
to the Strategy over time. See id. at viii. 

148 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GEN., PLANNING, MANAGEMENT, 
AND SYSTEMS, ISSUES HINDER DHS' EFFORTS TO PROTECT CYBERSPACE AND THE NATION'S 
CYBER INFRASTRUCTURE (Redacted) 13 (2011), available at 
http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIGr_11-89_Jun11.pdf. 

 

YOUNG 

319 

2012] 
 
companies  now  meet  regularly  with  top  officials  from  DHS,  ODNI, 
and DoD.”149 
 
The  benefits  of  this  relationship  are  faster  identification  and 
application  of  commercial  best  practices  from  top  industry  leaders. 
The  ESF  addresses  how  the  “technological,  operational,  and  political 
factors  introduce  exposure  for  the  U.S.  and  opportunity  for  our 
adversaries, identify the means to manage the risk profile for the U.S. 
and its allies in this environment, and address today’s risk and provide 
a  permanent  forum  for  continued  engagement 
in  tomorrow’s 
technology marketplace.” 
 
The  downsides  are  similar  to  those  in  the  ISACs—a  limited 
government  ability  to  share  classified  information  with  the  private 
sector  and  the  private  sector’s  limited  inclination  to  share  with 
government  due  to  its  proprietary  concerns  and  liability  issues.  The 
Department  has  involved  some  of  its  Defense  Industrial  Base  (DIB) 
contractors in a pilot program to “improve sharing of information on 
cyber  threat,  alerts,  and  sensitive  data  by  establishing  a  new 
partnership  model.”150  This  pilot  program  is  governed  by  voluntary 
agreements  between  DoD  and  cleared  defense  contractors.  These 
contractors 
threat 
information and best practices: 

classified  and  unclassified 

receive 

cyber 

In  return,  the  private  sector  partners  agree  to  share 
cyber intrusion information with the DoD Cyber Crime 
Center,  which  is  to  serve  as  the  focal  point  for 
information-sharing  and  digital  forensics  analysis 
activities related to protecting unclassified information 
on DIB information systems and networks. DoD’s goal 
is  to  transition  from  pilot  to  program  status  and 
expand the program to all qualified cleared contractors. 
In  addition,  the  officials  stated  that  they  expect  to 
eventually  modify  DoD  contractual 
to 
encourage contractors to increase cybersecurity in their 
networks.151 

language 

 
 

 
 

149 William J. Lynn III, Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon's Cyberstrategy, 
FOREIGN AFF., Sept./Oct. 2010. 

150 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-10-628, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROTECTION: KEY PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CYBER EXPECTATIONS NEED TO BE CONSISTENTLY 
ADDRESSED 22 (2010), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10628.pdf. 

151 Id. at 23.  

 

320 
 

I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY 

[Vol. 8:2 

XII. CONCLUSION 

The 

federal 

requires 

adequate 

government 

 
operational 
relationships  that  will  facilitate  information  and  resource  sharing  in 
times  of  expanding  cybersecurity  threats  and  shrinking  federal 
budgets.  All  federal  departments  and  agencies  must  participate  and 
contribute  to  more  secure  information  systems,  but  the  departments 
with  the  largest  budgets  and  most  expertise—the  Departments  of 
Defense  and  Homeland  Security,  and  those  with  greater  insight  into 
the capabilities and intentions of potential adversaries—likely have the 
most significant contributions to make across the federal government 
and the private sector.  
 
The  Defense  Industrial  Base  Cyber  Pilot  conducted  by  DoD  and 
the  EINSTEIN  program  initiated  by  DHS  are  excellent  examples  of 
collaboration  within  government  and  with  the  private  sector.  These 
initiatives require expansion and maturation. The collaborative efforts 
between  DoD  and  DHS  in  the  Joint  Coordination  Element  need  to 
become  stronger  vehicles  for  information  sharing  and  cooperative 
planning.  Following  these  recommendations  will  result  in  better 
avoidance  of,  preparation  for,  and  recovery  from  a  devastating  cyber 
attack.  The  United  States  government  has  established  good 
operational  relationships  to  address  the  cyber  threat,  but  it  must 
improve these relationships to be more inclusive and to coordinate at 
a much faster pace. 

 

