Who Should 
Lead U.S. 
Cybersecurity 
Efforts?

By KeVIn P. neWMeyeR

T hreats to computer systems, government and commercial networks—and even private 

citizens’ personal information—have exploded in recent years, but the U.S. Government 
has failed to address these threats adequately. One author has stated that “the cyber threat 
[is] the most pervasive and pernicious threat” facing the country today.1 The danger is no longer 
random teenagers looking for thrills by hacking into the local university network, but sophisticated 
criminal enterprises looking to steal information or money. The same technologies used to attack 
financial systems can be unleashed on the Nation’s critical infrastructure. In 2007, several Cabinet 
Departments including Defense, Homeland Security, and Commerce were hacked and terabytes of 
information were exfiltrated by unknown agents.2

The discovery of the Stuxnet virus in 2010 pointed to nation-state involvement in cyber attacks 
at an unprecedented level and followed the Ghostnet penetrations of the Dali Lama’s networks in 
2009. Cybersecurity changed from a nuisance problem in the early 1990s to a vital national security 
issue in the early 21st century. In one of his first acts, President Barack Obama called for a compre-
hensive review of U.S. policy on cybersecurity, but little has been done to implement the recommen-
dations from the review.3 While the White House published its International Strategy for Cyberspace 
in May 2011, the document does little to address the current domestic situation. Despite the need 

Kevin P. newmeyer is an assistant Professor in the Center for hemispheric Defense Studies at 
the national Defense university.

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 115

newMeyeR

for effective national cybersecurity policy, the 
lack of consensus on which leadership model 
would best achieve the desired results continues 
to delay policy implementation.

Several authors have proposed strategies and 
models for U.S. cybersecurity policy leadership. 
One prominent school of thought, highlighted 
by the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies (CSIS) report Securing Cyberspace for the 
44th Presidency, is that cybersecurity policy direction 
should fall under a powerful “czar” in the Executive 
Office of the President. The authors believe the 
centralization of power in the White House is 
the best course of action for providing the neces-
sary policy direction. A second school of thought 

despite the need for effective national 
cybersecurity policy, the lack of 
consensus on which leadership  
model would best achieve the  
desired results continues to delay  
policy implementation

argues that policy direction would best be accom-
plished through a Cabinet-level department. One 
study from this school argues that responsibility 
should remain with the Department of Homeland 
Security due to its role as the lead agency for 
response to domestic incidents.4 Others argue 
that moving the responsibility to the Executive 
Office of the President from Homeland Security 
would be insufficient and that a broader restructur-
ing is needed to address the triad of cybersecurity 
(government at Federal, state, and local levels). 
Paul Rosenzweig presents an argument for the 
Department of Defense (DOD) assuming the lead-
ership role based on the depth of talent and expe-
rience resident in the National Security Agency 
(NSA) as compared to the relative lack of human 
capital in the Department of Homeland Security.5

None of the present studies has provided a 
model that achieves the necessary political con-
sensus on the approach to cybersecurity lead-
ership to implement. Arguments for a strong 
White House role fail to address the limited 
success this model has had in other areas such 
as the war on drugs. Granting the leadership 
role to DOD ignores the lack of legal authorities 
for the military to act in domestic roles under 
the Posse Comitatus Act. The Department of 
Homeland Security, although having respon-
sibility, has not been able to achieve necessary 
levels of performance for a variety of reasons. 
Indeed, the White House czar model offers the 
advantage of access to the inner circle of the 
President and the bully pulpit but no regula-
tory capability. The Cabinet department model 
offers regulatory power but lacks the authority 
of the White House in the interagency process.

Options for Cybersecurity Leadership
Policy leadership can remain in the White 
House with a powerful cyber czar able to set and 
implement policy decisions with the backing 
of the President. It could also be vested in one 
of the Cabinet departments. The Department 
of Homeland Security currently has a role in 
policy coordination among government agen-
cies for nondefense networks and systems, but 
each department remains responsible for its 
own systems.6 DOD is responsible for its own 
systems, both classified and unclassified, as well 
as some defense-related critical infrastructure 
necessary to defend the Nation. A third alterna-
tive is the creation of a new entity within the 
Federal Government as a hybrid.

The History

The origins of U.S. cybersecurity policy rest 
in critical infrastructure protection efforts begun 
during the Clinton administration. President 

116 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?

Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13010, 
“Critical Infrastructure Protection,” in 1996, 
which created the President’s Commission on 
Critical Infrastructure Protection and high-
lighted the threat to the Nation’s economic 
and national security from cyber attacks. The 
recommendations of the commission resulted in 
President Clinton issuing Presidential Decision 
Directive (PDD) 63 in May 1998.

PDD 63 established several cybersecu-
rity-related organizations within the govern-
ment including the National Coordinator 
for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and 
Counterterrorism with an Office of Critical 
Infrastructure to support the Coordinator and 
the National Infrastructure Protection Center. 
It also was the first step in encouraging the for-
mation of the sectoral Information Sharing and 
Analysis Centers (ISACs), which have con-
tinued to develop and form a key part of the 
public-private partnership necessary to secure 
cyberspace. With these centers, the Clinton 
administration focused on the public-private 
partnership as the means to secure cyberspace.
While the George W. Bush administration 
initially continued the Clinton approach, the 
attacks of 9/11 caused it to significantly refocus 
from cyber attacks on critical infrastructure to 
physical attacks by terrorist groups. The National 
Strategy to Secure Cyberspace was published in 
2003 but was criticized as more a list of rec-
ommendations than a comprehensive strategy 
document that tied in ends, ways, and means.7 
In addition, the Bush administration published 
the National Infrastructure Protection Plan in 
2006, which designated 17 (now 18) key infra-
structure sectors that required individual protec-
tion plans. The Bush administration also pub-
lished the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity 
Initiative in 2008, but critics found that its focus 
on the government Internet domain (.gov) was 

too limited. During the Bush administration, 
cybersecurity responsibility was vague, with lim-
ited leadership and diluted responsibility in the 
White House, Homeland Security, and DOD. 
Homeland Security was given the overall coor-
dination role, but responsibility still rested with 
individual agencies.

The Obama administration initiated 
its cybersecurity efforts with the “60-Day 
Cyberspace Policy Review.” Published in late 
May 2009, the document was an ambitious 
effort that presented a solid review of where 
the government was in relation to cybersecu-
rity, but it offered little in the way of vision on 
how to get to the destination. The key recom-
mendation of the review is that the President 
should appoint a single cybersecurity policy 
official to serve as the central coordinator for 
government and national efforts. This essen-
tially repeats the recommendation made by the 
Center for Strategic and International Studies 
commission report in 2008. Interestingly, 
the White House did not name a cyber czar 
until December 2009, when Howard Schmidt 
accepted the position. In May 2011, the White 
House issued the International Strategy to Secure 
Cyberspace, which provided an outline of U.S. 
intentions at the international level, but the 
document is largely silent on what needs to be 
done within the government and the Nation 
to address the challenges domestically.

This brings us to the present day. Although 
several bills were presented in the 110th Congress 
and even more in the 111th Congress, no compre-
hensive cybersecurity legalization has been voted 
into law, and more than 30 separate pieces of leg-
islation are pending before the 112th Congress.8 
The Congressional Research Service pointed out 
that no single congressional committee or execu-
tive agency has primary responsibility for cyber-
security issues, and this has led to a hodgepodge 

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 117

President obama waits to be 
introduced at critical infrastructure 
Ceos meeting on cybersecurity at 
eisenhower executive office Building

newMeyeR

)
a
z
u
o
S
 
e
t
e
P
(
 
e
s
u
o
H
 
e
t
i

h
W

 
e
h
T

of initiatives and good ideas but no unifying focus.9 Many similarities exist among the documents that 
form the progression of U.S. cybersecurity policy under three administrations, and the outlines of 
the policy are sound—but difficult interagency and legislative decisions necessary for effective action 
remain to be taken. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) commented that cybersecurity 
leadership was challenged by a lack of top-level leadership and the difficulty of coordinating across 
multiple agencies. It is a situation that cannot be allowed to continue; there is too much at risk.

Policy Options

There are several basic options for providing cybersecurity leadership within the U.S. 
Government: a powerful White House–based executive/coordinator; designation of a Cabinet-
level agency with the requisite authority to be directive as opposed to consultative in dealing with 
other departments; and creation of some hybrid entity. If Cabinet-level leadership is chosen, the 
follow-up question is which department will take the lead, with Homeland Security and DOD as 
the most likely candidates.

Option A: National Coordinator in the Executive Office of the President. A leading option for 
cybersecurity leadership is to establish a National Coordinator for Cybersecurity within the White 
House structure. This option is favored by the CSIS report and the Obama administration’s 60-day 
review. The CSIS plan recommended:

118 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?

❖❖  appointing an assistant for cyberspace 
and establishing a cybersecurity direc-
torate within the National Security 
Council to assume current Homeland 
Security Council responsibilities

❖❖  establishing a National Office for 
Cyberspace  that  would  assume 
the responsibilities for the current 
National Cybersecurity Center and 
Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force.

The office/official would also assume over-
sight and control over the multiple cybersecu-
rity functions within the Federal Government 
and provide a single point of authority on 
related policy decisions.

The CSIS report placed the blame for the 
current weakness in cybersecurity policy at the 
Federal level on “lack of strategic focus, overlap-
ping missions, poor coordination and collabora-
tion, and diffuse responsibility.”10 This lack of 
focus continued even though the Clinton admin-
istration adopted PDD 63 and established Richard 
Clarke as the National Coordinator for Security, 
Infrastructure Protection, and Counterterrorism.
Sharp concurred with the CSIS recom-
mendation and pointed out the current lack of 
an authoritative decisionmaker in a position to 
compel action to respond to a serious threat to 
national security.11 He offered two models—one 
based on U.S. Strategic Command and its abil-
ity to order military components within the 
Global Information Grid to take action, and the 
other based on the role played by the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI). The DNI can-
not direct subordinate agencies to take action, 
but it has the power to reallocate resources, 
make budgetary changes, and issue formal task-
ings that would enable a National Coordinator 
for Cybersecurity to be effective. The CSIS 
report also offered the DNI as a potential model 

for the coordinator, highlighting the role the 
DNI plays as a strategist and network-builder. 
Senator Joseph Lieberman stated that there 
needs to be a strong cybersecurity coordina-
tor within the White House to oversee both 
the civilian and military efforts in cybersecu-
rity when he introduced legislation in 2009 to 
implement the CSIS recommendations.12

The White House cyber czar option has not 
met with universal approval. There are several 
weaknesses in the PDD 63 version, including the 
lack of budget authority and difficulties in getting 
the different departments to agree. Resources 
are the key in Washington, and without bud-
get authority, the National Cyber Coordinator 
will have a difficult job. Fundamental to the 
importance of the cyber czar is the authority del-
egated to him by the President. To be effective, a 
leader requires authority commensurate with his 
responsibility. Empowerment of the cyber czar by 
the President is fundamental.

Others have questioned the effectiveness 
of czars in general and argue that yet another 
rearrangement of the deck chairs is not neces-
sary. They believe that merely placing responsi-
bility in the White House would be insufficient 
to effect change and that much more drastic 
reorganization would be required.

Another weakness of the White House 
cyber czar is the lack of accountability to 
Congress.  The  current  advisor,  Howard 
Schmidt, was not subjected to a Senate confir-
mation. Several administrations have rejected 
calls for Presidential advisors to testify before 
Congress. The legislation proposed by Senator 
Lieberman required the President to nominate 
a cyber coordinator for Senate approval simi-
lar to the process used for the DNI. This would 
instill some measure of congressional oversight 
and allow Congress to demand testimony from 
the cyber czar. Senator Robert Byrd noted that 

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 119

newMeyeR

the increased use of Presidential czars presented 
a potential threat to the Constitution’s system 
of checks and balances. Senator Susan Collins 
resisted placing cybersecurity leadership in the 
White House because of the difficulty for con-
gressional oversight of budgets and spending.13
Filling the job of a cybersecurity coordina-
tor proved difficult. It took more than 7 months 
from the completion of the Obama administra-
tion’s cybersecurity review to name the coor-
dinator. The GAO saw the slow adoption of 
the policy review’s recommendations as a result 
of the lack of authoritative guidance from the 
White House.14

the interagency process is far from 
smooth, and each department  
secretary values his or her direct line  
to the President

Option B: Place a Cabinet Department 
in Charge. Two primary options exist for plac-
ing a Cabinet department in charge of cyberse-
curity: Defense and Homeland Security. Before 
looking at the details involved with each 
one, some general observations are in order. 
Cabinet-level management of the problem is 
more in line with the traditional response to 
threats for the U.S. Government. It provides 
for congressional oversight via the confir-
mation and budget processes. Cabinet-level 
officials may be summoned to testify before 
Congress. Agencies operate under authorities 
designated in law and are normally empowered 
to publish regulations that are binding on indi-
viduals and companies.

There  are  challenges  to  placing  a 
Cabinet-level department in charge. The 
interagency process is far from smooth, 
and each department secretary values his 

or her direct line to the President. Placing 
one department in a position to mandate to 
another how it is to defend and operate its 
internal computer systems could be prob-
lematic. The Trusted Internet Connection 
(TIC) program that was designed to reduce 
the number of governmental connections to 
the Internet is indicative of some of the prob-
lems. TIC was launched in 2007 by the Office 
of Management and Budget to improve the 
reliability and security of U.S. Government 
networks, with all departments except DOD 
required to participate. As of September 
2009, none of the 23 agencies involved was 
fully compliant.15

Option B (1): Placing the Department 
of  Homeland  Security  in  Charge. The 
Department of Homeland Security legal author-
ities allow it to protect information shared with 
the private sector, lead a civilian response to 
a cyber attack, request law enforcement and 
intelligence assistance from other government 
agencies, and offer liability protection to com-
panies that sell and use technology to defend 
against cyber terrorism. Given that more than 
85 percent of the government’s information 
traffic flows over private sector networks, it is 
necessary that the lead agency for cybersecu-
rity has strong relations with the private sec-
tor. Homeland Security has already established 
relationships with the private sector via the 
ISACs and has included private sector repre-
sentatives on the watch floor at the National 
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration 
Center (NCCIC). Homeland Security also has 
existing regulatory capacity.

Additionally, Homeland Security has expe-
rience with cybersecurity. Since the creation of 
the department, it has had significant responsi-
bilities for critical infrastructure protection and 
cybersecurity. The department currently directs 

120 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?

the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team, 
NCCIC, and has implemented lessons learned 
and modified its internal structure to address its 
shortcomings. With its appointment to a focal 
point role, it has advanced cybersecurity readi-
ness within government, but it is far from perfect.
Among the challenges facing Homeland 
Security is attracting and retaining suffi-
cient personnel to meet its current, let alone 
expanded cybersecurity responsibilities. In 
2011, the department announced that it plans 
to increase its cybersecurity staff by 50 percent 
to 400 by October 2012. This will be particu-
larly challenging in an age when governmental 
salaries are frozen and the demand from the pri-
vate sector is continuing to grow.

The CSIS report recommends that the 
departments retain their existing operational 
responsibilities. Citing the concept that cyber-
security has now become an essential national 
security issue, the report argues that a departmen-
tal-level agency could not perform the overarch-
ing policy coordination needed and thus rejects 
an enhanced Department of Homeland Security 
oversight role. With the threat including foreign 
intelligence agencies and militaries, the report 
argues that cybersecurity is well beyond the scope 
of Homeland Security and critical infrastruc-
ture protection. Cybersecurity has become an 
international problem that significantly exceeds 
the capabilities and management capacity of 
Homeland Security.

Option B (2): Placing the Department 
of Defense in Charge. Others suggested that 
DOD be given the leadership role for cyberse-
curity across the government. Defense already 
has responsibility for defending its own systems 
and has been forward leaning in establishing 
policy and making organizational changes for 
cybersecurity. Among the initiatives was the 
establishment of U.S. Cyber Command to 

have overall responsibility within the military 
for cyber defense and attack issues. The depart-
ment has also established relationships with the 
private sector through its defense industrial base 
cybersecurity pilot initiatives, which fall under 
its responsibility for defense-related critical 
infrastructure protection.

Much of the argument for giving cybersecu-
rity leadership responsibility to DOD is based on 
its combination of experience and manpower.16 
NSA has extensive experience and capability 
for monitoring and protecting networks. In 
October 2010, Homeland Security and DOD 
signed a memorandum of understanding that 
allowed NSA to support Homeland Security 
cybersecurity efforts and established a person-
nel exchange between the agencies.17

The drawbacks of placing DOD in charge 
of cybersecurity are numerous. The legal restric-
tions of the Posse Comitatus Act on domestic 
activity by military forces represent only the 
most basic of issues. The department for the 
most part lacks regulatory authority and law 
enforcement powers. It is also a drastic depar-
ture from the department’s primary mission. 
Defense also would suffer many of the same 
challenges in interagency coordination that 
affect Homeland Security. Additionally, DOD 
relationships with the private sector are not 
nearly as extensive as Homeland Security’s. 
Challenges would also be likely from civil liber-
ties groups and Congress to a greater militariza-
tion of cyberspace.

Option B (3): Create a New Cabinet-
level Agency for Cybersecurity. Creating a new 
agency that combines all cybersecurity func-
tions offers a chance to address the deficiencies 
of the current models. Precedents exist with the 
National Security Act of 1947, which created 
DOD in response to the new threats emerging 
from the Cold War and the aftermath of World 

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 121

newMeyeR

War II, and with the creation of the Department 
of Homeland Security in 2002 in response to the 
attacks of 9/11. Several experts and politicians 
have claimed that the threat of cyber attack and 
other cyber risks have exceeded the capabilities 
of current arrangements and that cybersecurity 

a Cabinet-level agency allows for 
congressional oversight of budgets 
and leadership consistent with normal 
constitutional process

is now an issue of national security. Creation of 
a new agency allows for the combining of cyber 
offensive and defensive operations. With proper 
legislative action, the new agency could be given 
the necessary regulatory and law enforcement 
authorities to execute its missions. A Cabinet-
level agency allows for congressional oversight 
of budgets and leadership consistent with normal 
constitutional process.

Consolidation within one department 
clarifies the lines of authority and centralizing 
control over budgets and policy. It counters the 
lack of unity of effort that is often cited as one 
of the significant failures of the current system.
The creation of a new agency is not a pana-
cea. As the experience with Homeland Security 
demonstrated, it is not easy to combine agen-
cies from different departments with different 
organizational cultures into an effective orga-
nization. The delays in properly organizing for 
cybersecurity and taking effective action are 
already a national security issue. Turf wars are 
already an issue with cybersecurity policy. A 
new agency would also face the same issues as 
other departments with interagency coordina-
tion and compliance among equals.

O p t i o n   C :   C r e a t e   a   D i r e c t o r   o f 
Cybersecurity. A variation of the White 

House cyber czar would be the creation of a 
powerful coordinator for cybersecurity along 
the lines of the DNI. Created in the after-
math of the 9/11 attacks to unify the efforts 
of domestic, international, and military intel-
ligence programs, the DNI serves as the head 
of the Intelligence Community. The office 
establishes objectives and priorities across 
the intelligence agencies to meet the needs of 
the executive and legislative branches as well 
as the Armed Forces. Of critical importance, 
the DNI develops and executes the budget 
for the National Intelligence Program based 
on inputs and priorities from the Service and 
agency components.

A similar position could be created for 
cyber security, a Director of Cybersecurity 
(DCYBER). Implementing legislation could 
allow for budget oversight across the Federal 
Government, Senate confirmation of the direc-
tor, and establishment of clear lines of authority 
and responsibility with the government as well 
as for relationships with the private sector.

Analysis of Options

None of the options available is perfect. 
While several bills have been introduced to 
Congress over the past several years, progress 
has been slow. Cybersecurity must compete on 
the legislative and executive agenda with other 
significant issues. Health care, financial reform, 
public debt, and ongoing wars continue to 
dominate the news and the legislative agenda. 
It is clear, however, that current structures are 
insufficient to achieve cybersecurity. Repeated 
studies and reviews have yielded remarkably 
similar recommendations.

The centralization of cybersecurity pol-
icy initiatives in the Executive Office of the 
President remains a leading contender; it 
offers the power of the Presidency to achieve 

122 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

)
n
o
s
e
e
r
G
n

 

i
t
r
a

M

(
 
y
m
A

r

 
.

.

S
U

who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?

uSaF Brigadier General 
Gregory Brundidge discusses 
need to aid collaboration 
and improve empowerment 
of cyber defense personnel, 
technology, and processes 

cross-organizational agreement within the executive branch. Strong leadership is clearly essential 
for achieving sufficient cybersecurity.

The most significant limitations on a White House cyber czar center on his authority to com-
pel compliance from the disparate executive branch agencies. Without a clear establishment of 
authorities in legislation, the individual would only have the referent power and authority granted 
by his standing with the President. Lack of strong backing from the President would constrain his 
effectiveness in executing his mission. To be effective, the position needs a legal structure solidified 
in legislation similar to the DNI, which would imply greater congressional oversight.

In examining the various Cabinet-level department options, it is difficult to argue that any of them 
could overcome the problems of the current structure. The present system has obviously failed as repeated 
penetration of DOD and other governmental systems has entailed the loss of terabytes of data.

Placing the responsibilities in DOD presents numerous challenges. While defending systems 
from foreign attack could become a defense mission, the department has little experience with 
regulatory matters and procedures. The civil liberty implications of using the military in domestic 
intelligence activities are enormous. The Posse Comitatus Act would have to be significantly revised 
to allow for military activity beyond training inside the United States. This would cause civil lib-
erties debates greater than those over the USA PATRIOT Act. Placing the military in charge of 
cybersecurity for civilian systems would not be politically viable.

Creation of a new department to focus on cybersecurity would achieve many of the objectives 
listed in the CSIS report. It would allow for collection of the many siloed activities currently under 

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 123

newMeyeR

DOD, Homeland Security, Commerce, and 
State. The establishing legislation would have 
to clarify authorities, regulatory powers, and 
relationships with the existing departments. The 
budget and nomination process provides for the 
needed congressional oversight.

The challenges to a new department are 
daunting. Starting something in Washington 
at the Cabinet level normally requires a dra-
matic trigger event along the lines of 9/11 or an 
indefatigable champion willing to expend the 
political capital necessary to carry the battle. To 
date, this has not occurred on the cyber front. 
Other issues have occupied the political space 
and pushed cybersecurity to the rear. A new 
department would also face significant grow-
ing pains. In the current budget and political 
climate, it is unlikely to garner the support 
needed in Congress. While it may provide the 
best operational and constitutional solution, it 
is the least likely in the near to mid term.

Retaining cybersecurity leadership within 
the Department of Homeland Security is the 
most likely alternative among the Cabinet-
level organizations. As previously discussed, the 
department has the basic regulatory functions 
necessary and significant experience in cyber-
security issues. The relationship with DOD has 
improved significantly in cybersecurity and a 
cooperative strategy is in place.

What Homeland Security lacks in the cyber-
security leadership role is consistent Presidential 
and congressional focus. It has a coordination 
role given to it by the President in a series of 
decision documents, but coordination is not 
control. Homeland Security cannot truly compel 
other departments to adhere to its policies and 
decisions. The department itself is still growing 
and developing. Less than 10 years old, it does 
not have the longstanding policies and cultures 
of the Department of State or DOD. Congress 

has not helped the problems at the department 
and must clarify its committee jurisdiction issues 
regarding not only cybersecurity but also all of 
the missions assigned to Homeland Security. At 
present, more than 80 committees have a role in 
the department’s oversight.18

The other significant hurdle for Homeland 
Security is building the human capital neces-
sary to establish and implement policy and 
operations in support of cybersecurity. The 
department has announced ambitious plans for 
growing its cyber forces, but it will not be easy. 
Recruiting and retaining these specialists will be 
a constant challenge.

Recommendations

Cybersecurity is a daunting policy prob-
lem, and a simple solution is not apparent. 
The choice will be a compromise among vari-
ous options that must occur within a political 
environment with a limited attention span and 
several competing priorities. The President and 
Congress should do the following:

❖❖  Establish a Director of National 
Cybersecurity. The director role 
would be modeled on the DNI with 
some  significant  enhancements. 
With proper legislative action, the 
DCYBER would have clear budget 
and operational authority over cyber-
security programs across the Federal 
Government. Individual departments 
would not be able to reprogram funds 
without DCYBER approval. The posi-
tion would be subject to the advice 
and consent of the Senate as other 
political appointees. DCYBER would 
have a fixed 5-year term with the pos-
sibility of reappointment for 1 addi-
tional term. Fixed terms allow for a 

124 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?

measure of independence from polit-
ical concerns and are used in other 
Federal agencies such as the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation and Equal 
Opportunity Commission.

❖❖  Enact legislation to provide Homeland 
Security clear directive authority for 
cybersecurity across nondefense agen-
cies. Simple coordination has not been 
effective in improving cybersecurity 
across Federal agencies. A definitive 
authority is required for Homeland 
Security to mandate action and adjust 
the priorities of other agencies for this 
critical national security issue.

❖❖  Enact legislation to establish a U.S. 
Government Cybercorps. To attract 
and retain qualified personnel, the 
standard General Schedule has proven 
insufficient. A better alignment of 
incentives and streamlined recruiting 
with flexible personnel policies is nec-
essary. Positions within agencies would 
be allocated for Cybercorps-designated 
personnel in much the same manner as 
Intelligence Community and acquisi-
tion specialists are currently desig-
nated. Funds would be established for 
continued professional education and 
training for Cybercorps personnel to 
remain current.

❖❖  Formalize personnel exchanges between 
Homeland Security and DOD for cyber-
security personnel. The existing memo-
randum of understanding between the 
two departments should be codified 
in legislation. Congress needs to out-
line the limitations on intelligence 
exchange between military and law 
enforcement for cyber related issues.

❖❖  Establish  a  permanent  position 
for private sector participation in 
DCYBER. With the vast majority of 
computer networks and other criti-
cal infrastructure under private sec-
tor control, it is imperative that they 
have a continuous voice in the poli-
cymaking process. Confidentiality and 
liability issues are manageable.

Conclusion

Cybersecurity concerns have only grown 
with the expansion of digital technology into 
all aspects of daily life and daily government 
operations. President Obama in the International 
Strategy to Secure Cyberspace stated that cyber-
security is part and parcel of everyday life for all 
Americans and much of the world. Maintaining 
the status quo of scattered responsibilities and 
patchwork policy solutions is not only poor gov-
ernance but also potentially places the Nation’s 
critical assets at risk.

Establishing  a  strong  DCYBER  at  a 
Cabinet-equivalent level would provide 
the necessary leadership within the Federal 
Government. The Department of Homeland 
Security would continue to play an impor-
tant role in protecting civilian governmental 
systems and coordinating with the private 
sector. DOD has already taken several steps 
to improve its capabilities for action, and 
senior leaders are addressing cybersecurity in 
a responsible manner.

Congress and the President need to dem-
onstrate the political leadership and expend 
the political capital to make the needed 
changes in legislation and structure on the 
domestic front. Waiting for a perfect solution 
to appear is not an option. Decisive action is 
required now. PRISM

PRISM 3, no. 2 

FeatuReS  | 125

newMeyeR

Notes

1 Walter Gary Sharp, Sr., “The Past, Present and Future of Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law & 
Policy 4, no. 13 (2010), 13–16, available at <http://insct.org/jnslp/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/03_Sharp.pdf>.

2 This problem continues unabated. During the presentation of the Department of Defense Cyber Security 
Strategy in July 2011, Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn III commented that another major loss of 
sensitive data occurred in early 2011.

3 See the Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure 
(Washington, DC: The White House, 2009), available at <www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_
Review_final.pdf> and the follow-on critique Cybersecurity Two Years Later, A Report of the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies (CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency (Washington, DC: CSIS, January 
2011), available at <http://csis.org/files/publication/110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf>.

4 Gus P. Coldebella and Brian M. White, “Foundation Questions Regarding the Federal Role in 

Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law & Policy 4, no. 233 (2010), 233–245.

5 Paul Rosenzweig, “10 Conservative Principles for Cybersecurity Policy,” Backgrounder No. 
2513 (Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation, 2011), available at <www.heritage.org/research/
reports/2011/01/10-conservative-principles-for-cybersecurity-policy>.

6 Sharp.
7 The CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th President was a strong critic. See also Catherine 
A. Theohary and John Rollins, Cybersecurity, Current Legislation, Executive Branch Initiatives, and Options for 
Congress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2009).

8 Amber Corrin, “Will Congressional Infighting Stall Cybersecurity Laws?” Federal Computer Week, 
October 11, 2011, available at <http://fcw.com/articles/2011/10/11/congress-cybersecurity-legislation-umuc-
panel.aspx>.

9 Theohary and Rollins.
10 Cybersecurity Two Years Later, 34.
11 Sharp, 15–16.
12 Patrick Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” CQ Researcher 20, no. 8, February 26, 2010.
13 Ibid.
14 David A. Powner, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy 
Review Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO-11-24 (Washington, DC: Government 
Accountability Office, October 2010), available at <www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-24>.

15 Gregory C. Wilshusen, Concerted Effort Needed to Consolidate and Secure Internet Connections at Federal 
Agencies, GAO-10-237 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, March 2010), available at 
<www.gao.gov/new.items/d10237.pdf>.

16 Rosenzweig.
17 “Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of 
Defense Regarding Cybersecurity,” September 2010, available at <www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/20101013-dod-
dhs-cyber-moa.pdf>.

18 See Timothy Balunis, Jr., and William Hemphill, “Escaping the Entanglement: Reversing Jurisdictional 
Fragmentation over the Department of Homeland Security,” Journal of Homeland Security & Emergency 
Management 6, no. 1 (2009).

126 |  FeatuReS 

PRISM 3, no. 2

