CYBER GUIDE  1.0  Meeting  AGENCY  Agents Council for Technology  Agency Cyber Guide 1.0  Tools for Compliance and Protection in  today’s world of Data Breach  and Cybercrime July, 2017  2  |  ACT Agency Cyber Guide 1.0  V  Compliance and Protection Roadmap:  In the section immediately below, we are providing you with details on each of 12 Cybersecurity  Regulations, as well as resources to address those.
The regulations detailed are:  1) Risk Assessment 2) Written Security Policy 3) Incident Response Plan 4) Staff Training and Monitoring 5) Penetration Testing/Vulnerability Assessment 6) Access control Protocol  7) Written Security Policy for 3rd-Party Service Providers 8) Encryption on Non-Public Information 9) Designation of CIO 10) Audit Trail 11) Implementing Multi-Factor Authentication 12) Procedure for Disposal of Non-Public Information  Independent insurance agents & brokers deal with sensitive client information every day.
For  many insurance transactions, consumers must disclose confidential personal information that  they would not normally or willingly disclose even to close personal friends.
This puts the burden  on agents and brokers to properly collect and protect this information which means complying  with state and federal regulations as well as adhering to customer service best practice  standards.
Handling sensitive information is now one of the most critical responsibilities  faced by the modern insurance agency.
Admittedly, technology significantly contributes to the ease of data collection and reduces the  time required to write and service policies.
Federal and  state acts such as Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (“GLBA”), the New York Department of Financial  Services, and other emerging regulatory requirements or recommendations to protect consumer  information but that are also in the agents’ best interest.
The Agents Council for Technology (ACT) in cooperation with independent agent  distribution entities has created this Agency Cyber Guide for Big “I” independent  agents and brokers.
The tool includes a list of the major Federal and State regulations  with clear descriptions and resources to address each one.
ACT  envisions this tool is to be a point-in-time “best practices” resource.
Given the swift  nature of change in technology and the increasing sophistication of cybercrime, this  tool will be updated on a periodic basis.
Here is a high-level overview of the GLBA security measure regulations:  1.
Access controls on customer information systems, including controls to authenticate   and permit access only to authorized individuals and systems to prevent employees from  providing customer information to unauthorized individuals who seek it through fraudulent  means;  2.
Access restrictions at physical locations containing customer information; 3.
Encryption of electronic customer information, including when in transit or in storage on   systems where unauthorized individuals may have access;  4.
Procedures to ensure that customer information system modifications are consistent with   an organization’s information security program;  5.
Dual control procedures, segregation of duties and employee background checks for   employees with access to customer information;  www.independentagent.com/act  |  3  6.
Monitoring of systems and procedures to detect actual and attempted attacks on or intrusion into   customer information systems;  7.
Response programs for when an organization suspects or detects that unauthorized individuals have   gained access to customer information systems;  8.
Measures to protect customer information from destruction, loss or damage by environmental hazards or   technological failure;  9.
Training for staff to implement the security program; and 10.
Regular testing of the key controls, systems and procedures of the security program.
It is critical that agents and brokers:  1.  understand these requirements 2.  begin to comply and protect 3.   follow the road map to fully address all areas that apply to them  V  Costs and Penalties for Noncompliance: Statistics show that 50% of small and medium-sized business have suffered a cyberattack in the  last 12 months (through YE 2016)—this number will increase.
The U.S. National Cyber Security  Alliance found that 60 percent of small companies are unable to sustain their businesses six  months after a cyberattack.
Penalties can vary by state, as do the data  breach communication requirements.
Penalties can be assessed as:  •  Civil penalties per resident affected and/or per breach,  •  Additional penalties for actual economic damages,  •  Noncompliance also punishable by other state-specific deceptive trade practices laws, or as   •   prescribed by a state attorney general.
There are also required timelines for responses.
These may carry penalties for each day of failure  to provide notice of security breach.
ACT  recognizes that this is a point-in-time snapshot, so we have developed a process to update this  document as individual regulations—as well as federal and state laws—change.
4  |  ACT Agency Cyber Guide 1.0  V Regulations, Descriptions, Resources  •  Note that all regulations listed are critical to comply with GLBA, which also covers  other emerging regulation such as NY DFS.
These are considered “best practices”  for agency security.
Risk Assessment A risk assessment is the identification of hazards that could negatively impact an organization’s ability  to conduct business.
These assessments help identify inherent business risks and provide measures,  processes and controls to reduce the impact of these risks to business operations.
The assessment should  include a risk mitigation checklist.
Resources:  •  ACT/CIS ‘Cyber Hygiene Toolkits’ For hardware & software, the ability to Count, Configure,   Control, Patch: Click here to access  •  StaySafeOnline.org  2.
Written Security Policy A security policy is a document that states in writing how a company plans to protect the company’s  physical and information technology (IT) assets.
It can also be referred to as a ‘written information security  policy” or “WISP”.
The document must detail your agency’s operations for security, governance, inventories, controls,  continuity and disaster planning and systems monitoring.
This includes internal and external mitigation  policies.
Primary Resource  •  ACT Cybersecurity Policy Template   Resources:  Information Shield  •  •  FCC – Cyber Security Planning Guide •  NetGen Data Security  3.
Incident Response Plan An incident response is an organized approach to addressing and managing the aftermath of a security  breach or attack (also known as an incident).
This  includes communication/notices to state superintendent upon detection of a cybersecurity event and  communication to customers, insurers, and third-party service providers.
This is part of an overall written security plan (see item #2 above).
Resources:  •  Mintz-Levin 2017Apr Data Breach Guidelines by State •  NCSL Security Breach Notification Laws by State •  Guidance for Incident Response Plans •  NetGen Data Security  www.independentagent.com/act  |  5  4.
Resources:  •  Phishme.com – Phishing simulator for agency training •  KnowBe4 – Staff security awareness training •  Cybersecurity employee training guidelines from Travelers – Click here •  NetGen Data Security  5.
Penetration Testing and Vulnerability Assessment Penetration testing (also called pen testing) is the annual practice of testing a computer system, network  or Web application to find vulnerabilities that an attacker could exploit.
This should be done internally and  externally.
Vulnerability Assessment is a biannual process that defines, identifies, and classifies the security holes  (vulnerabilities) in a computer, network or communications infrastructure.
Resources:  •  Tutorials: Differences/Details between Penetration Testing and Vulnerability Assessments •  Veracode - Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing •   Illumant Security Assessment Services - Vulnerability and Penetration testing  6.
Access Control Protocol This responds to regulations requiring restricted access to non-public Information, including PII, PHI, PCI.
Resources:  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act  •  FTC.Gov - How to Comply with the ‘Privacy of Consumer Financial Information Rule’ of the   7.
Written Security Policy for Third-Party Service Providers These are written policies and procedures designed to ensure the security of information systems and  nonpublic information that are accessible to, or held by, third-party service providers.
Note: The NAIC refers to this an “information security program.”  Resources:  •  NetGen Data Security  This is an evolving issue, with regulatory guidance to come.
6  |  ACT Agency Cyber Guide 1.0  8.
Encryption of Non-Public Information Encryption is the process of encoding a message so that it can be read only by the sender and the  intended recipient.
Non-Public Information refers to all electronic information that is not publicly-available information and for  insurance purposes refers to PII (personally identifiable information), PHI (protected health information), and  PCI (payment card industry data security standards).
This regulation describes the need to encrypt and protect this data when in storage and when transferred  between the insurance agency and its policyholders (email)  Resources:  •  What is Data Encryption, How to Get Started •  Comparison of the Best Data Encryption Software - 2017 •  ACT – TLS email encryption FAQs •  ACT - Protect Your Clients with Secure Email Using TLS •  ACT – IA Carriers with TLS Secure Email Enabled  Note: There is an exemption to this requirement, however it requires a waiver request to be  submitted annually.
Designation of Chief Information Officer This is the title required by NY DFS for some agencies doing business in New York.
; nationally this role can  be viewed as ‘Data Security Coordinator’.
The presence of a reliable and easy to follow audit trail is an indicator of  good internal controls instituted by a firm, and forms the basis of objectivity.
For agencies, using your agency management system (with all other interfacing systems) provides a solid  foundation for an audit trail.
Resources:  •  NIST (Nat’l Institute of Standards & Technology) on Audit Trails  11.
Implementing Multi-Factor Authentication Multifactor authentication (MFA) is a security system that requires more than one method of authentication  from different categories of credentials to verify the user’s identity for a login or other transaction.
Procedure for Disposal of Non-Public Information As with encryption, this regulation refers to all electronic information that is not publicly available, including  PII, PHI and PCI.
Improper document destruction is often a downfall of small business security.
Agents doing business in multiple states should adhere to the highest  level of requirements.
Keep in mind, there is a difference between complete disposal of information, and  simply deletion.
Resources:  •  Nat’l Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) - Data Disposal Laws by State  Also, please contact your agency management system provider for their disposal protocol.
V  APPENDIX  Additional details on laws driving regulations listed in the ACT Agency  Cyber Guide:  •  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act •  NAIC Cybersecurity Recommendations •  NY DFS 23 NYCRR 500 Regulations  NOTE: For some of the regulations listed in section 500.19 of the NY DFS regulations,  agencies doing business in the state of NY can apply for an exemption.
**However, it is strongly encouraged that agencies review and work to comply with these  regulations, as they are strong tenets of a solid, effective agency security environment.
•  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Privacy Law for Producers  Additional insurance solutions:  •  NY Exemption Filing information via IIABNY •  Cybersecurity Vendors and Offerings •  Big “I” Cyber Resources  Following are resources for selling Cyber Security Liability Insurance  Policies :  **Do not confuse these with agency security processes detailed in this document prior  to this section.
•  Big ‘I’ Markets - Cyber Liability Solutions •  A Buyer’s Guide to Cyber Insurance – McGuire/Woods  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ACT would like to thank the following individuals from the Security Issues work group who  provided the input and guidance to make this Cyber Guide a reality: Bill Larson, Erin Odell, Jerry  Fox, Joe Doherty, Kathleen Weinheimer, Paul Peeples, Rachel Tuller, and Wes Bissett.
AGENTS COUNCIL  for TECHNOLOGY  Driving technology forward for independent agents  SECURITY  Encrypt Your Databases Err on the side of caution when it comes to  encrypting data.
We’ve got the best practices  for compliant data encryption, and a primer on  state regulations.
State privacy and PII regulations   Secure Your VoIP Be aware of the overall security level of your  data infrastructure, including your IP phone  system.
resources to protect your VoIP   CHANGING NATURE OF RISK    Remotely Access Agency Systems Remote access requires awareness,  authentication, intrusion detection/prevention  systems and a secure VPN to lessen risks.
Remote Access software rankings,   eSignatures B E S T   P R A C T I C E S &   I N D U S T R Y   R E C O M M E N D A T I O NS  ACT eSignatures Work Group  INDEPENDENTAGENT.COM/ACTSECURE  ACT has what you  need to  tech protection gaps.
Visit IndependentAgent.com/ACTSecure     The Agents Council for Technology encourages the independent agency  system to implement consistent  and innovative workflows.
Be part  of a forum of agents, carriers, and  vendors working together to create  best practices and help the industry  implement consistent technology.
Volunteer for a virtual workgroup: - Customer Experience - Security  INDEPENDENTAGENT.COM/ACTSECURE  - Future Issues  - E-Signature  - Changing Nature    of Risk  - Small Commercial   Lines Rating  ACT NOW!
independentagent.com/ACT  Meeting  Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of America, Inc.  127 South Peyton Street, Alexandria, VA 22314   800.221.7917  Update on the Key   Initiatives Recommended  by NTT Data regarding the   Agency Cyber Security   Framework  Texas Higher Education  Coordinating Board  Zhenzhen Sun Assistant Commissioner                                                               Information Security Officer             Information Solutions and Services                                           Information Solutions and Services  John House  AOC – January 24th, 2018  Implementation Strategy and Approach  ?
The assessment  report produced by NTT Data described the agency’s current  cybersecurity posture.
The recommendations provided by the vendor laid out a “Target State” vision for our cybersecurity infrastructure.
Our implementation strategy was established by focusing on the five key functions in  cybersecurity risks management as outlined in the TX Cybersecurity Framework:  ?
2  Cybersecurity Risks Management Framework  Identify  People  Recover  Protect  Cybersecurity   Risks   Management  Process  Respond  Detect  Technology  3  Security Key Initiatives Implementation Roadmap  4  Progress Report – FY18 Q2  Initiative  Completed  Planned  Protect  Role Based Training  Identify  Risk Assessment  Identify  Asset Inventory  Protect  Policy & Procedure / Framework   60%  Development  Protect  Configuration Hardening Standards  75%  FERPA Sensitive PII Training  CJIS Training  Data Owner Responsibilities Computer Incident First Responder   Application Security Training  USB Encryption Training Information Security Training Library  90%  Application  & Data Inventory Department Review sessions Data Owner Training  Formal presentation to management  Risk Assessment Data Inventory USB Survey  100%  Additional USB Inventory  Removable Media technical controls  Procedures Updated ITSC Charter Updated IT Policy Review  Additional Security and Application Development Procedure Updates  System Security Plan Template  25%  Complete System Security Plans  based on Risk Assessment priorities  5  Progress Report – FY18 Q2  Initiative  Respond  Incident Detection & Response  Protect  Software Development Lifecycle Security  Detect  Centralized Logging Strategy (SIEM)  Detect  Data Loss Prevention  Completed Established Incident Response Team Response Plan updates Quarterly meetings Incident response training   Web Application Firewall  implementation  Installed Open Source  Security Incident & Event  Monitoring (SIEM)  Removable device survey USB Inventory  75%  25%  50%  20%  Planned  Privacy incident policy and  procedures Response Plan exercises  Updated testing tools Updated coding standards &  frameworks Security training for  developers Commercial SIEM / Managed  Security Services  Additional technical survey  and controls for removable  devices  6  Progress Report – FY18 Q2  Identify  ?
Established a formal Information Security Program   ?
Security Governance Structure ?
Information Security Charter  ?
Established a formal agency Security Risk Assessment Tool   ?
Risk assessment results documented and reviewed with management ?
Currently developing additional removable media device controls and   inventory process  ?
Draft 2017 Agency Risk Assessment and Management Plan pending for   review and approval   7  Progress Report – FY18 Q2  Protect  ?
Using results gathered from the risk assessment to prioritize documenting   and the implementation of configuration hardening for agency critical assets ?
Currently reviewing and completing system security plans for critical systems   identified by the risk assessment  ?
Provided training to agency staff pertaining to protection of Personally   Identifiable Information  ?
Staff completed Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) training ?
Updating Application Security Framework documentation ?
Currently developing training for the application developers  ?
The team completed first responder training in order to strengthen our   agency’s ability in response to security events and incidents  ?
Implemented a leading open source Security Incident & Event Management   product to provide event monitoring prior to managed services offerings  ?
Evaluating application security scanning tools offered under DIR Managed   Security Service Contract  ?
DIR Managed Security Services offerings will be evaluated for Security   Incident & Event Monitoring offerings  9  Progress Report – FY18 Q2  Respond and Recover ?
Implemented the THECB Security Incident Response Plan ?
Working with General Counsel on drafting the Agency Data Breach Policy  ?
Post mortem evaluation and response  10  Texas Higher Education  Coordinating Board  11      CEROW AGENCY, INC.    CYBERSECURITY   POLICY                DATE UPDATED   07/26/17                               V                                                     Template provided by our association:      DOCUMENT DEFINITIONS   ”Policy” refers to the Information Security Policy.
”Information System” means a discrete set of electronic information resources organized for the collection,  processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination or disposition of electronic information, as well as any  specialized system such as industrial/process controls systems, telephone switching and private branch  exchange systems, and environmental control systems.
”Nonpublic Information” shall mean all electronic information that is not Publicly Available Information and  is:    1.  Business related information of a Covered Entity the tampering with which, or unauthorized disclosure,   access or use of which, would cause a material adverse impact to the business, operations or security of  the Covered Entity;    2.
Any information concerning an individual which because of name, number, personal mark, or other   identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or more of the following data  elements: (i) social security number, (ii) drivers' license number or non-driver identification card number,  (iii) account number, credit or debit card number, (iv) any security code, access code or password that  would permit access to an individual's financial account, or (v) biometric records;    3.
Any information or data, except age or gender, in any form or medium created by or derived from a health   care provider or an individual and that relates to (i) the past, present or future physical, mental or  behavioral health or condition of any individual or a member of the individual's family, (ii) the provision of  health care to any individual, or (iii) payment for the provision of health care to any individual.
”Person” means any individual or non-governmental entity, including but not limited to any non-governmental  partnership, corporation, branch, agency or association.
”Third Party Servicer Providers” refers to a person that is not an affiliate of the Agency that provides  services to the Agency and maintains, processes or is otherwise permitted access to Nonpublic Information  through its provision of services to the Agency.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   2     INFORMATION SECURITY   This Policy for Cerow Agency, Inc. (herein after referred to as “Agency”) is intended to create effective  administrative, technical, electronic and physical protections to safeguard the personal information of the  Agency’s Clients and employees, the Agency’s proprietary and confidential information, the physical security of  our premises, and the integrity of our electronic systems so that they are best positioned to function smoothly  without interruption.
This Policy sets forth the Agency’s procedures for electronic and physical methods of accessing, collecting,  storing, using, transmitting, destroying, and protecting Nonpublic Information of Clients, the Agency and/or  Agency employees and also the use of the Agency’s Systems by Agency employees and any authorized third  parties, as deemed appropriate and/or required by applicable laws and regulations.
In formulating and implementing this Policy, we have:    1.
Identified reasonably foreseeable internal and external risks to Agency’s security, confidentiality and/or  integrity of electronic, paper or other records containing Private Information   2.
Assessed the likelihood and potential danger of these threats, taking into consideration the sensitivity of   the Nonpublic Information   3.
Designed and implemented an approach that puts safeguards in place to minimize those risks, consistent   with the requirements of applicable laws/regulations   Included regular monitoring of the effectiveness of those safeguards   5.
All security measures contained in this Policy shall be reviewed and re-evaluated annually or when there is a  change in applicable laws or regulations or in the business activities of Agency.
Each employee with access to Nonpublic Information shall receive training as necessary on this Policy.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   3     INFORMATION SECURITY COORDINATOR   The Agency has designated Catherine Hungerford as the “Information Security Coordinator” to oversee  implementation of this Policy.
The Information Security Coordinator will be responsible for:   Initial implementation and maintaining responsibility for implementation of this Policy;   1.
Reviewing the security measures in this Policy annually or when there is a change in applicable laws or   regulations or in business activities of Agency; and   4.
Conducting training as necessary for all Agency employees with access to Nonpublic Information.
Implementing policies and procedures to ensure the security of Information Systems and Nonpublic  Information that are accessible to, or held by, Third Party Service Providers        DATA GOVERNANCE & CLASSIFICATION   SPECIAL PROTECTION FOR NONPUBLIC INFORMATION   Nonpublic Information is to be accorded the highest level of confidentiality by the Agency and employees.
Examples of Nonpublic Information include, but are not limited to - first name and last name, or first initial and last  name, and any one or more of the following:   1.
Social Security number  2.
Financial account number, or credit or debit card number, with or without any required security code,   access code, personal identification number or password   4.
Personal or protected health information  5.
Biometric records   The information listed in 1-4 above, even if it is not connected with a name, should each be treated as Nonpublic  Information.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   4   WHERE NONPUBLIC INFORMATION IS STORED   The Agency and its employees recognize that the Agency possesses Nonpublic Information in the following  places, whether in the Agency’s premises or off site, and whether created or maintained by Agency or third  parties on behalf of Agency:   1.
Personnel files, Form I-9s, benefits information, payroll information, and direct deposit information for   employees wherever located, including but not limited to hard copies at desks, in file drawers and other  storage areas, and in electronic form on the Agency’s Systems   3.
Third Party Service Providers entrusted with Nonpublic Information from the Agency   This Policy is intended to protect Nonpublic Information possessed by the Agency from unauthorized access,  dissemination and/or use.
Nonpublic Information may not be disseminated, communicated or stored on or through any social media  websites or services, at any time or for any reason.
Employees will adhere to the Agency document retention schedule and requirements.
When it is appropriate to  destroy Agency records, paper and electronic records containing Nonpublic Information must be destroyed in a  manner in which they cannot be read or reconstructed.
Unless otherwise directed by the Information Security Coordinator, a commercial shredding company will be used  to destroy paper documents.
When computers, digital copiers, scanners and/or printers with electronic storage  capacity, or portable electronic devices and media are discarded, such disposal should be coordinated with the  Information Security Coordinator, and care needs to be taken to ensure that the hard drives or other storage  media are destroyed in a manner that all data becomes unreadable.
ASSET INVENTORY & DEVICE MANAGEMENT   1.
Employees should keep mobile electronic communications devices (such as PDAs, smart phones, etc.)
with access to Nonpublic Information in their possession or in a secured location at all times, and  Employees will not share passwords or other access information with others.
Employees will not put any Agency data on thumb drives, laptops or other portable media, drives and   devices unless authorized by the Agency.
If so authorized, the thumb drives, laptops or other portable  media, drives and devices should be password-protected and encrypted, and the portable mobile  electronic communications devices and laptops should be password-protected and encrypted.
Employees that no longer work for the Agency must:  (1) return to Agency all Agency information   (including, but not limited to, any Nonpublic Information) in any form, whether stored on computers,  laptops, portable devices, electronic media, or in files, records, work papers, cloud- or web-based storage,  etc.
; (2) return all keys, IDs, access codes and/or badges; and (3) not access Nonpublic Agency  information (including, but not limited to, any Private Information).
In accordance with the Agency’s human resources manual, access by the former employee to Agency  email and voice mail accounts can be immediately disabled and access transferred to other Agency staff  to assure a continuity of work, and inactivated when determined appropriate by Agency.
Employees are required to report all actual or potential unauthorized access to, use of or disclosure of   Nonpublic Information to the Information Security Coordinator.
ACCESS CONTROLS & IDENTITY MANAGEMENT   INTERNAL CONTROLS   1.
Agency computers will require a user ID and password and Agency mobile devices should require a   password (and be encrypted, if reasonably feasible).
Employee log-ins and passwords should be  appropriately strong (with the minimum number of characters and other elements required by the  Agency’s Systems).
Electronic files containing Nonpublic Information will not be left accessible to others, such as on   computers or portable storage devices accessible (e.g., computer screens must be locked when an  employee using such files leaves his or her computer, even briefly).
Paper and electronic files must not  be removed from the Agency premises or accessed remotely unless specific authorization has been  provided in advance, and then, the security of that Nonpublic Information must be maintained.
The Agency will implement controls to  terminate computer sessions and/or lock computers after a predetermined time of inactivity (e.g., 10  minutes).
Employees should not open any email attachment, link, or application where the employee does not   reasonably believe the information expected to be accessed is from a trustworthy source.
Employees will  not use Agency equipment to access any application or software not approved by the Agency.
To combat internal risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic   Information, the following measures will be taken:   6.
The Agency will retain only the last four digits of credit card numbers and will not retain bank routing   numbers, personal bank account numbers and checks, and all credit- and banking-related information not  retained will be destroyed in accordance with applicable law and Agency-designated business practices.
EXTERNAL CONTROLS   In addition to the measures taken to combat internal risks, the following measures will be taken to minimize  external risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic Information:   1.
Visitors to the Agency will be escorted within the office and will not have access to Agency computers or  property that may contain Nonpublic Information.
Guests’ wireless access should be fire-walled off from  the Agency’s Systems.
The Agency will maintain security measures so that its wireless networks cannot be accessed remotely by   the public.
Servers and other equipment at the Agency’s premises containing Nonpublic Information will be   maintained in a secure location.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   6     SYSTEMS & NETWORK SECURITY,              OPERATIONS & AVAILABILITY    1.
The Agency will employ an email filter (hardware, software, or third-party provided) that works to restrict   and eliminate viruses, spyware and other malware before getting to Agency desktop and portable  computers.
The Agency will maintain up-to-date network and firewall protection and operating system security   patches on its Systems, servers and desktop and laptop computers, as well as other security measures  deemed appropriate.
The Agency will maintain security software, which includes malware protection with up-to-date patches   and virus definitions, on its Systems and its servers, desktop and laptop computers, and all mobile  devices, which is updated as frequently as possible, but at least daily.
All back-ups will be password-protected and encrypted and kept in a secured location off site.
Agency employees should use care in communications (e.g., outgoing email and attachments) to ensure:  first, that the Nonpublic Information needs to be sent by email and, if so, that it is transmitted using secure  email in accordance with Agency policy.
The Agency will create a secure SSL tunnel between its website and the consumer before allowing the   consumer to enter any Nonpublic Information or to enter a password.
When an employee accesses Agency Systems and/or Nonpublic Information from a remote location, the   Agency’s secure SSL connection must be used (such as Virtual Private Network (VPN), GoToMyPC,  LogMeIn).
Employees should not access Agency Systems or Nonpublic Information using non-Agency equipment   (e.g., a home computer) unless authorized by the Agency and provided with appropriate firewalls and  virus protection, and done through the Agency’s secure SSL connection.
Employees will not store any  Nonpublic Information on any non-Agency equipment.
SYSTEMS & NETWORK MONITORING   1.
The Agency will monitor its Systems and equipment for any act or attempt, successful or unsuccessful, to   gain unauthorized access to, disrupt or misuse an Information System or information stored on such  Information System, including but not limited to implementing hardware, software and/or procedural  mechanisms to record and report activity for the Systems and equipment.
The Agency will exercise due diligence in making sure third-party service providers that are provided   Nonpublic Information have the requisite security controls and written policy in place, provide the Agency  a written commitment to safeguard and store Nonpublic Information with at least the same level of  security controls as the Agency maintains (as outlined in this Policy), and advise the Agency as to any  actual, suspected or potential breaches of Private Information.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   7     BUSINESS CONTINUITY & DISASTER RECOVERY   IF A BREACH OF NONPUBLIC INFORMATION (CYBERSECURITY EVENT) OCCURS OR IS SUSPECTED   A security breach occurs when there is an unauthorized acquisition, dissemination, use or loss of Nonpublic  Information.
Each employee shall be responsible for notifying the Information Security Coordinator whenever he  or she learns that there has been or may have been a security breach that may have compromised Nonpublic  Information or other Agency information about Clients, employees or Agency business.
The Agency will take the following actions in the event of a security breach:   a.  assess the security breach  b.  consult counsel  c.  d.  notify the carriers whose policyholders insured through the Agency may have been affected by   review the requirements of the applicable state laws and regulations    the event   e.  notify the carrier for the Agency’s cybersecurity coverage  f.  notify individuals, regulatory and law enforcement authorities (if and as required and further as   deemed appropriate by Agency management)  take and document corrective actions to contain and control the problem    identify who will address any media inquiries    g.  h.  i.  draft the content of all communications regarding the event for potentially affected individuals and,   if appropriate, the public             Malicious Control System Cyber  Security Attack Case Study– Maroochy Water Services,  Australia  Marshall D. Abrams, The MITRE Corporation Joe Weiss, Applied Control Solutions, LLC  August 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
NIST Industrial Control System (ICS) Cyber  Security Project  ¦ Objective: to improve the cyber security of federally owned/operated   ICS  ¦ ICS pervasive throughout all critical infrastructures ¦ Improve the security of public and private sector ICS  – Work with voluntary industry standards groups (e.g., The  Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society – ISA)  oAssist in ICS cyber security standards and guideline   development  oFoster ICS cyber security standards convergence  – Raise the level of ICS security through R&D and testing  ¦ Purpose of case studies is to focus in on factors otherwise   overlooked, not to ascribe any blame  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
2  NIST Cyber Security Strategic Vision  ¦ Promote the development of key security standards and   guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance  with the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)  ¦ Build a solid foundation of information security across one of  the largest information technology infrastructures in the world  based on comprehensive security standards and technical  guidance.
¦ Institutionalize a comprehensive Risk Management Framework   that promotes flexible, cost-effective information security  programs for federal agencies.
¦ Establish a fundamental level of ?security due diligence?
for   federal agencies and their contractors based on minimum  security requirements and security controls.
¦ NIST standards and guidelines are voluntarily used by the   private sector  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
Public and private sector enterprises today are highly  dependent on information systems to carry out their  missions and business functions.
Developments in ICS have seen these traditionally closed  systems become open and internet-connected, thus  putting the national services critical infrastructure at risk.
To achieve mission and business success, enterprise  information systems must be dependable in the face of  serious cyber threats.
To achieve information system dependability, the systems  must be appropriately protected.
4  The Threat Situation  ¦ ICS are becoming more open making them vulnerable to   intentional and unintentional cyber threats  ¦ Effects of errors and omissions increasingly catastrophic ¦ Attacks are organized, disciplined, aggressive, and well   resourced; many are extremely sophisticated  ¦ Adversaries are nation states, terrorist groups, criminals,   hackers, and individuals or groups with intentions of  compromising information systems  ¦ Significant exfiltration of critical and sensitive information   and implantation of malicious software occurring on a  regular basis   ¦ Largely untutored work force with little interest in IT security ¦ ICS community diverse using different protocols (many   archaic)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
5  NIST ICS Project Deliverables  ¦ Support public & private sectors, and standards organizations   that want to use NIST Standards & Guidelines for ICS  ¦ Evolve SP 800-53 Recommended Security Controls for Federal   Information Systems to better address ICS – Revision 2 published December 2007  ¦ Develop SP 800-82 Guide to Supervisory Control and Data   Acquisition (SCADA) and Industrial Control System Security – Second draft September 2007 – Final in 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
6  Case Study Overview  ¦ Examine actual control system cyber event  – Resulted in significant environmental and economic damage – Malicious attack by knowledgeable insider, who had been a   trusted contractor employee  – Timelines, control system response, and control system   policies   ¦ Identify operating policies and procedures that were missing or   had readily identifiable cyber security vulnerabilities   ¦ Identify NIST SP 800-53 management, operational, and technical  safeguards or countermeasures that, if implemented, could have  prevented or ameliorated the event   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
7  Attack Synopsis  ¦ Vitek Boden worked for Hunter Watertech, an Australian   firm that installed SCADA radio-controlled sewage  equipment for the Maroochy Shire Council in Queensland,  Australia (a rural area of great natural beauty and a tourist  destination ) – Applied for a job with the Maroochy Shire Council  – Walked away from a ?strained relationship?
9  Evidence Found in Boden’s Vehicle   ¦ Laptop  – Reloaded February 28, 2000  – Software used in the sewerage system (re)installed February 29    o Run at least 31 times prior to April 19 o Last run on April 23  ¦ Motorola M120 two-way radio same type used in the Council’s   system – Tuned into the frequencies of the repeater stations  – Serial numbers matched delivery docket provided by the supplier   of the radios to Hunter Watertech  ¦ PDS Compact 500 computer control device  – Address set to spoof pumping station  – Serial number identified it as a device which should have been in   the possession of Hunter Watertech  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
10  Observations (1/2)  ¦ Boden was an insider who was never an employee of the   organization he attacked – Employee of contractor that supplied IT/control system technology  – With his knowledge he was the ?ultimate insider?
¦ Contractor’s responsibilities unstated or inadequate   – Management, technical and operational cyber security controls  – Personnel security controls   o Background investigations o Protection from disgruntled employees  ¦ As a skillful adversary, Boden was able to disguise his actions  – A number of anomalous events occurred before recognition that the   incidents were intentional  – Extensive digital forensics were required to determine that a   deliberate attack was underway   ¦ No existing cyber security policies or procedures ¦ No cyber security defenses  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
¦ Difficult to protect against insider attacks ¦ Radio communications commonly used in SCADA systems are   often insecure or improperly configured  ¦ SCADA devices and software should be secured to the extent   possible using physical and logical controls  ¦ Security controls often not implemented or used properly ¦ Generally SCADA systems lack adequate logging mechanisms   for forensic purposes  ¦ Also recommended   • Anti-virus  ?
Appropriate use of encryption  • Upgrade-able SCADA systems (from a security perspective)  • Proper staff training  ?
Security auditing and control.
12  SP 800-53 Security Control Classes, Families,  and Identifiers   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
13  IDENTIFIER FAMILY CLASS  AC Access Control Technical AT Awareness and Training Operational AU Audit and Accountability Technical CA Certification, Accreditation, and Security Assessments Management CM Configuration Management Operational CP Contingency Planning Operational IA Identification and Authentication Technical IR Incident Response Operational MA Maintenance Operational MP Media Protection Operational PE Physical and Environmental Protection Operational PL Planning Management PS Personnel Security Operational RA Risk Assessment Management SA System and Services Acquisition Management SC System and Communications Protection Technical SI System and Information Integrity Operational  SP 800-53 Pervasive Cyber Security  Prophylactic Controls  PROBLEM  CONTROL FAMILY  Policy and Procedures The first control in every control family   addresses policy and procedure.
Personnel Security  Personnel Security (PS)  Hardware & Software  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  Awareness and  Training  Audit  Awareness and Training (AT)   Audit and Accountability (AU)   Contingency Planning Contingency Planning (CP)  Incident Response  Incident Response (IR)  Cryptographic  Protection  System and Communications Protection   (SC)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
14  Security Policy and Procedures  ¦ SP 800-53 policy and procedure controls  – The first control in every control family is policy and procedure  – The organization develops, disseminates, and periodically   reviews/updates:   o a formal, documented, <family> policy that addresses   purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management  commitment, coordination among organizational entities,  and compliance  oformal, documented procedures to facilitate the   implementation of the <family> policy and associated  <family> controls.
15  Personnel Security (PS)  ¦ No personnel security requirements on contractor  PS-1 Personnel Security Policy and   PS-5  Personnel Transfer  Procedures  PS-2 Position Categorization  PS-6  Access Agreements  PS-3 Personnel Screening  PS-7  Third-Party Personnel Security  PS-4 Personnel Termination  PS-8  Personnel Sanctions  ¦ PS-7 identifies need for contractual obligations  ¦ Other controls candidates for inclusion  - Key personnel clause  – Sometime contractors treated same as employees  – Example: PS-4 exit interview might have identified   potential malicious action  Controls that would have helped are underlined  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
16  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  ¦ Contractor supplied hardware & software ¦ No indication that any System and Services Acquisition   family (SA) controls were in contract  SA-1 System and Services  Acquisition Policy and Procedures  SA-7 User Installed Software  SA-2 Allocation of Resources  SA-8 Security Engineering Principles  SA-3  Life Cycle Support  SA-9 External Information System   SA-4 Acquisitions  SA-10 Developer Configuration   Services  SA-5  Information System  Documentation  SA-6 Software Usage Restrictions  Management  SA-11 Developer Security Testing  ¦ Example SA-11 required tests for resistance to penetration  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
17  Awareness and Training (AT)  ¦ No security training had been provided to staff  AT-1  AT-2  Security Awareness and  Training Policy and  Procedures Security Awareness  AT-3  Security Training  AT-4  Security Training Records  AT-5  Contacts with Security Groups  and Associations  ¦ People are one of the weakest links in cyber security  ¦ Robust awareness and training program is paramount to ensuring that   people understand cyber security responsibilities, organizational policies,  and how to properly use and protect the resources entrusted to them  ¦ All individuals should receive specialized training focused on their   responsibilities and the application rules   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
18  Audit (AU)  ¦ System lacked sufficient audit capability ¦ Audit supports other control families such as incident response,   access control, and flaw remediation.
AU-1  AU-2  Audit and Accountability  Policy and Procedures Auditable Events  AU-3  Content of Audit Records  AU-7 Audit Reduction and Report   AU-8  AU-9  Generation Time Stamps  Protection of Audit  Information  AU-4  Audit Storage Capacity  AU-10 Non-repudiation  AU-5  AU-6  Response to Audit  Processing Failures Audit Monitoring, Analysis,  and Reporting  AU-11 Audit Record Retention  ¦ Recording and analyzing remote access might have led to   quicker determination of malicious activity  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
19  Contingency Planning (CP)  ¦ All the analysis indicates that there were no plans to deal   with an emergency or system disruption  CP-1  CP-2  Contingency Planning Policy  and Procedures Contingency Plan  CP-3  Contingency Training  CP-4  CP-5  Contingency Plan Testing  and Exercises Contingency Plan Update  CP-6 Alternate Storage Site  CP-7 Alternate Processing Site  CP-8  CP-9  Telecommunications  Services Information System Backup  CP-10 Information System Recovery   and Reconstitution ¦ Existing plans for dealing with natural disasters and   equipment breakdowns should be augmented for deliberate  attacks, physical and cyber  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
20  Incident Response (IR)  ¦ Response to the sewerage discharge was ad hoc  – Considerable time elapsed during troubleshooting before malicious intent   was considered  IR-1  IR-2  IR-3  Incident Response Policy  and Procedures  IR-5  Incident Monitoring  Incident Response Training IR-6  Incident Reporting  Incident Response Testing  and Exercises  IR-7  Incident Response  Assistance  IR-4  Incident Handling  ¦ All incident response controls contribute to  - Rapidly detecting incidents - Minimizing loss and destruction - Mitigating the weaknesses that were exploited - Restoring services - Apprehending malefactors  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
21  System and Communications Protection (SC)  ¦ Cryptographic protection recommended  - Supports identification and authentication (I&A)  SC-1 System and Communications   SC-13 Use of Cryptography  Protection Policy and Procedures Transmission Confidentiality  SC-9  SC-17 Public Key Infrastructure   Certificates  ¦ Recent U.S. government policy ¦ Protection of Sensitive Agency Information, OMB M-06-16,   June 23, 2006, specifies - Full disk encryption - Two factor authentication   Other SC controls not relevant to cryptography  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
22  SP 800-53 Controls for Malicious Activities  MALICIOUS   CONTROL FAMILY  ACTIVITY  Issuing radio  commands  Access Control (AC) Identification and Authentication (IA)  Falsifying network  address  Sending false data  and instructions  Disabling alarms  Access Control (AC)  System and Information Integrity (SI)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
23  Access Control (AC)  ¦ A combination of access controls would have alleviated or   prevented the attack   ¦ Tightly coupled with Identification and Authentication  AC-1 Access Control Policy and   AC-11 Session Lock  Procedures  AC-2 Account Management  AC-12 Session Termination  AC-3 Access Enforcement  AC-13 Supervision and Review—  AC-4  Information Flow  Enforcement  Access Control  AC-14 Permitted Actions without   Identification or Authentication  AC-5 Separation of Duties  AC-15 Automated Marking  AC-6  Least Privilege  AC-16 Automated Labeling  AC-7 Unsuccessful Login Attempts AC-17 Remote Access  AC-8 System Use Notification  AC-18 Wireless Access Restrictions  AC-9 Previous Logon Notification  AC-19 Access Control for Portable   and Devices  AC-10 Concurrent Session Control  AC-20 Use of External Information   Systems  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
24  Access Control Examples  ¦ Radio access (AC-18) limited to   – Specific hardware devices  – Authorized persons and processes  ¦ Authorization & credentials require management (AC-2) ¦ Authorized persons granted only those privileges necessary to   do their job (AC-6)  ¦ Audit log review uncover unexpected access (AC-13)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
25  Identification & Authentication (IA)  ¦ Physical possession of radio and computer should not have   been sufficient  IA-1  IA-2  IA-3  Identification and  Authentication Policy and Procedures  User Identification and  Authentication  IA-5  Authenticator Management  IA-6  Authenticator Feedback  Device Identification and  Authentication  IA-7  Cryptographic Module  Authentication  IA-4  Identifier Management  ¦ Techniques for hardware (radio) I&A  - Shared known information (e.g., Media Access Control (MAC))  - Organizational authentication solution (e.g., IEEE 802.1x and   Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP))  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
26  System & Information Integrity (SI)  ¦ Unauthorized activity could have been detected  SI-1  SI-2  System and Information  Integrity Policy and  Procedures Flaw Remediation  SI-7  Software and Information  Integrity  SI-8  Spam Protection  SI-3 Malicious Code Protection  SI-9  SI-4  SI-5  SI-6  Information System  Monitoring Tools and  Techniques Security Alerts and  Advisories Security Functionality  Verification  SI-10  SI-11  SI-12  Information Input  Restrictions Information Accuracy,  Completeness, Validity, and  Authenticity Error Handling  Information Output Handling  and Retention  ¦ Commands that led to dumping raw sewerage  - Detected  - Validated  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
27  Learning From the 2000 Maroochy Shire  Cyber Attack  ¦ Public record of an intentional, targeted attack by a   knowledgeable person on an industrial control system teaches  us to consider: – Critical physical, administrative, and supply chain vulnerabilities  – Vulnerabilities coming from suppliers or others outside the   organization  – Contractor and sub-contractor personnel as a potential attack   source  ¦ Need to be concerned with both inside & outside attack ¦ Difficulty in identifying a control system cyber incident as a  malicious attack and retaking control of a ?hijacked?
system   ¦ A determined, knowledgeable adversary could potentially   defeat most controls  ¦ Structured defense-in-depth security is best  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
28  Additional Information  ¦ Authors  – Marshall Abrams  <abrams@mitre.org>  – Joe Weiss  <joe.weiss@realtimeacs.com>  ¦ Incident  – See references in paper  ¦ Case Study  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/papers.html  ¦ NIST Industrial Control System Security Project  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/index.html   ¦ NIST Project Managers  – Stu Katzke  <stuart.katzke@nist.gov> – Keith Stouffer  <keith.stouffer@nist.gov>  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
29 Malicious Control System Cyber  Security Attack Case Study– Maroochy Water Services,  Australia  Marshall D. Abrams, The MITRE Corporation Joe Weiss, Applied Control Solutions, LLC  August 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
NIST Industrial Control System (ICS) Cyber  Security Project  ¦ Objective: to improve the cyber security of federally owned/operated   ICS  ¦ ICS pervasive throughout all critical infrastructures ¦ Improve the security of public and private sector ICS  – Work with voluntary industry standards groups (e.g., The  Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society – ISA)  oAssist in ICS cyber security standards and guideline   development  oFoster ICS cyber security standards convergence  – Raise the level of ICS security through R&D and testing  ¦ Purpose of case studies is to focus in on factors otherwise   overlooked, not to ascribe any blame  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
2  NIST Cyber Security Strategic Vision  ¦ Promote the development of key security standards and   guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance  with the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)  ¦ Build a solid foundation of information security across one of  the largest information technology infrastructures in the world  based on comprehensive security standards and technical  guidance.
¦ Institutionalize a comprehensive Risk Management Framework   that promotes flexible, cost-effective information security  programs for federal agencies.
¦ Establish a fundamental level of ?security due diligence?
for   federal agencies and their contractors based on minimum  security requirements and security controls.
¦ NIST standards and guidelines are voluntarily used by the   private sector  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
Public and private sector enterprises today are highly  dependent on information systems to carry out their  missions and business functions.
Developments in ICS have seen these traditionally closed  systems become open and internet-connected, thus  putting the national services critical infrastructure at risk.
To achieve mission and business success, enterprise  information systems must be dependable in the face of  serious cyber threats.
To achieve information system dependability, the systems  must be appropriately protected.
4  The Threat Situation  ¦ ICS are becoming more open making them vulnerable to   intentional and unintentional cyber threats  ¦ Effects of errors and omissions increasingly catastrophic ¦ Attacks are organized, disciplined, aggressive, and well   resourced; many are extremely sophisticated  ¦ Adversaries are nation states, terrorist groups, criminals,   hackers, and individuals or groups with intentions of  compromising information systems  ¦ Significant exfiltration of critical and sensitive information   and implantation of malicious software occurring on a  regular basis   ¦ Largely untutored work force with little interest in IT security ¦ ICS community diverse using different protocols (many   archaic)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
5  NIST ICS Project Deliverables  ¦ Support public & private sectors, and standards organizations   that want to use NIST Standards & Guidelines for ICS  ¦ Evolve SP 800-53 Recommended Security Controls for Federal   Information Systems to better address ICS – Revision 2 published December 2007  ¦ Develop SP 800-82 Guide to Supervisory Control and Data   Acquisition (SCADA) and Industrial Control System Security – Second draft September 2007 – Final in 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
6  Case Study Overview  ¦ Examine actual control system cyber event  – Resulted in significant environmental and economic damage – Malicious attack by knowledgeable insider, who had been a   trusted contractor employee  – Timelines, control system response, and control system   policies   ¦ Identify operating policies and procedures that were missing or   had readily identifiable cyber security vulnerabilities   ¦ Identify NIST SP 800-53 management, operational, and technical  safeguards or countermeasures that, if implemented, could have  prevented or ameliorated the event   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
7  Attack Synopsis  ¦ Vitek Boden worked for Hunter Watertech, an Australian   firm that installed SCADA radio-controlled sewage  equipment for the Maroochy Shire Council in Queensland,  Australia (a rural area of great natural beauty and a tourist  destination ) – Applied for a job with the Maroochy Shire Council  – Walked away from a ?strained relationship?
9  Evidence Found in Boden’s Vehicle   ¦ Laptop  – Reloaded February 28, 2000  – Software used in the sewerage system (re)installed February 29    o Run at least 31 times prior to April 19 o Last run on April 23  ¦ Motorola M120 two-way radio same type used in the Council’s   system – Tuned into the frequencies of the repeater stations  – Serial numbers matched delivery docket provided by the supplier   of the radios to Hunter Watertech  ¦ PDS Compact 500 computer control device  – Address set to spoof pumping station  – Serial number identified it as a device which should have been in   the possession of Hunter Watertech  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
10  Observations (1/2)  ¦ Boden was an insider who was never an employee of the   organization he attacked – Employee of contractor that supplied IT/control system technology  – With his knowledge he was the ?ultimate insider?
¦ Contractor’s responsibilities unstated or inadequate   – Management, technical and operational cyber security controls  – Personnel security controls   o Background investigations o Protection from disgruntled employees  ¦ As a skillful adversary, Boden was able to disguise his actions  – A number of anomalous events occurred before recognition that the   incidents were intentional  – Extensive digital forensics were required to determine that a   deliberate attack was underway   ¦ No existing cyber security policies or procedures ¦ No cyber security defenses  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
¦ Difficult to protect against insider attacks ¦ Radio communications commonly used in SCADA systems are   often insecure or improperly configured  ¦ SCADA devices and software should be secured to the extent   possible using physical and logical controls  ¦ Security controls often not implemented or used properly ¦ Generally SCADA systems lack adequate logging mechanisms   for forensic purposes  ¦ Also recommended   • Anti-virus  ?
Appropriate use of encryption  • Upgrade-able SCADA systems (from a security perspective)  • Proper staff training  ?
Security auditing and control.
12  SP 800-53 Security Control Classes, Families,  and Identifiers   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
13  IDENTIFIER FAMILY CLASS  AC Access Control Technical AT Awareness and Training Operational AU Audit and Accountability Technical CA Certification, Accreditation, and Security Assessments Management CM Configuration Management Operational CP Contingency Planning Operational IA Identification and Authentication Technical IR Incident Response Operational MA Maintenance Operational MP Media Protection Operational PE Physical and Environmental Protection Operational PL Planning Management PS Personnel Security Operational RA Risk Assessment Management SA System and Services Acquisition Management SC System and Communications Protection Technical SI System and Information Integrity Operational  SP 800-53 Pervasive Cyber Security  Prophylactic Controls  PROBLEM  CONTROL FAMILY  Policy and Procedures The first control in every control family   addresses policy and procedure.
Personnel Security  Personnel Security (PS)  Hardware & Software  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  Awareness and  Training  Audit  Awareness and Training (AT)   Audit and Accountability (AU)   Contingency Planning Contingency Planning (CP)  Incident Response  Incident Response (IR)  Cryptographic  Protection  System and Communications Protection   (SC)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
14  Security Policy and Procedures  ¦ SP 800-53 policy and procedure controls  – The first control in every control family is policy and procedure  – The organization develops, disseminates, and periodically   reviews/updates:   o a formal, documented, <family> policy that addresses   purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management  commitment, coordination among organizational entities,  and compliance  oformal, documented procedures to facilitate the   implementation of the <family> policy and associated  <family> controls.
15  Personnel Security (PS)  ¦ No personnel security requirements on contractor  PS-1 Personnel Security Policy and   PS-5  Personnel Transfer  Procedures  PS-2 Position Categorization  PS-6  Access Agreements  PS-3 Personnel Screening  PS-7  Third-Party Personnel Security  PS-4 Personnel Termination  PS-8  Personnel Sanctions  ¦ PS-7 identifies need for contractual obligations  ¦ Other controls candidates for inclusion  - Key personnel clause  – Sometime contractors treated same as employees  – Example: PS-4 exit interview might have identified   potential malicious action  Controls that would have helped are underlined  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
16  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  ¦ Contractor supplied hardware & software ¦ No indication that any System and Services Acquisition   family (SA) controls were in contract  SA-1 System and Services  Acquisition Policy and Procedures  SA-7 User Installed Software  SA-2 Allocation of Resources  SA-8 Security Engineering Principles  SA-3  Life Cycle Support  SA-9 External Information System   SA-4 Acquisitions  SA-10 Developer Configuration   Services  SA-5  Information System  Documentation  SA-6 Software Usage Restrictions  Management  SA-11 Developer Security Testing  ¦ Example SA-11 required tests for resistance to penetration  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
17  Awareness and Training (AT)  ¦ No security training had been provided to staff  AT-1  AT-2  Security Awareness and  Training Policy and  Procedures Security Awareness  AT-3  Security Training  AT-4  Security Training Records  AT-5  Contacts with Security Groups  and Associations  ¦ People are one of the weakest links in cyber security  ¦ Robust awareness and training program is paramount to ensuring that   people understand cyber security responsibilities, organizational policies,  and how to properly use and protect the resources entrusted to them  ¦ All individuals should receive specialized training focused on their   responsibilities and the application rules   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
18  Audit (AU)  ¦ System lacked sufficient audit capability ¦ Audit supports other control families such as incident response,   access control, and flaw remediation.
AU-1  AU-2  Audit and Accountability  Policy and Procedures Auditable Events  AU-3  Content of Audit Records  AU-7 Audit Reduction and Report   AU-8  AU-9  Generation Time Stamps  Protection of Audit  Information  AU-4  Audit Storage Capacity  AU-10 Non-repudiation  AU-5  AU-6  Response to Audit  Processing Failures Audit Monitoring, Analysis,  and Reporting  AU-11 Audit Record Retention  ¦ Recording and analyzing remote access might have led to   quicker determination of malicious activity  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
19  Contingency Planning (CP)  ¦ All the analysis indicates that there were no plans to deal   with an emergency or system disruption  CP-1  CP-2  Contingency Planning Policy  and Procedures Contingency Plan  CP-3  Contingency Training  CP-4  CP-5  Contingency Plan Testing  and Exercises Contingency Plan Update  CP-6 Alternate Storage Site  CP-7 Alternate Processing Site  CP-8  CP-9  Telecommunications  Services Information System Backup  CP-10 Information System Recovery   and Reconstitution ¦ Existing plans for dealing with natural disasters and   equipment breakdowns should be augmented for deliberate  attacks, physical and cyber  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
20  Incident Response (IR)  ¦ Response to the sewerage discharge was ad hoc  – Considerable time elapsed during troubleshooting before malicious intent   was considered  IR-1  IR-2  IR-3  Incident Response Policy  and Procedures  IR-5  Incident Monitoring  Incident Response Training IR-6  Incident Reporting  Incident Response Testing  and Exercises  IR-7  Incident Response  Assistance  IR-4  Incident Handling  ¦ All incident response controls contribute to  - Rapidly detecting incidents - Minimizing loss and destruction - Mitigating the weaknesses that were exploited - Restoring services - Apprehending malefactors  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
21  System and Communications Protection (SC)  ¦ Cryptographic protection recommended  - Supports identification and authentication (I&A)  SC-1 System and Communications   SC-13 Use of Cryptography  Protection Policy and Procedures Transmission Confidentiality  SC-9  SC-17 Public Key Infrastructure   Certificates  ¦ Recent U.S. government policy ¦ Protection of Sensitive Agency Information, OMB M-06-16,   June 23, 2006, specifies - Full disk encryption - Two factor authentication   Other SC controls not relevant to cryptography  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
22  SP 800-53 Controls for Malicious Activities  MALICIOUS   CONTROL FAMILY  ACTIVITY  Issuing radio  commands  Access Control (AC) Identification and Authentication (IA)  Falsifying network  address  Sending false data  and instructions  Disabling alarms  Access Control (AC)  System and Information Integrity (SI)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
23  Access Control (AC)  ¦ A combination of access controls would have alleviated or   prevented the attack   ¦ Tightly coupled with Identification and Authentication  AC-1 Access Control Policy and   AC-11 Session Lock  Procedures  AC-2 Account Management  AC-12 Session Termination  AC-3 Access Enforcement  AC-13 Supervision and Review—  AC-4  Information Flow  Enforcement  Access Control  AC-14 Permitted Actions without   Identification or Authentication  AC-5 Separation of Duties  AC-15 Automated Marking  AC-6  Least Privilege  AC-16 Automated Labeling  AC-7 Unsuccessful Login Attempts AC-17 Remote Access  AC-8 System Use Notification  AC-18 Wireless Access Restrictions  AC-9 Previous Logon Notification  AC-19 Access Control for Portable   and Devices  AC-10 Concurrent Session Control  AC-20 Use of External Information   Systems  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
24  Access Control Examples  ¦ Radio access (AC-18) limited to   – Specific hardware devices  – Authorized persons and processes  ¦ Authorization & credentials require management (AC-2) ¦ Authorized persons granted only those privileges necessary to   do their job (AC-6)  ¦ Audit log review uncover unexpected access (AC-13)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
25  Identification & Authentication (IA)  ¦ Physical possession of radio and computer should not have   been sufficient  IA-1  IA-2  IA-3  Identification and  Authentication Policy and Procedures  User Identification and  Authentication  IA-5  Authenticator Management  IA-6  Authenticator Feedback  Device Identification and  Authentication  IA-7  Cryptographic Module  Authentication  IA-4  Identifier Management  ¦ Techniques for hardware (radio) I&A  - Shared known information (e.g., Media Access Control (MAC))  - Organizational authentication solution (e.g., IEEE 802.1x and   Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP))  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
26  System & Information Integrity (SI)  ¦ Unauthorized activity could have been detected  SI-1  SI-2  System and Information  Integrity Policy and  Procedures Flaw Remediation  SI-7  Software and Information  Integrity  SI-8  Spam Protection  SI-3 Malicious Code Protection  SI-9  SI-4  SI-5  SI-6  Information System  Monitoring Tools and  Techniques Security Alerts and  Advisories Security Functionality  Verification  SI-10  SI-11  SI-12  Information Input  Restrictions Information Accuracy,  Completeness, Validity, and  Authenticity Error Handling  Information Output Handling  and Retention  ¦ Commands that led to dumping raw sewerage  - Detected  - Validated  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
27  Learning From the 2000 Maroochy Shire  Cyber Attack  ¦ Public record of an intentional, targeted attack by a   knowledgeable person on an industrial control system teaches  us to consider: – Critical physical, administrative, and supply chain vulnerabilities  – Vulnerabilities coming from suppliers or others outside the   organization  – Contractor and sub-contractor personnel as a potential attack   source  ¦ Need to be concerned with both inside & outside attack ¦ Difficulty in identifying a control system cyber incident as a  malicious attack and retaking control of a ?hijacked?
system   ¦ A determined, knowledgeable adversary could potentially   defeat most controls  ¦ Structured defense-in-depth security is best  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
28  Additional Information  ¦ Authors  – Marshall Abrams  <abrams@mitre.org>  – Joe Weiss  <joe.weiss@realtimeacs.com>  ¦ Incident  – See references in paper  ¦ Case Study  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/papers.html  ¦ NIST Industrial Control System Security Project  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/index.html   ¦ NIST Project Managers  – Stu Katzke  <stuart.katzke@nist.gov> – Keith Stouffer  <keith.stouffer@nist.gov>  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.