Malicious Control System Cyber  Security Attack Case Study– Maroochy Water Services,  Australia  Marshall D. Abrams, The MITRE Corporation Joe Weiss, Applied Control Solutions, LLC  August 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
NIST Industrial Control System (ICS) Cyber  Security Project  ¦ Objective: to improve the cyber security of federally owned/operated   ICS  ¦ ICS pervasive throughout all critical infrastructures ¦ Improve the security of public and private sector ICS  – Work with voluntary industry standards groups (e.g., The  Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society – ISA)  oAssist in ICS cyber security standards and guideline   development  oFoster ICS cyber security standards convergence  – Raise the level of ICS security through R&D and testing  ¦ Purpose of case studies is to focus in on factors otherwise   overlooked, not to ascribe any blame  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
2  NIST Cyber Security Strategic Vision  ¦ Promote the development of key security standards and   guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance  with the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)  ¦ Build a solid foundation of information security across one of  the largest information technology infrastructures in the world  based on comprehensive security standards and technical  guidance.
¦ Institutionalize a comprehensive Risk Management Framework   that promotes flexible, cost-effective information security  programs for federal agencies.
¦ Establish a fundamental level of ?security due diligence?
for   federal agencies and their contractors based on minimum  security requirements and security controls.
¦ NIST standards and guidelines are voluntarily used by the   private sector  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
Public and private sector enterprises today are highly  dependent on information systems to carry out their  missions and business functions.
Developments in ICS have seen these traditionally closed  systems become open and internet-connected, thus  putting the national services critical infrastructure at risk.
To achieve mission and business success, enterprise  information systems must be dependable in the face of  serious cyber threats.
To achieve information system dependability, the systems  must be appropriately protected.
4  The Threat Situation  ¦ ICS are becoming more open making them vulnerable to   intentional and unintentional cyber threats  ¦ Effects of errors and omissions increasingly catastrophic ¦ Attacks are organized, disciplined, aggressive, and well   resourced; many are extremely sophisticated  ¦ Adversaries are nation states, terrorist groups, criminals,   hackers, and individuals or groups with intentions of  compromising information systems  ¦ Significant exfiltration of critical and sensitive information   and implantation of malicious software occurring on a  regular basis   ¦ Largely untutored work force with little interest in IT security ¦ ICS community diverse using different protocols (many   archaic)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
5  NIST ICS Project Deliverables  ¦ Support public & private sectors, and standards organizations   that want to use NIST Standards & Guidelines for ICS  ¦ Evolve SP 800-53 Recommended Security Controls for Federal   Information Systems to better address ICS – Revision 2 published December 2007  ¦ Develop SP 800-82 Guide to Supervisory Control and Data   Acquisition (SCADA) and Industrial Control System Security – Second draft September 2007 – Final in 2008  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
6  Case Study Overview  ¦ Examine actual control system cyber event  – Resulted in significant environmental and economic damage – Malicious attack by knowledgeable insider, who had been a   trusted contractor employee  – Timelines, control system response, and control system   policies   ¦ Identify operating policies and procedures that were missing or   had readily identifiable cyber security vulnerabilities   ¦ Identify NIST SP 800-53 management, operational, and technical  safeguards or countermeasures that, if implemented, could have  prevented or ameliorated the event   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
7  Attack Synopsis  ¦ Vitek Boden worked for Hunter Watertech, an Australian   firm that installed SCADA radio-controlled sewage  equipment for the Maroochy Shire Council in Queensland,  Australia (a rural area of great natural beauty and a tourist  destination ) – Applied for a job with the Maroochy Shire Council  – Walked away from a ?strained relationship?
9  Evidence Found in Boden’s Vehicle   ¦ Laptop  – Reloaded February 28, 2000  – Software used in the sewerage system (re)installed February 29    o Run at least 31 times prior to April 19 o Last run on April 23  ¦ Motorola M120 two-way radio same type used in the Council’s   system – Tuned into the frequencies of the repeater stations  – Serial numbers matched delivery docket provided by the supplier   of the radios to Hunter Watertech  ¦ PDS Compact 500 computer control device  – Address set to spoof pumping station  – Serial number identified it as a device which should have been in   the possession of Hunter Watertech  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
10  Observations (1/2)  ¦ Boden was an insider who was never an employee of the   organization he attacked – Employee of contractor that supplied IT/control system technology  – With his knowledge he was the ?ultimate insider?
¦ Contractor’s responsibilities unstated or inadequate   – Management, technical and operational cyber security controls  – Personnel security controls   o Background investigations o Protection from disgruntled employees  ¦ As a skillful adversary, Boden was able to disguise his actions  – A number of anomalous events occurred before recognition that the   incidents were intentional  – Extensive digital forensics were required to determine that a   deliberate attack was underway   ¦ No existing cyber security policies or procedures ¦ No cyber security defenses  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
¦ Difficult to protect against insider attacks ¦ Radio communications commonly used in SCADA systems are   often insecure or improperly configured  ¦ SCADA devices and software should be secured to the extent   possible using physical and logical controls  ¦ Security controls often not implemented or used properly ¦ Generally SCADA systems lack adequate logging mechanisms   for forensic purposes  ¦ Also recommended   • Anti-virus  ?
Appropriate use of encryption  • Upgrade-able SCADA systems (from a security perspective)  • Proper staff training  ?
Security auditing and control.
12  SP 800-53 Security Control Classes, Families,  and Identifiers   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
13  IDENTIFIER FAMILY CLASS  AC Access Control Technical AT Awareness and Training Operational AU Audit and Accountability Technical CA Certification, Accreditation, and Security Assessments Management CM Configuration Management Operational CP Contingency Planning Operational IA Identification and Authentication Technical IR Incident Response Operational MA Maintenance Operational MP Media Protection Operational PE Physical and Environmental Protection Operational PL Planning Management PS Personnel Security Operational RA Risk Assessment Management SA System and Services Acquisition Management SC System and Communications Protection Technical SI System and Information Integrity Operational  SP 800-53 Pervasive Cyber Security  Prophylactic Controls  PROBLEM  CONTROL FAMILY  Policy and Procedures The first control in every control family   addresses policy and procedure.
Personnel Security  Personnel Security (PS)  Hardware & Software  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  Awareness and  Training  Audit  Awareness and Training (AT)   Audit and Accountability (AU)   Contingency Planning Contingency Planning (CP)  Incident Response  Incident Response (IR)  Cryptographic  Protection  System and Communications Protection   (SC)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
14  Security Policy and Procedures  ¦ SP 800-53 policy and procedure controls  – The first control in every control family is policy and procedure  – The organization develops, disseminates, and periodically   reviews/updates:   o a formal, documented, <family> policy that addresses   purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management  commitment, coordination among organizational entities,  and compliance  oformal, documented procedures to facilitate the   implementation of the <family> policy and associated  <family> controls.
15  Personnel Security (PS)  ¦ No personnel security requirements on contractor  PS-1 Personnel Security Policy and   PS-5  Personnel Transfer  Procedures  PS-2 Position Categorization  PS-6  Access Agreements  PS-3 Personnel Screening  PS-7  Third-Party Personnel Security  PS-4 Personnel Termination  PS-8  Personnel Sanctions  ¦ PS-7 identifies need for contractual obligations  ¦ Other controls candidates for inclusion  - Key personnel clause  – Sometime contractors treated same as employees  – Example: PS-4 exit interview might have identified   potential malicious action  Controls that would have helped are underlined  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
16  System and Services Acquisition (SA)  ¦ Contractor supplied hardware & software ¦ No indication that any System and Services Acquisition   family (SA) controls were in contract  SA-1 System and Services  Acquisition Policy and Procedures  SA-7 User Installed Software  SA-2 Allocation of Resources  SA-8 Security Engineering Principles  SA-3  Life Cycle Support  SA-9 External Information System   SA-4 Acquisitions  SA-10 Developer Configuration   Services  SA-5  Information System  Documentation  SA-6 Software Usage Restrictions  Management  SA-11 Developer Security Testing  ¦ Example SA-11 required tests for resistance to penetration  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
17  Awareness and Training (AT)  ¦ No security training had been provided to staff  AT-1  AT-2  Security Awareness and  Training Policy and  Procedures Security Awareness  AT-3  Security Training  AT-4  Security Training Records  AT-5  Contacts with Security Groups  and Associations  ¦ People are one of the weakest links in cyber security  ¦ Robust awareness and training program is paramount to ensuring that   people understand cyber security responsibilities, organizational policies,  and how to properly use and protect the resources entrusted to them  ¦ All individuals should receive specialized training focused on their   responsibilities and the application rules   © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
18  Audit (AU)  ¦ System lacked sufficient audit capability ¦ Audit supports other control families such as incident response,   access control, and flaw remediation.
AU-1  AU-2  Audit and Accountability  Policy and Procedures Auditable Events  AU-3  Content of Audit Records  AU-7 Audit Reduction and Report   AU-8  AU-9  Generation Time Stamps  Protection of Audit  Information  AU-4  Audit Storage Capacity  AU-10 Non-repudiation  AU-5  AU-6  Response to Audit  Processing Failures Audit Monitoring, Analysis,  and Reporting  AU-11 Audit Record Retention  ¦ Recording and analyzing remote access might have led to   quicker determination of malicious activity  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
19  Contingency Planning (CP)  ¦ All the analysis indicates that there were no plans to deal   with an emergency or system disruption  CP-1  CP-2  Contingency Planning Policy  and Procedures Contingency Plan  CP-3  Contingency Training  CP-4  CP-5  Contingency Plan Testing  and Exercises Contingency Plan Update  CP-6 Alternate Storage Site  CP-7 Alternate Processing Site  CP-8  CP-9  Telecommunications  Services Information System Backup  CP-10 Information System Recovery   and Reconstitution ¦ Existing plans for dealing with natural disasters and   equipment breakdowns should be augmented for deliberate  attacks, physical and cyber  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
20  Incident Response (IR)  ¦ Response to the sewerage discharge was ad hoc  – Considerable time elapsed during troubleshooting before malicious intent   was considered  IR-1  IR-2  IR-3  Incident Response Policy  and Procedures  IR-5  Incident Monitoring  Incident Response Training IR-6  Incident Reporting  Incident Response Testing  and Exercises  IR-7  Incident Response  Assistance  IR-4  Incident Handling  ¦ All incident response controls contribute to  - Rapidly detecting incidents - Minimizing loss and destruction - Mitigating the weaknesses that were exploited - Restoring services - Apprehending malefactors  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
21  System and Communications Protection (SC)  ¦ Cryptographic protection recommended  - Supports identification and authentication (I&A)  SC-1 System and Communications   SC-13 Use of Cryptography  Protection Policy and Procedures Transmission Confidentiality  SC-9  SC-17 Public Key Infrastructure   Certificates  ¦ Recent U.S. government policy ¦ Protection of Sensitive Agency Information, OMB M-06-16,   June 23, 2006, specifies - Full disk encryption - Two factor authentication   Other SC controls not relevant to cryptography  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
22  SP 800-53 Controls for Malicious Activities  MALICIOUS   CONTROL FAMILY  ACTIVITY  Issuing radio  commands  Access Control (AC) Identification and Authentication (IA)  Falsifying network  address  Sending false data  and instructions  Disabling alarms  Access Control (AC)  System and Information Integrity (SI)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
23  Access Control (AC)  ¦ A combination of access controls would have alleviated or   prevented the attack   ¦ Tightly coupled with Identification and Authentication  AC-1 Access Control Policy and   AC-11 Session Lock  Procedures  AC-2 Account Management  AC-12 Session Termination  AC-3 Access Enforcement  AC-13 Supervision and Review—  AC-4  Information Flow  Enforcement  Access Control  AC-14 Permitted Actions without   Identification or Authentication  AC-5 Separation of Duties  AC-15 Automated Marking  AC-6  Least Privilege  AC-16 Automated Labeling  AC-7 Unsuccessful Login Attempts AC-17 Remote Access  AC-8 System Use Notification  AC-18 Wireless Access Restrictions  AC-9 Previous Logon Notification  AC-19 Access Control for Portable   and Devices  AC-10 Concurrent Session Control  AC-20 Use of External Information   Systems  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
24  Access Control Examples  ¦ Radio access (AC-18) limited to   – Specific hardware devices  – Authorized persons and processes  ¦ Authorization & credentials require management (AC-2) ¦ Authorized persons granted only those privileges necessary to   do their job (AC-6)  ¦ Audit log review uncover unexpected access (AC-13)  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
25  Identification & Authentication (IA)  ¦ Physical possession of radio and computer should not have   been sufficient  IA-1  IA-2  IA-3  Identification and  Authentication Policy and Procedures  User Identification and  Authentication  IA-5  Authenticator Management  IA-6  Authenticator Feedback  Device Identification and  Authentication  IA-7  Cryptographic Module  Authentication  IA-4  Identifier Management  ¦ Techniques for hardware (radio) I&A  - Shared known information (e.g., Media Access Control (MAC))  - Organizational authentication solution (e.g., IEEE 802.1x and   Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP))  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
26  System & Information Integrity (SI)  ¦ Unauthorized activity could have been detected  SI-1  SI-2  System and Information  Integrity Policy and  Procedures Flaw Remediation  SI-7  Software and Information  Integrity  SI-8  Spam Protection  SI-3 Malicious Code Protection  SI-9  SI-4  SI-5  SI-6  Information System  Monitoring Tools and  Techniques Security Alerts and  Advisories Security Functionality  Verification  SI-10  SI-11  SI-12  Information Input  Restrictions Information Accuracy,  Completeness, Validity, and  Authenticity Error Handling  Information Output Handling  and Retention  ¦ Commands that led to dumping raw sewerage  - Detected  - Validated  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
27  Learning From the 2000 Maroochy Shire  Cyber Attack  ¦ Public record of an intentional, targeted attack by a   knowledgeable person on an industrial control system teaches  us to consider: – Critical physical, administrative, and supply chain vulnerabilities  – Vulnerabilities coming from suppliers or others outside the   organization  – Contractor and sub-contractor personnel as a potential attack   source  ¦ Need to be concerned with both inside & outside attack ¦ Difficulty in identifying a control system cyber incident as a  malicious attack and retaking control of a ?hijacked?
system   ¦ A determined, knowledgeable adversary could potentially   defeat most controls  ¦ Structured defense-in-depth security is best  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
28  Additional Information  ¦ Authors  – Marshall Abrams  <abrams@mitre.org>  – Joe Weiss  <joe.weiss@realtimeacs.com>  ¦ Incident  – See references in paper  ¦ Case Study  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/papers.html  ¦ NIST Industrial Control System Security Project  – http://csrc.nist.gov/sec-cert/ics/index.html   ¦ NIST Project Managers  – Stu Katzke  <stuart.katzke@nist.gov> – Keith Stouffer  <keith.stouffer@nist.gov>  © 2008 The MITRE Corporation.
29  CYBERSECURITY GAMES: BUILDING TOMORROW’S WORKFORCE  2  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This paper is made possible by the efforts, support and participation  of numerous experts and thought leaders on the subject of  cybersecurity competitions.
It is responsive to the strategic goals of  the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) led by the  National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST).
The need for  this paper was identified by the Competitions subgroup of the NICE  Working Group (NICEWG) which has been established to provide  a mechanism in which public and private sector participants can  develop concepts, design strategies, and pursue actions that advance  cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development.
For more information or access to speakers, please contact  info@katzcy.com.
3  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAcknowledgments   A Note About NIST NICE, its Cybersecurity Workforce Framework,  and the NICE Working Group Competitions Subgroup  Introduction   Competitions: An Overview   Why Competitions?
The Many Faces of Cyber Competitions   Technical Skills vs. Soft Skills   Individual vs.
Long-Term Workforce Needs   Workforce Development vs. Extracurricular Activity   Teachers vs. Students   Standardization vs. the Speed of Creativity   Tools  Scenarios  Resources  Performance Measurement  Taxonomy   Fun and Games vs. Means to an End   Recommendations   Appendices  Appendix 1: Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders   Appendix 2: Cyber Competitions List   Appendix 3: Contributors   3  6   7  10  11  12  14  15  16  17  18  20  21  23 23 23 23 23 24  24  27  30  34  37  4  TABLE OF CONTENTSAmong the diverse opinions offered  by this paper’s contributors,  a consensus emerged: the current  and projected workforce needs must  be met not only by training more  cybersecurity personnel, but also  by raising the bar on their skills,  aptitude and ability to collaborate.
Cybersecurity competitions can play  a critical role in this mandate.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  5 5  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceA NOTE ABOUT NIST NICE, ITS  CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE FRAMEWORK,  AND THE NICE WORKING GROUP  COMPETITIONS SUBGROUP  The National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) is a non-regulatory agency  of the United States Department of Commerce.
Its mandate is to promote innovation  and industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science, standards and  technology for the enhancement of economic security and quality of life.
The National  Initiative for Cyber Education (NICE), led by NIST, is a partnership between government,  academia, and the private sector focused on cybersecurity education, training, and  workforce development.
The mission of NICE is to energize and promote a robust network  and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development.
NICE  fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and industry partners to  build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and bring leadership  and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping to keep our  Nation secure, and provide leadership.
NICE (http://csrc.nist.gov/nice/nicewg/index.html) brings together public and private  sector participants to develop concepts, design strategies and pursue actions that advance  cybersecurity education, training and workforce development.
Within the Working  Group, subgroups focus on specific topics.
The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (a.k.a.
the NICE Framework and NIST Special  Publication 800-181) provides a blueprint to categorize, organize and describe cybersecurity  work into specialty areas and work roles that include specific tasks and knowledge, skills  and abilities (KSAs).
The CWF provides a common lexicon to discuss cybersecurity positions  and roles.
It provides a common language to speak about cybersecurity work roles and  positions/jobs, and is a reference to help define professional requirements in cybersecurity.
The NICE Framework organizes cybersecurity work into seven high-level  task categories:  • Securely Provision • Analyze • Operate and Maintain • Oversee and Govern • Collect and Operate • Protect and Defend • Investigate  As this paper explores themes and priorities for developing cybersecurity skills, the NICE  Framework provides a starting-point for creating taxonomy and encouraging standardization  that will accelerate growth and expansion.
6  INTRODUCTION  Whether hacking critical infrastructure like utilities and financial institutions, disrupting  political campaigns, stealing intellectual property, or robbing citizens of their identities and  sense of security, cyber attackers pose an enormous threat to the American way of life.
To  defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats, the  US National Security Strategy is predicated on expanding the skilled workforce to perform  duties relating to information security.
A significant shortfall exists between the number of workers with cybersecurity defense skills  and the number of open job requisitions, in both private enterprise and government.
The  federal government faces the greatest challenge with 83% of hiring managers struggling to  find and employ qualified candidates.1  For commercial enterprises, a skilled workforce is  imperative; yet experts forecast a demand for 6 million cyber workers by 2019 and a shortfall  of 1.5 million.2    To produce this paper, the NIST NICE Subcommittee for Competitions interviewed more  than 25 thought leaders from government agencies, defense contractors, other private  industry entities and academia.
All participants are actively engaged in cybersecurity.
They  shared their perspectives on this looming issue and the role that cyber competitions might  play in raising awareness, enhancing education, attracting capable resources to the field,  and addressing the skills gap.3  The interviews sought to understand:  • How effective are current competitions at all levels — secondary, university and  professional — at developing and demonstrating skills, generating awareness and a pipeline  of current and future professionals in the cyber defense field?
• What are the challenges and opportunities for expanding competitions beyond current   levels to reach larger audiences, generate more skilled resources, and elevate the skill  levels of the cyber defenders in the workplace?
• Who might take the lead in elevating the scope of competitions across government,   academia and private industry?
The body of this paper details those diverse opinions,  addressing such questions as:    • Are technical skills or soft skills more important in producing a strong cyber defense?
• Does skilled cyber defense require individual or group effort?
• Should cyber training and competitions emphasize offense, defense or both?
• Does the responsibility for addressing the workforce shortage and skills gap fall primarily   to public agencies or private industry?
• How should investments in education prioritize between short-term and long-term   workforce requirements?
• When does standardization of the competition and education process enable scale, and   when does it hinder the creativity and agility needed in a rapidly shifting area?
7  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThis paper explores whether competitions — as games or as tools for skills development —  might be improved through standardization and through an expansion of the competitive  arena.
The downside of standardization is that it could slow the pace of growth.
However,  if left to develop at an organic pace, the competitions area — and other aspects of cyber  education — may never sufficiently address the intensified needs of the cyber workforce in  the short and long term.
Among the diverse opinions expressed, one core belief was shared by virtually every  stakeholder: the cyber workforce shortage is so critical that it demands an artificial  injection, an impetus, to attract greater interest and participation that will accelerate skills  development.
The arena of cyber competitions can serve as a significant contributor.
Cyber  gaming appeals to younger generations, representing both immediate and future cyber  workforces.
An organized collaboration among key stakeholders can:  • Raise public awareness of the world of cyber competition.
• Exponentially multiply the number of cyber games, sponsors and participants.
• Inform and restructure academic curricula.
• Transform and popularize specific cyber training strategies.
Cyber competitions, while not alone in these endeavors, are highly effective way of  developing skills by providing hands-on experience in simulated, real-world situations.
When discussing the standardization of cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made  comparisons to sports.
To the uninitiated, cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made  comparisons to their athletic counterparts.
There are few cyber stadiums,4 few superstar  players with recognizable names and faces beyond this specific realm,5 no cheerleaders, no  endorsement contracts, and no standard rules of the game.
Yet, the essence of competition  is the same: participants strive to be the best, to excel by recognizing and focusing their  talents and to develop winning strategies.
Professionalizing cyber competitions can mirror  the common structure used by the thousands of sports leagues in the US today.
They all rely  upon common characteristics for breadth and scale:  rules, team roles, organized games,  audiences and fans, awards, marketing, and funding through sponsorships and advertisers.
The main difference between cyber and athletic competitions underscores the importance of  this white paper:  a real-world cyber arena exists, where bad actors with malicious intent are  inflicting damage upon individuals, corporations and nations.
For students, competitions are held at the middle school, high school and collegiate levels  and complement classroom teaching and laboratory assignments with hands-on work in a  social/gaming environment that fosters learning in entirely different ways.
The National Cyber League http://www.nationalcyberleague.org/ is an example where stadium-like environments have been created.
We acknowledge that cyber competition superstars do exist today.
8  For cyber professionals in the private sector, competitions are used to develop and  demonstrate skills, to evaluate job candidate abilities, to increase awareness among  business leaders, and to boost morale and therefore productivity.
For industry and certification bodies, competitions are increasingly seen as relevant work  experience for recertification.
For governments, competitions are a vital element of generating the skills needed to  defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats;  competitions also strongly complement the other tabletop war games used in training.
On the global level, the subject of cyber threats is increasingly the subject of national  policy and regulation.
Investments are being made to encourage collaboration among all  stakeholders to develop and expand the workforce, and to that end, there are a growing  number of cyber competitions where nations compete against each other to develop a  workforce, and to demonstrate skills and share knowledge (e.g., at the EC-Council’s Hacker  Halted).
And for the cybersecurity field in general, competitions provide an arena to foster  innovation:  innovation in tactics and techniques, both offensive and defensive, where  learning is shared and drives the advancement of processes, technology, knowledge and  skills among the competitors.
The opinions, case studies and anecdotes captured for this white paper suggest that  cybersecurity competitions are an effective way to raise awareness, develop and  demonstrate skills, and deliver an able pool of human resources for recruitment into  government or private sector jobs.
The social and gaming aspects are seen as particularly  compelling for up-and-coming generations of potential workers, and the stakeholders  participating in this white paper yearn for cyber competition to achieve what sports  leagues have with publicity, followership, sponsorship and participation.
They wonder  how all aspects of an athletic league, like baseball or football, could be adapted and  utilized to both accelerate and broaden the adoption of cyber competitions.
This paper  makes recommendations on not only continuing but also fast-tracking this discussion, and  expanding it to include all  interested parties.
9  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCOMPETITIONS: AN OVERVIEW  Cyber competitions have been around for over two decades.
Mr. Jeff Moss, the founder  of DEFCON, created the inaugural event in 1993 to bring together knowledgeable BBS  (bulletin board system) hackers to speak, practice and share hacking skills.6  Shortly after,  this initiative attracted participation from industry and law enforcement in the hopes of  developing better cyber defensive tactics and strategies.
Cyber competitions today come in a few different flavors.
Many are events where  individuals or teams play defense or offense to protect or attack assets in an Internet- connected computer network, or to solve forensic or other cyber-related challenges.
• “Capture the Flag” (CTF) competitions can involve Jeopardy-style questions or hands-on   offensive-defensive activity on a network.7   -   In a Jeopardy-style CTF, teams are scored and advance by answering questions on  topics in various cyber categories including cryptography, steganography, physical  security, forensics and scanning.
-   In offensive-defensive CTF, while battling competitors, players endeavor simultaneously  or alternately to defend their assets and infiltrate their opponents’ network to assets to  reach their objective.
• Operational competitions evaluate teams and award points not only in the technical areas  of defending a network and maintaining continual service, but also in business challenges  related to an IT security job function (e.g., researching technology or presenting to  management).
In these types of competitions, a “red team” of expert volunteers perform  as hackers, and attempt to break into the network and disrupt service.
• Forensics competitions task students to solve forensic challenges either in a standalone   event (see https://cyberforensicschallenge.com/) or as part of a larger cyber competition.
• A research paper competition sponsored by the “National Security Agency Science and   Security Program” recognizes the best scientific cybersecurity paper from the previous  calendar year published in a peer review journal or presented at a conference.
Described  by Dr. Adam Tagert, director: for four years, this initiative has recognized researchers  who have demonstrated lasting impact to the science of cybersecurity.
• Policy cyber competitions, such as the Atlantic Council’s Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge,  provide an opportunity for students across academic disciplines to interact and compete  to achieve a deeper understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis  and conflict.
Using an interactive learning experience with a competitive scenario, exercise  teams respond to a realistic, evolving cyber attack and analyze the threat it poses to  national, international and private sector interests.
Competitions may be executed in controlled8 environments under the supervision of cyber  experts from academia, government and private industry who construct the playing field  ecosystem, design the scenarios, and usually act as the attackers and role play characters   6. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lg6bQMTjHCE.
Competitions can be conducted entirely online, but the most common type of competition  discussed by our stakeholders is a team competition, played in rounds, in live environments  where competitors, organizers, judges, educators and sponsors are present.
Competitions come from many sources: the brainchild of a single individual or the work  of a large, organized group.
Appendix 2 includes a list of the many  competitions discussed by this paper’s contributors.
“On the playing field, as  in the Security Operations  Center, skills matter.
Cyber sports teach  security professionals to think  critically and creatively about  offense and defense, about the  measures and counter-measures  associated with every move.”  Jessica Gulick, CEO,  KATZCY Consulting  WHY COMPETITIONS?
Analogies from the sports  world are often used to inform everyday discussions on topics from  business to education to politics.
Youth leagues allow kids to participate in  games, learning the fundamental skills, strategies and teamwork  required to compete more effectively at higher levels.
At this culminating  moment of the season, the Super Bowl pits two teams of elite athletes  against each other, with their heroic exploits broadcast internationally,   11  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforcewhile celebrations are thrown in homes across the country as many Americans gather to  watch the game.
Cyber competitions generally tap into this tradition of pitting one side against the other.
Youth competitions offer participants a chance to learn the fundamentals of cybersecurity in  a fun, engaging format and provide an entry point into the professional workforce.
“Cyber as a sport” is a growing trend in high schools; the number of high school  teams that participated in the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot doubled in a two-year  period from over 2,200 in 2014 to over 4,000 in 2016.9  Educators increasingly recognize  cyber competitions demonstrate and develop planning, leadership, collaboration and  communication skills and offer a compelling alternative for students of all ages who are less  likely to compete or excel at physical sports.
Finally, the safety, security and enjoyment aspects of competitions should not be  overlooked.
When practicing both offensive and defensive maneuvers in a typical  competition environment, players are encouraged to practice and hone cybersecurity  skills in a controlled, real-world environment where no harm can come to the competitors.
Moreover, cyber competitions are enjoyed as a forum for networking, team building, and  information sharing.
THE MANY FACES OF CYBER COMPETITIONS  In today’s advanced societies, many youth have never experienced a world without  computers, cellphones and other Internet-enabled devices.
And whether they enjoy Candy  Crush Saga or multiplayer games, according to one estimate, the average “21-year-old has  spent 10,000 hours gaming  —  about the same amount of time he’s spent in school from  5th to 12th grade.”10  Clearly, the social and gaming aspects of competitions are particularly compelling to up- and-coming generations of young people, which qualifies cyber sports as a particularly  valuable tool in cyber workforce development.
It makes sense to consider how the  standardization and professionalization of athletic competitions at all levels have broadened  popular appeal, reach and participation.
How can a similar approach accelerate the growth  of cyber competitions in terms of number, size, reach and stature?
However, the stakeholder  community is at odds over how best to address the cybersecurity workforce shortage.
As  cyber competitions grow and evolve around the world in an effort to keep pace with market  changes, their relative novelty and expanding adoption create a study of contrasts.
The  following sections describe key topics where our cyber competition experts held differing  opinions on cybersecurity, competitions and the way forward for each.
12  LEADERSHIP, TEAMWORK,  COMMUNICATION AND CONFIDENCE  Our contributors listed many skills than can be developed through  cyber competitions.
But frankly, we’re looking for leadership: who is leading, motivating,  helping them overcome when they’re ready to quit, because they’ve  been hacked.”  Joe Krull, Security Principal Director, Accenture  Communication is essential “to make very compelling arguments  as to why certain issues are important, and to determine who can  identify consequences, who can make decisions for prioritization  and the like.”  Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity  and Communications, Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  Competition builds “self-driven research skills — in these  competitions.
Ultimately, it’s a confidence builder.”  Lisa Jiggetts, CEO, Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  13 13  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTECHNICAL SKILLS VS. SOFT SKILLS  Skills development is acknowledged to be a critical outcome for cyber competitors.
People often assume competitors in today’s  competitions, and most cyber professionals in the workforce, should be technically trained.
Computer science and computer engineering are anecdotally the most desired majors  for college students being recruited into the cybersecurity workforce.
There are strong  viewpoints that cyber competitors and cybersecurity professionals alike must have at least  a basic knowledge of “how things work,” including networks, threats and malware.
This  technical emphasis explains the predominant presence of computer science and computer  engineering students at cyber competitions, relative to other disciplines.
But the soft skills of leadership, communication (translating technical subjects into business  terms), critical/analytic thinking, teamwork, and creativity were frequently identified as  desirable characteristics in a cybersecurity role.
The need for both hard and soft skills in the workforce is well established and extends to  the NICE Framework and to certification organizations.
As (ISC)2’s Dan Waddell, regional  managing director for the North America region, observes “If you put [all certification  bodies] in one room and map our certifications to the NICE Framework, it covers the gamut.
You  need a blend.”   Although, says Laurin Buchanan, principal investigator at Secure Decisions, “(Competitions  remain) focused on high school and college level students, who may or may not be studying  computer science and computer engineering — which, from my point of view, is entirely  useless to hire someone as a cybersecurity engineer.
They don’t understand networks; they  don’t understand threats and malware.”   Both technical and soft skills are observable in a competition, as Rodney Petersen, director  of NICE, notes: “When I walk around the competitions and observe, I quickly notice the  teamwork and how small groups of people are working together.
And employers can do the same thing by walking around and observing them.”  Cyber education, of which competitions are a critical part, is often associated with or  compared to STEM (or STEAM) education (science, technology, engineering, art and math).
If soft skills are equally as important to a cyber practitioner as  technical skills, then a STEM-like approach and STEM-like programs may be insufficient.
It  has been argued that the present impetus for expanding cyber education is more critical —  the defense of our nation, our industries and our citizens — than the concerns that previously  sparked an emphasis on STEM education — a declining position in technology skills on the  global stage.
Therefore, cyber education must be addressed and deployed more rapidly  and more widely than STEM.
TEAM SKILLS  (AND MIXED-GENDER TEAMS)  There are differing opinions and genuine contradictions about the role of the individual  versus the role of the team in the world of cyber competitions and the broader subject  of the cyber workforce.
Competitions are widely recognized as a source for cyber talent:  nurturing future talent in the long term, and proving a hiring source in the now.
While an employee is hired, evaluated and progresses through his or her career as an  individual, cybersecurity professionals in the workplace are overwhelmingly expected to  contribute as a team.
One of our contributors posited that the white knight or the lone cyber warrior, may be an  image conjured up by Hollywood (e.g., as seen, in the television program NCIS).
However,  other contributors were quick to point out that security training and certification programs  focused on the individual could reinforce the notion of being an army of one.
In contrast,  Mike Cameron, director of business development at Leidos, reminds us, “If you look at  the cyber competitions, the ability to succeed is driven not just by individual skills, but  how well they communicate as a team to deploy those software skills and team behaviors  and function.
You’re not just training, but you’re doing workforce development: you are  developing teams as well as people.”  With no end in sight to the skills shortage, developing and testing team skills in real-world  scenarios appears imperative.
Evaluating individual skills and overcoming challenges  of scoring (discussed in a later section), stem from the inherent nature of cybersecurity,  requiring both individual warriors and well-coordinated teams.
Upon completion, the young women were  invited to participate in a cyber competition and were asked to choose  between a mixed-gender competition and an all-girls competition.
But now that the team  had proven what they could do, they had confidence and would choose  to be in a mixed group.
Women are gaining ground in the cyber arena, including in  competitions; 2016’s Brigham Young University team at the National  Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) notably included four  female members.11  Teamwork, the soft skills that come with it, and  targeted outreach to girls and women, are all necessary considerations  for expanding the cyber competition arena, and workforce.
“There are no  lone eagles; this is  a team sport.”  Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant  Secretary, Cybersecurity and  Communications, DHS  11.  http://fortune.com/2016/04/27/mormon-women-cybersecurity/.
15  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceOFFENSE VS. DEFENSE  Whether cyber education and cyber competitions should include offensive skills — the role  of the attacker or hacker — is contentious subjects.
Most of the contributors who organize  and/or sponsor secondary school and collegiate competitions believe that the scope of the  game should be limited to defensive capabilities.
In the era of WikiLeaks and state-sponsored hacking, some stakeholders feel it is too  much to expect competitions to teach the complex ethical issues of hacking alongside the  technical and soft skills required of a cybersecurity practitioner.
And there is a lingering bias  that practicing offensive skills encourages the wrong talents.
This stance, however, runs counter to the beliefs of some stakeholders who consider the  cyber arena to be a battleground.
And as real-world cyber threats become increasingly sophisticated, the need to “get into the  enemy’s mind” intensifies.
This skill is best developed by walking in the enemy’s shoes and  learning offensive methods.
“Being able to look at your defensive position as an attacker, through  an attacker’s eyes, is critical,” says Pete Clay, principal of Zeneth  Technology Partners.
“From my background, a military point of view,  my ability to attack has informed my ability to defend.
Jenn Henley, director of security at Facebook, points out, “If you’ve  learned something in a book, by the time you’ve graduated and put  it in practice, threat actors and models have changed.
Where these  competitions are so valuable  —  they force students to use critical  thinking, take foundational skills and put them in practice.
It allows  them to practice both offensive and defensive [techniques].
And you can’t get that from a  book, or in a classroom.”  “Playing a part on the blue  team in information security  can, to a very small degree, be  compared to the lot of a hapless  soldier.
It seems a bit  unfair really; even the American  Revolution got Paul Revere.”   Verizon’s 2016 Breach  Investigations Report  16  PRIVATE VS. PUBLIC  Not surprisingly, during their interviews, many interviewees made  an association between patriotism and cybersecurity.
In fact, today’s  cyber competitions draw significant investment and attention from the  military services and defense industry.
Mike Cameron points out, “The  cyber competition community is usually at the nexus of government  organizations, academia and professional organizations like the Air Force  Association and others.”    Public sector funds have helped to jump-start programs, providing seed  money to stimulate interest in competitions.
The most significant  backers of some of the largest competitions, like CyberPatriot and  NCCDC, are defense-related organizations or government agencies:  the Armed Forces Association, DHS, NSA, Northrop Grumman, and  Raytheon, to name just a few.
“Northrup Grumman has taken the lead, put many millions of dollars  into Cyber Patriot, even though there is no guarantee that the  (participants), will work for Northrup Grumman.
(Company leaders)  have made a commitment that this is important for our country and  our company and our workforce.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer  Information Systems, California State Polytechnic University  Yet, because 95% of US critical infrastructure is in the hands of private  industry, it is private industry that has the most to gain in developing  a skilled cyber workforce.12 gain (or lose) in (not) developing..workforce.
It is widely accepted that private industry faces a real need for highly- skilled cyber employees.
To create a labor supply that can meet this  demand, most companies will require a business case for investment.
That investment strategy may include:  • Sponsoring competitions to increase size and scope, and to expand   outreach to students/competitors.
• Providing cyber expertise to competition organizers, helping them   develop scenarios, offering staff as coaches and mentors, and staffing  the red/white teams, etc.
• Developing technology to enable competitions to scale, working to   develop standard taxonomy and process.
• Raising awareness in their communities and among their clientele —   and the public in general — about the subject of cybersecurity.
“The US Cyber Challenge  focuses on the national level,  to elevate the defense of our  companies, governments  and institutions and citizens  and ensure their private  and personal information  doesn’t  get into the hands  of people who will use it in  a malicious way.”   Karen Evans,  KE&T Partners, CyberCompEx.org  12.
17  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThe private sector typically considers return on investment when making decisions, and a  cybersecurity business case will seek to quantify the impact of investing in defensive skills.
New technologies may be developed with government seed-funding,  but expansion, adoption and maturity is almost always the result of private investment.
In the long run, for cyber competitions, the contributors all agree that the needs and  involvement of private industry will ultimately elevate the game to the benefit of private  and public enterprises alike.
This factor reinforces the importance of ongoing  conversations and collaborations among all cybersecurity stakeholders.
LONG-TERM  WORKFORCE NEEDS  When discussing the role that competitions play in secondary and higher  education, and in preparing competitors for careers in cybersecurity, it  becomes apparent that there are different needs and expectations in the  short term versus the long term.
• Over 1.5 million cybersecurity jobs will be unfilled in the US by 2020.13 • A leading Internet-based company reported to the NICE Working  Group that thousands of candidates apply for every open software  engineering position posted; yet due to the scarcity of skilled  personnel, it takes 8-12 months to hire one cybersecurity professional  (in an environment with 125 open requisitions).
Re-designing the education system to develop the pipeline for the  cybersecurity workforce is a long-term option.
The required approach  may differ from STEM.
Cybersecurity skills are needed to face real,  current threats of attack on our nation, our citizens and our industries.
“I tell people; if you  want to be a security  professional and want  to wear a suit and tie  every day, there is a  place for you.
If you  want to have purple  hair and sit in a  corner and not talk  to anyone, there’s a  place for you too.”  Jenn Henley, Director of Security,  Facebook  13.  http://www.boston.com/jobs/jobs-news/2015/12/08/all-those-scary-hacks-are-creating-a-lot-of-demand-for-certain-computer-experts.
In every case, the demand got  met; universities changed their curriculum to educate more people; practical/tactical  organizations like SANS began to do it; pay in the field was so much more that people  shifted.
In every other case, sooner or later, it got met.”  Jim Michaud, Director, CyberTalent Solutions, The SANS Institute  To address the immediate and short-term demand, most agree that other tactics are  required.
Tactics might include:  • Raising awareness of the need to attract skilled personnel to the field, and not necessarily  technically-trained people.
I find that many technically-skilled people are not very  good at communicating in plain language, in simple easy-to-understand terms,  what is going on.”  • Expanding professional competitions to develop skills and redeploy resources where   they are needed.
This opportunity benefits people who are re-entering the workforce or  changing careers mid-stream; and based on the statistics cited above, the cybersecurity  field represents a “growth industry”, while other traditional job functions are on the  decline.
• Creating training programs to address the need at a national level, and consider options   for engaging a diverse workforce, including training women and veterans, and offering  flexible working conditions.
Before WWII, we needed 20 times the number of  pilots, and we set up 22 flight schools around the country.”  • Generating interest and enthusiasm among people with the skills, knowledge, or aptitude,   to fill cyber positions.
To target young people, make cyber “cool” and accessible.
In cyber, that’s important, but not enough, and will take too  long.
Middle schoolers  don’t have careers for 10 years, and we need to address the problem NOW.”  19  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceStackSmash is one example  of a professional cyber  competition.
GE’s annual  IT security hackathon  provides a gateway to  cybersecurity at GE.
By  engaging professionals  from IT functions to explore  the limits of innovation for  real-world security issues,  GE has seen tremendous  value in imaginative thinking  and new tools as well as the  by-products of enabling  collaboration and building  cross-business relationships.
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT VS.  EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITY  Competitions not only have a place as extracurricular activities for  students, but also as workforce development tools for current and  advancing professionals.
Since much of the interviewee discussion  focused on raising awareness in schools of cybersecurity as a subject, a  skill set and as a career.
This section regarding workforce development  is a natural extension of the previous short-term versus long-term  debate.
Increasing student involvement in cybersecurity is an important  long-term strategy, but there are significant short-term needs that must  be addressed as well.
There is a groundswell of support for professional  competitions to enhance the skills of practicing professionals.
However,  if professional competitions are going to be accepted as tools to train  and develop practitioners in the field, then stakes have to be higher  than professional bragging rights.
In his ieee paper, Dr. Gregory White, Director for Infrastructure  Assurance and Security at the University of Texas, references Microsoft’s  Senior Technology Officer Lewis Shepherd’s 201014 webcast, Hiring the  Next Generation of Cyber Professionals in Government.
White explains  the concern that government agencies, like DHS and NSA, were hiring  virtually all the available qualified professionals, leaving private industry  to scramble.
Certs, like the CISSP and others, require ongoing coursework to  maintain their status.
Today, credits can be issued manually, but  standardizing their issuance should be considered.
Businesses can also  incorporate competitions into workforce development and standard  operating procedures.
As Nasrin Rezai, global CISO of GE Capital explains, “Not only in cyber  but in other parts of the company, there are a lot of competition-style  ways of promoting new idea generation.
Sometimes organizations do  it [competitions] one-off, or it isn’t a part of their development and  workforce planning strategy.
We see it as a component of our workforce  development.
The challenge becomes when you  consider it a side job, interest or hobby of the group, instead of a critical  component of learning and development.”  14.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwlkcC5KMvA.
20  Another professional  development competition is  GhostRed.
This homegrown  capture-the-flag competition,  has expanded organically  within GE over the past  five years.
What started as  a volunteer-driven effort to  excite and connect students  with hands-on cybersecurity  experiences, has now  become a formalized GE  program designed to recruit  top talent into the company.
TEACHERS VS. STUDENTS  The interviewees frequently discussed a shortcoming in the education system: students  are not generally aware of cybersecurity as a field of study or as a career path.
Today’s first graders are proficient in the use of smart phones  and tablets because these devices have been in existence and widely available since their  birth.
The probability that they know more than their teachers and parents about the use of  tablets, because this technology is high.
In this situation, attention is needed to train educators, parents, coaches and the wider  education complex on awareness about cybersecurity.
But if education is about teaching critical skills,  Laurin Buchanan suggests “(We must) graduate useful, intelligent members of society and  workforce; and we haven’t done that with cyber.”   Many interviewees made comparisons to their own high school curricula in their analogies  to today’s need for cybersecurity education: health class and hygiene, physical education,  driver’s education, home economics and trade/manufacturing-related courses were widely  taught, because they were considered critical life skills.
These interviewees asserted that the  current prevalence of technology and related threats indicates that cybersecurity education  can be viewed on equal footing with other subjects taught in schools.
Training educators on  cybersecurity issues can be made a higher priority; just as driver education instructors are  expected to have a driver’s license, all educators can be expected to have a general working  knowledge of cybersecurity.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  21  “I think cyber education is about teaching  how things actually work.
You need to  understand how the Internet works and  how packets work.
Cyber education needs to be about  explaining how the Internet and networks  work; this needs to begin as early as  elementary school.”   Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator  Applied Visions, Inc.,   a division of Secure Decisions   22 22  STANDARDIZATION VS.
THE SPEED OF CREATIVITY  The subject of standardization in the realm of cybersecurity and  competitions was not greeted with much enthusiasm by interviewees.
In an arena where speed, adaptability and creativity are core defining  tenets, there is resistance to adopt standards that may encumber  innovation.
There is great reluctance to overlay the process of  proposing, developing, agreeing upon and adopting standards.
But  when discussing creating, executing and expanding competitions,  several areas were identified where a standard approach would be  beneficial to deliver economies of scale in an environment of scarcity.
Areas for standardization and collaboration across competitions include:  Tools Competitions involve labor intense processes for injecting actions into  game play, tracking competitor progress, and scoring individual and  team performance.
Interviewees recommended automated solutions:  Facebook’s Capture the Flag platform, Leidos’s Cyber NXUS,  GE’s  GhostRed,  the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot competition engine,  and Secure Decisions’ Comic-BEE, a “choose your own adventure story”  platform).
Scenarios Competitions continuously require new scenarios to challenge the  participants, especially returning participants.
Collaborating on scenario  development and developing standard taxonomy were identified to  mitigate this challenge.15  Resources Effective and challenging events are resource-intensive.
Cyber  experts develop and run the game, and may participate as red teams.
Performance Measurement Several interviewees noted the challenge in comparing the scores or  results of one competition to another, and more so, comparing the  achievements of one competitor to another.
They take time,  money and people to develop  and update them.
If you’ve ever  had to manage the logistics for  one of these events, you know  what it takes to do it.”   Dan Waddell,  Regional Managing Director,  North America Region,  (ISC)2, Inc.  15.
Bryan Fite, global account CISO for British Telecom, mentions a Scenario Development Language (SDL).
23  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTaxonomy A dominant theme throughout the interviews was the need to standardize the taxonomy  —   the roles and definitions  —  in the cybersecurity workforce, both for competitions and in a  professional environment.
A human capital perspective was often repeated: establish better- defined team roles that can be commonly understood across organizational and industry  boundaries.
FUN AND GAMES VS. MEANS  TO AN END  Among all other objectives, cyber competitions are games intended  to be enjoyed by the participants.
While interviewees assign a high  entertainment value to cyber competitions, a non-expert audience may  likely disagree, which is one of the primary barriers when discussing  cyber competitions as a competitive sport.
The fun comes from meeting  the challenge, learning new skills, working on a team, socializing with  competitors and sponsors, and achieving success.
But a stronger argument for gamification of  the cybersecurity arena might be that those competitive elements —  process, teamwork and results — are precisely what it takes to construct  an effective cyber workforce.
To set student competitions apart from classroom learning or lab work,  it is important to maintain a safe competition environment and remove  the pressure of performing that can come with scoring (the equivalent  of being graded for classroom learning).
Davina Pruitt-Mentle, lead for  the NICE’s Academic Engagement at NIST, says competitions “allow  students to engage in an informal, non-threatening way, unlike in the  classroom where they are graded.
If we insist on scoring them, we will  turn off some kids, because it takes them out of their comfort zone and  away from the idea that they are just going out and having fun.”  “GE actively participates and  sponsors numerous high school  and college outreach programs  to raise awareness and create  interest and excitement in  technology; and several are  focused on girls.
But now that I’ve  done this and known what  I’m doing, I would choose to  be in a mixed team.”  This  response is precisely what GE  wants to achieve for the girls: to  build their confidence in their  knowledge and skills, so that  they are comfortable working  in technical areas in a mixed  group.”  Nasrin Rezai, Global Chief  Information Security Officer  GE Capital & GE Digital Security  Governance, Tech Risk and  M&A  24  And by making the games fun, cyber competitions are viewed by many  as a channel for other endeavors:  attracting students to STEM fields,  and stimulating creative thinking and innovation through intellectual  problem-solving.
Clearly STEM education is critical to national security,  as the 21st Century Science, Technology and Innovation Initiative for  America’s National Security report from May 2016 asserts;16 cyber  competitions are compelling method of attracting students to STEM.
Nasrin Rezai says, “We think that gaming/cyber competition is a key  component of learning, education, and recruiting.” Competitions,  especially at the collegiate and professional levels, are ideally suited for  individual competitors to demonstrate skills and for hiring managers in  the government, defense sector and private industry to most effectively  identify the best resources with the best skills.
In 2009, Boeing, one of the sponsors of  the Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC),  hired the entire team from Cal Poly Pomona on the spot.
These examples suggest that competitions might be  considered auditions for potential cybersecurity professionals.
Interviews explored whether two concepts  —  the game itself and a tool  for skills development, assessment and recruiting — could be improved  by standardizing and expanding the competitive arena.
Is a standardized approach  unnecessary?
Or does the lack of a trained workforce and the rapid  advancement of technology justify intervention?
Consideration has been given to whether competitions can count  towards cybersecurity professional certification.
Dan Waddell  from (ISC)2 indicated that currently, a manual calculation process  determines whether a candidate’s participation and performance in  a cyber competition can contribute to the professional development  component of maintaining CISSP certification.
Expanding competitions,  particularly at the professional level, and advancing consistency in  their processes and measurement, would facilitate organizations like  (ISC)2 accepting them as valuable skills development tools and as a  part of the certification process.
“The Women’s Society of  Cyberjutsu is committed to  providing women professionals  with opportunities to develop  and enhance their skills in the  field.
Through competitions,  our members learn  communication and leadership,  along with the technical  and system administration  foundations that are required.
25  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceEnvisioning the potential reach, structure and impact that cyber competitions might have,  several stakeholders rely on the sports league analogies.
Sports leagues, for example  football leagues, have:  • Standard rule books (with age-appropriate adaptations as needed).
• Organized events at multiple levels from Pop Warner to the NFL.
These attributes work in concert to elevate awareness of and passion for the sport, and  attract athletes to the sport from a very early age.
This is not the case in the cybersecurity arena.
With 2 million jobs waiting to be filled,  the prospects for young cyber athletes to find employment (after study, practice, and  demonstrating his or her abilities) are on the playing field, are great.
Cyber competitions are ideally suited for co-ed play.
RECOMMENDATIONS  The opinions and narratives of interviewees reflect different approaches and varying  priorities regarding:  • Cybersecurity skills development • Offensive and defensive roles  • Awareness, education and workforce development  The opportunity of competitions—to raise awareness, develop skills, and build a pipeline  of cyber professionals — encourage a national dialogue of stakeholders from diverse  constituencies:  • Founders and long-standing sponsors of the leading competitions in the US, such as  CCDC, CyberPatriot, the US Cyber Challenge, Day-Con, the Atlantic Council Policy  Challenge, DEFCON and others.
26  • Government agencies responsible for developing cyber skills,   including the NSA, DHS and the Department of Education.
• Defense contractors who significantly invest in competitions, for skills   development and recruiting.
• Private industry, which faces a skills shortage and is well-situated to  develop and distribute tools to enable competitions and accelerate  product development and differentiation using competitions as a  proving ground.
The objectives of this larger dialog should:  Agree upon areas where collaboration and standardization  can facilitate expansion to a larger audience across geographies,  age groups, school districts, and public and private enterprises   without dampening the creativity and innovation paramount  to keeping pace with the attackers.
But you also put  on handcuffs; what is unique  about the cybersecurity industry  is that people think differently.
A vast majority  of cyber experts are self-taught.
So we need a structure that can  be replicated; but we must ensure  there is enough variance to allow  ‘out of the box’ thinking.”   1  2  3  Explore how shared investment in technology and process can  both compensate for and develop areas of competition that are  otherwise limited by resources (people) and sponsors (funding).
Accelerate the advancement of the following aspects of  competitions as well as the cybersecurity workforce as a whole:  Standardizing  performance  measurement at  the individual and  team level across  competitions  “It’s great that everyone wants more cyber competitions, but without  ‘division rules’ it makes it difficult to judge the relative value of one  competition versus another.
Without knowing whether the A team from  one competition is as good as the A team from another, it isn’t an effective  hiring guide.”   Bobbie Stempfley, Director of Cyber Strategy Implementation,  the MITRE Corporation  “The goals of the NIST NICE Working Group competitions subgroup are  in sync with industry: to advance and identify skilled people ready to fill  the growing needs of the workforce.
The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework is a great place to start to begin to understand the relationships  between competitions that develop proficiencies in cybersecurity knowledge  skills and abilities and employers who value those knowledge, skills and  abilities tie to perform vital tasks in cybersecurity work roles.”  Bill Newhouse, Deputy Director, National Initiative for Cyber Security  Education (NICE)  Aligning  competitions  with the NIST  Framework  27  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDeveloping and  sharing competitive  platforms  “Until you’ve done one, you don’t know how critical and how difficult  it is getting the competition environment working.
You need a willing  partner, usually a college or university, to host and deliver the resource- intensive tasks of providing working computers, a functional wireless  network, enough bandwidth from the ISP, and so on.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer Information  Systems at Cal Poly Pomona./Co-Chair NICE Working Group  Competions SubGroup  “From my military background, I know that my ability to attack informed  my ability to defend.
But teaching attack  methods alongside defensive techniques will enable your teams to better  prevent bad things from happening.”  Pete Clay, Principal, Zeneth Tech Partners  Developing  offensive  and defensive  scenarios  Defining roles and  responsibilities  within a team  of competitors   or professionals  “Security is a very broad field ranging from  policies, standards and  compliance to software engineering and application security.
We are  now focused on defining and communicating the variety of security  roles and how and where they fit into our corporate environment.
There isn’t a single path into security: there are different skills and  techniques and tools to advance a career down a desired path.”   Jenn Henley, Director of Security, Facebook  “It’s important to understand what is age-appropriate, train the educators,  and give them the tools to teach.
A good analogy for teaching  cybersecurity is teaching health; we teach children about hygiene, bacteria  and germs first and then move on to more advanced topics in the higher  grades.
They need to understand the risk to their personal health and the  risk to their cyber health.”  Dan Manson, CPP/Co-chair NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup  Training the  trainers to  enhance  educator skills  28  Raising awareness  among students,  educators, mentors  and parents on the  career opportunities  for cyber  professionals  “Kids don’t say ‘I want to work in the medical profession when I   grow up.’ They say ‘I want to be a doctor, a nurse, a sonogram  technician, an EMT.’ They pursue specific roles that they have seen  and understand what is involved, that they know who is helped by  that person or that role.
In the cyber arena today, there is almost   no visibility at this level.”   Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator, Applied Visions, Inc.,  a division of Secure Decisions  “In 1971, there were 700 women and 78,000 men playing high  school soccer.
For cyber, we want to create a showcase that holds up  these mental athletes in as much esteem as physical athletes are  held up.
More jobs, careers and economic impact will come from  this arena than from physical sports, and have(ing) competitive  cyber leagues will bring that level of attention, excitement,  support and awareness that the field deserves.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair , California State  Polytechnic University  Establishing leagues  and divisions to  support a  competitive ladder  for varying ages  and skill levels  Developing  Cyber as a Sport  “Cyber is more than IT.
Cyber games train us to know what we’re  looking for, as well as how best to respond.
They develop leadership,  communication and teamwork skills in a group of people that typically  are more introverted.
By developing cyber teams that compete in games  like sports teams do, we can establish a code of ethics and a non-military  approach centered on collaboration and strategy that will create the  workforce we need for the future.”   Jessica Gulick, CEO, Katzcy Consulting   Both a great need and a great opportunity exist for all stakeholders in the cyber  competitions community to come together to better define the end-goal.
Whatever the  differences of opinions and priorities, there are significant synergies across all participants;  and these synergies can deliver accelerated results through collaboration, coordination and  standardization, while acknowledging that creativity and agility must be given a wide berth.
29  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 1:  Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders  In the course of over 25 interviews, interviewers described their involvement with and the  operation of many competitions at the secondary school, collegiate and professional level.
A comprehensive inventory of most competitions is included in a separate appendix; this  appendix describes several of the competitions and competition platforms mentioned by  the stakeholders.
CyberPatriot for middle school and high school students CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Education Program.
There are three main  programs within CyberPatriot: the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition, AFA  CyberCamps and the Elementary School Cyber Education Initiative.
At the center of  CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition.
The competition puts teams  of high school and middle school students in the position of newly hired IT professionals  tasked with managing the network of a small company.
In the rounds of competition,  teams are given a set of virtual images that represent operating systems and are tasked  with finding cybersecurity vulnerabilities within the images and hardening the system while  maintaining critical services.
National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) for college students NCCDC’s ask competitions ask student teams to assume administrative and protective  duties for an existing “commercial” network — typically a small company with 50+ users,  7 to 10 servers, and common Internet services such as a web server, mail server, and  e-commerce site.
Each team begins the competition with an identical set of hardware and  software and is scored on their ability to detect and respond to outside threats, maintain  availability of existing services such as mail servers and web servers, respond to business  requests such as the addition or removal of additional services, and balance security needs  against business needs.
Throughout the competition, an automated scoring engine is used  to verify the functionality and availability of each team’s services on a periodic basis; and  traffic generators continuously feed simulated user traffic into the competition network.
30  Day-Con X for professionals Day-Con is an annual conference dedicated to security training, competitions and  information exchange.
Started in 2007, the group hosts an annual event in Dayton, Ohio  and facilitates PacketwarsTM battles, which are described as “Formula One Racing meets  World Cup with a dash of Professional Wrestling thrown in for good measure.” Public and  private battles provide combatants the opportunity to train and be assessed in a fast-paced  and “safe” environment.
Attendees include computer security professionals, journalists,  lawyers, federal government employees, security researchers, students and hackers  with a general interest in software, computer architecture, phone phreaking, hardware  modifications, and anything else that can be “hacked.”  The event includes speaker tracks  as well as social war games and other contents.
Black Hat for professionals Black Hat is the most technical and relevant global information security event series in  the world.
For more than 18 years, Black Hat has provided attendees with the very latest  in information security research, development, and trends in a strictly vendor-neutral  environment.
These high-profile global events and Trainings are driven by the needs of  the security community, striving to bring together the best minds in the industry.
From its inception in 1997, Black Hat has grown from a single annual conference in Las  Vegas to the most respected information security event series internationally.
Today, the  Black Hat Briefings and Trainings are held annually in the United States, Europe and Asia,  providing a premier venue for elite security researchers and trainers to find their audience.
CyberQuest an online competition qualifier for US Cyber Challenge CyberQuests are a series of fun but challenging on-line competitions allowing participants  to demonstrate their knowledge in a variety of information security realms.
The quests have varying levels of difficulty  and complexity, with some quests geared toward beginners, while others include more  intermediate and ultimately advanced material.
US Cyber Challenge for professionals The mission of U.S. Cyber Challenge (USCC) is to significantly reduce the shortage in  today’s cyber workforce by serving as the premier program to identify, attract, recruit and  place the next generation of cybersecurity professionals.
USCC’s goal is to find 10,000 of  America’s best and brightest to fill the ranks of cybersecurity professionals where their skills  can be of the greatest value to the nation.
31  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceNational Cyber League (NCL) for college students  The NCL was founded in May 2011 to provide an ongoing virtual training ground for  collegiate students to develop, practice, and validate their cybersecurity skills using next- generation high-fidelity simulation environments.
This allows players to use the Gym environment to develop  knowledge and skills and then demonstrate these newly acquired skills in competitive  individual and team play.
It also allows the NCL to measure player’s game performance and  produce individualized reports (NCL Scouting Report) on strengths and weakness among  various learning objectives and industry-recognized competencies.
Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) for the military academies The Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) is an annual competition designed to sharpen the skills  of our nation’s next generation of cyber warriors.
The prestigious event, held each spring,  tests the ability of students representing U.S. and Canadian military service academies to  build, secure, and defend networks from cyber attacks mounted by IA experts.
FireEye’s FLARE for students and professionals Now in its third year, this online challenge has achieved international success.
This six-week  challenge presents individual competitors with a series of reverse engineering challenges  and puzzles targeting engineers, malware analysts and security professionals.
Cyber 9/12 Challenge for high school students Now entering its fourth year, the Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge is a one-of-a-kind  competition designed to provide students across academic disciplines with a deeper  understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis and conflict.
Part  interactive learning experience and part competitive scenario exercise, it challenges  teams to respond to a realistic, evolving cyberattack and analyze the threat it poses to  national, international, and private sector interests.
Students have a unique opportunity to  interact with expert mentors and high-level cyber professionals while developing valuable  skills in policy analysis and presentation.
CSAW for college students Cybersecurity Awareness Week (CSAW) is the largest student-run cybersecurity event in  the nation, featuring six competitions, an industry conference, workshops and an industry  fair.
Today, CSAW is preparing the nation’s  brightest students to shape the future of the industry.
Every year, it brings undergrad and  graduate students together with academic and professional experts to discuss the tools and  techniques used by attackers and defenders throughout the field, while students of every  academic level (from high school to doctoral) compete in a range of challenges designed to  motivate, educate and showcase industry talent.
32  SANS NetWars for professionals SANS NetWars is a suite of hands-on, interactive learning scenarios that enable information  security professionals to develop and master the real-world, in-depth skills they need to  excel in their field.
With NetWars, we have really raised  the ante, as participants learn in a cyber range while working through various challenge  levels, all hands-on, with a focus on mastering the skills information security professionals  can use in their jobs every day.
Secure Decision’s Comic-BEE for students Comic-BEE (Comic-Based Education and Evaluation) is a cyber security education  technology suitable for all ages and expertise levels, developed with funding from the  Department of Homeland Security (DHS) S&T, Cyber Security Division.
GE’s GhostRed for students GhostRed is a hands on technology platform for high school and college students to learn  cybersecurity.
It contains many module and challenges that cover the breadth of topics  required to understand the subject matter, from programming, digital forensics, networking  many modules and system administration.
Facebook’s CTF Open Source platform for students Facebook began hosting college-level CTF competitions in 2013, and increasingly focused  on helping younger kids discover computer science and security.
Their CTF platform has  been used at dozens of events with organizations all over the world, from the Girl Scouts of  America to the University of Cambridge and high schools in Spain.
Due to the high cost and  technical requirements of building and running CTF environments, few publicly available  resources exist for schools, students, and non-profit organizations to use.
Additionally,  finding any security education resources at the middle and high school level is still a  challenge.
As a result, Facebook built a free platform for everyone to use that takes care  of the backend requirements of running a CTF, including the game map, team registration,  and scoring.
33  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 2:  Cyber Competitions List  16+ Middle School High School 18+ Collegiate  Competition Name  Level  Location  URL  Cyber Security Challenge UK  16+  United Kingdom  https://cybersecuritychallenge.
org.uk/index.php  Cyber Security Awarenes Week (CSAW)  Qualifications & Finals  High School and  Collegiate  US  https://csaw.engineering.nyu.
edu  At Large Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate Penetration Testing  Competition  Collegiate  Alaska, Hawaii  http://www.virtualccdc.com/  Collegiate  US  http://cptc.csec.rit.edu  Digital Forensics Cyber Quest   Collegiate  National  http://digitalforensics.
securitytreasurehunt.com/  Information Security Talent Search  Collegiate  United States  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Iowa State University Cyber Defense  Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Iowa  https://cdc.iseage.org  Mid-Atlantic Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Midwest Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Pennsylvania,  New Jersey,  West Virginia,  Maryland,  Delaware, Virginia  Iowa, Missouri,  Ohio, Michigan,  Indiana,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota, Illinois  http://maccdc.org  http://www.cssia.org/ccdc/  National Collegiate Cyber Defense  Ccmpetition (NCCDC)  Collegiate  United States  http://www.nationalccdc.org  National Cyber League  Collegiate  United States  http://www.
nationalcyberleague.org/  34  Competition Name  Level  Location  URL  North Central Regional Collegiate  Cyber Defense Competition  Collegiate  Northeast Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Montana, North  Dakota, South  Dakota, Wyoming  Maine, Vermont,  New Hampshire,  New York,  Massachusetts,  Rhode Island,  Connecticut  http://dakotacon.org  http://dakotacon.org/#ccdc  http://neccdc.net/wordpress/  Pacific Rim Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Washington,  Oregon, Idaho  https://www.prccdc.org  Packet Capture Analysis Cyber Quest   Collegiate  National  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Panoply  Collegiate  Global  http://www.Cyberpanoply.com  Rocky Mountain Regional Collegiate  Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Utah, Colorado,  Nebraska, Kansas  http://academic.regis.edu/ cias/rmccdc/  Southeast Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Southwest Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Western Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Alabama,  Florida, Georgia,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  Tennessee, South  Carolina, and  North Carolina  Oklahoma,  Arkansas,  Louisiana, New  Mexico, Texas  Arizona,  California,  Nevada  http://www.seccdc.org/  http://southwestccdc.org  http://www.wrccdc.org/  CyberPatriot  High School and   Middle School  United States  http://www.uscyberpatriot.org  ASIS Capture the Flag   Over 18  Global  https://asis-ctf.ir/home/  35  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCompetition Name  Level  Location  URL  Black T-Shirt Cyber Forensics  Challenge  Over 18  National  BSides Colombia Capture the Flag  Over 18  Codegate  CyberLympics  Over 18  Over 18  DEFCON: Backdoor Hiding Contests  Over 18  DEFCON: Crack Me If You Can  DerbyCon Capture the Flag  Over 18  Over 18  Global  Korea  Global  Nevada  Nevada  Global  https:// cyberforensicschallenge.com  Not provided  http://www.codegate.org/  http://www.cyberlympics.org  http://www.defcon.org/  http://www.defcon.org/  https://www.derbycon.com  Digital Forensics Security Treasure  Hunt  Over 18  Global  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Facebook Capture The Flag 2016  Over 18  Global  Ghost in the Shell Code  Over 18  Global  Maryland Cyber Challenge &  Conference (MDC3)  Over 18  Maryland  http://gsec.hitb.org/sg2016/ facebook-capture-the-flag/  http://ghostintheshellcode.
com  http://www.sans.org/cyber- ranges/netwars  http://packetwars.com/  http://www.shmoocon.org/ hack_fortress  http://smashthestack.org  http://ictf.cs.ucsb.edu/  Global  Global  Global  Global  NetRiders  NetWars  PacketWars  SchmooCon Hack Fortress  Over 18  Global  Over 18  Over 18  Smash the Stack Wargaming Network  Over 18  UCSB International Capture the Flag  Over 18  List of Cyber Competitions (Provided by Dan Manson)  36  Appendix 3:  Contributors  The views expressed by these contributors do not necessarily reflect the views of their  organizations.
Laurin Buchanan CISSP, Principal Investigator Applied Visions, Inc., a division of Secure Decisions   A Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) with  over 25 years’ experience in Information Technology, Ms. Buchanan  has experience both as an information security practitioner and a  cyber security researcher.
She has a strong technical background in  infrastructure, networks and systems, having managed corporate IT  operations and security operations, as well as developing information  security programs and awareness training at all levels.
Ms. Buchanan  currently is Principle Investigator for cybersecurity software R&D projects  to develop novel techniques for cybersecurity education, cyber security  visualizations, and to automatically model and map dependencies  between missions, users, and the cyber assets they depend on.
Laurin cut her teeth defending a corporate network from international  hacktivists in 2000, and brought inline Intrusion Prevention Systems onto  that network a year later.
She has a strong technical background in infrastructure, networks and  systems, having performed and managed IT operations, as well as  security operations and architecture.
She has developed and delivered  security awareness training at all levels.
She has created and managed  corporate information security programs from the ground up.
Coming  into IT from business, she understands business needs and compliance  concerns and can communicate these to management.
Laurin leads research efforts to develop ways to improve the  performance of people who are defending our networks and  information, through better education, more usable systems, and  leveraging automation wherever possible.
37  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceChris Camacho Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer Ninjajobs    Chris is responsible of the leadership and direction of NinjaJobs.
He  has over 15 years of technical leadership in cybersecurity and has led  initiatives across multiple areas including Incident Response, Forensic  Investigations, Security Operations Centers, and Operational Strategy, to  ensure Global Financials cyber risk posture are aligned with the business.
Chris is an active member of the FS-ISAC Threat Intelligence Committee  and serves on multiple cybersecurity and innovation boards.
Mike Cameron Director of Business Development Leidos    Mike is the Director of Business Development for Leidos Cyber  Operations/AIMO and leads the market strategy and business  development for cyber solutions and services across Intelligence,  Defense, Civil, and International markets.
He is experienced in forming  regional marketing and sales agreements with international partners.
Mike currently serves as an industry advisor to a NATO working group  on Cybersecurity and is a frequent public speaker on the subject of  cyber workforce development.
His last assignment was the  Technical Operations Manager for Network Security at the Pentagon and  he’s been featured in FCW, CNN, BBC, ABC, Washington Times, and  many others.
In 2014 he was  awarded ‘Industry IT Executive of the Year’ by GCN, and in 2015 was  inducted into the Wash 100 by Executive Mosaic as one of the most  influential Industry Executives impacting Government.
He has a BSc in  Computer Networking, is the former President of ISSA-DC, and an ICIT  Fellow.
Peter Clay Principal  Zeneth Tech Partners   With over 20 years of experience in Cybersecurity, Peter Clay is a veteran  CISO, a visionary practitioner and respected business leader skilled at  building highly effective cybersecurity initiatives on a global scale.
With  notable expertise in making complex security concepts accessible and  actionable, Peter embraces innovation, encouraging his teams to think  out of the box to achieve risk management objectives.
As a Principal at  Zeneth Tech Partners, Peter is focused on scaling information security to  meet the needs of the other 99% of organizations’ information security  requirements.
Peter is a frequent keynote speaker at industry events  and meetings of corporate executive boards and trade associations.
Peter holds a certification in Information System Security  (CISSP).
An Oxford University-educated historian, Peter brings a unique  perspective to cybersecurity, with his passion for American and British  history informing his studies of modern cyber warfare.
39  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceKaren Evans Partner KE&T Partners, LLC CyberCompEx.org    Currently serving as an independent director and outside manager for  publicly traded companies.
Karen oversaw the development of over  $70B spent by the federal government in Information Technology  and associated services and advised the Director of the Office of  Management and Budget on the performance of these investments and  the federal enterprise architecture promoting inter and intra-agency  cooperation for key Presidential initiatives and cross government  solutions.
Accomplishments included Homeland Security Presidential  Directive 12 regarding authentication; IPv6, Information Sharing  Initiatives, Cyber Security, privacy to address the interests of the citizens  and government to improve government services through the use  of technology and leveraging the federal government buying power  and requirements with the establishment of the SmartBUY program.
Transparency and accountability were demonstrated with the publication  of the Management Watch List and High Risk List, the E-Gov Benefits  Report to Congress, FISMA reporting and increased focus on cyber  security with the creation of the Federal Desktop Core Configuration.
40  Bryan Fite Global Account CISO British Telecom    A committed security practitioner and entrepreneur, Bryan is currently  a Global Account CISO with BT Security.
Having  spent over 25 years in mission-critical environments, Bryan is uniquely  qualified to advise organizations on what works and what doesn’t.
Bryan  has worked with organizations in every major vertical throughout the  world and has established himself as a trusted advisor.
“The challenges  facing organizations today require a business reasonable approach  to managing risk, trust and limited resources, while protecting what  matters.”  Professional Highlights: • Host of Day-Con the annual “Non-Con” Dayton Security Summit • Founded MeshcoTM Producers of PacketWarsTM • Introduced ForensixTM computer forensics collection, analysis and   visualization suite   • Released AFIRM: Active Forensic Intelligent Response Method to the   general public  • Founded GETSecureTM a full service security practice; products,   professional services, managed services and training.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  41  Jessica Gulick  CEO and Founder  Katzcy Consulting    Jessica Gulick is founder and CEO of Katzcy Consulting, a woman- owned growth strategy and marketing firm specializing in cybersecurity  start-ups and SMBs.
A CISSP and PMP, Jessica is a 20-year veteran in  the cybersecurity industry with proven experience in strategy, cyber  policy, business metrics, global marketing and security program  management.
She has successfully launched multiple award-winning  global cyber marketing campaigns for services, products and cyber  competitions.
Her portfolio of work also includes the authorship of  NIST Special Publications, strategic cybersecurity plans for federal  government agencies and white papers for private companies,  cybersecurity consulting and engineering projects for national security  and financial clients, and a public-private initiative launching the first  Maryland Cyber Challenge and Conference.
In addition to being a  Mach37 mentor, she is president of the Virginia Tech MBA alumni board,  vice president of the Society of Women Cyberjutsu national board, and  co-chair of the NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup.
Katie Hanson Director  Sherman Consulting      Sherman Consulting was founded in 1997 when professionals from  various industries of organizational development, PR, government and  public affairs came together to create a synergy of talents to offer clients  strategic and innovative solutions.
As a Director at Sherman Consulting, I offer an entrepreneurial spirit  to Sherman Consulting’s environment offering innovative solutions for  clients in the fields of communications, marketing, public relations,  government relations and business strategy, where I oversee various  aspects of both strategy and implementation processes.
Currently, my focus at Sherman resides in the cybersecurity industry as  we facilitate the strategy and advancement of workforce development  programs and information sharing that builds the cybersecurity  community.
We specifically work with organizations and programs  including US Cyber Challenge, the Center for Internet Security, the  Council on CyberSecurity and CyberCompEx.
42  Jenn Henley Director of Security Facebook    Jennifer (Jenn) Henley is a Director of Security at Facebook.
In her role,  Jenn is responsible for leadership and planning across the Security  organization.
On a day to day basis she manages growth & strategic  initiatives for the organization and also the team’s cross functional  relationships with other departments and teams across Facebook.
She has over 15 years industry experience, holds her PMP  certification and is a graduate of St. Mary’s College of California where  she received a B.A.
George Heron Executive Vice President, Education and Mentorship Lifejourney    George Heron is the executive vice president for Education and  Mentorship at LifeJourney, an online learning platform that enables  students to live a day in the life of America’s STEM and Cyber leaders.
He has a passion for inspiring students to follow paths in STEM  education and explore technology careers, and he is active in youth  training events, cyber competitions and education-based technology  initiatives across the country.
43  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceLisa Jiggetts Founder & CEO Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu    Lisa Foreman-Jiggetts is the founder and CEO of the Women’s Society  of Cyberjutsu (WSC); one of the fastest growing nonprofits dedicated to  women in cybersecurity.
WSC provides women with the resources and  support required to enter and advance as a cybersecurity professional.
Her organization uses a holistic approach to develop programs that  train women in both the hard technical skills and soft skills, leaving  them feeling empowered to succeed.
A service-disabled veteran, she began her cyber career  in the military where she excelled as an IT security specialist.
44  Peder J. Jungck Vice President, Chief Technology Officer BAE Systems, Intelligence & Security    Peder is Vice President and Chief Technology Officer of BAE Systems  Intelligence & Security (I&S) sector.
BAE Systems Intelligence & Security  enables the U.S. government to transform data into intelligence and  provides engineering, integration and sustainment support for critical  military platforms and systems.
Peder joined BAE Systems in April 2013 after serving in several key  technology leadership positions for Science Applications International  Corporation (now Leidos), most recently as the Senior Vice President  and Chief Technology Officer of the Cyber Security Group within the  National Security Sector.
He joined SAIC via the acquisition of the Silicon Valley based  CloudShield Technologies, Inc. which he founded in 2000 delivering  trusted platforms for cyber security to the defense, intelligence and  commercial telecommunications provider communities.
Previous roles  include leading large scale IT deployments in the retail sector while  working for AT&T/NCR, as well as a breadth of IT and Software, CTO  and CIO roles for private, public and venture backed corporations.
He has earned 24 patents, published many peer-reviewed papers, a  regular conference speaker and co-author of the packetC language  for cyber and software defined networking.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  45  Joseph Krull Security Principal Director Accenture -    Joe provides high-impact professional services to Fortune 500/Global  1000 companies and emerging technology companies.
He is an author  and frequent public speaker on security and privacy subjects including  application security, mobile device security, secure e-commerce, identity  fraud prevention, wireless threats and the maturing science of Network  Intrusion Prevention.
He is a Certified Protection Professional (CPP),  Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP), National  Security Agency IAM Certified, Certified Information Systems Auditor  (CISA), Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control (CRISC) and  Certified Information Privacy Professional (CIPP).
Joe is an Advisory  Board member of the  National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition  (NCCDC) and a member of the Texas Chief Information Security Officer  (CISO) Council.
Marcelle Lee Adjunct Professor Anne Arundel Community College,  University of Maryland    Marcelle Lee is a malware analyst, an adjunct professor at Anne Arundel  Community College and University of Maryland, and co-founder of  Fractal Security Group, LLC.
She is involved with several industry  organizations, working groups, and boards, including the Women’s  Society of Cyberjutsu and the ISSA Women in Security Special Interest  Group.
Marcelle has earned the CSX-P, GCFA, GCIA, GCIH, GPEN, GISF, GCCC,   C|EH, CCNA, Security+, Network+, and ACE industry certifications.
She  holds several degrees and is currently pursuing a Master’s degree in  cybersecurity at UMBC.
She is a cybersecurity competition enthusiast  and an active volunteer in outreach to students and the community.
46  William Leigher Government Cyber Solutions Director Raytheon    Bill is a career U.S. Navy officer with thirty-three years’ experience in  operations and staff experience in Signals Intelligence, Information  Operations, Communications and Network Operations.
He has  extensive and hands-on experience operating and securing enterprise  networks on a worldwide scale.
Developed and implemented  methodologies for predictive analysis of network intrusion events.
Dr. Daniel Manson Professor and Department Chair  California State Polytechnic University    Dr. Dan Manson, CISSP, is a Professor and Department Chair in  Computer Information Systems at California State Polytechnic  University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona).
Dr. Manson has taught  Information Systems Auditing, Internet Security and Computer  Forensics in the College of Business Administration Computer  Information Systems undergraduate and Master of Science in  Information Systems Auditing programs.
From September 2003 to  March 2004 and January to December 2006, Dr. Manson served as the  campus Information Security Officer for Cal Poly Pomona.
Dr. Manson led the effort for Cal Poly Pomona to be designated a  National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance  Education in 2005 and again in 2008.
Dr. Manson is in charge of the  Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition and California  Cyber Challenge as part of the United States Cyber Challenge.
Dan has been co-Principal Investigator on three National Science  Foundation grants to support workforce, curriculum and professional  development in cyber security, including the current CyberWatch West  NSF ATE Regional Center grant.
Dan serves on the Academic Relations  Committee for the Los Angeles Chapter of the Information Systems  Audit and Control Association and is a past president of the Southern  California High Technology Crime Investigation Association.
47  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceJim Michaud Director, CyberTalent Solutions The SANS Institute    Jim Michaud is the Director of CyberTalent Solutions for the SANS  Institute, which helps clients find, develop, and retain qualified  cybersecurity professionals.
48  Diane Miller Director, InfoSec Operations and Cyber Initiatives Northrop Grumman Corporation    Diane Miller is the director of InfoSec Operations and Identity  Management for Northrop Grumman Corporation, and is Northrop  Grumman director of Global Cyber Education and Workforce  Development Programs.
In her role as director, Infosec Operations  and Identity Management, Ms. Miller ensures effective operational  leadership of the Information Security function for Northrop Grumman’s  Global Network and leads all aspects of both assured identity and  identity provisioning for the company.
In her role as director for Global  Cyber Education and Workforce Development Programs, Ms. Miller  is the focal point for the corporation’s global cybersecurity education,  outreach and workforce development efforts, leading its commitment  to cultivate a highly-trained, global cyber workforce of tomorrow.
Ms. Miller is a member of the Advisory Board for the IEEE Software  Technology Conference, a member of the Association of Information  Technology Professionals, and a founding member of the National  Software Council.
For 12 years, she served on the Editorial Board of the  Northrop Grumman Corporation Technology Review Journal.
She is a  member of the President’s Strategy Development Council for California  State Polytechnic University, Pomona, the National Visiting Committee  for the National Science Foundation’s National CyberWatch Center  and CyberWatch West, and a member of the Education and Workforce  Development Working Group at Department of Homeland Security.
Ms. Miller graduated Magna Cum Laude with a bachelor of science  degree in information systems from California State Polytechnic  University, Pomona.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  49  William Newhouse Deputy Director National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Bill Newhouse is the Deputy Director of the National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE), and Senior Security Engineer at that  National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), Both NICE  and the NCCoE are part of the Applied Cybersecuirty Division in the  Information Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST).
As the deputy director of NICE, he leads and promotes efforts within  government and with those involved in cybersecurity competitions  to foster, energize, and promote a robust network and an integrated  ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development that can more effectively secure cyberspace.
At the NCCoE, he is leading the drafting of building blocks that  address broad technology gaps in cybersecurity implementations that  affect multiple sectors.
These projects rely on insight and passion from  members of various industries who share a common goal of meeting  a particular cybersecurity need and will demonstrate commercially  available technologies that provide cybersecurity improvements to the  multiple sectors addressed.
Additionally, Mr. Newhouse promotes cybersecurity R&D efforts as a  co-chair of a Federal cybersecurity interagency working group and as  a regular representative to other federal cybersecurity R&D working  groups.
Before coming to NIST in 2010, Bill spent five years in the Office of  the Secretary of Defense where he worked initially with the Assistant  Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (ASD(R&E)) and  then with the Office of the Chief Information Officer for Identity and  Information Assurance focused on cybersecurity R&D and technology  discovery.
Bill utilized the Defense Venture Catalyst Initiative (DeVenCI)  to focus on innovative companies working in areas that had the potential  to improve cybersecurity.
Bill started his Federal career at NSA evolving  from telecommunications to information assurance to cybersecurity.
Mr. Newhouse is a graduate of both the Georgia Institute of Technology  and George Washington University and has been with the federal  government for over 29 years.
50  Rodney Petersen Director National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Rodney Petersen is the director of the National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST).
He previously served as the Managing Director  of the EDUCAUSE Washington Office and a Senior Government  Relations Officer.
He founded and directed the EDUCAUSE  Cybersecurity Initiative and was the lead staff liaison for the Higher  Education Information Security Council.
Prior to joining EDUCAUSE,  he worked at two different times for the University of Maryland - first  as Campus Compliance Officer in the Office of the President and  later as the Director of IT Policy and Planning in the Office of the Vice  President and Chief Information Officer.
He is the co- editor of a book entitled “Computer and Network Security in Higher  Education”.
51  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDavina Pruitt-Mentle Academic Lead National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Dr. Davina Pruitt-Mentle serves as Lead for Academic Engagement of  the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Prior to joining NICE, she  was a senior researcher and policy analyst for Educational Technology  Policy, Research and Outreach (ETPRO) and served as the Co-PI for the  National Science Foundation (NSF) supported National Cyberwatch  Center (NCC).
Previous to NCC leadership, she served as faculty within  the College of Education at the University of Maryland, College Park,  and served as Director of Educational Technology Outreach within the  College of Education at UMCP from 2001-2008.
She has spent the past  20 years conducting research on student and educator cyberawareness,  and developing programs to help increase the cybersecurity workforce  pipeline.
She received her Ph.D. in Educational Technology Policy from  the University of Maryland, her M.Ed from Lynchburg College, and her  B.S.
52  Nasrin Rezai Global Chief Information Security Officer  GE Capital & GE Digital Security Governance, Tech Risk and M&A    Nasrin Rezai is GE Capital’s Global Chief Information Security Officer  and head of Corporate Governance, Technology Risk and M&A security,  for the industrial GE businesses.
In this role she is responsible for all  aspects of cyber security management including incident response,  threat intelligence, security management, operation, compliance.
Prior to joining GE, Nasrin was SVP Chief Technology Risk Officer in the  Enterprise Risk Management Organization at State Street.
In this role,  she oversaw the creation of a technology risk management function to  ensure effective, independent technology risk management governance,  improved risk-based management decision processes and framework  and automated processes and reporting.
Nasrin’s other senior roles also included chief Technology Officer of  Security for Cisco Sales and architecture function.
In that role, she  promoted thought leadership in security architecture and technology  for Cisco’s customers.
She also led go to market strategies to embed  security in cross architecture selling models.
Other roles at Cisco also  included responsibility for Cisco’s global security vision, strategy, and  architecture to protect the company’s information and computing  assets.
In that capacity, she integrated leading-edge technologies and  solutions  —  including borderless networking, “BYOD,” virtualization  and cloud computing  —  into the company’s security architecture.
With  responsibility for the security architectures of Cisco’s diverse businesses  such as WebEx, Nasrin oversaw the development and management  of the company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) security model.
Throughout her career, Nasrin has promoted engineering, architecture  in designing security solutions for large enterprises.
She is passionate  about helping others develop their potential, and mentors many young  men and women.
She holds a master’s degree in business administration  and a bachelor’s degree in information systems.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  53  Monica Ricci Executive Producer, Content and Messaging Katzcy Consulting, LLC     Throughout her career, Monica’s method is to directly engage with  customers and market experts to realize her mission: bringing insights  and market awareness into an organization’s strategy, roadmap and  execution.
She excels at bridging the expanse between technical teams  and business leaders, positioning technology both to optimize business  processes and to deliver intelligence, as well as translating business  goals and objectives into technical requirements.
Monica worked for  over twenty years in the telecommunications industry, as a cellular radio  engineer, an operations business analyst, a product manager and a  director of marketing strategy.
was named National  Commissioner of CyberPatriot, the Air Force Association’s National  Youth Cyber Education Program, in 2010.
Skoch graduated from the  University of Arkansas in 1974 with a bachelor’s degree in industrial  engineering.
Skoch has more than 20 years of experience in leadership positions  developing, managing and implementing communications and  information systems for the United States Air Force as well as the  Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA).
During his time at DISA  he served as the Principal Director for Customer Advocacy and also  as the Principal Director for Network Services.
Within the USAF he  served as Director of Mission Systems, Director of Communications  Operations, and Director of Chief Information Officer Support where  he was responsible for aligning information technology systems with  business process improvements.
He has developed policies for global  telephone, video, radio, voice, data and satellite systems.
Before  joining CyberPatriot, Skoch was a consultant in the cyber and IT industry.
As Commissioner, Skoch oversees the planning and implementation  of CyberPatriot and provides leadership and support for the program’s  development.
In this role, Skoch is able to further student interest in  science, technology, engineering and mathematics related studies, as  well as increase their awareness of cybersecurity threats.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  55  Bobbie Stempfley Director Cyber Strategy Implementation The MITRE Corporation    Roberta “Bobbie” Stempfley is currently director of cybersecurity  implementation at The MITRE Corporation.
She is responsible for  advancing MITRE’s cyber strategy, shaping the company’s cyber  work program, executing the cyber business strategy, and raising  awareness across the customer base.
Most recently, Ms. Stempfley  served in key leadership roles in the Department of Homeland Security,  including deputy assistant secretary and acting assistant secretary for  cybersecurity and communications.
Previously, Ms. Stempfley was  the chief information officer at DISA.
Dr. Adam Tagert Technical Director  NSA Science of Security Program    Adam Tagert is the Science of Security (SoS) Technical lead in National  Security Agency Research Directorate.
He works in all aspects of SoS  particularly in the promotion of collaboration and use of foundational  cybersecurity research.
He promotes rigorous research methods by  leading the Annual Best Scientific Cybersecurity Paper Competition  and supports the SoS community as a frequent poster on the SoS  Virtual Organization Site.
Dr. Tagert received his Ph.D. from Carnegie  Mellon University in Engineering and Public Policy where he researched  national cybersecurity strategies of small developing nations, particularly  Rwanda.
56  Greg Touhill Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity and Communications DHS    Greg Touhill is one of the nation’s premier cybersecurity and information  technology senior executives.
In September  2016, he was named as the first ever federal chief information security  officer, reporting to Tony Scott (federal CIO) and responsible for  bolstering the government’s digital defenses.
57  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDan Waddell Regional Managing Director, North America Region  (ISC)2, Inc.    Dan Waddell is responsible for managing (ISC)2 operations in the North  America Region, which primarily focuses on supporting our U.S. and  Canadian members, customers and strategic partners with over 20 years  of experience in information technology, information assurance, and  cybersecurity.
Dan has served in various management and leadership  roles with (ISC)2 for over 15 years.
He has been a featured guest speaker  on cybersecurity issues on both TV and radio shows such as “NBC  News4 Midday,” “Government Matters” and “Federal News Radio,”  in addition to several cybersecurity conferences across the United  States.
He is currently a Fellow at the Institute of Critical Infrastructure  Technology (ICIT), a non-partisan think-tank based in Washington, D.C.  that acts as a conduit between the legislative community, technology  providers and federal agencies.
During his consulting career, Dan’s clients included the Department of  Transportation, Department of Defense, Department of State, Internal  Revenue Service, Social Security Administration, Department of Health  and Human Services and the Department of Homeland Security.
Services provided included CISO/CSO advisory services, information  security program management, secure cloud computing, security  authorization, privacy, data loss prevention, information assurance,  regulatory compliance, threat and vulnerability assessments, incident  response, disaster recovery/business continuity, risk management and  security engineering.
58  Dr. Gregory White Director, Center for Infrastructure Assurance and Security (CIAS) UT San Antonio  Dr. Gregory White has been involved in computer and network security  since 1986.
He obtained his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Texas A&M University  in 1995 conducting research in the area of computer network intrusion  detection and he continues to conduct research in this area today.
He  currently serves as the Director of the Center for Infrastructure Assurance  and Security (CIAS) and is an Associate Professor of Computer Science  at The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA).
Dr. White has been involved in security instruction for many years.
He taught at the U.S. Air Force Academy for seven years where he  developed and taught courses on Computer Security and Information  Warfare.
He helped build the nation’s first undergraduate information  warfare laboratory while at the Academy and twice received the  Academy’s Computer Science Research Excellence Award.
At UTSA  Dr. White continues to develop and teach courses on computer and  network security.
He has also been very active in the development and  presentation of cyber security exercises for states and communities  around the nation and with the development of training designed to  help states and communities develop viable and sustainable cyber  security programs.
He very active in development of cyber security  competitions and was instrumental in the development of NCCDC and  CyberPatriot.
Dr. White has written numerous articles and conference papers on  computer security.
He is also the co-author for five textbooks on security  and has written chapters for two others.
His current research interests  include an examination of organizational issues affecting computer  security, high-speed intrusion detection, infrastructure protection,  community cyber incident response, and the development of the  Community Cyber Security Maturity Model (CCSMM).
59  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce© Copyright 2016 Katzcy Consulting.
CYBERSECURITY   WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT   TOOLKIT  How to Build a Strong Cybersecurity Workforce      Updated November 2016   WHAT IS CYBERSECURITY?
Cybersecurity refers to the technologies and techniques used to protect information and  systems from being stolen, compromised or attacked.
This includes unauthorized or criminal  use of electronic data, attacks on networks and computers, and viruses and malicious  codes.
Cybersecurity is a national priority and critical to the well-being of all organizations.
Start building your cybersecurity workforce today.
Together, we can build a skilled and cyber-  capable workforce to meet the cybersecurity challenges of the future.
ABOUT PLANNING YOUR CYBERSECURITY  WORKFORCE      Cybersecurity professionals have unique skills, are in short supply, and are vital to our  nation’s security.
This requires organizations to tailor how they plan for their cybersecurity  workforce so they have the right people in the right positions.
The Department of Homeland  Security (DHS) is committed to strengthening the workforce to help ensure we have skilled  cybersecurity workers today and a strong pipeline of future cybersecurity leaders.
This kit will help you strengthen your organization through tools to help you understand your  organization’s cybersecurity workforce risks and take inventory of your workforce, templates  to create your own cybersecurity career paths, and resources to recruit and retain top  cybersecurity talent.
Before getting started, familiarize yourself with key cybersecurity  workforce design concepts and best practices:   Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Diagnostic     Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model    Best Practices for Planning a Cybersecurity  Workforce     National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework    DHS CMSI PushButtonPDTM Tool    Cybersecurity Training Catalog        HOW TO USE THE TOOLKIT      This kit has the resources and information you need to plan, build, and advance your  cybersecurity workforce.
How you use this toolkit is up to you: use the kit to start  conversations with managers about building their cybersecurity teams, talk with employees  about professional development, and/or integrate the concepts found in this toolkit into  strategic planning efforts for future staffing needs.
This kit is meant for Leaders and  Program/Function Managers in large government and private organizations, including  Human Resources, Information Security, Risk Management, Information Technology and  Cybersecurity.
For more information email niccs@hq.dhs.gov.
This kit has a number of tools to help you build your cybersecurity workforce.
Adapt the content for your  organization’s specific cybersecurity needs.
Assess Your Organization’s Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Readiness  I need to determine how ready my organization is to conduct cybersecurity workforce  planning.
How to Plan for your Cybersecurity Team  I need to determine my cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance.
I need help inventorying my cybersecurity workforce.
I need to determine and address my cybersecurity workforce gaps.
What Should a Cybersecurity Team Look Like?
I need a better understanding of the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework.
I need to create a cybersecurity position description.
I need help identifying traits of high-performing cyber professionals.
I need guidance for how to recruit cyber talent.
Develop Your People  I need help creating cybersecurity career paths.
I need tips for retaining cyber staff at every level.
I need suggestions for professional development opportunities for my cyber workforce.
2   P  R  E  P  A  R  E   ASSESS YOUR ORGANIZATION’S  CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE PLANNING  READINESS     A first step in preparing to build your cybersecurity workforce is having a shared vision for  organizing your cybersecurity workforce against cybersecurity work.
Having a common  understanding supports leaders in responding to changing environments – giving you data  to better adjust resources, see patterns of work, and highlight areas of potential risk.
This  is especially important in the ever-changing environment of cybersecurity.
To understand your organization’s readiness to begin assessing your cybersecurity  workforce, explore the Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability Maturity Model (CMM).
The CMM is a self-evaluation tool to help organizations evaluate the maturity of their  cybersecurity workforce planning capability.
How Mature is Your Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability?
Each organization is unique.
The CMM helps you identify with one of these levels and  determine where to best apply your organization’s planning resources:   Workforce Planning Maturity Levels     LIMITED   The most basic level, with a  cybersecurity workforce  planning capability in its  infancy.
For example, this  organization may have  limited established  processes, lack of clear  planning guidance, and  limited data and analysis  methods.
PROGRESSING  This level indicates some  aspects of cybersecurity  workforce planning  throughout the organization  that have started to perform  and establish some  infrastructure to support  planning efforts.
OPTIMIZING   The highest level of maturity,  indicates workforce planning  capabilities that are fully  developed, are integrated  with other business  processes, and can support  different levels of workforce  and workload analysis.
3         P  L  A  N   HOW TO PLAN FOR YOUR CYBERSECURITY  TEAM     Your organization must ensure protection against threats to information systems.
Unchecked risk puts any organization in jeopardy.
Security breaches are often caused not  by breakdown in technology, but by breakdown in organizational structure or workforce.
To plan for protection, you need a good understanding of your current cybersecurity  workforce as well as a strategy for the structure and management of that workforce for  the future.
Below are the first five (5) steps to start planning for your cybersecurity team, including  developing an inventory of your current cybersecurity workforce, understanding workload  and staffing levels, and beginning to address any gaps.
Explore Your Cybersecurity Risks: Gain foundational knowledge about your   cybersecurity workforce risk and the extent to which your organization can tolerate  the potential outcomes.
Increased risk places greater demands on your workforce  and drives much of your future cybersecurity workforce needs.
To help identify your general cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance, and tailor  your cybersecurity workforce planning to better predict future need, use the  Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Diagnostic.
Separate sections for government and  private organizations are included.
While the Diagnostic will help identify general  cybersecurity risk exposure and risk tolerance (i.e.
your risk profile), it is not a  substitute for in-depth, organization-specific risk assessment and analysis in  collaboration with leadership, human capital experts and cybersecurity managers.
Inventory Your Cybersecurity Workforce: Work with your cybersecurity managers to   quantify the size of your cybersecurity team, number of vacancies, identify the team’s  skills, and capture the activities they perform.
Government organizations – Access the Office of Personnel Management’s   (OPM) Information Technology Workforce Assessment for Cybersecurity  (ITWAC) Summary Report to see a count of staff performing cybersecurity  work, as well as training needs and workforce demographics (e.g., proficiency  levels, background).
Private organizations – A tool to help inventory your cybersecurity workforce is   forthcoming.
4         P  L  A  N   Use the results as a baseline to understand the current state of your organization’s  cybersecurity workforce.
As you take inventory of your cybersecurity staff skills, also consider the following  recommended characteristics of high-performing cybersecurity teams.
Dynamic: To  respond to new  threats, teams  need to always  learn new skills   and   methodologies   to secure  systems.
Informal: Cyber   teams favor  flexible work  hours and   shifting duties   to remain   engaged and on   top of their   game.
Determine Any Gaps: Evaluate your organization’s risk profile and workforce planning   Characteristics of High-Performing Cybersecurity Teams         recommendations from step 1 (Workforce Planning Diagnostic) against your  workforce inventory in step 2 to begin to determine future needs and close gaps.
List the skills needed to meet your team’s workload and the types/number of   professionals you need to develop internally or recruit externally   ?
Address the Gaps: Below are examples of steps you can take to address the gaps   identified in your organization’s cybersecurity workforce inventory.
Consider adjusting the mix of positions and skills that make up your   cybersecurity workforce   ?
Develop a program to create future cybersecurity leaders  ?
Convene an internal panel of decision makers.
Consider including:   o  Senior leaders  o  Financial and budgetary representatives  o  Human capital experts  o  Cybersecurity managers   ?
Consider aligning the workforce planning process to your organization’s   budgetary process to ensure funding for cybersecurity positions     5.  Review and Update: Once you have completed the first four steps, revisit the CMM in  the Prepare section to determine additional ways to further your planning capability.
5   B U  I  L  D   WHAT SHOULD A CYBERSECURITY TEAM  LOOK LIKE?
What is the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce   The Workforce Framework is the foundation  for all cyber workforce development activities  and was created to increase the size and  capability of the U.S. cybersecurity workforce.
One way to ensure you have the right  cybersecurity team is to align to current  national standards.
The NICE Cybersecurity  Workforce Framework (Workforce  Framework) is the standard for defining  your cybersecurity workforce.
Align position  descriptions, job duties, and skill  requirements to the Workforce Framework  to operate successfully.
For example, you  can use Specialty Area definitions, as well  as Tasks and Knowledge, Skills and Abilities  (KSAs), to develop position descriptions and  establish competency models.
An updated version of the Workforce Framework will be released in 2017 as Special  Publication 800-181 by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
It will  include a new layer of specificity – Work Roles – which will provide lists of KSAs that roles  must have in order to perform a specific set of Tasks.
50+ Work Roles will be organized  under Specialty Areas.
With this addition, organizations will more easily be able to align  positions to the Workforce Framework.
• Organizes cybersecurity work into 7  Categories and 33 Specialty Areas  Identifies the Tasks and Knowledge, Skills,  and Abilities (KSAs) required to complete  cyber work   •  1.
Align your Cybersecurity Workforce to National Standards: Understand how each   position aligns to the Workforce Framework to uncover potential skill gaps.
o  Choose from the Work Roles (found in the Workforce Framework) for each  o  Compare current tasks performed to additional tasks recommended for each   position that performs cybersecurity work          Specialty Area         3.
Use the DHS CMSI PushButtonPDTM Tool to create custom cyber-specific positions for   your organization.
Federal organizations can use the DHS CMSI PushButtonPDTM Tool to quickly draft a  federal employee Position Description (PD) without extensive training or prior      6   knowledge of position classification.
Non-Federal organizations can use the following template to populate the highlighted  fields with information that meets the needs of your organization (you can find  Specialty Areas and Task examples in the Workforce Framework).
Position Title  Primary Specialty Area(s)   Secondary Specialty Area(s)    [Fill in Position Title]  [Fill in Specialty Area(s)]   [Fill in Specialty Area(s)]    Current Tasks Performed (i.e., specific job duties)    Additional Tasks recommended by Specialty Area            What to Look for in High-Performing Cybersecurity Professionals    Another important part of building a cybersecurity team is knowing the unique  characteristics you want to add to your team.
Whether your organization is looking to hire  one cybersecurity professional or build a whole team, understanding what makes a  cybersecurity professional tick is important to attracting - and keeping - the right team.
The table below features many of the traits of top cybersecurity professionals.
Also, think about how you might change your approach to attracting cybersecurity  professionals to better identify individuals with these attributes.
For example, use these questions to interview candidates for your cybersecurity team.
7   B U  I  L  D                    B U  I  L  D        How to Recruit Top Cybersecurity Talent    Use the Cybersecurity Recruitment Activity Checklist to build a cybersecurity workforce  that meets the needs of your organization.
Cybersecurity Recruitment Activity Checklist    Use the checklist to recruit top cybersecurity talent.
Work with hiring managers and workforce planners to determine cybersecurity   recruiting needs    ?
Use the workforce planning tools and cybersecurity traits profiles included in this   toolkit to identify target population characteristics, work preferences, technical  background, and current cybersecurity trends to increase job interest   EVALUATE POTENTIAL SOURCES FOR THE TALENT PIPELINE   ?
Create a comprehensive list of current and potential recruiting alliances that align with   organizational goals and resources (e.g., Centers of Academic Excellence (CAEs)),  colleges, universities, cybersecurity competitions, and Veterans transition programs)  ?
Prioritize where and how to recruit cybersecurity professionals (e.g.
online job search   engines, hackathons, cyber competitions, personal referrals, social media)    ?
Identify current cybersecurity employees who can engage with potential candidates at   recruiting events (e.g., job fairs, campus recruiting events)       8   ?
Establish an employee referral program to recruit talented and trusted cybersecurity   professionals from your cybersecurity employees’ personal networks (e.g.,  colleges/universities, alma maters, professional associations)    DEVELOP MARKETING STRATEGY & MATERIALS    ?
Develop a list of advantages and benefits of the position(s) and your organization (i.e.,  selling points) to incorporate into outreach efforts and materials.
Highlight key technology, tools, and IT capabilities to attract the right cybersecurity   talent for your organization’s specific risk profile from page four of this kit   ?
Develop materials (e.g., slick sheets, job announcements, social media messages)    ?
Consider using interactive communication tools, such as social media (e.g., Twitter),   that live where cybersecurity professionals do – the internet – to recruit    ?
Use the cybersecurity trait profiles and interview questions provided in this toolkit to   evaluate non-technical characteristics of cybersecurity professionals    ?
If a decision to hire candidate is made, create a competitive offer package to attract   top cybersecurity talent, considering the development items in the next section      9   B U  I  L  D         Develop Your People    Retain Staff at Every Level    Whether entry level, mid-career or seasoned cybersecurity professionals, here are some  simple steps you can take to recognize, develop and retain staff at every level.
Use the  profiles below as a guide to understand which of the steps outlined in the Advance  section will best support the specific type of cybersecurity professional your organization  is looking to recruit and retain.
Entry-Level Cyber   Professional   Mid-Career Cyber   Professional   Seasoned or Executive   Cyber Professional   •  College, graduate, post-  •  Professionals with   •  Demonstrated cyber   A D V A N C  E                                                                    graduate, and career  changers new to  cybersecurity.
Focused on learning cyber  technical skillset and job  requisites, acclimating to  organizational environment,  establishing support  network, and gaining work  experience.
Ensure that cyber   professionals have quality  supervision and mentorship   ?
Recognize staff for strong   work performance   previous cyber related  experience and skills.
Focused on shaping  career path and  advancing technical  skillset through job  rotations, certifications,  developing technology,  and supervisory  opportunities.
Focused on expanding  technical expertise, making  contributions to technical  domain and broader cyber  security community, and  leadership development.
Allow information sharing   within the organization  and professional forums   ?
Offer challenging job   assignments  Include employees in  decision making and  innovation  Implement reward  programs    ?
Provide advanced training   and development  opportunities  ?
Create tailored   development plans that  identify leadership  competencies and areas  for development   ?
Promote cyber executives   to develop intellectual  capital and create  information sharing  mechanisms   10      Help Your Staff Navigate Cybersecurity Careers    Once you have the cybersecurity team you need inside your organization, it is equally  important to take measures to grow and keep that staff.
According to the September  2016 State of Cyber Security Professional Careers, approximately 46% of respondents  (cybersecurity professionals) reported that they were solicited for jobs at other companies  at least once per week.
It’s important that HR professionals and cybersecurity managers  work together to retain cybersecurity professionals, and help staff develop career paths  inside your organization.
Develop and share career paths with employees to help staff  identify their proficiency levels and advance in their chosen paths.
Here are three (3) steps you can take to start building your organization’s cybersecurity  career path.
Sample Proficiency Levels   BEGINNER   INTERMEDIATE   SENIOR/EXPERT   Ability to apply basic  knowledge and skills in   simple work situations with  specific instructions and/or   guidance         Ability to apply knowledge and  skills in straightforward, routine   work situations with limited   need for direction            Ability to apply advanced  knowledge and skills in   complex, difficult, or novel work  situations; is an acknowledged   authority, advisor, or key  resource in a given topic      Sample Career Paths   Suggested Experience &   Credentials     Bachelor’s Degree from an  accredited program in a  Computer Science-related  field   OR   2 years relevant work  experience     CAREER PATH: BEGINNER LEVEL   Sample KSAs / Skills      Sample KSAs   •  Vulnerabilities Assessment   o  Skill in the use of penetration  testing tools and techniques  •  Information Security/Assurance   o  Skill in performing damage   assessments     Sample Non-Technical Skills   •  Critical Thinking & Analytical   Skills   •  Written & Oral Communication   Suggested Training &  Development Activities     Sample Development  Activities   •  University Programs  (e.g., George Mason  University; Stevens  Institute of Technology;  Carnegie Mellon  University)   •  Government agency   courses (e.g., IRM-NDU,  NSA, DoD, Department  of State DSTC, DHS  certifications)   11   A D V A N C  E         CAREER PATH: INTERMEDIATE LEVEL   Sample KSAs / Skills   Suggested Training &  Development Activities     *No UMUC or SANS courses  considered map to this  specialty area at the Full  Performance level    Sample Development Activities  •  University Programs (e.g.,  George Mason University;  Stevens Institute of  Technology; Carnegie  Mellon University)   •  Formal training   programs/seminars (e.g.,  GIAC-Auditing Networks,  Perimeters & Systems)   •  Government agency   courses (e.g., IRM-NDU,  NSA, DoD, Department of  State DSTC, DHS  certifications)   •  Joint Duty Assignments   Suggested Experience &   Credentials     Bachelor’s Degree from an  accredited program in a  Computer Science-related  field plus 3 years of relevant  work experience;  OR   6 years relevant work  experience    Possession and  demonstrated application of  relevant certifications (as  determined by the  department/agency):    Information systems security  certifications (e.g., (ISC)2  CSSLP and CISSP, various  SANS certifications, EnCase  Cybersecurity suite, GIAC  Security Essentials  Certification (GSEC), and  relevant programming  languages)     Sample KSAs   •  Vulnerabilities Assessment   o  Ability to identify   systemic security issues  based on the analysis of  vulnerability and  configuration data  o  Skill in the use of   penetration testing tools  and techniques   •  Information   Security/Assurance  o  Skill in performing   damage assessments   •  Computer Network Defense   o  Skill in detecting host   and network-based  intrusions      Sample Non-Technical Skills   •  Critical Thinking &   Analytical Skills  •  Written & Oral   Communication      12   A D V A N C  E               A D V A N C  E   Suggested Experience &   Credentials     Master’s Degree from an  accredited program in a  Computer Science-related  field plus 5 years of relevant  work experience;  OR   Bachelor’s degree plus 10  years relevant work  experience and project  management experience    Possession and  demonstrated application of  relevant certifications (as  determined by the  department/agency):      PMP, Information systems  security certifications (e.g.,  (ISC)2 CSSLP and CISSP,  various SANS certs, EnCase  Cybersecurity suite, GIAC  Security Essentials  Certification (GSEC), ISACA  Certified Information Security  Manager Certification (CISM),  Security Certified Network  Professional (SCNP),  IT/Business Systems Audit  certifications (e.g., CISA,  GSNA), and relevant  programming languages)   •            CAREER PATH: SENIOR/EXPERT LEVEL   Sample KSAs / Skills     Sample KSAs   •  Vulnerabilities   Assessment  o  Ability to identify  systemic security  issues based on the  analysis of  vulnerability and  configuration data   o  Knowledge of   application  vulnerabilities   o  Skill in the use of   penetration testing  tools and techniques   •  Information   Security/Assurance  o  Skill in performing   damage assessments   •  Computer Network   Defense  o  Skill in mimicking  threat behaviors   o  Skill in detecting host   and network-based  intrusions via intrusion  detection technologies  (e.g., Snort)     Sample Non-Technical Skills   •  Critical Thinking &   Analytical Skills   •  Attention to Detail  •  Creative Problem Solving  •  Written & Oral   Communication  •  Project/Program   Management   •  Leadership & People   Management  Influencing/Negotiating     Suggested Training &  Development Activities     Training – UMUC   •   INFA660 Security Policy,  Ethics and the Legal  Environment     Sample Development Activities  •  University Programs (e.g.,  George Mason University;  Stevens Institute of  Technology; Carnegie  Mellon University)   •  Formal training   programs/seminars (e.g.,  GIAC-Auditing Networks,  Perimeters & Systems)   •  Participation in community  organizations and working  groups (e.g., Federal  Information Systems  Security Educators  Association (FISSEA),  Information Systems  Security Association (ISSA))   •  Joint Duty Assignments  •  Participation in   professional associations,  communities, practice or  network groups in the field  to share best practices,  trends   •  Developing white papers   and policies   •  Participating in   professional coaching  sessions, particularly for  general competencies   •  Participation in security and  cyber relevant conferences  (i.e.
BlackHat, Defcon,  Shmoocon, RSA, CANSEC  West, others)      13   Step 2 – Use the following template to create custom cybersecurity-specific career paths  for your organization.
Populate the highlighted fields with information that meets the  needs of your organization (KSAs can be found in the Workforce Framework)      Suggested Experience &   Credentials   [DEGREE] from [PROGRAM  TYPE] (plus) [YEARS] relevant  work experience;  OR   [YEARS] relevant work  experience    Possession and  demonstrated application of  relevant certifications (as  determined by the  department/agency):    [CERTIFICATIONS] and/or  relevant programming  languages      CAREER PATH: [LEVEL]   Suggested KSAs / Skills *     KSAs   •  [KSA]  •  [KSA]  •  [KSA]  •  [KSA]  •  [KSA]  •  [KSA]     Non-Technical Skills   •  [Varied based on level;  e.g., communications,  ability to listen and ask  meaningful questions,  skill in managing staff,  skill in mentoring,  strategic thinking]   Suggested Training &  Development Activities     Training   •  [COURSE]     Sample Development Activities  •  [UNIVERSITY PROGRAMS]   •  [FORMAL TRAINING   PROGRAMS/SEMINARS]  •  [GOVERNMENT AGENCY   COURSES]   •  [ACTIVITY]  •  [ACTIVITY]   * KSAs are found in the Workforce Framework; Non-technical skills are not cyber-specific – each  organization will need to decide which non-technical skills are valued in their workforce.
Step 3 – Share career paths with cybersecurity managers and staff.
Communications  channels might include:   Internal websites   •  •  Employee communications  •  Annual reviews      Professional Growth Opportunities for Your Cybersecurity Staff     In addition to career paths, your organization can provide a variety of professional growth  opportunities to attract, engage, and retain cybersecurity professionals.
Offering staff  opportunities to think outside-the-box, solve complex cybersecurity challenges, and learn  new cybersecurity skills may increase job satisfaction and improve retention.
These  opportunities also enable your staff to develop their skills for the quickly-evolving field of  cybersecurity.
14   A D V A N C  E         A D V A N C  E   SUPPLY AND  DEMAND   TRAINING   CERTIFICATIONS   SHADOWING   •  Visit cyberseek.org to learn more about the supply and demand of   cybersecurity workers in your community   •  Uncover additional market dynamics like in-demand skills and   credentials, average salaries, and number of job openings  •  Encourage staff to explore common cybersecurity roles and   transition opportunities    •  Direct all cybersecurity staff to more than 3,000 cyber training  courses on the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and  Studies (NICCS) Training Catalog    •  Government cybersecurity staff and veterans also have access to   free courses through the Federal Virtual Training Environment  (FedVTE) - Post the following FedVTE Flyer in your workplace   •  Federal employees can also receive free, instructor-led, virtual   training through FedVTE Live!
•  Earning certifications enables staff to stay current on in-demand   skills and become leaders in the cybersecurity field   •  Example Certifications:   o  CompTIA SECURITY+  o  Certified Information Systems Security Professional   o  GIAC Security Essentials (GSEC)   •  Staff gain on-the-job experience for a desired position   •  Encourage staff to connect with cybersecurity colleagues;   shadowing is a great way to network and learn from others    MENTORING   •  Encourage cybersecurity staff to establish mentoring relationships   to learn from seasoned cybersecurity professionals    CONFERENCES &  PROFESSIONAL  ORGANIZATIONS   CYBERSECURITY  AWARENESS   TOP   CYBERSECURITY   SCHOOLS   •  Employees can stay up-to-date with developments in the field and   network with fellow cybersecurity professionals   •  Example Conferences:   o  NICE Conference & Expo  o  RSA Security Conference   o  NSA Information Assurance Symposium   o  Information Systems Security Association   •  Example Professional Organization:   Stop.Think.Connect.TM   •  National public awareness campaign aimed at increasing the   understanding of cybersecurity threats and empowering all  Americans to be safer and more secure online.
Resources are  available at www.dhs.gov/stopthinkconnect    •  October is National Cyber Security Awareness Month.
Learn more   at www.dhs.gov/national-cyber-security-awareness-month    •  Centers of Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cyber Defense: DHS/NSA   designated over 230 institutions where employees can pursue  degrees   •  For more information visit the CAE Site or email   askCAEIAE@nsa.gov   •  The Scholarship for Service (SFS) provides funding to full-time  students in exchange for government service.
Learn more here      15      TELL US WHAT YOU THINK     The field of cybersecurity is ever-changing.
If you have ideas on additional resources that will  help you plan for, build, and advance your cybersecurity workforce, please email us at  niccs@hq.dhs.gov.
CYBERSECURITY GAMES: BUILDING TOMORROW’S WORKFORCE  2  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This paper is made possible by the efforts, support and participation  of numerous experts and thought leaders on the subject of  cybersecurity competitions.
It is responsive to the strategic goals of  the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) led by the  National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST).
The need for  this paper was identified by the Competitions subgroup of the NICE  Working Group (NICEWG) which has been established to provide  a mechanism in which public and private sector participants can  develop concepts, design strategies, and pursue actions that advance  cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development.
For more information or access to speakers, please contact  info@katzcy.com.
3  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAcknowledgments   A Note About NIST NICE, its Cybersecurity Workforce Framework,  and the NICE Working Group Competitions Subgroup  Introduction   Competitions: An Overview   Why Competitions?
The Many Faces of Cyber Competitions   Technical Skills vs. Soft Skills   Individual vs.
Long-Term Workforce Needs   Workforce Development vs. Extracurricular Activity   Teachers vs. Students   Standardization vs. the Speed of Creativity   Tools  Scenarios  Resources  Performance Measurement  Taxonomy   Fun and Games vs. Means to an End   Recommendations   Appendices  Appendix 1: Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders   Appendix 2: Cyber Competitions List   Appendix 3: Contributors   3  6   7  10  11  12  14  15  16  17  18  20  21  23 23 23 23 23 24  24  27  30  34  37  4  TABLE OF CONTENTSAmong the diverse opinions offered  by this paper’s contributors,  a consensus emerged: the current  and projected workforce needs must  be met not only by training more  cybersecurity personnel, but also  by raising the bar on their skills,  aptitude and ability to collaborate.
Cybersecurity competitions can play  a critical role in this mandate.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  5 5  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceA NOTE ABOUT NIST NICE, ITS  CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE FRAMEWORK,  AND THE NICE WORKING GROUP  COMPETITIONS SUBGROUP  The National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) is a non-regulatory agency  of the United States Department of Commerce.
Its mandate is to promote innovation  and industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science, standards and  technology for the enhancement of economic security and quality of life.
The National  Initiative for Cyber Education (NICE), led by NIST, is a partnership between government,  academia, and the private sector focused on cybersecurity education, training, and  workforce development.
The mission of NICE is to energize and promote a robust network  and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development.
NICE  fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and industry partners to  build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and bring leadership  and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping to keep our  Nation secure, and provide leadership.
NICE (http://csrc.nist.gov/nice/nicewg/index.html) brings together public and private  sector participants to develop concepts, design strategies and pursue actions that advance  cybersecurity education, training and workforce development.
Within the Working  Group, subgroups focus on specific topics.
The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (a.k.a.
the NICE Framework and NIST Special  Publication 800-181) provides a blueprint to categorize, organize and describe cybersecurity  work into specialty areas and work roles that include specific tasks and knowledge, skills  and abilities (KSAs).
The CWF provides a common lexicon to discuss cybersecurity positions  and roles.
It provides a common language to speak about cybersecurity work roles and  positions/jobs, and is a reference to help define professional requirements in cybersecurity.
The NICE Framework organizes cybersecurity work into seven high-level  task categories:  • Securely Provision • Analyze • Operate and Maintain • Oversee and Govern • Collect and Operate • Protect and Defend • Investigate  As this paper explores themes and priorities for developing cybersecurity skills, the NICE  Framework provides a starting-point for creating taxonomy and encouraging standardization  that will accelerate growth and expansion.
6  INTRODUCTION  Whether hacking critical infrastructure like utilities and financial institutions, disrupting  political campaigns, stealing intellectual property, or robbing citizens of their identities and  sense of security, cyber attackers pose an enormous threat to the American way of life.
To  defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats, the  US National Security Strategy is predicated on expanding the skilled workforce to perform  duties relating to information security.
A significant shortfall exists between the number of workers with cybersecurity defense skills  and the number of open job requisitions, in both private enterprise and government.
The  federal government faces the greatest challenge with 83% of hiring managers struggling to  find and employ qualified candidates.1  For commercial enterprises, a skilled workforce is  imperative; yet experts forecast a demand for 6 million cyber workers by 2019 and a shortfall  of 1.5 million.2    To produce this paper, the NIST NICE Subcommittee for Competitions interviewed more  than 25 thought leaders from government agencies, defense contractors, other private  industry entities and academia.
All participants are actively engaged in cybersecurity.
They  shared their perspectives on this looming issue and the role that cyber competitions might  play in raising awareness, enhancing education, attracting capable resources to the field,  and addressing the skills gap.3  The interviews sought to understand:  • How effective are current competitions at all levels — secondary, university and  professional — at developing and demonstrating skills, generating awareness and a pipeline  of current and future professionals in the cyber defense field?
• What are the challenges and opportunities for expanding competitions beyond current   levels to reach larger audiences, generate more skilled resources, and elevate the skill  levels of the cyber defenders in the workplace?
• Who might take the lead in elevating the scope of competitions across government,   academia and private industry?
The body of this paper details those diverse opinions,  addressing such questions as:    • Are technical skills or soft skills more important in producing a strong cyber defense?
• Does skilled cyber defense require individual or group effort?
• Should cyber training and competitions emphasize offense, defense or both?
• Does the responsibility for addressing the workforce shortage and skills gap fall primarily   to public agencies or private industry?
• How should investments in education prioritize between short-term and long-term   workforce requirements?
• When does standardization of the competition and education process enable scale, and   when does it hinder the creativity and agility needed in a rapidly shifting area?
7  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThis paper explores whether competitions — as games or as tools for skills development —  might be improved through standardization and through an expansion of the competitive  arena.
The downside of standardization is that it could slow the pace of growth.
However,  if left to develop at an organic pace, the competitions area — and other aspects of cyber  education — may never sufficiently address the intensified needs of the cyber workforce in  the short and long term.
Among the diverse opinions expressed, one core belief was shared by virtually every  stakeholder: the cyber workforce shortage is so critical that it demands an artificial  injection, an impetus, to attract greater interest and participation that will accelerate skills  development.
The arena of cyber competitions can serve as a significant contributor.
Cyber  gaming appeals to younger generations, representing both immediate and future cyber  workforces.
An organized collaboration among key stakeholders can:  • Raise public awareness of the world of cyber competition.
• Exponentially multiply the number of cyber games, sponsors and participants.
• Inform and restructure academic curricula.
• Transform and popularize specific cyber training strategies.
Cyber competitions, while not alone in these endeavors, are highly effective way of  developing skills by providing hands-on experience in simulated, real-world situations.
When discussing the standardization of cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made  comparisons to sports.
To the uninitiated, cyber competitions, interviewees frequently made  comparisons to their athletic counterparts.
There are few cyber stadiums,4 few superstar  players with recognizable names and faces beyond this specific realm,5 no cheerleaders, no  endorsement contracts, and no standard rules of the game.
Yet, the essence of competition  is the same: participants strive to be the best, to excel by recognizing and focusing their  talents and to develop winning strategies.
Professionalizing cyber competitions can mirror  the common structure used by the thousands of sports leagues in the US today.
They all rely  upon common characteristics for breadth and scale:  rules, team roles, organized games,  audiences and fans, awards, marketing, and funding through sponsorships and advertisers.
The main difference between cyber and athletic competitions underscores the importance of  this white paper:  a real-world cyber arena exists, where bad actors with malicious intent are  inflicting damage upon individuals, corporations and nations.
For students, competitions are held at the middle school, high school and collegiate levels  and complement classroom teaching and laboratory assignments with hands-on work in a  social/gaming environment that fosters learning in entirely different ways.
The National Cyber League http://www.nationalcyberleague.org/ is an example where stadium-like environments have been created.
We acknowledge that cyber competition superstars do exist today.
8  For cyber professionals in the private sector, competitions are used to develop and  demonstrate skills, to evaluate job candidate abilities, to increase awareness among  business leaders, and to boost morale and therefore productivity.
For industry and certification bodies, competitions are increasingly seen as relevant work  experience for recertification.
For governments, competitions are a vital element of generating the skills needed to  defend the nation, its industries and its citizens against existing and emerging threats;  competitions also strongly complement the other tabletop war games used in training.
On the global level, the subject of cyber threats is increasingly the subject of national  policy and regulation.
Investments are being made to encourage collaboration among all  stakeholders to develop and expand the workforce, and to that end, there are a growing  number of cyber competitions where nations compete against each other to develop a  workforce, and to demonstrate skills and share knowledge (e.g., at the EC-Council’s Hacker  Halted).
And for the cybersecurity field in general, competitions provide an arena to foster  innovation:  innovation in tactics and techniques, both offensive and defensive, where  learning is shared and drives the advancement of processes, technology, knowledge and  skills among the competitors.
The opinions, case studies and anecdotes captured for this white paper suggest that  cybersecurity competitions are an effective way to raise awareness, develop and  demonstrate skills, and deliver an able pool of human resources for recruitment into  government or private sector jobs.
The social and gaming aspects are seen as particularly  compelling for up-and-coming generations of potential workers, and the stakeholders  participating in this white paper yearn for cyber competition to achieve what sports  leagues have with publicity, followership, sponsorship and participation.
They wonder  how all aspects of an athletic league, like baseball or football, could be adapted and  utilized to both accelerate and broaden the adoption of cyber competitions.
This paper  makes recommendations on not only continuing but also fast-tracking this discussion, and  expanding it to include all  interested parties.
9  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCOMPETITIONS: AN OVERVIEW  Cyber competitions have been around for over two decades.
Mr. Jeff Moss, the founder  of DEFCON, created the inaugural event in 1993 to bring together knowledgeable BBS  (bulletin board system) hackers to speak, practice and share hacking skills.6  Shortly after,  this initiative attracted participation from industry and law enforcement in the hopes of  developing better cyber defensive tactics and strategies.
Cyber competitions today come in a few different flavors.
Many are events where  individuals or teams play defense or offense to protect or attack assets in an Internet- connected computer network, or to solve forensic or other cyber-related challenges.
• “Capture the Flag” (CTF) competitions can involve Jeopardy-style questions or hands-on   offensive-defensive activity on a network.7   -   In a Jeopardy-style CTF, teams are scored and advance by answering questions on  topics in various cyber categories including cryptography, steganography, physical  security, forensics and scanning.
-   In offensive-defensive CTF, while battling competitors, players endeavor simultaneously  or alternately to defend their assets and infiltrate their opponents’ network to assets to  reach their objective.
• Operational competitions evaluate teams and award points not only in the technical areas  of defending a network and maintaining continual service, but also in business challenges  related to an IT security job function (e.g., researching technology or presenting to  management).
In these types of competitions, a “red team” of expert volunteers perform  as hackers, and attempt to break into the network and disrupt service.
• Forensics competitions task students to solve forensic challenges either in a standalone   event (see https://cyberforensicschallenge.com/) or as part of a larger cyber competition.
• A research paper competition sponsored by the “National Security Agency Science and   Security Program” recognizes the best scientific cybersecurity paper from the previous  calendar year published in a peer review journal or presented at a conference.
Described  by Dr. Adam Tagert, director: for four years, this initiative has recognized researchers  who have demonstrated lasting impact to the science of cybersecurity.
• Policy cyber competitions, such as the Atlantic Council’s Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge,  provide an opportunity for students across academic disciplines to interact and compete  to achieve a deeper understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis  and conflict.
Using an interactive learning experience with a competitive scenario, exercise  teams respond to a realistic, evolving cyber attack and analyze the threat it poses to  national, international and private sector interests.
Competitions may be executed in controlled8 environments under the supervision of cyber  experts from academia, government and private industry who construct the playing field  ecosystem, design the scenarios, and usually act as the attackers and role play characters   6. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lg6bQMTjHCE.
Competitions can be conducted entirely online, but the most common type of competition  discussed by our stakeholders is a team competition, played in rounds, in live environments  where competitors, organizers, judges, educators and sponsors are present.
Competitions come from many sources: the brainchild of a single individual or the work  of a large, organized group.
Appendix 2 includes a list of the many  competitions discussed by this paper’s contributors.
“On the playing field, as  in the Security Operations  Center, skills matter.
Cyber sports teach  security professionals to think  critically and creatively about  offense and defense, about the  measures and counter-measures  associated with every move.”  Jessica Gulick, CEO,  KATZCY Consulting  WHY COMPETITIONS?
Analogies from the sports  world are often used to inform everyday discussions on topics from  business to education to politics.
Youth leagues allow kids to participate in  games, learning the fundamental skills, strategies and teamwork  required to compete more effectively at higher levels.
At this culminating  moment of the season, the Super Bowl pits two teams of elite athletes  against each other, with their heroic exploits broadcast internationally,   11  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforcewhile celebrations are thrown in homes across the country as many Americans gather to  watch the game.
Cyber competitions generally tap into this tradition of pitting one side against the other.
Youth competitions offer participants a chance to learn the fundamentals of cybersecurity in  a fun, engaging format and provide an entry point into the professional workforce.
“Cyber as a sport” is a growing trend in high schools; the number of high school  teams that participated in the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot doubled in a two-year  period from over 2,200 in 2014 to over 4,000 in 2016.9  Educators increasingly recognize  cyber competitions demonstrate and develop planning, leadership, collaboration and  communication skills and offer a compelling alternative for students of all ages who are less  likely to compete or excel at physical sports.
Finally, the safety, security and enjoyment aspects of competitions should not be  overlooked.
When practicing both offensive and defensive maneuvers in a typical  competition environment, players are encouraged to practice and hone cybersecurity  skills in a controlled, real-world environment where no harm can come to the competitors.
Moreover, cyber competitions are enjoyed as a forum for networking, team building, and  information sharing.
THE MANY FACES OF CYBER COMPETITIONS  In today’s advanced societies, many youth have never experienced a world without  computers, cellphones and other Internet-enabled devices.
And whether they enjoy Candy  Crush Saga or multiplayer games, according to one estimate, the average “21-year-old has  spent 10,000 hours gaming  —  about the same amount of time he’s spent in school from  5th to 12th grade.”10  Clearly, the social and gaming aspects of competitions are particularly compelling to up- and-coming generations of young people, which qualifies cyber sports as a particularly  valuable tool in cyber workforce development.
It makes sense to consider how the  standardization and professionalization of athletic competitions at all levels have broadened  popular appeal, reach and participation.
How can a similar approach accelerate the growth  of cyber competitions in terms of number, size, reach and stature?
However, the stakeholder  community is at odds over how best to address the cybersecurity workforce shortage.
As  cyber competitions grow and evolve around the world in an effort to keep pace with market  changes, their relative novelty and expanding adoption create a study of contrasts.
The  following sections describe key topics where our cyber competition experts held differing  opinions on cybersecurity, competitions and the way forward for each.
12  LEADERSHIP, TEAMWORK,  COMMUNICATION AND CONFIDENCE  Our contributors listed many skills than can be developed through  cyber competitions.
But frankly, we’re looking for leadership: who is leading, motivating,  helping them overcome when they’re ready to quit, because they’ve  been hacked.”  Joe Krull, Security Principal Director, Accenture  Communication is essential “to make very compelling arguments  as to why certain issues are important, and to determine who can  identify consequences, who can make decisions for prioritization  and the like.”  Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity  and Communications, Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  Competition builds “self-driven research skills — in these  competitions.
Ultimately, it’s a confidence builder.”  Lisa Jiggetts, CEO, Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  13 13  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTECHNICAL SKILLS VS. SOFT SKILLS  Skills development is acknowledged to be a critical outcome for cyber competitors.
People often assume competitors in today’s  competitions, and most cyber professionals in the workforce, should be technically trained.
Computer science and computer engineering are anecdotally the most desired majors  for college students being recruited into the cybersecurity workforce.
There are strong  viewpoints that cyber competitors and cybersecurity professionals alike must have at least  a basic knowledge of “how things work,” including networks, threats and malware.
This  technical emphasis explains the predominant presence of computer science and computer  engineering students at cyber competitions, relative to other disciplines.
But the soft skills of leadership, communication (translating technical subjects into business  terms), critical/analytic thinking, teamwork, and creativity were frequently identified as  desirable characteristics in a cybersecurity role.
The need for both hard and soft skills in the workforce is well established and extends to  the NICE Framework and to certification organizations.
As (ISC)2’s Dan Waddell, regional  managing director for the North America region, observes “If you put [all certification  bodies] in one room and map our certifications to the NICE Framework, it covers the gamut.
You  need a blend.”   Although, says Laurin Buchanan, principal investigator at Secure Decisions, “(Competitions  remain) focused on high school and college level students, who may or may not be studying  computer science and computer engineering — which, from my point of view, is entirely  useless to hire someone as a cybersecurity engineer.
They don’t understand networks; they  don’t understand threats and malware.”   Both technical and soft skills are observable in a competition, as Rodney Petersen, director  of NICE, notes: “When I walk around the competitions and observe, I quickly notice the  teamwork and how small groups of people are working together.
And employers can do the same thing by walking around and observing them.”  Cyber education, of which competitions are a critical part, is often associated with or  compared to STEM (or STEAM) education (science, technology, engineering, art and math).
If soft skills are equally as important to a cyber practitioner as  technical skills, then a STEM-like approach and STEM-like programs may be insufficient.
It  has been argued that the present impetus for expanding cyber education is more critical —  the defense of our nation, our industries and our citizens — than the concerns that previously  sparked an emphasis on STEM education — a declining position in technology skills on the  global stage.
Therefore, cyber education must be addressed and deployed more rapidly  and more widely than STEM.
TEAM SKILLS  (AND MIXED-GENDER TEAMS)  There are differing opinions and genuine contradictions about the role of the individual  versus the role of the team in the world of cyber competitions and the broader subject  of the cyber workforce.
Competitions are widely recognized as a source for cyber talent:  nurturing future talent in the long term, and proving a hiring source in the now.
While an employee is hired, evaluated and progresses through his or her career as an  individual, cybersecurity professionals in the workplace are overwhelmingly expected to  contribute as a team.
One of our contributors posited that the white knight or the lone cyber warrior, may be an  image conjured up by Hollywood (e.g., as seen, in the television program NCIS).
However,  other contributors were quick to point out that security training and certification programs  focused on the individual could reinforce the notion of being an army of one.
In contrast,  Mike Cameron, director of business development at Leidos, reminds us, “If you look at  the cyber competitions, the ability to succeed is driven not just by individual skills, but  how well they communicate as a team to deploy those software skills and team behaviors  and function.
You’re not just training, but you’re doing workforce development: you are  developing teams as well as people.”  With no end in sight to the skills shortage, developing and testing team skills in real-world  scenarios appears imperative.
Evaluating individual skills and overcoming challenges  of scoring (discussed in a later section), stem from the inherent nature of cybersecurity,  requiring both individual warriors and well-coordinated teams.
Upon completion, the young women were  invited to participate in a cyber competition and were asked to choose  between a mixed-gender competition and an all-girls competition.
But now that the team  had proven what they could do, they had confidence and would choose  to be in a mixed group.
Women are gaining ground in the cyber arena, including in  competitions; 2016’s Brigham Young University team at the National  Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) notably included four  female members.11  Teamwork, the soft skills that come with it, and  targeted outreach to girls and women, are all necessary considerations  for expanding the cyber competition arena, and workforce.
“There are no  lone eagles; this is  a team sport.”  Greg Touhill, Deputy Assistant  Secretary, Cybersecurity and  Communications, DHS  11.  http://fortune.com/2016/04/27/mormon-women-cybersecurity/.
15  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceOFFENSE VS. DEFENSE  Whether cyber education and cyber competitions should include offensive skills — the role  of the attacker or hacker — is contentious subjects.
Most of the contributors who organize  and/or sponsor secondary school and collegiate competitions believe that the scope of the  game should be limited to defensive capabilities.
In the era of WikiLeaks and state-sponsored hacking, some stakeholders feel it is too  much to expect competitions to teach the complex ethical issues of hacking alongside the  technical and soft skills required of a cybersecurity practitioner.
And there is a lingering bias  that practicing offensive skills encourages the wrong talents.
This stance, however, runs counter to the beliefs of some stakeholders who consider the  cyber arena to be a battleground.
And as real-world cyber threats become increasingly sophisticated, the need to “get into the  enemy’s mind” intensifies.
This skill is best developed by walking in the enemy’s shoes and  learning offensive methods.
“Being able to look at your defensive position as an attacker, through  an attacker’s eyes, is critical,” says Pete Clay, principal of Zeneth  Technology Partners.
“From my background, a military point of view,  my ability to attack has informed my ability to defend.
Jenn Henley, director of security at Facebook, points out, “If you’ve  learned something in a book, by the time you’ve graduated and put  it in practice, threat actors and models have changed.
Where these  competitions are so valuable  —  they force students to use critical  thinking, take foundational skills and put them in practice.
It allows  them to practice both offensive and defensive [techniques].
And you can’t get that from a  book, or in a classroom.”  “Playing a part on the blue  team in information security  can, to a very small degree, be  compared to the lot of a hapless  soldier.
It seems a bit  unfair really; even the American  Revolution got Paul Revere.”   Verizon’s 2016 Breach  Investigations Report  16  PRIVATE VS. PUBLIC  Not surprisingly, during their interviews, many interviewees made  an association between patriotism and cybersecurity.
In fact, today’s  cyber competitions draw significant investment and attention from the  military services and defense industry.
Mike Cameron points out, “The  cyber competition community is usually at the nexus of government  organizations, academia and professional organizations like the Air Force  Association and others.”    Public sector funds have helped to jump-start programs, providing seed  money to stimulate interest in competitions.
The most significant  backers of some of the largest competitions, like CyberPatriot and  NCCDC, are defense-related organizations or government agencies:  the Armed Forces Association, DHS, NSA, Northrop Grumman, and  Raytheon, to name just a few.
“Northrup Grumman has taken the lead, put many millions of dollars  into Cyber Patriot, even though there is no guarantee that the  (participants), will work for Northrup Grumman.
(Company leaders)  have made a commitment that this is important for our country and  our company and our workforce.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer  Information Systems, California State Polytechnic University  Yet, because 95% of US critical infrastructure is in the hands of private  industry, it is private industry that has the most to gain in developing  a skilled cyber workforce.12 gain (or lose) in (not) developing..workforce.
It is widely accepted that private industry faces a real need for highly- skilled cyber employees.
To create a labor supply that can meet this  demand, most companies will require a business case for investment.
That investment strategy may include:  • Sponsoring competitions to increase size and scope, and to expand   outreach to students/competitors.
• Providing cyber expertise to competition organizers, helping them   develop scenarios, offering staff as coaches and mentors, and staffing  the red/white teams, etc.
• Developing technology to enable competitions to scale, working to   develop standard taxonomy and process.
• Raising awareness in their communities and among their clientele —   and the public in general — about the subject of cybersecurity.
“The US Cyber Challenge  focuses on the national level,  to elevate the defense of our  companies, governments  and institutions and citizens  and ensure their private  and personal information  doesn’t  get into the hands  of people who will use it in  a malicious way.”   Karen Evans,  KE&T Partners, CyberCompEx.org  12.
17  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceThe private sector typically considers return on investment when making decisions, and a  cybersecurity business case will seek to quantify the impact of investing in defensive skills.
New technologies may be developed with government seed-funding,  but expansion, adoption and maturity is almost always the result of private investment.
In the long run, for cyber competitions, the contributors all agree that the needs and  involvement of private industry will ultimately elevate the game to the benefit of private  and public enterprises alike.
This factor reinforces the importance of ongoing  conversations and collaborations among all cybersecurity stakeholders.
LONG-TERM  WORKFORCE NEEDS  When discussing the role that competitions play in secondary and higher  education, and in preparing competitors for careers in cybersecurity, it  becomes apparent that there are different needs and expectations in the  short term versus the long term.
• Over 1.5 million cybersecurity jobs will be unfilled in the US by 2020.13 • A leading Internet-based company reported to the NICE Working  Group that thousands of candidates apply for every open software  engineering position posted; yet due to the scarcity of skilled  personnel, it takes 8-12 months to hire one cybersecurity professional  (in an environment with 125 open requisitions).
Re-designing the education system to develop the pipeline for the  cybersecurity workforce is a long-term option.
The required approach  may differ from STEM.
Cybersecurity skills are needed to face real,  current threats of attack on our nation, our citizens and our industries.
“I tell people; if you  want to be a security  professional and want  to wear a suit and tie  every day, there is a  place for you.
If you  want to have purple  hair and sit in a  corner and not talk  to anyone, there’s a  place for you too.”  Jenn Henley, Director of Security,  Facebook  13.  http://www.boston.com/jobs/jobs-news/2015/12/08/all-those-scary-hacks-are-creating-a-lot-of-demand-for-certain-computer-experts.
In every case, the demand got  met; universities changed their curriculum to educate more people; practical/tactical  organizations like SANS began to do it; pay in the field was so much more that people  shifted.
In every other case, sooner or later, it got met.”  Jim Michaud, Director, CyberTalent Solutions, The SANS Institute  To address the immediate and short-term demand, most agree that other tactics are  required.
Tactics might include:  • Raising awareness of the need to attract skilled personnel to the field, and not necessarily  technically-trained people.
I find that many technically-skilled people are not very  good at communicating in plain language, in simple easy-to-understand terms,  what is going on.”  • Expanding professional competitions to develop skills and redeploy resources where   they are needed.
This opportunity benefits people who are re-entering the workforce or  changing careers mid-stream; and based on the statistics cited above, the cybersecurity  field represents a “growth industry”, while other traditional job functions are on the  decline.
• Creating training programs to address the need at a national level, and consider options   for engaging a diverse workforce, including training women and veterans, and offering  flexible working conditions.
Before WWII, we needed 20 times the number of  pilots, and we set up 22 flight schools around the country.”  • Generating interest and enthusiasm among people with the skills, knowledge, or aptitude,   to fill cyber positions.
To target young people, make cyber “cool” and accessible.
In cyber, that’s important, but not enough, and will take too  long.
Middle schoolers  don’t have careers for 10 years, and we need to address the problem NOW.”  19  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceStackSmash is one example  of a professional cyber  competition.
GE’s annual  IT security hackathon  provides a gateway to  cybersecurity at GE.
By  engaging professionals  from IT functions to explore  the limits of innovation for  real-world security issues,  GE has seen tremendous  value in imaginative thinking  and new tools as well as the  by-products of enabling  collaboration and building  cross-business relationships.
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT VS.  EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITY  Competitions not only have a place as extracurricular activities for  students, but also as workforce development tools for current and  advancing professionals.
Since much of the interviewee discussion  focused on raising awareness in schools of cybersecurity as a subject, a  skill set and as a career.
This section regarding workforce development  is a natural extension of the previous short-term versus long-term  debate.
Increasing student involvement in cybersecurity is an important  long-term strategy, but there are significant short-term needs that must  be addressed as well.
There is a groundswell of support for professional  competitions to enhance the skills of practicing professionals.
However,  if professional competitions are going to be accepted as tools to train  and develop practitioners in the field, then stakes have to be higher  than professional bragging rights.
In his ieee paper, Dr. Gregory White, Director for Infrastructure  Assurance and Security at the University of Texas, references Microsoft’s  Senior Technology Officer Lewis Shepherd’s 201014 webcast, Hiring the  Next Generation of Cyber Professionals in Government.
White explains  the concern that government agencies, like DHS and NSA, were hiring  virtually all the available qualified professionals, leaving private industry  to scramble.
Certs, like the CISSP and others, require ongoing coursework to  maintain their status.
Today, credits can be issued manually, but  standardizing their issuance should be considered.
Businesses can also  incorporate competitions into workforce development and standard  operating procedures.
As Nasrin Rezai, global CISO of GE Capital explains, “Not only in cyber  but in other parts of the company, there are a lot of competition-style  ways of promoting new idea generation.
Sometimes organizations do  it [competitions] one-off, or it isn’t a part of their development and  workforce planning strategy.
We see it as a component of our workforce  development.
The challenge becomes when you  consider it a side job, interest or hobby of the group, instead of a critical  component of learning and development.”  14.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwlkcC5KMvA.
20  Another professional  development competition is  GhostRed.
This homegrown  capture-the-flag competition,  has expanded organically  within GE over the past  five years.
What started as  a volunteer-driven effort to  excite and connect students  with hands-on cybersecurity  experiences, has now  become a formalized GE  program designed to recruit  top talent into the company.
TEACHERS VS. STUDENTS  The interviewees frequently discussed a shortcoming in the education system: students  are not generally aware of cybersecurity as a field of study or as a career path.
Today’s first graders are proficient in the use of smart phones  and tablets because these devices have been in existence and widely available since their  birth.
The probability that they know more than their teachers and parents about the use of  tablets, because this technology is high.
In this situation, attention is needed to train educators, parents, coaches and the wider  education complex on awareness about cybersecurity.
But if education is about teaching critical skills,  Laurin Buchanan suggests “(We must) graduate useful, intelligent members of society and  workforce; and we haven’t done that with cyber.”   Many interviewees made comparisons to their own high school curricula in their analogies  to today’s need for cybersecurity education: health class and hygiene, physical education,  driver’s education, home economics and trade/manufacturing-related courses were widely  taught, because they were considered critical life skills.
These interviewees asserted that the  current prevalence of technology and related threats indicates that cybersecurity education  can be viewed on equal footing with other subjects taught in schools.
Training educators on  cybersecurity issues can be made a higher priority; just as driver education instructors are  expected to have a driver’s license, all educators can be expected to have a general working  knowledge of cybersecurity.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  21  “I think cyber education is about teaching  how things actually work.
You need to  understand how the Internet works and  how packets work.
Cyber education needs to be about  explaining how the Internet and networks  work; this needs to begin as early as  elementary school.”   Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator  Applied Visions, Inc.,   a division of Secure Decisions   22 22  STANDARDIZATION VS.
THE SPEED OF CREATIVITY  The subject of standardization in the realm of cybersecurity and  competitions was not greeted with much enthusiasm by interviewees.
In an arena where speed, adaptability and creativity are core defining  tenets, there is resistance to adopt standards that may encumber  innovation.
There is great reluctance to overlay the process of  proposing, developing, agreeing upon and adopting standards.
But  when discussing creating, executing and expanding competitions,  several areas were identified where a standard approach would be  beneficial to deliver economies of scale in an environment of scarcity.
Areas for standardization and collaboration across competitions include:  Tools Competitions involve labor intense processes for injecting actions into  game play, tracking competitor progress, and scoring individual and  team performance.
Interviewees recommended automated solutions:  Facebook’s Capture the Flag platform, Leidos’s Cyber NXUS,  GE’s  GhostRed,  the Air Force Association’s CyberPatriot competition engine,  and Secure Decisions’ Comic-BEE, a “choose your own adventure story”  platform).
Scenarios Competitions continuously require new scenarios to challenge the  participants, especially returning participants.
Collaborating on scenario  development and developing standard taxonomy were identified to  mitigate this challenge.15  Resources Effective and challenging events are resource-intensive.
Cyber  experts develop and run the game, and may participate as red teams.
Performance Measurement Several interviewees noted the challenge in comparing the scores or  results of one competition to another, and more so, comparing the  achievements of one competitor to another.
They take time,  money and people to develop  and update them.
If you’ve ever  had to manage the logistics for  one of these events, you know  what it takes to do it.”   Dan Waddell,  Regional Managing Director,  North America Region,  (ISC)2, Inc.  15.
Bryan Fite, global account CISO for British Telecom, mentions a Scenario Development Language (SDL).
23  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceTaxonomy A dominant theme throughout the interviews was the need to standardize the taxonomy  —   the roles and definitions  —  in the cybersecurity workforce, both for competitions and in a  professional environment.
A human capital perspective was often repeated: establish better- defined team roles that can be commonly understood across organizational and industry  boundaries.
FUN AND GAMES VS. MEANS  TO AN END  Among all other objectives, cyber competitions are games intended  to be enjoyed by the participants.
While interviewees assign a high  entertainment value to cyber competitions, a non-expert audience may  likely disagree, which is one of the primary barriers when discussing  cyber competitions as a competitive sport.
The fun comes from meeting  the challenge, learning new skills, working on a team, socializing with  competitors and sponsors, and achieving success.
But a stronger argument for gamification of  the cybersecurity arena might be that those competitive elements —  process, teamwork and results — are precisely what it takes to construct  an effective cyber workforce.
To set student competitions apart from classroom learning or lab work,  it is important to maintain a safe competition environment and remove  the pressure of performing that can come with scoring (the equivalent  of being graded for classroom learning).
Davina Pruitt-Mentle, lead for  the NICE’s Academic Engagement at NIST, says competitions “allow  students to engage in an informal, non-threatening way, unlike in the  classroom where they are graded.
If we insist on scoring them, we will  turn off some kids, because it takes them out of their comfort zone and  away from the idea that they are just going out and having fun.”  “GE actively participates and  sponsors numerous high school  and college outreach programs  to raise awareness and create  interest and excitement in  technology; and several are  focused on girls.
But now that I’ve  done this and known what  I’m doing, I would choose to  be in a mixed team.”  This  response is precisely what GE  wants to achieve for the girls: to  build their confidence in their  knowledge and skills, so that  they are comfortable working  in technical areas in a mixed  group.”  Nasrin Rezai, Global Chief  Information Security Officer  GE Capital & GE Digital Security  Governance, Tech Risk and  M&A  24  And by making the games fun, cyber competitions are viewed by many  as a channel for other endeavors:  attracting students to STEM fields,  and stimulating creative thinking and innovation through intellectual  problem-solving.
Clearly STEM education is critical to national security,  as the 21st Century Science, Technology and Innovation Initiative for  America’s National Security report from May 2016 asserts;16 cyber  competitions are compelling method of attracting students to STEM.
Nasrin Rezai says, “We think that gaming/cyber competition is a key  component of learning, education, and recruiting.” Competitions,  especially at the collegiate and professional levels, are ideally suited for  individual competitors to demonstrate skills and for hiring managers in  the government, defense sector and private industry to most effectively  identify the best resources with the best skills.
In 2009, Boeing, one of the sponsors of  the Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC),  hired the entire team from Cal Poly Pomona on the spot.
These examples suggest that competitions might be  considered auditions for potential cybersecurity professionals.
Interviews explored whether two concepts  —  the game itself and a tool  for skills development, assessment and recruiting — could be improved  by standardizing and expanding the competitive arena.
Is a standardized approach  unnecessary?
Or does the lack of a trained workforce and the rapid  advancement of technology justify intervention?
Consideration has been given to whether competitions can count  towards cybersecurity professional certification.
Dan Waddell  from (ISC)2 indicated that currently, a manual calculation process  determines whether a candidate’s participation and performance in  a cyber competition can contribute to the professional development  component of maintaining CISSP certification.
Expanding competitions,  particularly at the professional level, and advancing consistency in  their processes and measurement, would facilitate organizations like  (ISC)2 accepting them as valuable skills development tools and as a  part of the certification process.
“The Women’s Society of  Cyberjutsu is committed to  providing women professionals  with opportunities to develop  and enhance their skills in the  field.
Through competitions,  our members learn  communication and leadership,  along with the technical  and system administration  foundations that are required.
25  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceEnvisioning the potential reach, structure and impact that cyber competitions might have,  several stakeholders rely on the sports league analogies.
Sports leagues, for example  football leagues, have:  • Standard rule books (with age-appropriate adaptations as needed).
• Organized events at multiple levels from Pop Warner to the NFL.
These attributes work in concert to elevate awareness of and passion for the sport, and  attract athletes to the sport from a very early age.
This is not the case in the cybersecurity arena.
With 2 million jobs waiting to be filled,  the prospects for young cyber athletes to find employment (after study, practice, and  demonstrating his or her abilities) are on the playing field, are great.
Cyber competitions are ideally suited for co-ed play.
RECOMMENDATIONS  The opinions and narratives of interviewees reflect different approaches and varying  priorities regarding:  • Cybersecurity skills development • Offensive and defensive roles  • Awareness, education and workforce development  The opportunity of competitions—to raise awareness, develop skills, and build a pipeline  of cyber professionals — encourage a national dialogue of stakeholders from diverse  constituencies:  • Founders and long-standing sponsors of the leading competitions in the US, such as  CCDC, CyberPatriot, the US Cyber Challenge, Day-Con, the Atlantic Council Policy  Challenge, DEFCON and others.
26  • Government agencies responsible for developing cyber skills,   including the NSA, DHS and the Department of Education.
• Defense contractors who significantly invest in competitions, for skills   development and recruiting.
• Private industry, which faces a skills shortage and is well-situated to  develop and distribute tools to enable competitions and accelerate  product development and differentiation using competitions as a  proving ground.
The objectives of this larger dialog should:  Agree upon areas where collaboration and standardization  can facilitate expansion to a larger audience across geographies,  age groups, school districts, and public and private enterprises   without dampening the creativity and innovation paramount  to keeping pace with the attackers.
But you also put  on handcuffs; what is unique  about the cybersecurity industry  is that people think differently.
A vast majority  of cyber experts are self-taught.
So we need a structure that can  be replicated; but we must ensure  there is enough variance to allow  ‘out of the box’ thinking.”   1  2  3  Explore how shared investment in technology and process can  both compensate for and develop areas of competition that are  otherwise limited by resources (people) and sponsors (funding).
Accelerate the advancement of the following aspects of  competitions as well as the cybersecurity workforce as a whole:  Standardizing  performance  measurement at  the individual and  team level across  competitions  “It’s great that everyone wants more cyber competitions, but without  ‘division rules’ it makes it difficult to judge the relative value of one  competition versus another.
Without knowing whether the A team from  one competition is as good as the A team from another, it isn’t an effective  hiring guide.”   Bobbie Stempfley, Director of Cyber Strategy Implementation,  the MITRE Corporation  “The goals of the NIST NICE Working Group competitions subgroup are  in sync with industry: to advance and identify skilled people ready to fill  the growing needs of the workforce.
The NICE Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework is a great place to start to begin to understand the relationships  between competitions that develop proficiencies in cybersecurity knowledge  skills and abilities and employers who value those knowledge, skills and  abilities tie to perform vital tasks in cybersecurity work roles.”  Bill Newhouse, Deputy Director, National Initiative for Cyber Security  Education (NICE)  Aligning  competitions  with the NIST  Framework  27  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDeveloping and  sharing competitive  platforms  “Until you’ve done one, you don’t know how critical and how difficult  it is getting the competition environment working.
You need a willing  partner, usually a college or university, to host and deliver the resource- intensive tasks of providing working computers, a functional wireless  network, enough bandwidth from the ISP, and so on.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair in Computer Information  Systems at Cal Poly Pomona./Co-Chair NICE Working Group  Competions SubGroup  “From my military background, I know that my ability to attack informed  my ability to defend.
But teaching attack  methods alongside defensive techniques will enable your teams to better  prevent bad things from happening.”  Pete Clay, Principal, Zeneth Tech Partners  Developing  offensive  and defensive  scenarios  Defining roles and  responsibilities  within a team  of competitors   or professionals  “Security is a very broad field ranging from  policies, standards and  compliance to software engineering and application security.
We are  now focused on defining and communicating the variety of security  roles and how and where they fit into our corporate environment.
There isn’t a single path into security: there are different skills and  techniques and tools to advance a career down a desired path.”   Jenn Henley, Director of Security, Facebook  “It’s important to understand what is age-appropriate, train the educators,  and give them the tools to teach.
A good analogy for teaching  cybersecurity is teaching health; we teach children about hygiene, bacteria  and germs first and then move on to more advanced topics in the higher  grades.
They need to understand the risk to their personal health and the  risk to their cyber health.”  Dan Manson, CPP/Co-chair NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup  Training the  trainers to  enhance  educator skills  28  Raising awareness  among students,  educators, mentors  and parents on the  career opportunities  for cyber  professionals  “Kids don’t say ‘I want to work in the medical profession when I   grow up.’ They say ‘I want to be a doctor, a nurse, a sonogram  technician, an EMT.’ They pursue specific roles that they have seen  and understand what is involved, that they know who is helped by  that person or that role.
In the cyber arena today, there is almost   no visibility at this level.”   Laurin Buchanan, CISSP, Principal Investigator, Applied Visions, Inc.,  a division of Secure Decisions  “In 1971, there were 700 women and 78,000 men playing high  school soccer.
For cyber, we want to create a showcase that holds up  these mental athletes in as much esteem as physical athletes are  held up.
More jobs, careers and economic impact will come from  this arena than from physical sports, and have(ing) competitive  cyber leagues will bring that level of attention, excitement,  support and awareness that the field deserves.”  Dan Manson, Professor and Department Chair , California State  Polytechnic University  Establishing leagues  and divisions to  support a  competitive ladder  for varying ages  and skill levels  Developing  Cyber as a Sport  “Cyber is more than IT.
Cyber games train us to know what we’re  looking for, as well as how best to respond.
They develop leadership,  communication and teamwork skills in a group of people that typically  are more introverted.
By developing cyber teams that compete in games  like sports teams do, we can establish a code of ethics and a non-military  approach centered on collaboration and strategy that will create the  workforce we need for the future.”   Jessica Gulick, CEO, Katzcy Consulting   Both a great need and a great opportunity exist for all stakeholders in the cyber  competitions community to come together to better define the end-goal.
Whatever the  differences of opinions and priorities, there are significant synergies across all participants;  and these synergies can deliver accelerated results through collaboration, coordination and  standardization, while acknowledging that creativity and agility must be given a wide berth.
29  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 1:  Cyber Competitions Mentioned by Stakeholders  In the course of over 25 interviews, interviewers described their involvement with and the  operation of many competitions at the secondary school, collegiate and professional level.
A comprehensive inventory of most competitions is included in a separate appendix; this  appendix describes several of the competitions and competition platforms mentioned by  the stakeholders.
CyberPatriot for middle school and high school students CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Education Program.
There are three main  programs within CyberPatriot: the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition, AFA  CyberCamps and the Elementary School Cyber Education Initiative.
At the center of  CyberPatriot is the National Youth Cyber Defense Competition.
The competition puts teams  of high school and middle school students in the position of newly hired IT professionals  tasked with managing the network of a small company.
In the rounds of competition,  teams are given a set of virtual images that represent operating systems and are tasked  with finding cybersecurity vulnerabilities within the images and hardening the system while  maintaining critical services.
National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (NCCDC) for college students NCCDC’s ask competitions ask student teams to assume administrative and protective  duties for an existing “commercial” network — typically a small company with 50+ users,  7 to 10 servers, and common Internet services such as a web server, mail server, and  e-commerce site.
Each team begins the competition with an identical set of hardware and  software and is scored on their ability to detect and respond to outside threats, maintain  availability of existing services such as mail servers and web servers, respond to business  requests such as the addition or removal of additional services, and balance security needs  against business needs.
Throughout the competition, an automated scoring engine is used  to verify the functionality and availability of each team’s services on a periodic basis; and  traffic generators continuously feed simulated user traffic into the competition network.
30  Day-Con X for professionals Day-Con is an annual conference dedicated to security training, competitions and  information exchange.
Started in 2007, the group hosts an annual event in Dayton, Ohio  and facilitates PacketwarsTM battles, which are described as “Formula One Racing meets  World Cup with a dash of Professional Wrestling thrown in for good measure.” Public and  private battles provide combatants the opportunity to train and be assessed in a fast-paced  and “safe” environment.
Attendees include computer security professionals, journalists,  lawyers, federal government employees, security researchers, students and hackers  with a general interest in software, computer architecture, phone phreaking, hardware  modifications, and anything else that can be “hacked.”  The event includes speaker tracks  as well as social war games and other contents.
Black Hat for professionals Black Hat is the most technical and relevant global information security event series in  the world.
For more than 18 years, Black Hat has provided attendees with the very latest  in information security research, development, and trends in a strictly vendor-neutral  environment.
These high-profile global events and Trainings are driven by the needs of  the security community, striving to bring together the best minds in the industry.
From its inception in 1997, Black Hat has grown from a single annual conference in Las  Vegas to the most respected information security event series internationally.
Today, the  Black Hat Briefings and Trainings are held annually in the United States, Europe and Asia,  providing a premier venue for elite security researchers and trainers to find their audience.
CyberQuest an online competition qualifier for US Cyber Challenge CyberQuests are a series of fun but challenging on-line competitions allowing participants  to demonstrate their knowledge in a variety of information security realms.
The quests have varying levels of difficulty  and complexity, with some quests geared toward beginners, while others include more  intermediate and ultimately advanced material.
US Cyber Challenge for professionals The mission of U.S. Cyber Challenge (USCC) is to significantly reduce the shortage in  today’s cyber workforce by serving as the premier program to identify, attract, recruit and  place the next generation of cybersecurity professionals.
USCC’s goal is to find 10,000 of  America’s best and brightest to fill the ranks of cybersecurity professionals where their skills  can be of the greatest value to the nation.
31  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceNational Cyber League (NCL) for college students  The NCL was founded in May 2011 to provide an ongoing virtual training ground for  collegiate students to develop, practice, and validate their cybersecurity skills using next- generation high-fidelity simulation environments.
This allows players to use the Gym environment to develop  knowledge and skills and then demonstrate these newly acquired skills in competitive  individual and team play.
It also allows the NCL to measure player’s game performance and  produce individualized reports (NCL Scouting Report) on strengths and weakness among  various learning objectives and industry-recognized competencies.
Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) for the military academies The Cyber Defense Exercise (CDX) is an annual competition designed to sharpen the skills  of our nation’s next generation of cyber warriors.
The prestigious event, held each spring,  tests the ability of students representing U.S. and Canadian military service academies to  build, secure, and defend networks from cyber attacks mounted by IA experts.
FireEye’s FLARE for students and professionals Now in its third year, this online challenge has achieved international success.
This six-week  challenge presents individual competitors with a series of reverse engineering challenges  and puzzles targeting engineers, malware analysts and security professionals.
Cyber 9/12 Challenge for high school students Now entering its fourth year, the Cyber 9/12 Student Challenge is a one-of-a-kind  competition designed to provide students across academic disciplines with a deeper  understanding of the policy challenges associated with cyber crisis and conflict.
Part  interactive learning experience and part competitive scenario exercise, it challenges  teams to respond to a realistic, evolving cyberattack and analyze the threat it poses to  national, international, and private sector interests.
Students have a unique opportunity to  interact with expert mentors and high-level cyber professionals while developing valuable  skills in policy analysis and presentation.
CSAW for college students Cybersecurity Awareness Week (CSAW) is the largest student-run cybersecurity event in  the nation, featuring six competitions, an industry conference, workshops and an industry  fair.
Today, CSAW is preparing the nation’s  brightest students to shape the future of the industry.
Every year, it brings undergrad and  graduate students together with academic and professional experts to discuss the tools and  techniques used by attackers and defenders throughout the field, while students of every  academic level (from high school to doctoral) compete in a range of challenges designed to  motivate, educate and showcase industry talent.
32  SANS NetWars for professionals SANS NetWars is a suite of hands-on, interactive learning scenarios that enable information  security professionals to develop and master the real-world, in-depth skills they need to  excel in their field.
With NetWars, we have really raised  the ante, as participants learn in a cyber range while working through various challenge  levels, all hands-on, with a focus on mastering the skills information security professionals  can use in their jobs every day.
Secure Decision’s Comic-BEE for students Comic-BEE (Comic-Based Education and Evaluation) is a cyber security education  technology suitable for all ages and expertise levels, developed with funding from the  Department of Homeland Security (DHS) S&T, Cyber Security Division.
GE’s GhostRed for students GhostRed is a hands on technology platform for high school and college students to learn  cybersecurity.
It contains many module and challenges that cover the breadth of topics  required to understand the subject matter, from programming, digital forensics, networking  many modules and system administration.
Facebook’s CTF Open Source platform for students Facebook began hosting college-level CTF competitions in 2013, and increasingly focused  on helping younger kids discover computer science and security.
Their CTF platform has  been used at dozens of events with organizations all over the world, from the Girl Scouts of  America to the University of Cambridge and high schools in Spain.
Due to the high cost and  technical requirements of building and running CTF environments, few publicly available  resources exist for schools, students, and non-profit organizations to use.
Additionally,  finding any security education resources at the middle and high school level is still a  challenge.
As a result, Facebook built a free platform for everyone to use that takes care  of the backend requirements of running a CTF, including the game map, team registration,  and scoring.
33  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceAppendix 2:  Cyber Competitions List  16+ Middle School High School 18+ Collegiate  Competition Name  Level  Location  URL  Cyber Security Challenge UK  16+  United Kingdom  https://cybersecuritychallenge.
org.uk/index.php  Cyber Security Awarenes Week (CSAW)  Qualifications & Finals  High School and  Collegiate  US  https://csaw.engineering.nyu.
edu  At Large Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate Penetration Testing  Competition  Collegiate  Alaska, Hawaii  http://www.virtualccdc.com/  Collegiate  US  http://cptc.csec.rit.edu  Digital Forensics Cyber Quest   Collegiate  National  http://digitalforensics.
securitytreasurehunt.com/  Information Security Talent Search  Collegiate  United States  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Iowa State University Cyber Defense  Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Iowa  https://cdc.iseage.org  Mid-Atlantic Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Midwest Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CDC)  Collegiate  Pennsylvania,  New Jersey,  West Virginia,  Maryland,  Delaware, Virginia  Iowa, Missouri,  Ohio, Michigan,  Indiana,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota, Illinois  http://maccdc.org  http://www.cssia.org/ccdc/  National Collegiate Cyber Defense  Ccmpetition (NCCDC)  Collegiate  United States  http://www.nationalccdc.org  National Cyber League  Collegiate  United States  http://www.
nationalcyberleague.org/  34  Competition Name  Level  Location  URL  North Central Regional Collegiate  Cyber Defense Competition  Collegiate  Northeast Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Montana, North  Dakota, South  Dakota, Wyoming  Maine, Vermont,  New Hampshire,  New York,  Massachusetts,  Rhode Island,  Connecticut  http://dakotacon.org  http://dakotacon.org/#ccdc  http://neccdc.net/wordpress/  Pacific Rim Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Washington,  Oregon, Idaho  https://www.prccdc.org  Packet Capture Analysis Cyber Quest   Collegiate  National  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Panoply  Collegiate  Global  http://www.Cyberpanoply.com  Rocky Mountain Regional Collegiate  Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Utah, Colorado,  Nebraska, Kansas  http://academic.regis.edu/ cias/rmccdc/  Southeast Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Southwest Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Western Regional Collegiate Cyber  Defense Competition (CCDC)  Collegiate  Alabama,  Florida, Georgia,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  Tennessee, South  Carolina, and  North Carolina  Oklahoma,  Arkansas,  Louisiana, New  Mexico, Texas  Arizona,  California,  Nevada  http://www.seccdc.org/  http://southwestccdc.org  http://www.wrccdc.org/  CyberPatriot  High School and   Middle School  United States  http://www.uscyberpatriot.org  ASIS Capture the Flag   Over 18  Global  https://asis-ctf.ir/home/  35  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceCompetition Name  Level  Location  URL  Black T-Shirt Cyber Forensics  Challenge  Over 18  National  BSides Colombia Capture the Flag  Over 18  Codegate  CyberLympics  Over 18  Over 18  DEFCON: Backdoor Hiding Contests  Over 18  DEFCON: Crack Me If You Can  DerbyCon Capture the Flag  Over 18  Over 18  Global  Korea  Global  Nevada  Nevada  Global  https:// cyberforensicschallenge.com  Not provided  http://www.codegate.org/  http://www.cyberlympics.org  http://www.defcon.org/  http://www.defcon.org/  https://www.derbycon.com  Digital Forensics Security Treasure  Hunt  Over 18  Global  http://uscc.cyberquests.org/  Facebook Capture The Flag 2016  Over 18  Global  Ghost in the Shell Code  Over 18  Global  Maryland Cyber Challenge &  Conference (MDC3)  Over 18  Maryland  http://gsec.hitb.org/sg2016/ facebook-capture-the-flag/  http://ghostintheshellcode.
com  http://www.sans.org/cyber- ranges/netwars  http://packetwars.com/  http://www.shmoocon.org/ hack_fortress  http://smashthestack.org  http://ictf.cs.ucsb.edu/  Global  Global  Global  Global  NetRiders  NetWars  PacketWars  SchmooCon Hack Fortress  Over 18  Global  Over 18  Over 18  Smash the Stack Wargaming Network  Over 18  UCSB International Capture the Flag  Over 18  List of Cyber Competitions (Provided by Dan Manson)  36  Appendix 3:  Contributors  The views expressed by these contributors do not necessarily reflect the views of their  organizations.
Laurin Buchanan CISSP, Principal Investigator Applied Visions, Inc., a division of Secure Decisions   A Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) with  over 25 years’ experience in Information Technology, Ms. Buchanan  has experience both as an information security practitioner and a  cyber security researcher.
She has a strong technical background in  infrastructure, networks and systems, having managed corporate IT  operations and security operations, as well as developing information  security programs and awareness training at all levels.
Ms. Buchanan  currently is Principle Investigator for cybersecurity software R&D projects  to develop novel techniques for cybersecurity education, cyber security  visualizations, and to automatically model and map dependencies  between missions, users, and the cyber assets they depend on.
Laurin cut her teeth defending a corporate network from international  hacktivists in 2000, and brought inline Intrusion Prevention Systems onto  that network a year later.
She has a strong technical background in infrastructure, networks and  systems, having performed and managed IT operations, as well as  security operations and architecture.
She has developed and delivered  security awareness training at all levels.
She has created and managed  corporate information security programs from the ground up.
Coming  into IT from business, she understands business needs and compliance  concerns and can communicate these to management.
Laurin leads research efforts to develop ways to improve the  performance of people who are defending our networks and  information, through better education, more usable systems, and  leveraging automation wherever possible.
37  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceChris Camacho Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer Ninjajobs    Chris is responsible of the leadership and direction of NinjaJobs.
He  has over 15 years of technical leadership in cybersecurity and has led  initiatives across multiple areas including Incident Response, Forensic  Investigations, Security Operations Centers, and Operational Strategy, to  ensure Global Financials cyber risk posture are aligned with the business.
Chris is an active member of the FS-ISAC Threat Intelligence Committee  and serves on multiple cybersecurity and innovation boards.
Mike Cameron Director of Business Development Leidos    Mike is the Director of Business Development for Leidos Cyber  Operations/AIMO and leads the market strategy and business  development for cyber solutions and services across Intelligence,  Defense, Civil, and International markets.
He is experienced in forming  regional marketing and sales agreements with international partners.
Mike currently serves as an industry advisor to a NATO working group  on Cybersecurity and is a frequent public speaker on the subject of  cyber workforce development.
His last assignment was the  Technical Operations Manager for Network Security at the Pentagon and  he’s been featured in FCW, CNN, BBC, ABC, Washington Times, and  many others.
In 2014 he was  awarded ‘Industry IT Executive of the Year’ by GCN, and in 2015 was  inducted into the Wash 100 by Executive Mosaic as one of the most  influential Industry Executives impacting Government.
He has a BSc in  Computer Networking, is the former President of ISSA-DC, and an ICIT  Fellow.
Peter Clay Principal  Zeneth Tech Partners   With over 20 years of experience in Cybersecurity, Peter Clay is a veteran  CISO, a visionary practitioner and respected business leader skilled at  building highly effective cybersecurity initiatives on a global scale.
With  notable expertise in making complex security concepts accessible and  actionable, Peter embraces innovation, encouraging his teams to think  out of the box to achieve risk management objectives.
As a Principal at  Zeneth Tech Partners, Peter is focused on scaling information security to  meet the needs of the other 99% of organizations’ information security  requirements.
Peter is a frequent keynote speaker at industry events  and meetings of corporate executive boards and trade associations.
Peter holds a certification in Information System Security  (CISSP).
An Oxford University-educated historian, Peter brings a unique  perspective to cybersecurity, with his passion for American and British  history informing his studies of modern cyber warfare.
39  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceKaren Evans Partner KE&T Partners, LLC CyberCompEx.org    Currently serving as an independent director and outside manager for  publicly traded companies.
Karen oversaw the development of over  $70B spent by the federal government in Information Technology  and associated services and advised the Director of the Office of  Management and Budget on the performance of these investments and  the federal enterprise architecture promoting inter and intra-agency  cooperation for key Presidential initiatives and cross government  solutions.
Accomplishments included Homeland Security Presidential  Directive 12 regarding authentication; IPv6, Information Sharing  Initiatives, Cyber Security, privacy to address the interests of the citizens  and government to improve government services through the use  of technology and leveraging the federal government buying power  and requirements with the establishment of the SmartBUY program.
Transparency and accountability were demonstrated with the publication  of the Management Watch List and High Risk List, the E-Gov Benefits  Report to Congress, FISMA reporting and increased focus on cyber  security with the creation of the Federal Desktop Core Configuration.
40  Bryan Fite Global Account CISO British Telecom    A committed security practitioner and entrepreneur, Bryan is currently  a Global Account CISO with BT Security.
Having  spent over 25 years in mission-critical environments, Bryan is uniquely  qualified to advise organizations on what works and what doesn’t.
Bryan  has worked with organizations in every major vertical throughout the  world and has established himself as a trusted advisor.
“The challenges  facing organizations today require a business reasonable approach  to managing risk, trust and limited resources, while protecting what  matters.”  Professional Highlights: • Host of Day-Con the annual “Non-Con” Dayton Security Summit • Founded MeshcoTM Producers of PacketWarsTM • Introduced ForensixTM computer forensics collection, analysis and   visualization suite   • Released AFIRM: Active Forensic Intelligent Response Method to the   general public  • Founded GETSecureTM a full service security practice; products,   professional services, managed services and training.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  41  Jessica Gulick  CEO and Founder  Katzcy Consulting    Jessica Gulick is founder and CEO of Katzcy Consulting, a woman- owned growth strategy and marketing firm specializing in cybersecurity  start-ups and SMBs.
A CISSP and PMP, Jessica is a 20-year veteran in  the cybersecurity industry with proven experience in strategy, cyber  policy, business metrics, global marketing and security program  management.
She has successfully launched multiple award-winning  global cyber marketing campaigns for services, products and cyber  competitions.
Her portfolio of work also includes the authorship of  NIST Special Publications, strategic cybersecurity plans for federal  government agencies and white papers for private companies,  cybersecurity consulting and engineering projects for national security  and financial clients, and a public-private initiative launching the first  Maryland Cyber Challenge and Conference.
In addition to being a  Mach37 mentor, she is president of the Virginia Tech MBA alumni board,  vice president of the Society of Women Cyberjutsu national board, and  co-chair of the NICE Working Group Competitions subgroup.
Katie Hanson Director  Sherman Consulting      Sherman Consulting was founded in 1997 when professionals from  various industries of organizational development, PR, government and  public affairs came together to create a synergy of talents to offer clients  strategic and innovative solutions.
As a Director at Sherman Consulting, I offer an entrepreneurial spirit  to Sherman Consulting’s environment offering innovative solutions for  clients in the fields of communications, marketing, public relations,  government relations and business strategy, where I oversee various  aspects of both strategy and implementation processes.
Currently, my focus at Sherman resides in the cybersecurity industry as  we facilitate the strategy and advancement of workforce development  programs and information sharing that builds the cybersecurity  community.
We specifically work with organizations and programs  including US Cyber Challenge, the Center for Internet Security, the  Council on CyberSecurity and CyberCompEx.
42  Jenn Henley Director of Security Facebook    Jennifer (Jenn) Henley is a Director of Security at Facebook.
In her role,  Jenn is responsible for leadership and planning across the Security  organization.
On a day to day basis she manages growth & strategic  initiatives for the organization and also the team’s cross functional  relationships with other departments and teams across Facebook.
She has over 15 years industry experience, holds her PMP  certification and is a graduate of St. Mary’s College of California where  she received a B.A.
George Heron Executive Vice President, Education and Mentorship Lifejourney    George Heron is the executive vice president for Education and  Mentorship at LifeJourney, an online learning platform that enables  students to live a day in the life of America’s STEM and Cyber leaders.
He has a passion for inspiring students to follow paths in STEM  education and explore technology careers, and he is active in youth  training events, cyber competitions and education-based technology  initiatives across the country.
43  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceLisa Jiggetts Founder & CEO Women’s Society of Cyberjutsu    Lisa Foreman-Jiggetts is the founder and CEO of the Women’s Society  of Cyberjutsu (WSC); one of the fastest growing nonprofits dedicated to  women in cybersecurity.
WSC provides women with the resources and  support required to enter and advance as a cybersecurity professional.
Her organization uses a holistic approach to develop programs that  train women in both the hard technical skills and soft skills, leaving  them feeling empowered to succeed.
A service-disabled veteran, she began her cyber career  in the military where she excelled as an IT security specialist.
44  Peder J. Jungck Vice President, Chief Technology Officer BAE Systems, Intelligence & Security    Peder is Vice President and Chief Technology Officer of BAE Systems  Intelligence & Security (I&S) sector.
BAE Systems Intelligence & Security  enables the U.S. government to transform data into intelligence and  provides engineering, integration and sustainment support for critical  military platforms and systems.
Peder joined BAE Systems in April 2013 after serving in several key  technology leadership positions for Science Applications International  Corporation (now Leidos), most recently as the Senior Vice President  and Chief Technology Officer of the Cyber Security Group within the  National Security Sector.
He joined SAIC via the acquisition of the Silicon Valley based  CloudShield Technologies, Inc. which he founded in 2000 delivering  trusted platforms for cyber security to the defense, intelligence and  commercial telecommunications provider communities.
Previous roles  include leading large scale IT deployments in the retail sector while  working for AT&T/NCR, as well as a breadth of IT and Software, CTO  and CIO roles for private, public and venture backed corporations.
He has earned 24 patents, published many peer-reviewed papers, a  regular conference speaker and co-author of the packetC language  for cyber and software defined networking.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  45  Joseph Krull Security Principal Director Accenture -    Joe provides high-impact professional services to Fortune 500/Global  1000 companies and emerging technology companies.
He is an author  and frequent public speaker on security and privacy subjects including  application security, mobile device security, secure e-commerce, identity  fraud prevention, wireless threats and the maturing science of Network  Intrusion Prevention.
He is a Certified Protection Professional (CPP),  Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP), National  Security Agency IAM Certified, Certified Information Systems Auditor  (CISA), Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control (CRISC) and  Certified Information Privacy Professional (CIPP).
Joe is an Advisory  Board member of the  National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition  (NCCDC) and a member of the Texas Chief Information Security Officer  (CISO) Council.
Marcelle Lee Adjunct Professor Anne Arundel Community College,  University of Maryland    Marcelle Lee is a malware analyst, an adjunct professor at Anne Arundel  Community College and University of Maryland, and co-founder of  Fractal Security Group, LLC.
She is involved with several industry  organizations, working groups, and boards, including the Women’s  Society of Cyberjutsu and the ISSA Women in Security Special Interest  Group.
Marcelle has earned the CSX-P, GCFA, GCIA, GCIH, GPEN, GISF, GCCC,   C|EH, CCNA, Security+, Network+, and ACE industry certifications.
She  holds several degrees and is currently pursuing a Master’s degree in  cybersecurity at UMBC.
She is a cybersecurity competition enthusiast  and an active volunteer in outreach to students and the community.
46  William Leigher Government Cyber Solutions Director Raytheon    Bill is a career U.S. Navy officer with thirty-three years’ experience in  operations and staff experience in Signals Intelligence, Information  Operations, Communications and Network Operations.
He has  extensive and hands-on experience operating and securing enterprise  networks on a worldwide scale.
Developed and implemented  methodologies for predictive analysis of network intrusion events.
Dr. Daniel Manson Professor and Department Chair  California State Polytechnic University    Dr. Dan Manson, CISSP, is a Professor and Department Chair in  Computer Information Systems at California State Polytechnic  University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona).
Dr. Manson has taught  Information Systems Auditing, Internet Security and Computer  Forensics in the College of Business Administration Computer  Information Systems undergraduate and Master of Science in  Information Systems Auditing programs.
From September 2003 to  March 2004 and January to December 2006, Dr. Manson served as the  campus Information Security Officer for Cal Poly Pomona.
Dr. Manson led the effort for Cal Poly Pomona to be designated a  National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance  Education in 2005 and again in 2008.
Dr. Manson is in charge of the  Western Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition and California  Cyber Challenge as part of the United States Cyber Challenge.
Dan has been co-Principal Investigator on three National Science  Foundation grants to support workforce, curriculum and professional  development in cyber security, including the current CyberWatch West  NSF ATE Regional Center grant.
Dan serves on the Academic Relations  Committee for the Los Angeles Chapter of the Information Systems  Audit and Control Association and is a past president of the Southern  California High Technology Crime Investigation Association.
47  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceJim Michaud Director, CyberTalent Solutions The SANS Institute    Jim Michaud is the Director of CyberTalent Solutions for the SANS  Institute, which helps clients find, develop, and retain qualified  cybersecurity professionals.
48  Diane Miller Director, InfoSec Operations and Cyber Initiatives Northrop Grumman Corporation    Diane Miller is the director of InfoSec Operations and Identity  Management for Northrop Grumman Corporation, and is Northrop  Grumman director of Global Cyber Education and Workforce  Development Programs.
In her role as director, Infosec Operations  and Identity Management, Ms. Miller ensures effective operational  leadership of the Information Security function for Northrop Grumman’s  Global Network and leads all aspects of both assured identity and  identity provisioning for the company.
In her role as director for Global  Cyber Education and Workforce Development Programs, Ms. Miller  is the focal point for the corporation’s global cybersecurity education,  outreach and workforce development efforts, leading its commitment  to cultivate a highly-trained, global cyber workforce of tomorrow.
Ms. Miller is a member of the Advisory Board for the IEEE Software  Technology Conference, a member of the Association of Information  Technology Professionals, and a founding member of the National  Software Council.
For 12 years, she served on the Editorial Board of the  Northrop Grumman Corporation Technology Review Journal.
She is a  member of the President’s Strategy Development Council for California  State Polytechnic University, Pomona, the National Visiting Committee  for the National Science Foundation’s National CyberWatch Center  and CyberWatch West, and a member of the Education and Workforce  Development Working Group at Department of Homeland Security.
Ms. Miller graduated Magna Cum Laude with a bachelor of science  degree in information systems from California State Polytechnic  University, Pomona.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  49  William Newhouse Deputy Director National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Bill Newhouse is the Deputy Director of the National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE), and Senior Security Engineer at that  National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), Both NICE  and the NCCoE are part of the Applied Cybersecuirty Division in the  Information Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST).
As the deputy director of NICE, he leads and promotes efforts within  government and with those involved in cybersecurity competitions  to foster, energize, and promote a robust network and an integrated  ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development that can more effectively secure cyberspace.
At the NCCoE, he is leading the drafting of building blocks that  address broad technology gaps in cybersecurity implementations that  affect multiple sectors.
These projects rely on insight and passion from  members of various industries who share a common goal of meeting  a particular cybersecurity need and will demonstrate commercially  available technologies that provide cybersecurity improvements to the  multiple sectors addressed.
Additionally, Mr. Newhouse promotes cybersecurity R&D efforts as a  co-chair of a Federal cybersecurity interagency working group and as  a regular representative to other federal cybersecurity R&D working  groups.
Before coming to NIST in 2010, Bill spent five years in the Office of  the Secretary of Defense where he worked initially with the Assistant  Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (ASD(R&E)) and  then with the Office of the Chief Information Officer for Identity and  Information Assurance focused on cybersecurity R&D and technology  discovery.
Bill utilized the Defense Venture Catalyst Initiative (DeVenCI)  to focus on innovative companies working in areas that had the potential  to improve cybersecurity.
Bill started his Federal career at NSA evolving  from telecommunications to information assurance to cybersecurity.
Mr. Newhouse is a graduate of both the Georgia Institute of Technology  and George Washington University and has been with the federal  government for over 29 years.
50  Rodney Petersen Director National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Rodney Petersen is the director of the National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST).
He previously served as the Managing Director  of the EDUCAUSE Washington Office and a Senior Government  Relations Officer.
He founded and directed the EDUCAUSE  Cybersecurity Initiative and was the lead staff liaison for the Higher  Education Information Security Council.
Prior to joining EDUCAUSE,  he worked at two different times for the University of Maryland - first  as Campus Compliance Officer in the Office of the President and  later as the Director of IT Policy and Planning in the Office of the Vice  President and Chief Information Officer.
He is the co- editor of a book entitled “Computer and Network Security in Higher  Education”.
51  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDavina Pruitt-Mentle Academic Lead National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)    Dr. Davina Pruitt-Mentle serves as Lead for Academic Engagement of  the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Prior to joining NICE, she  was a senior researcher and policy analyst for Educational Technology  Policy, Research and Outreach (ETPRO) and served as the Co-PI for the  National Science Foundation (NSF) supported National Cyberwatch  Center (NCC).
Previous to NCC leadership, she served as faculty within  the College of Education at the University of Maryland, College Park,  and served as Director of Educational Technology Outreach within the  College of Education at UMCP from 2001-2008.
She has spent the past  20 years conducting research on student and educator cyberawareness,  and developing programs to help increase the cybersecurity workforce  pipeline.
She received her Ph.D. in Educational Technology Policy from  the University of Maryland, her M.Ed from Lynchburg College, and her  B.S.
52  Nasrin Rezai Global Chief Information Security Officer  GE Capital & GE Digital Security Governance, Tech Risk and M&A    Nasrin Rezai is GE Capital’s Global Chief Information Security Officer  and head of Corporate Governance, Technology Risk and M&A security,  for the industrial GE businesses.
In this role she is responsible for all  aspects of cyber security management including incident response,  threat intelligence, security management, operation, compliance.
Prior to joining GE, Nasrin was SVP Chief Technology Risk Officer in the  Enterprise Risk Management Organization at State Street.
In this role,  she oversaw the creation of a technology risk management function to  ensure effective, independent technology risk management governance,  improved risk-based management decision processes and framework  and automated processes and reporting.
Nasrin’s other senior roles also included chief Technology Officer of  Security for Cisco Sales and architecture function.
In that role, she  promoted thought leadership in security architecture and technology  for Cisco’s customers.
She also led go to market strategies to embed  security in cross architecture selling models.
Other roles at Cisco also  included responsibility for Cisco’s global security vision, strategy, and  architecture to protect the company’s information and computing  assets.
In that capacity, she integrated leading-edge technologies and  solutions  —  including borderless networking, “BYOD,” virtualization  and cloud computing  —  into the company’s security architecture.
With  responsibility for the security architectures of Cisco’s diverse businesses  such as WebEx, Nasrin oversaw the development and management  of the company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) security model.
Throughout her career, Nasrin has promoted engineering, architecture  in designing security solutions for large enterprises.
She is passionate  about helping others develop their potential, and mentors many young  men and women.
She holds a master’s degree in business administration  and a bachelor’s degree in information systems.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  53  Monica Ricci Executive Producer, Content and Messaging Katzcy Consulting, LLC     Throughout her career, Monica’s method is to directly engage with  customers and market experts to realize her mission: bringing insights  and market awareness into an organization’s strategy, roadmap and  execution.
She excels at bridging the expanse between technical teams  and business leaders, positioning technology both to optimize business  processes and to deliver intelligence, as well as translating business  goals and objectives into technical requirements.
Monica worked for  over twenty years in the telecommunications industry, as a cellular radio  engineer, an operations business analyst, a product manager and a  director of marketing strategy.
was named National  Commissioner of CyberPatriot, the Air Force Association’s National  Youth Cyber Education Program, in 2010.
Skoch graduated from the  University of Arkansas in 1974 with a bachelor’s degree in industrial  engineering.
Skoch has more than 20 years of experience in leadership positions  developing, managing and implementing communications and  information systems for the United States Air Force as well as the  Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA).
During his time at DISA  he served as the Principal Director for Customer Advocacy and also  as the Principal Director for Network Services.
Within the USAF he  served as Director of Mission Systems, Director of Communications  Operations, and Director of Chief Information Officer Support where  he was responsible for aligning information technology systems with  business process improvements.
He has developed policies for global  telephone, video, radio, voice, data and satellite systems.
Before  joining CyberPatriot, Skoch was a consultant in the cyber and IT industry.
As Commissioner, Skoch oversees the planning and implementation  of CyberPatriot and provides leadership and support for the program’s  development.
In this role, Skoch is able to further student interest in  science, technology, engineering and mathematics related studies, as  well as increase their awareness of cybersecurity threats.
Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce  55  Bobbie Stempfley Director Cyber Strategy Implementation The MITRE Corporation    Roberta “Bobbie” Stempfley is currently director of cybersecurity  implementation at The MITRE Corporation.
She is responsible for  advancing MITRE’s cyber strategy, shaping the company’s cyber  work program, executing the cyber business strategy, and raising  awareness across the customer base.
Most recently, Ms. Stempfley  served in key leadership roles in the Department of Homeland Security,  including deputy assistant secretary and acting assistant secretary for  cybersecurity and communications.
Previously, Ms. Stempfley was  the chief information officer at DISA.
Dr. Adam Tagert Technical Director  NSA Science of Security Program    Adam Tagert is the Science of Security (SoS) Technical lead in National  Security Agency Research Directorate.
He works in all aspects of SoS  particularly in the promotion of collaboration and use of foundational  cybersecurity research.
He promotes rigorous research methods by  leading the Annual Best Scientific Cybersecurity Paper Competition  and supports the SoS community as a frequent poster on the SoS  Virtual Organization Site.
Dr. Tagert received his Ph.D. from Carnegie  Mellon University in Engineering and Public Policy where he researched  national cybersecurity strategies of small developing nations, particularly  Rwanda.
56  Greg Touhill Deputy Assistant Secretary, Cybersecurity and Communications DHS    Greg Touhill is one of the nation’s premier cybersecurity and information  technology senior executives.
In September  2016, he was named as the first ever federal chief information security  officer, reporting to Tony Scott (federal CIO) and responsible for  bolstering the government’s digital defenses.
57  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s WorkforceDan Waddell Regional Managing Director, North America Region  (ISC)2, Inc.    Dan Waddell is responsible for managing (ISC)2 operations in the North  America Region, which primarily focuses on supporting our U.S. and  Canadian members, customers and strategic partners with over 20 years  of experience in information technology, information assurance, and  cybersecurity.
Dan has served in various management and leadership  roles with (ISC)2 for over 15 years.
He has been a featured guest speaker  on cybersecurity issues on both TV and radio shows such as “NBC  News4 Midday,” “Government Matters” and “Federal News Radio,”  in addition to several cybersecurity conferences across the United  States.
He is currently a Fellow at the Institute of Critical Infrastructure  Technology (ICIT), a non-partisan think-tank based in Washington, D.C.  that acts as a conduit between the legislative community, technology  providers and federal agencies.
During his consulting career, Dan’s clients included the Department of  Transportation, Department of Defense, Department of State, Internal  Revenue Service, Social Security Administration, Department of Health  and Human Services and the Department of Homeland Security.
Services provided included CISO/CSO advisory services, information  security program management, secure cloud computing, security  authorization, privacy, data loss prevention, information assurance,  regulatory compliance, threat and vulnerability assessments, incident  response, disaster recovery/business continuity, risk management and  security engineering.
58  Dr. Gregory White Director, Center for Infrastructure Assurance and Security (CIAS) UT San Antonio  Dr. Gregory White has been involved in computer and network security  since 1986.
He obtained his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Texas A&M University  in 1995 conducting research in the area of computer network intrusion  detection and he continues to conduct research in this area today.
He  currently serves as the Director of the Center for Infrastructure Assurance  and Security (CIAS) and is an Associate Professor of Computer Science  at The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA).
Dr. White has been involved in security instruction for many years.
He taught at the U.S. Air Force Academy for seven years where he  developed and taught courses on Computer Security and Information  Warfare.
He helped build the nation’s first undergraduate information  warfare laboratory while at the Academy and twice received the  Academy’s Computer Science Research Excellence Award.
At UTSA  Dr. White continues to develop and teach courses on computer and  network security.
He has also been very active in the development and  presentation of cyber security exercises for states and communities  around the nation and with the development of training designed to  help states and communities develop viable and sustainable cyber  security programs.
He very active in development of cyber security  competitions and was instrumental in the development of NCCDC and  CyberPatriot.
Dr. White has written numerous articles and conference papers on  computer security.
He is also the co-author for five textbooks on security  and has written chapters for two others.
His current research interests  include an examination of organizational issues affecting computer  security, high-speed intrusion detection, infrastructure protection,  community cyber incident response, and the development of the  Community Cyber Security Maturity Model (CCSMM).
59  Cybersecurity Games: Building Tomorrow’s Workforce© Copyright 2016 Katzcy Consulting.
ET  Tuesday, April 4, 2017     United States Government Accountability Office    Testimony         Before the Subcommittee on Information      Technology, Committee on Oversight      and Government Reform, House of        Representatives  CYBERSECURITY  Federal Efforts Are Under  Way That May Address  Workforce Challenges   Statement of Nick Marinos, Director, Cybersecurity and  Information Management Issues             GAO-17-533T       April 4, 2017  CYBERSECURITY  Federal Efforts Are Under Way That May  Address Workforce Challenges       Highlights of GAO-17-533T, a testimony  before the Subcommittee on Information  Technology, Committee on Oversight and  Government Reform, House of  Representatives   Why GAO Did This Study  The federal government faces an ever- evolving array of cyber-based threats  to its systems and information.
Further,  federal systems and networks are  inherently at risk because of their  complexity, technological diversity, and  geographic dispersion, among other  reasons.
GAO has designated the  protection of federal information  systems as a government-wide high- risk area since 1997.
In 2001, GAO  introduced strategic government-wide  human capital management as another  area of high risk.
A key component of  the government’s ability to mitigate and  respond to cyber threats is having a  qualified, well-trained cybersecurity  workforce.
However, shortages in  qualified cybersecurity professionals  have been identified, which can hinder  the government’s ability to ensure an  effective workforce.
This statement discusses challenges  agencies face in ensuring an effective  cybersecurity workforce, recent  initiatives aimed at improving the  federal cyber workforce, and ongoing  activities that could assist in recruiting  and retaining cybersecurity  professionals.
In preparing this  statement, GAO relied on published  work related to federal cybersecurity  workforce efforts, and information  reported by other federal and non- federal entities focusing on  cybersecurity workforce challenges.
Agencies are in  various stages of implementing these  recommendations.
For more information,  contact Nick Marinos at (202) 512-9342 or  marinosn@gao.gov.
What GAO Found  GAO and others have identified a number of key challenges facing federal  agencies in ensuring that they have an effective cybersecurity workforce:  •   Identifying skills gaps: As GAO reported in 2011, 2015, and 2016, federal  agencies have faced challenges in effectively implementing workforce  planning processes for information technology (IT) and defining cybersecurity  staffing needs.
GAO also reported that the Office of Personnel Management  (OPM) could improve its efforts to close government-wide skills gaps.
•  Recruiting and retaining qualified staff: Federal agencies continue to be   challenged in recruiting and retaining qualified cybersecurity staff.
For  example, in August 2016, GAO reported that federal chief information  security officers faced significant challenges in recruiting and retaining  personnel with high-demand skills.
For example, in July 2016, OPM and  the Office of Management and Budget issued a strategy with goals, actions, and  timelines for improving the cybersecurity workforce.
In addition, laws such as the  Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 require agencies to  identify IT and cyber-related positions of greatest need.
Further, other ongoing activities have the potential to assist agencies in  developing, recruiting, and retaining an effective cybersecurity workforce.
For  example:  •  Promoting cyber and science, technology, engineering and   mathematics (STEM) education: A center funded by the Department of  Homeland Security (DHS) developed a kindergarten to 12th grade-level  cyber-based curriculum that provides opportunities for students to become  aware of cyber issues, engage in cyber education, and enter cyber career  fields.
•  Cybersecurity scholarships: Programs such as Scholarship for Service   provide tuition assistance to undergraduate and graduate students studying  cybersecurity in exchange for a commitment to federal service.
•  National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies: DHS, in   partnership with several other agencies, launched the National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Careers and Studies in 2013 as an online resource to connect  government employees, students, educators, and industry with cybersecurity  training providers across the nation.
If effectively implemented, these initiatives, laws, and activities could further  agencies’ efforts to establish the cybersecurity workforce needed to secure and  protect federal IT systems.
United States Government Accountability Office   Letter        Letter           Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and Members of the  Subcommittee:   Thank you for inviting me to participate in today’s hearing on the federal  information technology (IT) and cybersecurity workforce.
As recent  cyberattacks have illustrated, the need for robust and effective  cybersecurity has never been greater.
Compounding the risk, systems  used by federal agencies often have security vulnerabilities.
Accordingly, having cybersecurity professionals in the federal workforce  to help to prevent or mitigate vulnerabilities in federal IT systems that can  be exploited by the increasing number of threats from a variety of sources  is essential.
However, achieving a resilient, well-trained, and dedicated  cybersecurity workforce to help protect our information and infrastructure  has been a long-standing challenge for the federal government.
Since  1997 we have identified the protection of federal information systems as a  government-wide high-risk area.
In addition, in 2001, we introduced  strategic government-wide human capital management as another area  of high risk.1   My statement today discusses a number of the key challenges federal  agencies face in ensuring that they have an effective cybersecurity  workforce with the right knowledge, skills, and abilities to secure federal  systems and critical cyber infrastructure.
I will also discuss executive  branch initiatives and federal laws aimed at improving the federal  cybersecurity workforce, as well as other ongoing activities that could  assist agencies in recruiting and retaining cybersecurity professionals.
In preparing this statement, we relied on our previously published work  related to cybersecurity and government-wide workforce efforts and  challenges faced by the federal government in establishing an effective  cybersecurity workforce.
Based on this work, we examined recently  enacted legislation, executive branch initiatives, and other ongoing  activities intended to address these challenges.
Further, we reviewed  information reported by other federal and non-federal entities focusing on  cybersecurity workforce challenges.
Page 1   GAO-17-533T     Background                include detailed discussions of the objectives, scope, and methodology  for the work that we conducted.
The work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance  with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards  require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate  evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions  based on our audit objectives.
Federal agencies and our nation’s critical infrastructures—such as  energy, transportation systems, communications, and financial services—  are dependent on computerized (cyber) information systems and  electronic data to carry out operations and to process, maintain, and  report essential information.
The information systems and networks that  support federal operations are highly complex and dynamic,  technologically diverse, and often geographically dispersed.
This  complexity increases the difficulty in identifying, managing, and protecting  the myriad of operating systems, applications, and devices comprising the  systems and networks.
The security of federal information systems and data is vital to public  confidence and the nation’s safety, prosperity, and well-being.
However,  systems used by federal agencies are often riddled with security  vulnerabilities—both known and unknown.
For example, the national  vulnerability database maintained by the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST) identified 82,384 publicly known cybersecurity  vulnerabilities and exposures as of February 9, 2017, with more being  added each day.
Federal systems and networks are also often interconnected with other  internal and external systems and networks, including the Internet,  thereby increasing the number of avenues of attack and expanding their  attack surface.
In addition, cyber threats to systems supporting the  federal government and critical infrastructure are evolving and becoming  more sophisticated.
Page 2   GAO-17-533T                  Cybersecurity professionals can help to prevent or mitigate the  vulnerabilities that could allow malicious individuals and groups access to  federal IT systems.
The ability to secure federal systems depends on the  knowledge, skills, and abilities of the federal and contractor workforce that  uses, implements, secures, and maintains these systems.
This includes  federal and contractor employees who use the IT systems in the course  of their work as well as the designers, developers, programmers, and  administrators of the programs and systems.
However, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has noted that  the federal government and private industry face a persistent shortage of  cybersecurity and IT talent to implement and oversee information security  protections to combat cyber threats.
In addition, the RAND Corporation2  and the Partnership for Public Service3 have reported that there is a  nationwide shortage of cybersecurity experts, in particular in the federal  government.
According to these reports, this shortage of cybersecurity  professionals makes securing the nation’s networks more challenging and  may leave federal IT systems vulnerable to malicious attacks.
We and others have identified a number of key challenges federal  agencies are facing to ensure that they have a sufficient cybersecurity  workforce with the skills necessary to protect their information and  networks from cyber threats.
A high-performance organization needs a workforce with talent,  multidisciplinary knowledge, and up-to-date skills in order to achieve its  mission.
To ensure such a workforce for cybersecurity, we have identified  key practices for strategic IT workforce planning that focus especially on  the need for organizations to identify and address gaps in critical skills.
These practices include (1) setting the strategic direction for IT workforce  planning, (2) analyzing the workforce to identify skill gaps, (3) developing                                                                                                                          2RAND Corporation.
Hackers Wanted: An Examination of the Cybersecurity Labor Market  (2014).
3The Partnership for Public Service and Booz Allen Hamilton, Cyber-In-security:  Strengthening the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce (July 2009) and Cyber In-Security II:  Closing the Federal Talent Gap (April 2015).
Page 3   GAO-17-533T     Agencies Face Key  Challenges in  Ensuring an Effective  Cybersecurity  Workforce   Identifying and Closing  Skill Gaps                strategies and implementing activities to address these gaps, and (4)  monitoring and reporting progress in addressing gaps.4   However, over the last several years, we and others have reported on  federal agencies’ challenges to define their cybersecurity workforces and  address their IT skills gaps.
For example:   •   •   In November 2011, we reported that eight federal agencies had  identified challenges in their workforce planning efforts.5 For example,  they were not able to determine the size of their cybersecurity  workforce because of variations in how the cyber-related work was  defined and the lack of a cybersecurity specific occupational series.
In  addition, we noted that the eight agencies had taken varied steps to  implement workforce planning practices for cybersecurity personnel.
For example, five of the eight agencies had established cybersecurity  workforce plans or other agency-wide activities addressing  cybersecurity workforce planning.
However, these plans did not  always include strategies for addressing gaps in critical skills or  competencies, among other things.
Since our report was issued,  the agencies have implemented most of these recommendations.
In January 2015, we reported that the Office of Personnel  Management (OPM) and a Chief Human Capital Officers Council  working group had identified skills gaps in government-wide, mission- critical occupations, including cybersecurity.6 We noted that, although  these initial efforts had created an infrastructure for addressing skills  gaps, overall progress was mixed.
At times, goals had targets that  were difficult to measure.
In addition,  OPM had not established time frames or a process for collecting                                                                                                                           4See GAO, Cybersecurity Human Capital: Initiatives Need Better Planning and  Coordination, GAO-12-8 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 29, 2011) and IT Workforce: Key  Practices Help Ensure Strong Integrated Program Teams; Selected Departments Need to  Assess Skill Gaps, GAO-17-8 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 30, 2016).
Based on these  findings, we recommended that OPM (1) strengthen its methodology  for identifying and addressing skills gaps, (2) establish a schedule and  process for collecting government-wide staffing and competency data,  and (3) develop a set of metrics for agency HRstat reviews.
These recommendations have not yet been implemented.
In an April 2015 report, the Partnership for Public Service noted a  continuing need for the government to develop an understanding of  the size and skills of the current cybersecurity workforce; project the  government’s future cybersecurity human capital needs; assess  qualitative and quantitative gaps between the current workforce and  the workforce needed to address future challenges; and develop  strategies, as well as program and policy goals, designed to close  those gaps.
The Partnership attributed these challenges to the lack of  a government-wide master cybersecurity workforce strategy, leaving  agencies to operate largely on their own under a haphazard system.7  In November 2016, we reported that five selected agencies had made  mixed progress in assessing their IT skill gaps.8 These agencies had  started focusing on identifying cybersecurity staffing gaps, but more  work remained in assessing competency gaps and in broadening the  focus to include the entire IT community.
We recommended that the agencies take steps to fully  implement IT workforce planning practices.
The agencies agreed or  partially agreed with our recommendations; however, the  recommendations have not yet been implemented.
7Partnership for Public Service, Cyber In-Security II.
Page 5   GAO-17-533T     Recruiting and Retaining  Qualified Staff                An effective hiring process meets the needs of agencies and managers  by filling positions with quality employees through the use of a timely,  efficient, and transparent process.
Agencies can also use training and development  opportunities as an incentive to help recruit and retain employees.
However, we and others have found that agencies have faced persistent  challenges in recruiting and retaining well-qualified cybersecurity talent:   •   •   In November 2011, we reported that the quality of cybersecurity  training and development programs varied significantly across the  eight agencies in our review.
Additionally, most of the eight agencies  in our review said they used some incentives to support their  cybersecurity workforce; however, they either had not evaluated or  had difficulty evaluating whether incentives effectively support hiring  and retaining highly skilled personnel in hard-to-fill positions.9 We also  found that, although OPM had planned to develop guidance and tools  to assist agencies in the administration and oversight of their incentive  programs, it had not yet done so.
To address this shortcoming, we  recommended that OPM finalize and issue guidance to agencies on  how to track the use and effectiveness of incentives for hard-to-fill  positions, including cybersecurity positions; OPM has since  implemented this recommendation.
In August 2016, we reported the results of our review of the current  authorities of agency chief information security officers (CISO).10  Among other things, CISOs identified key challenges they faced in  fulfilling their responsibilities.
Several of these challenges related to  the cybersecurity workforce, such as not having enough personnel to  oversee the implementation of the number and scope of security  requirements.
Furthermore, CISOs  said that some security personnel lacked security skills or were not  sufficiently trained.
10GAO, Federal Chief Information Security Officers: Opportunities Exist to Improve Roles  and Address Challenges to Authority, GAO-16-686 (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 26, 2016).
Page 6   GAO-17-533T     Navigating the Federal  Hiring Process                •  Others have also noted the challenge of hiring and retaining qualified  cybersecurity professionals.
For example, the April 2015 Partnership  for Public Service report highlighted obstacles to federal recruitment  of cybersecurity talent, including the inability of the government to  offer salaries competitive with those in the private sector.11 In addition,  according to a January 2017 report from the federal CIO Council,  chief information officers (CIO) reported that it is difficult for agencies  to offer well-qualified candidates a salary that is competitive with the  private sector.12 This salary issue in turn can create problems in  retaining talented government employees.
OMB has also identified  additional potential issues, such as job candidates’ concern that a  private sector position may give them more autonomy and a more  flexible work culture than a federal information security position.
We have previously reported that the federal hiring process all too often  does not meet the needs of (1) agencies in achieving their missions; (2)  managers in filling positions with the right talent; and (3) applicants for a  timely, efficient, transparent, and merit-based process.
In short, we noted  that the federal hiring process is often an impediment to the very  customers it is designed to serve in that it makes it difficult for agencies  and managers to obtain the right people with the right skills, and  applicants can be dissuaded from public service because of the complex  and lengthy procedures.13   As we and others have reported, the federal hiring process can pose  obstacles to the efficient and effective hiring of cybersecurity talent:   •  The Partnership for Public Service reported in 2015 that the   government loses top candidates to a slow and ineffective hiring  process characterized by “self-inflicted” process delays and outdated  assessment methods.14 The CIO Council also reported in January  2017 that CIOs were often frustrated with the federal hiring process.
12CIO Council, State of Federal Information Technology (January 2017).
14Partnership for Public Service, Cyber In-Security II.
Page 7   GAO-17-533T                  •   officials with limited cybersecurity expertise may misevaluate  candidates’ capabilities, leading to under-qualified candidates  advancing ahead of well-qualified ones.15  In August 2016, we issued a report on the extent to which federal  hiring authorities were meeting agency needs.16 Although competitive  hiring17 has been the traditional method of hiring, agencies can use  additional hiring authorities to expedite the hiring process or achieve  certain public policy goals.
Further, while OPM  collects a variety of data to assess the federal hiring process, neither  it nor agencies used this information to assess the effectiveness of  hiring authorities.
We  recommended that OPM work with agencies to determine the extent  to which hiring authorities were meeting agency needs and use this  information to refine, eliminate, or expand authorities as needed.
OPM  generally concurred with these recommendations but has not yet  implemented them.
As noted previously, we have identified both information security and  strategic human capital management as government-wide high-risk  areas.
To address these high-risk areas, agencies need to take focused,  concerted action, including implementing our outstanding  recommendations, which can help mitigate the challenges associated  with developing an effective cybersecurity workforce.
This will help ensure  that the federal government has a capable cybersecurity workforce with  the necessary knowledge, skills, and competencies for carrying out its  mission.
15CIO Council, State of Federal Information Technology.
16GAO, Federal Hiring: OPM Needs to Improve Management and Oversight of Hiring  Authorities, GAO-16-521 (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 2, 2016).
17Federal employees can be hired under several different hiring authorities, including  competitive service (the standard hiring authority), excepted service, and direct hire  authority.
Page 8   GAO-17-533T     Recent Federal  Initiatives, Legislation,  and Ongoing  Activities Are  Intended to Improve  the Federal  Cybersecurity  Workforce  Multiple Executive Branch  Initiatives Are Under Way  to Address Workforce  Challenges                Based on a review of our previous work, we identified a number of  ongoing efforts to improve the cybersecurity workforce.
The executive  branch, Congress, and federal agencies have recognized the need for,  and taken actions aimed at achieving, an effective federal cybersecurity  workforce.
Specifically, executive branch organizations have initiatives  under way to help government agencies address workforce-related  challenges; Congress passed legislation intended to improve workforce  planning and hiring; and federal agencies have instituted other ongoing  activities that may assist the federal government in enhancing its  cybersecurity workforce.
A number of executive branch initiatives have been undertaken over the  last several years intended to improve the federal cybersecurity  workforce.
They include the following, among others:   •  The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE): This   initiative, which began in March 2010, is a partnership between  government, academia, and the private sector that is coordinated by  NIST to help improve cybersecurity education, including efforts  directed at training, public awareness, and the federal cybersecurity  workforce.
The mission of NICE is to energize and promote a robust  network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and  workforce development.
NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with  government, academic, and industry partners to build on existing  successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and bring  leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity  professionals helping to keep our nation secure.
•  National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework: In April 2013, NICE   published a national cybersecurity workforce framework, which was  intended to provide a consistent way to define and describe  cybersecurity work at any public or private organization, including  federal agencies.
The framework defined 31 cybersecurity-related  specialty areas that were organized into seven categories: (1)  securely provision, (2) operate and maintain, (3) protect and defend,  (4) investigate, (5) collect and operate, (6) analyze, and (7) oversight  and development.
Page 9   GAO-17-533T                  In November 2016, NIST issued a draft revision to the framework.18  Among other things, the revised framework defines work roles19 within  each specialty area and also describes cybersecurity tasks for each  work role and the knowledge, skills, and abilities demonstrated by a  person whose cybersecurity position includes each work role.
The  revised framework is intended to enable agencies to examine specific  IT, cybersecurity, and cyber-related work roles, and identify personnel  skills gaps, rather than merely examining the number of vacancies by  job series.
•  OMB Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan: In October   2015, OMB issued its Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation  Plan (CSIP) for the Federal Civilian Government to present the results  of a comprehensive review of the federal government’s cybersecurity  (known as the “Cybersecurity Sprint”).20 According to the CSIP, the  Cybersecurity Sprint identified two key observations related to the  federal cybersecurity workforce: (1) the vast majority of federal  agencies cited a lack of cyber and IT talent as a major resource  constraint that impacted their ability to protect information and assets;  and (2) there were a number of existing federal initiatives to address  this challenge, but implementation and awareness of these programs  was inconsistent.
To address these challenges, among other things,  the CSIP tasked OPM to provide agencies with information on a  number of hiring, pay, and leave flexibilities to help recruit and retain  individuals in cybersecurity positions, and called for OMB and OPM to  publish a cybersecurity human resources strategy and identify  possible actions to help the federal government recruit, develop, and  maintain a pipeline of cybersecurity talent.
•  Cybersecurity National Action Plan: Announced by the White   House in February 2016, the Cybersecurity National Action Plan was  intended to build on the CSIP activities while calling for innovation and  investments in cybersecurity education and training to strengthen the                                                                                                                          18NIST, NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NCWF), National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE), Draft Special Publication 800-181 (Gaithersburg, Md.
19According to NIST, work roles are the most detailed groupings of IT, cybersecurity, or  cyber-related work, which include specific knowledge, skills, and abilities required to  perform a set of tasks.
Some examples or work roles could include an authorizing official,  a software developer, or a system administrator.
20OMB, Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP) for the Federal Civilian  Government, M-16-04 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 30, 2015).
As part of this plan, the fiscal year 2017 President’s  Budget proposed investing $62 million to, among other things, expand  the CyberCorps Scholarship for Service program to include a  CyberCorps Reserve program offering scholarships for americans  who wish to gain cybersecurity education and serve their country in  the civilian federal government; develop a cybersecurity core  curriculum for academic institutions; and strengthen the National  Centers for Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity Program to  increase the number of participating academic institutions and expand  cybersecurity education across the nation.
These initiatives were  intended to help the federal government recruit and retain  cybersecurity talent with the technical skills, policy expertise, and  leadership abilities necessary to secure federal assets and networks  well into the future.
•  Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy: As called for by the  CSIP, OMB and OPM issued the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce  Strategy in July 2016, detailing government-wide actions to identify,  expand, recruit, develop, retain, and sustain a capable and competent  workforce in key functional areas to address complex and ever- evolving cyber threats.21 The strategy identified a number of key  actions within four broad goals to address cybersecurity workforce  challenges.
Table 1: National Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy Goals, Activities, and Responsible Entities   Goal  1.
Identify Cybersecurity  Workforce Needs   •   Examples of required activities  •   educate federal human resources and chief information officer staff  about the revised National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework  expand cybersecurity position coding to capture work roles outlined  in the framework, and align those roles with cybersecurity  vacancies  conduct strategic workforce planning   •  •  work with the private sector to explore trends and anticipate future   2.
Expand the  Cybersecurity Workforce  through Education and  Training   •   •   workforce needs  collaborate with academic institutions to address skill gaps by  identifying or promoting existing foundational curriculum that  institutions can consult and adopt  provide resources to academic institutions to accelerate and  expand cybersecurity education across the nation   Responsible entities  Office of Personnel Management  (OPM), National Initiative for  Cybersecurity Education (NICE)  partner agencies, other federal  agencies   Office of Management and  Budget (OMB), National Security  Agency, Department of  Homeland Security (DHS), and  NICE partner agencies                                                                                                                           21OMB and OPM, Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, M-16-15 (Washington, D.C.:  July 12, 2016).
Recruit and Hire  Highly-Skilled  Cybersecurity Talent   4.
Retain and Develop  Highly Skilled Talent   Examples of required activities  •   •   •   •   establish programs to assist federal agencies in their use of  existing flexibilities for compensation and explore opportunities for  new or revised pay programs for cybersecurity positions  establish a cybersecurity HR Cadre (an expert group of HR  professionals from across the government) to execute a model  cybersecurity end-to-end hiring process at agencies that is tailored,  timely, and a high-quality experience for both applicants and hiring  managers  develop a common training program for specific categories of  cybersecurity professionals  develop career paths that leverage existing programs and  responsibilities to deliver on best practices of performance  management, talent development, and compensation flexibility,  among other things   Responsible entities  OPM, DHS   OPM, DHS   Source: OMB and OPM Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, M-16-15 (Washington, D.C.: July 12, 2016).
| GAO-17-533T     Recent Laws Address  Cybersecurity Workforce  Issues   According to OMB’s 2016 report on agency implementation of the Federal  Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), agencies had  made progress in implementing this strategy to address workforce  shortages.22 Specifically, OMB reported that agencies hired over 7,500  cybersecurity and IT employees in 2016; by comparison, federal agencies  hired 5,100 cybersecurity and IT employees in 2015.
These executive branch initiatives include many actions that could help  address the challenges of identifying and closing skill gaps, recruiting and  retaining staff, and navigating the federal hiring process.
While  responsible agencies have begun to take action on many of these items,  it will be important to continue this momentum if these efforts are to be  effectively implemented and foster a significant improvement in the  federal cybersecurity workforce.
In addition to the aforementioned executive-level initiatives, several  recently enacted federal laws include provisions aimed at improving the  federal cybersecurity workforce.23 For example:   •  The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 includes provisions   intended to address challenges related to recruiting and hiring.
22OMB, Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 Annual Report to  Congress, Fiscal Year 2016 (Washington, D.C.: Mar.
23We have not evaluated whether these actions have been implemented.
Page 12   GAO-17-533T                  Specifically, the law requires the Department of Commerce, National  Science Foundation (NSF), and DHS, in consultation with OPM, to  support competitions and challenges to identify, develop, and recruit  talented individuals to perform duties relating to the security of  information technology in federal, state, local, and tribal government  agencies, and the private sector.24 The law also calls for NSF, in  coordination with OPM and DHS, to continue a federal cyber  scholarship-for-service program to recruit and train the next  generation of information technology professionals, industrial control  system security professionals, and security managers to meet the  needs of the cybersecurity mission for federal, state, local, and tribal  governments.
•  The Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014 includes   provisions intended to improve recruiting and hiring of cybersecurity  staff at DHS.
Specifically, the law authorizes the Secretary of  Homeland Security to establish, as positions in the excepted service,  such positions in DHS as the Secretary determines to be necessary to  carry out certain responsibilities relating to cybersecurity.25   •  The Homeland Security Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment   Act (2014) requires DHS to take certain actions related to  cybersecurity workforce planning.
Specifically, the Secretary of  Homeland Security is to identify all positions in DHS that perform  cybersecurity functions and identify cybersecurity work categories and  specialty areas of critical need.26   •  The Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015   assigns specific workforce planning-related actions to federal  agencies.27 These actions include                                                                                                                           24Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014, Pub.
25DHS cybersecurity workforce recruitment and retention provisions were enacted as  section 3 of the Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014, Pub.
26The Homeland Security Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act was enacted as part  of the Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014, Pub.
The act also requires GAO to  assess DHS’s efforts implementing the cybersecurity workforce initiative and to report on  our assessment by December 18, 2017.
27The Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 was enacted as a part of  the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016, Pub.
Page 13   GAO-17-533T                  •  developing a coding structure to capture the work roles outlined in  the revised National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (OPM,  in coordination with NIST);28   •  establishing procedures for implementing the coding structure to  identify all civilian cybersecurity positions (OPM, in coordination  with DHS, NIST, and the Office of the Director of National  Intelligence);  identifying all IT or cyber positions at agencies, and assigning the  appropriate codes to each (federal agencies); and  identifying IT and cyber-related work roles of critical need, and  report these needs to OPM (each federal agency, in consultation  with OPM, NIST, and DHS).29   •   •   The act also requires GAO to analyze and monitor the implementation  of the act’s requirements and report on this assessment to  Congress.30 We plan to report on the results of our review by no later  than December 18, 2018.
Similar to the executive branch initiatives discussed above, these laws  call for actions that, if effectively implemented, can address challenges  related to skill gaps and recruiting, hiring, and retaining skilled  cybersecurity professionals.
Further, these laws are an important  mechanism to hold agencies accountable for taking action and  demonstrating results in building an effective cybersecurity workforce.
28In October 2012, OPM, in coordination with NIST, published a coding structure for  federal cybersecurity positions based on the National Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework.
The codes were intended to  allow OPM and agencies to identify and categorize all federal cybersecurity positions,  laying the groundwork for a consistent government-wide count of the federal cybersecurity  workforce.
The coding structure that was developed under the Federal Cybersecurity  Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 was based on the November 2016 revision of the  framework.
29The act also includes various reporting and other requirements, including that OPM was  to submit a progress report on the implementation of the law’s requirements related to the  coding structure and applying the revised codes by June 2016.
30Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015, Pub.
Page 14   GAO-17-533T     Other Ongoing Activities  Could Assist Agencies in  Recruiting and Retaining  Cybersecurity  Professionals                Beyond the government-wide initiatives and recently enacted legislation  discussed previously, federal agencies have instituted other ongoing  activities that may assist the federal government in enhancing its  cybersecurity workforce.
These include the following, among others:   •  Promoting cyber and science, technology, engineering and   mathematics (STEM) education: A recent presidential commission  on cybersecurity highlighted the need for federal programs that  support education at all levels to incorporate cybersecurity awareness  for students as they are introduced to and provided with Internet- based devices.31 As an example of such a program, the National  Integrated Cyber Education Research Center (NICERC), an academic  division of the Cyber Innovation Center funded by DHS, was created  to design, develop, and advance both cyber and STEM academic  outreach and workforce development programs across the nation.
NICERC develops cyber-based curricula for use by K-12 teachers  across the country.
The curricula developed by NICERC is free to any  K-12 educator within the United States and comprises a library of  cyber-based curricula that provides opportunities for students to  become aware of cyber issues, engage in cyber education, and enter  cyber career fields.
•  CyberCorps scholarship: According to the Partnership for Public   Service, one way agencies can increase the supply of cyber talent is  through the use of undergraduate and graduate scholarships to  promising cybersecurity and STEM students.
One such program—the  Scholarship for Service program operated by DHS and NSF— provides scholarships and stipends to undergraduate and graduate  students who are pursuing information security-related degrees, in  exchange for 2 years of federal service after graduation.
There are also nearly 400 graduating students in  related academic programs to meet agencies’ cybersecurity needs  each year.
•  National Centers of Academic Excellence: Sponsored by DHS and  the National Security Agency, this program designates specific 2- and  4-year colleges and universities as “centers of academic excellence”  (CAE) based on their robust degree programs and close alignment to                                                                                                                           31Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity, Report on Securing and Growing the  Digital Economy (Dec. 1, 2016).
This  program is intended to help institutions of higher education produce  skilled and capable cybersecurity professionals and equip students  with the necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to protect  and defend our nation’s infrastructures.
•  National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies: DHS, in   partnership with several other agencies, launched the National  Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies (NICCS) in February  2013 as an online resource to connect government employees,  students, educators, and industry with cybersecurity training providers  across the nation.
Each course is mapped  to the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework.
In coordination with a strategic, government-wide approach to improving  the workforce, these programs and activities are intended to provide  valuable resources for agencies as they attempt to mitigate the shortage  of cybersecurity professionals.
In summary, recruiting, developing, and retaining a qualified and  competent cybersecurity workforce remains a critical challenge for the  federal government.
This is highlighted by the ever-evolving nature of the  cyber threat and the vulnerabilities that we have identified over the years  in agencies’ information security programs.
The federal government  continues to be challenged in key areas—such as identifying skills gaps,  recruiting and retaining qualified staff, and navigating the federal hiring  process—that are essential to ensuring the adequacy of its cybersecurity  workforce.
To better equip agencies to adequately protect federal  information and information systems from increasingly sophisticated and  ever-changing cyber threats, it is critical that a number of our open  recommendations be addressed.
Recent federal initiatives and legislation are intended to address the  challenges associated with the cybersecurity workforce, and agencies  may also be able to draw on other ongoing activities to help assist in  mitigating cybersecurity workforce gaps.
Page 16   GAO-17-533T                     If effectively implemented, these initiatives, laws, and activities could help  establish the cybersecurity workforce needed to secure and protect  federal IT systems.
Other contributors to  this statement include Tammi Kalugdan, assistant director; William Cook,  analyst-in-charge; Chris Businsky; David Hong; Franklin Jackson; Lee  McCracken; Luis Rodriguez; Adam Vodraska; Daniel Wexler; and Merry  Woo.
Contact and Staff  Acknowledgments   (101944)   Page 17   GAO-17-533T                   This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the  United States.
However, because this work may contain  copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be  necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.
GAO examines the use of public  funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,  recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed  oversight, policy, and funding decisions.
Pricing and ordering  information is posted on GAO’s website, http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.
Call for additional information.
To Report Fraud,  Waste, and Abuse in  Federal Programs  Congressional  Relations  Public Affairs   Contact:  Website: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm  E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov  Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470   Katherine Siggerud, Managing Director, siggerudk@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400,  U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125,  Washington, DC 20548   Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800  U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149   Washington, DC 20548   Strategic Planning and  External Liaison   James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707  U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814,  Washington, DC 20548      Please Print on Recycled Paper.
NIST Special Publication 800-181   National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE)   Cybersecurity Workforce Framework   William Newhouse  Stephanie Keith  Benjamin Scribner  Greg Witte          This publication is available free of charge from:  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181                          NIST Special Publication 800-181  National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE)   Cybersecurity Workforce Framework      William Newhouse  Applied Cybersecurity Division  Information Technology Laboratory  Stephanie Keith  Cyber Workforce Strategy & Policy Division  Office of the Deputy DoD Chief Information Officer  Benjamin Scribner  Cyber Education and Awareness Branch  DHS National Protection and Programs Directorate  Greg Witte  G2, Inc.  Annapolis Junction, MD      This publication is available free of charge from:  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181    August 2017           U.S. Department of Commerce  Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary    National Institute of Standards and Technology   Kent Rochford, Acting NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology            Authority   This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the  Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C.
NIST is responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines,  including minimum requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall  not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials  exercising policy authority over such systems.
This guideline is consistent with the requirements of the  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.
Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made mandatory  and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority.
This publication may be used by  nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-181   Natl.
There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under development by NIST in  accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities.
The information in this publication, including concepts and  methodologies, may be used by federal agencies even before the completion of such companion publications.
Thus,  until each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines, and procedures, where they exist, remain  operative.
For planning and transition purposes, federal agencies may wish to closely follow the development of  these new publications by NIST.
Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment periods and provide feedback  to NIST.
Many NIST cybersecurity publications, other than the ones noted above, are available at  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications.
Comments on this publication may be submitted to:   Attn: NICE, Applied Cybersecurity Division, Information Technology Laboratory   100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 2000) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-2000   National Institute of Standards and Technology   Email: ncwf@nist.gov    All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Reports on Computer Systems Technology   The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at NIST promotes the U.S. economy and public  welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards  infrastructure.
ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept  implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of  information technology.
ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management,  administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security  and privacy of other than national security-related information in federal information systems.
The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in  information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and  academic organizations.
Abstract   This publication describes the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)  Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NICE Framework), a reference structure that describes  the interdisciplinary nature of the cybersecurity work.
It serves as a fundamental reference  resource for describing and sharing information about cybersecurity work and the knowledge,  skills, and abilities (KSAs) needed to complete tasks that can strengthen the cybersecurity  posture of an organization.
As a common, consistent lexicon that categorizes and describes  cybersecurity work, the NICE Framework improves communication about how to identify,  recruit, develop, and retain cybersecurity talent.
The NICE Framework is a reference source from  which organizations or sectors can develop additional publications or tools that meet their needs  to define or provide guidance on different aspects of cybersecurity workforce development,  planning, training, and education.
Keywords      Ability; cybersecurity; cyberspace; education; knowledge; role; skill; specialty area; task;  training; work role.
ii   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Acknowledgements   The authors gratefully acknowledge and appreciate the significant contributions from individuals  and organizations in the public and private sectors, whose thoughtful and constructive comments  improved the overall quality, thoroughness, and usefulness of this publication.
We appreciate the  leadership and work of Rodney Petersen, Director of the National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE) at NIST.
The first NICE Framework was posted for public comment in September 2012 and published as  final in April 2013 as the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 1.0 [2].
The  authors recognize Dr. Jane Homeyer, Anne Quigley, Rex Min, Noel Kyle, Maya Yankelevich,  and Peggy Maxson for leading its development, along with Montana Williams and Roy Burgess  for their leadership in the development of National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version  2.0 which was posted in April 2014 [3].
Finally, the authors respectfully acknowledge the seminal work in computer security that dates to  the 1960s.
The vision, insights, and dedicated efforts of those early pioneers in computer security  serve as the philosophical and technical foundation for the tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities  noted in this publication.
All trademarks or registered trademarks belong to their respective organizations.
Trademark Information   I  /  .
NIST SP 800-181      Executive Summary   NICE FRAMEWORK   The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), led by the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST) of the U.S. Department of Commerce, is a partnership  between government, academia, and the private sector working to energize and promote a robust  network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development.
NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and  industry partners to build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and  bring leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping  to keep our nation secure.
NICE is committed to cultivating an integrated cybersecurity workforce that is globally  competitive from hire to retire and prepared to protect our nation from existing and emerging  cybersecurity challenges.
NICE promotes nationwide initiatives that increase the number of  people with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform the tasks required for cybersecurity  work.
As threats that exploit vulnerabilities in our cyberinfrastructure grow and evolve, an integrated  cybersecurity workforce must be capable of designing, developing, implementing, and  maintaining defensive and offensive cyber strategies.
An integrated cybersecurity workforce  includes technical and nontechnical roles that are staffed with knowledgeable and experienced  people.
An integrated cybersecurity workforce can address the cybersecurity challenges inherent  to preparing their organizations to successfully implement aspects of their missions and business  processes connected to cyberspace.
This publication provides a fundamental reference in support of a workforce capable of meeting  an organization’s cybersecurity needs by using a common, consistent lexicon to describe  cybersecurity work by category, specialty area, and work role.
It provides a superset of  cybersecurity Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) and Tasks for each work role.
The NICE  Framework supports consistent organizational and sector communication for cybersecurity  education, training, and workforce development.
A user of the NICE Framework will reference it for different aspects of workforce development,  education, and/or training purposes, and when that material is used at organizational levels, the  user should customize what is pulled from the NICE Framework to standards, regulations, needs,  and mission of the user’s organization.
The NICE Framework is a resource that will strengthen an organization’s ability to communicate  consistently and clearly about cybersecurity work and its cybersecurity workforce.
Organizations  or sectors can develop additional publications or tools that meet their needs to define or provide  guidance on different aspects of workforce development, planning, training, and education.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table of Contents   Executive Summary ..................................................................................................... iv  1  Introduction ............................................................................................................ 1  1.1  NICE Framework Background ........................................................................ 1  1.2  Purpose and Applicability ................................................................................ 2  1.3  Audience/Users .............................................................................................. 2  1.3.1  Employers ............................................................................................ 2  1.3.2  Current and Future Cybersecurity Workers .......................................... 3  1.3.3  Educators/Trainers ............................................................................... 3  1.3.4  Technology Providers ........................................................................... 4  1.4  Organization of this Special Publication .......................................................... 4  2  NICE Framework Components and Relationships .............................................. 5  2.1  Components of the NICE Framework ............................................................. 5  2.1.1  Categories ............................................................................................ 5  2.1.2  Specialty Areas .................................................................................... 5  2.1.3  Work Roles ........................................................................................... 5  2.1.4  Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) ................................................ 5  2.1.5  Tasks .................................................................................................... 6  2.2  NICE Framework Component Relationships .................................................. 6  3  Using the NICE Framework ................................................................................... 7  Identification of Cybersecurity Workforce Needs ............................................ 7  3.1  3.2  Recruitment and Hiring of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent ....................... 8  3.3  Education and Training of Cybersecurity Workforce Members ....................... 8  3.4  Retention and Development of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent ............... 8  4  Extensions ............................................................................................................ 10  4.1  Competencies ............................................................................................... 10  4.2  Job Titles ...................................................................................................... 10  4.3  Cybersecurity Guidance and Guideline documents ...................................... 10      List of Appendices   Appendix A – Listing of NICE Framework Elements ................................................ 11  A.1  NICE Framework Workforce Categories ....................................................... 11  A.2  NICE Framework Specialty Areas................................................................. 12   v      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.3  NICE Framework Work Roles ....................................................................... 15  A.4  NICE Framework Tasks ................................................................................ 24  A.5  NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions ................................................... 59  A.6  NICE Framework Skills Descriptions ............................................................ 77  A.7  NICE Framework Ability Descriptions ........................................................... 88  Appendix B – Work Role Detail Listing ..................................................................... 95  B.1  Securely Provision (SP) ................................................................................ 95  B.2  Operate and Maintain (OM) ........................................................................ 101  B.3  Oversee and Govern (OV) .......................................................................... 104  B.4  Protect and Defend (PR) ............................................................................. 110  B.5  Analyze (AN) ............................................................................................... 112  B.6  Collect and Operate (CO) ........................................................................... 116  B.7  Investigate (IN) ........................................................................................... 121  Appendix C – Workforce Development Tools ......................................................... 123  C.1  DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit ................................... 123  C.1.1  Proficiency Levels and Career Paths ................................................ 123  C.2  Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool ......................................... 123  C.3  Position Description Drafting Tool ............................................................... 124  Appendix D – Cross Reference to Guidance and Guideline Documents ............. 125  D.1  Cybersecurity Framework ........................................................................... 125   D.1.2  Example Integration of Cybersecurity Framework with NICE  Framework .................................................................................................. 127  D.2  Systems Security Engineering .................................................................... 129  D.3  U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Cybersecurity Codes ........ 130  Appendix E – Acronyms ........................................................................................... 132  Appendix F – References ......................................................................................... 134     List of Tables   Table 1 - NICE Framework Workforce Categories ........................................................ 11  Table 2 - NICE Framework Specialty Areas .................................................................. 12  Table 3 - NICE Framework Work Roles ........................................................................ 16  Table 4 - NICE Framework Tasks ................................................................................. 24  Table 5 - NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions .................................................... 59   vi   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 6 - NICE Framework Skills Descriptions .............................................................. 77  Table 7 - NICE Framework Ability Descriptions ............................................................ 88  Table 8 - Crosswalk of NICE Framework Workforce Categories to Cybersecurity   Framework Functions ........................................................................................... 127  Table 9 – Crosswalk of Work Role IDs to OPM Cybersecurity Codes ......................... 131   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      1   Introduction   NICE FRAMEWORK   The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), led by the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST) in the U.S. Department of Commerce, is a partnership  between government, academia, and the private sector that seeks to energize and promote a  robust network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development.
NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and  industry partners to build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and  bring leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping  to keep our nation secure and economically competitive.
NICE is committed to cultivating an integrated cybersecurity workforce that is globally  competitive from hire to retire, prepared to protect our nation from existing and emerging  cybersecurity challenges.
Throughout this document, the combined terms “cybersecurity workforce” is shorthand for a  workforce with work roles that have an impact on an organization’s ability to protect its data,  systems, and operations.
Included are new work roles that have been known traditionally as  information technology (IT) security roles.
Those roles have been added to this workforce  framework to highlight their importance to the overall cybersecurity posture of an organization.
Additionally, some of the work roles described herein include the shorter term cyber to be  inclusive of sectors where cyber has become the conversational norm for this field.
A cybersecurity workforce includes not only technically focused staff, but also those who apply  knowledge of cybersecurity when preparing their organization to successfully implement its  mission.
A knowledgeable and skilled cybersecurity workforce is needed to address  cybersecurity risks within an organization’s overall risk management process.
1.1  NICE Framework Background   The concept for the NICE Framework began before the establishment of NICE in 2010 and grew  out of the recognition that the cybersecurity workforce had not been defined and assessed.
To  address this challenge, the Federal Chief Information Officers (CIO) Council took on the task in  2008 to provide a standard framework to understand the cybersecurity roles within the federal  government.
Input from focus groups with subject matter experts from numerous federal  agencies helped the Federal CIO Council produce a research report that referenced where other  information technology professional development efforts were already under way, and thirteen  specific roles were identified as needed by agencies to conduct cybersecurity work.
Building on this inherently multidisciplinary exploration of the “field” of cybersecurity, the  Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative’s included a focus on workforce that tasked  several agencies to work together to develop a cybersecurity workforce framework.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) gathered input and validated final   1      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   recommendations via focus groups with subject matter experts from around the country and  across industry, academia, and government resulting in a second version of the NICE  Framework, version 2.0 [3], shared publicly in 2014.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) expanded on version 2.0 through internal  engagements with service components and external engagements with the private sector.
The  DHS and NIST co-authors worked with OSD to refine their expansion to become this publication  with a goal to emphasize private sector applicability and to reinforce the vision that the NICE  Framework is a reference resource for both the public and private sectors.
1.2  Purpose and Applicability   This publication serves as a fundamental reference resource to support a workforce capable of  meeting an organization’s cybersecurity needs.
It provides organizations with a common,  consistent lexicon that categorizes and describes cybersecurity work.
Using the NICE Framework as a fundamental reference will improve the communication needed  to identify, recruit, and develop cybersecurity talent.
The NICE Framework will allow employers  to use focused, consistent language in professional development programs, in their use of  industry certifications and academic credentials, and in their selection of relevant training  opportunities for their workforce.
The NICE Framework facilitates the use of a more consistent, comparable, and repeatable  approach to select and specify cybersecurity roles for positions within organizations.
It also  provides a common lexicon that academic institutions can use to develop cybersecurity curricula  that better prepares students for current and anticipated cybersecurity workforce needs.
The application of the NICE Framework offers the ability to describe all cybersecurity work.
An  applicability goal of the NICE Framework is that any cybersecurity job or position can be  described by identifying the relevant material from one or more components of the NICE  Framework.
Organizations or sectors can use the NICE Framework to develop additional publications or tools  that meet their needs to define or provide guidance on different aspects of workforce  development, planning, training, and education.
1.3  Audience/Users   The NICE Framework can be viewed as a non-prescriptive cybersecurity workforce dictionary.
Users of the NICE Framework who reference it should implement it locally for different  workforce development, education, or training purposes.
1.3.1  Employers   Use of the NICE Framework’s common lexicon enables employers to inventory and develop  their cybersecurity workforce.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •   •   •   •   Inventory and track their cybersecurity workforce to gain a greater understanding of the  strengths and gaps in Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities and Tasks performed;  Identify training and qualification requirements to develop critical Knowledge, Skills,  and Abilities to perform cybersecurity Tasks;  Improve position descriptions and job vacancy announcements selecting relevant KSAs  and Tasks, once work roles and tasks are identified;  Identify the most relevant work roles and develop career paths to guide staff in gaining  the requisite skills for those roles; and   •  Establish a shared terminology between hiring managers and human resources (HR) staff   for the recruiting, retention, and training of a highly-specialized workforce.
1.3.2  Current and Future Cybersecurity Workers   The NICE Framework supports those in the cybersecurity field and those who might wish to  enter the cybersecurity field, to explore Tasks within cybersecurity Categories and work roles.
It  also assists those who support these workers, such as human resource staffing specialists and  guidance counselors, to help job seekers and students understand which cybersecurity work roles  and which associated Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities are being valued by employers for in- demand cybersecurity jobs and positions.
These workers are further supported when vacancy announcements and open position  descriptions use the NICE Framework’s common lexicon to provide clear and consistent  descriptions of the cybersecurity tasks and training that are needed for those positions.
When training providers and industry certification providers use the common lexicon of the  NICE Framework, those in the cybersecurity field, or those who might wish to enter the  cybersecurity field, can find training and/or certification providers that can teach the tasks  necessary to secure a cybersecurity job or to progress into new positions.
Use of the common  lexicon helps students and professionals to obtain KSAs that are typically demonstrated by a  person whose cybersecurity position includes a given work role.
This understanding helps them  to find academic programs that include learning outcomes and knowledge units that map to the  KSAs and Tasks that are valued by employers.
1.3.3  Educators/Trainers   The NICE Framework provides a reference for educators to develop curriculum, certificate or  degree programs, training programs, courses, seminars, and exercises or challenges that cover the  KSAs and Tasks described in the NICE Framework.
3   NIST SP 800-181      1.3.4  Technology Providers   NICE FRAMEWORK   The NICE Framework allows a technology provider to identify the cybersecurity work roles and  the KSAs and Tasks associated with hardware and software products and services they provide.
A technology provider can then create appropriate support materials to assist members of the  cybersecurity workforce in the proper configuration and management of their products.
1.4  Organization of this Special Publication   The remainder of this special publication is organized as follows:    T h s    i  p u b  •  Chapter 2 defines the components of the NICE Framework: (i) Categories; (ii) Specialty  Areas; (iii) Work Roles; (iv) associated supersets of Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities; and  (v) Tasks for each work role.
•  Appendix A describes the NICE Framework list of Categories, Specialty Areas, Work   Roles, KSAs, and Tasks.
•  Appendix B provides a detailed listing of each work role, including the associated KSAs   and Tasks.
•  Appendix C provides some examples of workforce development tools  •  Appendix D provides some examples of guidance or guideline documents that cross   reference some of the content of those documents to components in the NICE Framework   •  Appendix E gives selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this document.
4   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   2   NICE Framework Components and Relationships   2.1  Components of the NICE Framework   The NICE Framework organizes cybersecurity and related work.
There are  seven Categories and all are composed of Specialty Areas and work roles.
This organizational  structure is based on extensive job analyses, which group together work and workers that share  common major functions, regardless of job titles or other occupational terms.
2.1.2  Specialty Areas   Categories contain groupings of cybersecurity work, which are called Specialty Areas.
There  were 31 specialty areas called out in National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 1.0  [2] and 32 in National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 2.0 [3].
Each specialty area  represents an area of concentrated work, or function, within cybersecurity and related work.
KSAs and Tasks are now associated with the work roles.
2.1.3  Work Roles   Work roles are the most detailed groupings of cybersecurity and related work which include a  list of attributes required to perform that role in the form of knowledge, skills, and abilities  (KSAs) and tasks performed in that role.
Work being performed in a job or position is described by selecting one or more work roles from  the NICE Framework relevant to that job or position, in support of mission or business  processes.
To aid in the organization and communication about cybersecurity responsibilities, work roles  are grouped into specific classes of categories and specialty areas as shown in Appendix A.
2.1.4  Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs)   Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) are the attributes required to perform work roles and are  generally demonstrated through relevant experience, education, or training.
Knowledge is a body of information applied directly to the performance of a function.
Skills needed for cybersecurity rely less on physical  manipulation of tools and instruments and more on applying tools, frameworks, processes,   5   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   and controls that have an impact on the cybersecurity posture of an organization or  individual.
2.1.5  Tasks   A Task is a specific defined piece of work that, combined with other identified Tasks, composes  the work in a specific specialty area or work role.
The NICE Framework components describe cybersecurity work.
As illustrated in Figure 1, each  Category is composed of Specialty Areas, each of which is composed of one or more work roles.
Each work role, in turn, includes KSAs and Tasks.
Grouping components in this manner simplifies communication about cybersecurity workforce  topics, and helps with alignment to other frameworks.
Specific associations of work roles to  KSAs and Tasks are shown in Appendix B and in a reference spreadsheet [4] posted to the NICE  Framework website [5].
NIST SP 800-181      3   Using the NICE Framework   NICE FRAMEWORK   Using the NICE Framework to understand organizational needs and assess the extent to which  those needs are met can help an organization to plan, implement, and monitor a successful  cybersecurity program.
3.1   Identification of Cybersecurity Workforce Needs   Cybersecurity is a rapidly changing and expanding field.
This expansion requires a cadre of  skilled workers to help organizations perform cybersecurity functions.
As organizations identify  what is needed to adequately manage current and future cybersecurity risk, leaders need to  consider the cybersecurity workforce capabilities and capacity needed.
Figure 2 illustrates how the NICE Framework is a central reference to help employers build a  capable and ready cybersecurity workforce.
Figure 2 - Building Blocks for a Capable and Ready Cybersecurity Workforce   The circular arrows on the left side of Figure 2 are activities that are likely to have an impact on  an organization’s ability to develop a capable and ready workforce:   •  Using the common lexicon of the NICE Framework clarifies communication between   cybersecurity educators, trainers/certifiers, employers, and employees.
•  Performing criticality analysis will identify those KSAs and tasks that are critical for   successful performance with a given work role and those that are key to multiple work  roles.
•  Running a proficiency analysis will inform an organization’s expectation of the level (e.g.
entry-level, expert) for positions, comprised often of more than one work role.
The  proficiency analysis should enable refinement of selection of the relevant tasks, and  KSAs needed for the work roles that make up that position.
7   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix C identifies some existing workforce development tools that support identification of  cybersecurity workforce needs.
3.2  Recruitment and Hiring of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent    Referencing the NICE Framework will help organizations to accomplish strategic workforce  planning and hiring.
Tasks used to describe  a position’s duties and responsibilities, and KSAs used to describe the position’s needed skills  and qualifications, should allow candidates and hiring managers to communicate more  effectively.
For organizations who are concerned with workforce gaps, a review of the NICE Framework’s  list of tasks can determine specific tasks which are not being performed by the organization.
Those tasks allow the organization to identify the work role(s) and specialty area(s) that are gaps.
The organization is better able to engage with the community of education, training, and  credential, and certification providers who map their offerings to the NICE Framework.
The  organization can identify training that will allow existing staff member to address the gaps.
The  organization’s hiring managers using data pulled from the NICE Framework in this manner can  recognize applicants who have the KSAs to perform the cybersecurity tasks.
3.3  Education and Training of Cybersecurity Workforce Members    The NICE Framework’ identification of tasks in work roles allows educators to prepare learners  with the specific KSAs from which they can demonstrate the ability to perform cybersecurity  tasks.
Academic institutions are a critical part of preparing and educating the cybersecurity workforce.
In turn,  developing and delivering curricula that are harmonized with the NICE Framework lexicon  allows institutions to prepare students with the skills needed by employers.
As the pipeline of  students finding desired jobs in cybersecurity increases, more students will be attracted to  academic cybersecurity programs as a pathway to a career.
3.4  Retention and Development of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent   A critical aspect of a skilled cybersecurity workforce involves the development and retention of  the skilled talent already onboard.
The following list illustrates some of the ways that the NICE  Framework supports retention and development of cybersecurity talent:   8      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  Organizations can develop career pathways that describe the qualifications necessary for  progressively challenging and evolving sets of work roles, such as those enumerated by  the NICE Framework.
•  A detailed understanding of the KSAs and Tasks helps existing staff to understand the   specific steps needed to develop their capabilities, promoting readiness for a desired  position.
•  An organization might offer staff rotations to provide opportunities to develop and use   new skills.
•  Organizations can identify personnel that are diligent in improving KSAs in relevant   areas, recognizing those who perform well.
•  Organizations can create development/improvement plans for staff to help them map out   how they can obtain KSAs required for new work roles.
•  Group training opportunities can be identified to prepare staff members to enhance   common knowledge, skills, and abilities in the work roles of an organization.
•  Organizations can use training and examinations that are based for specific cybersecurity   skills and abilities to assess proficiency in a realistic environment.
•  Organizations can use existing personnel to fill critical cybersecurity staffing needs,   leveraging the ability to review resumes of existing staff to identify those with desirable  KSAs.
•  The NICE Framework is helpful for existing employees who desire to move into a   cybersecurity work role from another position.
An organization can describe the KSAs  needed to allow a reliable employee in a non-cybersecurity work role to become part of  the cybersecurity workforce taking on cybersecurity tasks.
NIST SP 800-181      4   Extensions   NICE FRAMEWORK   Organizations or sectors can use the NICE Framework to develop additional publications or tools  that meet their needs and define or provide guidance on different aspects of workforce  development, planning, training, and education.
The following areas are a few examples from which additional publications or tools could be  developed.
4.1  Competencies    The Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration [6] defines a competency  as the capability of applying or using knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviors, and personal  characteristics to successfully perform critical work tasks, specific functions, or operate in a  given role or position.
Additional information about these  considerations is available from the Department of Labor’s CareerOneStop Site [7].
4.2  Job Titles   Job titles are a description of an employee’s job or position in an organization.
A mapping of  sample job titles to specialty areas or work roles would help organizations to use the NICE  Framework.
4.3  Cybersecurity Guidance and Guideline documents   NICE Strategic Goal #3, Guide Career Development and Workforce Planning, aims to support  employers to address market demands and enhance recruitment, hiring, development, and  retention of cybersecurity talent.
Adoption in this case means that the  NICE Framework is used as a reference resource for actions related to cybersecurity workforce,  training, and education.
One way to encourage adoption of the NICE Framework is to encourage authors of cybersecurity  guidance or guideline documents to cross reference their content with components of the NICE  Framework.
Each includes a two-character abbreviation (e.g.,  SP) for quick reference of the Category and to support the creation of NICE Framework work role identifiers (see Table 3 - NICE  Framework work roles).
Table 1 - NICE Framework Workforce Categories   Categories   Securely Provision (SP)   Descriptions   Conceptualizes, designs, procures, and/or builds secure information  technology (IT) systems, with responsibility for aspects of system and/or  network development.
Operate and Maintain (OM)  Provides the support, administration, and maintenance necessary to   Oversee and Govern (OV)   Protect and Defend (PR)   Analyze (AN)   Collect and Operate (CO)   Investigate (IN)   ensure effective and efficient information technology (IT) system  performance and security.
Provides leadership, management, direction, or development and  advocacy so the organization may effectively conduct cybersecurity  work.
Identifies, analyzes, and mitigates threats to internal information  technology (IT) systems and/or networks.
Performs highly-specialized review and evaluation of incoming  cybersecurity information to determine its usefulness for intelligence.
Provides specialized denial and deception operations and collection of  cybersecurity information that may be used to develop intelligence.
Investigates cybersecurity events or crimes related to information  technology (IT) systems, networks, and digital evidence.
Each Specialty Area includes a three-character  abbreviation (e.g., RSK) for quick reference of the specialty area and to support the creation of NICE Framework work role identifiers  (see Table 3 - NICE Framework work roles).
Table 2 - NICE Framework Specialty Areas   Categories  Securely Provision  (SP)   Specialty Areas  Risk Management (RSK)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Software Development (DEV)   Systems Architecture (ARC)   Technology R&D (TRD)   Systems Requirements Planning  (SRP)   Test and Evaluation (TST)   Systems Development (SYS)  Data Administration (DTA)   :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Operate and Maintain   (OM)    Specialty Area Descriptions   Oversees, evaluates, and supports the documentation, validation, assessment, and  authorization processes necessary to assure that existing and new information  technology (IT) systems meet the organization's cybersecurity and risk  requirements.
Ensures appropriate treatment of risk, compliance, and assurance  from internal and external perspectives.
Develops and writes/codes new (or modifies existing) computer applications,  software, or specialized utility programs following software assurance best  practices.
Develops system concepts and works on the capabilities phases of the systems  development life cycle; translates technology and environmental conditions (e.g.,  law and regulation) into system and security designs and processes.
Conducts technology assessment and integration processes; provides and  supports a prototype capability and/or evaluates its utility.
Consults with customers to gather and evaluate functional requirements and  translates these requirements into technical solutions.
Provides guidance to  customers about applicability of information systems to meet business needs.
Develops and conducts tests of systems to evaluate compliance with  specifications and requirements by applying principles and methods for cost- effective planning, evaluating, verifying, and validating of technical, functional,  and performance characteristics (including interoperability) of systems or  elements of systems incorporating IT.
Works on the development phases of the systems development life cycle.
Develops and administers databases and/or data management systems that allow  for the storage, query, protection, and utilization of data.
Knowledge Management (KMG)  Manages and administers processes and tools that enable the organization to  identify, document, and access intellectual capital and information content.
12   NIST SP 800-181      Categories   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Specialty Areas   Customer Service and Technical  Support (STS)   Network Services (NET)   Systems Administration (ADM)   Systems Analysis (ANA)      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Oversee and Govern  (OV)   Legal Advice and Advocacy  (LGA)   Training, Education, and  Awareness (TEA)   Cybersecurity Management  (MGT)   Strategic Planning and Policy  (SPP)  Executive Cyber Leadership  (EXL)  Program/Project Management  (PMA) and Acquisition   NICE FRAMEWORK   Specialty Area Descriptions   Addresses problems; installs, configures, troubleshoots, and provides  maintenance and training in response to customer requirements or inquiries (e.g.,  tiered-level customer support).
Typically provides initial incident information to  the Incident Response (IR) Specialty.
Installs, configures, tests, operates, maintains, and manages networks and their  firewalls, including hardware (e.g., hubs, bridges, switches, multiplexers, routers,  cables, proxy servers, and protective distributor systems) and software that  permit the sharing and transmission of all spectrum transmissions of information  to support the security of information and information systems.
Manages accounts, firewalls, and patches.
Responsible for access  control, passwords, and account creation and administration.
Studies an organization's current computer systems and procedures, and designs  information systems solutions to help the organization operate more securely,  efficiently, and effectively.
Brings business and information technology (IT)  together by understanding the needs and limitations of both.
Advocates legal  and policy changes, and makes a case on behalf of client via a wide range of  written and oral work products, including legal briefs and proceedings.
Develops, plans,  coordinates, delivers and/or evaluates training courses, methods, and techniques  as appropriate.
Oversees the cybersecurity program of an information system or network,  including managing information security implications within the organization,  specific program, or other area of responsibility, to include strategic, personnel,  infrastructure, requirements, policy enforcement, emergency planning, security  awareness, and other resources.
Develops policies and plans and/or advocates for changes in policy that support  organizational cyberspace initiatives or required changes/enhancements.
Supervises, manages, and/or leads work and workers performing cyber and  cyber-related and/or cyber operations work.
Applies knowledge of data, information, processes, organizational interactions,  skills, and analytical expertise, as well as systems, networks, and information   13   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Categories   Specialty Areas   Protect and Defend  (PR)    Cyber Defense Analysis (CDA)  Cyber Defense  Infrastructure Support (INF)  Incident Response (CIR)   Vulnerability Assessment and  Management (VAM)   Threat Analysis (TWA)   Exploitation Analysis (EXP)   All-Source Analysis (ASA)   Targets (TGT)   Language Analysis (LNG)   Analyze  (AN)   Specialty Area Descriptions   exchange capabilities to manage acquisition programs.
Executes duties  governing hardware, software, and information system acquisition programs and  other program management policies.
Provides direct support for acquisitions that  use information technology (IT) (including National Security Systems), applying  IT-related laws and policies, and provides IT-related guidance throughout the  total acquisition life cycle.
Uses defensive measures and information collected from a variety of sources to  identify, analyze, and report events that occur or might occur within the network  to protect information, information systems, and networks from threats.
Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, reviews, and administers the  infrastructure hardware and software that are required to effectively manage the  computer network defense service provider network and resources.
Monitors  network to actively remediate unauthorized activities.
Uses mitigation, preparedness, and response and  recovery approaches, as needed, to maximize survival of life, preservation of  property, and information security.
Conducts assessments of threats and vulnerabilities; determines deviations from  acceptable configurations, enterprise or local policy; assesses the level of risk;  and develops and/or recommends appropriate mitigation countermeasures in  operational and nonoperational situations.
Identifies and assesses the capabilities and activities of cybersecurity criminals  or foreign intelligence entities; produces findings to help initialize or support law  enforcement and counterintelligence investigations or activities.
Analyzes collected information to identify vulnerabilities and potential for  exploitation.
Analyzes threat information from multiple sources, disciplines, and agencies  across the Intelligence Community.
Synthesizes and places intelligence  information in context; draws insights about the possible implications.
Applies current knowledge of one or more regions, countries, non-state entities,  and/or technologies.
Applies language, cultural, and technical expertise to support information  collection, analysis, and other cybersecurity activities.
14   NIST SP 800-181      Categories   Collect and Operate   (CO)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Specialty Areas   Collection Operations (CLO)   Cyber Operational Planning  (OPL)   Cyber Operations (OPS)   Investigate   (IN)    Cyber Investigation (INV)   Digital Forensics (FOR)      A.3   NICE Framework Work Roles      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Specialty Area Descriptions   Executes collection using appropriate strategies and within the priorities  established through the collection management process.
Performs in-depth joint targeting and cybersecurity planning process.
Gathers  information and develops detailed Operational Plans and Orders supporting  requirements.
Conducts strategic and operational-level planning across the full  range of operations for integrated information and cyberspace operations.
Performs activities to gather evidence on criminal or foreign intelligence entities  to mitigate possible or real-time threats, protect against espionage or insider  threats, foreign sabotage, international terrorist activities, or to support other  intelligence activities.
Applies tactics, techniques, and procedures for a full range of investigative tools  and processes to include, but not limited to, interview and interrogation  techniques, surveillance, counter surveillance, and surveillance detection, and  appropriately balances the benefits of prosecution versus intelligence gathering.
Collects, processes, preserves, analyzes, and presents computer-related evidence  in support of network vulnerability mitigation and/or criminal, fraud,  counterintelligence, or law enforcement investigations.
Table 3 provides a description of each of the work roles described by the NICE Framework.
Each work role is identified by the  Category and Specialty Area, followed by a sequential number (e.g., SP-RSK-001 is the first work role in the SP Category and RSK  Specialty Area).
Some of the work role Descriptions originate with external documents (e.g., Committee on National Security Systems  Instruction [CNSSI] 4009) and include that information in the description column.
15   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 3 - NICE Framework Work Roles   Category  Securely  Provision  (SP)   T h s    i  p u b  Specialty Area  Risk Management  (RSK)   Work Role   Authorizing Official/Designating  Representative    Work Role ID  SP-RSK-001   Work Role Description   Senior official or executive with the authority to  formally assume responsibility for operating an  information system at an acceptable level of risk to  organizational operations (including mission,  functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets,  individuals, other organizations, and the Nation  (CNSSI 4009).
Security Control Assessor   Software  Development  (DEV)   Systems  Architecture  (ARC)   Software Developer    Secure Software Assessor   Enterprise Architect   Security Architect   SP-RSK-002  Conducts independent comprehensive assessments of  the management, operational, and technical security  controls and control enhancements employed within  or inherited by an information technology (IT) system  to determine the overall effectiveness of the controls  (as defined in NIST SP 800-37).
SP-DEV-001  Develops, creates, maintains, and writes/codes new   (or modifies existing) computer applications,  software, or specialized utility programs.
SP-DEV-002  Analyzes the security of new or existing computer   applications, software, or specialized utility programs  and provides actionable results.
SP-ARC-001  Develops and maintains business, systems, and   information processes to support enterprise mission  needs; develops information technology (IT) rules  and requirements that describe baseline and target  architectures.
SP-ARC-002  Ensures that the stakeholder security requirements  necessary to protect the organization’s mission and  business processes are adequately addressed in all  aspects of enterprise architecture including reference  models, segment and solution architectures, and the  resulting systems supporting those missions and  business processes.
16   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Technology R&D  (TRD)   Work Role   Research & Development  Specialist   Systems  Requirements  Planning (SRP)  Test and  Evaluation (TST)   Systems  Development  (SYS)   Systems Requirements Planner    System Testing and Evaluation  Specialist   Information Systems Security  Developer   Systems Developer    Operate and  Maintain  (OM)   Data  Administration  (DTA)   Database Administrator   Data Analyst   Knowledge  Management  (KMG)   Knowledge Manager      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  SP-TRD-001  Conducts software and systems engineering and   Work Role Description   software systems research to develop new  capabilities, ensuring cybersecurity is fully integrated.
Conducts comprehensive technology research to  evaluate potential vulnerabilities in cyberspace  systems.
SP-SRP-001  Consults with customers to evaluate functional   SP-TST-001   requirements and translate functional requirements  into technical solutions.
Plans, prepares, and executes tests of systems to  evaluate results against specifications and  requirements as well as analyze/report test results.
SP-SYS-001  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information   system security throughout the systems development  life cycle.
SP-SYS-002  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information   systems throughout the systems development life  cycle.
OM-DTA-001  Administers databases and/or data management  systems that allow for the secure storage, query,  protection, and utilization of data.
OM-DTA-002  Examines data from multiple disparate sources with   the goal of providing security and privacy insight.
Designs and implements custom algorithms,  workflow processes, and layouts for complex,  enterprise-scale data sets used for modeling, data  mining, and research purposes.
OM-KMG-001  Responsible for the management and administration  of processes and tools that enable the organization to  identify, document, and access intellectual capital and  information content.
17   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Customer Service  and Technical  Support (STS)   Network Services  (NET)   Systems  Administration  (ADM)   Work Role   Technical Support Specialist   Network Operations Specialist   System Administrator   Systems Analysis  (ANA)   Legal Advice and  Advocacy (LGA)   Systems Security Analyst   Cyber Legal Advisor   Privacy Officer/Privacy  Compliance Manager   Oversee and  Govern  (OV)   Training,  Education, and  Awareness (TEA)   Cyber Instructional Curriculum  Developer   Cyber Instructor   Information Systems Security  Manager      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  OM-STS-001  Provides technical support to customers who need   Work Role Description   assistance utilizing client-level hardware and software  in accordance with established or approved  organizational process components (i.e., Master  Incident Management Plan, when applicable).
OM-NET-001  Plans, implements, and operates network   services/systems, to include hardware and virtual  environments.
for example,  installing, configuring, and updating hardware and  software; establishing and managing user accounts;  overseeing or conducting backup and recovery tasks;  implementing operational and technical security  controls; and adhering to organizational security  policies and procedures).
OM-ANA-001  Responsible for the analysis and development of the  integration, testing, operations, and maintenance of  systems security.
OV-LGA-001  Provides legal advice and recommendations on   relevant topics related to cyber law.
OV-LGA-002  Develops and oversees privacy compliance program   and privacy program staff, supporting privacy  compliance, governance/policy, and incident response  needs of privacy and security executives and their  teams.
OV-TEA-001  Develops, plans, coordinates, and evaluates cyber   training/education courses, methods, and techniques  based on instructional needs.
OV-TEA-002  Develops and conducts training or education of   personnel within cyber domain.
OV-MGT-001  Responsible for the cybersecurity of a program,   organization, system, or enclave.
18   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Cybersecurity  Management  (MGT)   Work Role   Communications Security  (COMSEC) Manager    Work Role ID  OV-MGT-002   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Description   Individual who manages the Communications  Security (COMSEC) resources of an organization  (CNSSI  4009) or key custodian for a Crypto Key  Management System (CKMS).
T h s    i  p u b  Strategic Planning  and Policy (SPP)   Cyber Workforce Developer and  Manager   l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Executive Cyber  Leadership (EXL)   Program/Project  Management  (PMA) and  Acquisition   Cyber Policy and Strategy  Planner   Executive Cyber Leadership   Program Manager   IT Project Manager  Product Support Manager    OV-SPP-001  Develops cyberspace workforce plans, strategies, and  guidance to support cyberspace workforce manpower,  personnel, training and education requirements and to  address changes to cyberspace policy, doctrine,  materiel, force structure, and education and training  requirements.
OV-SPP-002  Develops and maintains cybersecurity plans, strategy,   and policy to support and align with organizational  cybersecurity initiatives and regulatory compliance.
OV-EXL-001  Executes decision-making authorities and establishes   vision and direction for an organization's cyber and  cyber-related resources and/or operations.
OV-PMA-002  Directly manages information technology projects.
OV-PMA-003  Manages the package of support functions required to   field and maintain the readiness and operational  capability of systems and components.
Protect and  Defend (PR)   Cyber Defense  Analysis (CDA)   Cyber Defense Analyst   IT Investment/Portfolio Manager  OV-PMA-004  Manages a portfolio of IT investments that align with  the overall needs of mission and enterprise priorities.
IT Program Auditor   OV-PMA-005  Conducts evaluations of an IT program or its   individual components to determine compliance with  published standards.
PR-CDA-001  Uses data collected from a variety of cyber defense   tools (e.g., IDS alerts, firewalls, network traffic logs)  to analyze events that occur within their environments  for the purposes of mitigating threats.
19   Work Role   Cyber Defense Infrastructure  Support Specialist   Work Role ID  PR-INF-001   Work Role Description   Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, and  administers the infrastructure hardware and software.
NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Cyber Defense  Infrastructure  Support (INF)  Incident Response  (CIR)  Vulnerability  Assessment and  Management  (VAM)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Cyber Defense Incident  Responder  Vulnerability Assessment  Analyst   Analyze  (AN)    Threat Analysis  (TWA)   Threat/Warning Analyst    Exploitation  Analysis (EXP)   Exploitation Analyst   All-Source  Analysis (ASA)   All-Source Analyst    Mission Assessment Specialist      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
PR-CIR-001   Investigates, analyzes, and responds to cyber  incidents within the network environment or enclave.
PR-VAM-001  Performs assessments of systems and networks within   AN-TWA-001  Develops cyber indicators to maintain awareness of   the network environment or enclave and identifies  where those systems/networks deviate from  acceptable configurations, enclave policy, or local  policy.
Measures effectiveness of defense-in-depth  architecture against known vulnerabilities.
Collects, processes, analyzes, and  disseminates cyber threat/warning assessments.
AN-EXP-001  Collaborates to identify access and collection gaps  that can be satisfied through cyber collection and/or  preparation activities.
Leverages all authorized  resources and analytic techniques to penetrate  targeted networks.
AN-ASA-001  Analyzes data/information from one or multiple   AN-ASA-002  Develops assessment plans and measures of   sources to conduct preparation of the environment,  respond to requests for information, and submit  intelligence collection and production requirements in  support of planning and operations.
Conducts strategic and  operational effectiveness assessments as required for  cyber events.
20   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Targets (TGT)   Work Role   Target Developer    T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Target Network Analyst   Language  Analysis (LNG)   Multi-Disciplined Language  Analyst   :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Collect and  Operate  (CO)   Collection  Operations (CLO)   All Source-Collection Manager   CO-CLO-001   21   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  AN-TGT-001  Performs target system analysis, builds and/or   Work Role Description   maintains electronic target folders to include inputs  from environment preparation, and/or internal or  external intelligence sources.
Coordinates with  partner target activities and intelligence organizations,  and presents candidate targets for vetting and  validation.
AN-TGT-002  Conducts advanced analysis of collection and open-  AN-LNG-001  Applies language and culture expertise with   source data to ensure target continuity; to profile  targets and their activities; and develop techniques to  gain more target information.
Determines how targets  communicate, move, operate and live based on  knowledge of target technologies, digital networks,  and the applications on them.
target/threat and technical knowledge to process,  analyze, and/or disseminate intelligence information  derived from language, voice and/or graphic material.
Creates and maintains language-specific databases  and working aids to support cyber action execution  and ensure critical knowledge sharing.
Identifies collection authorities and environment;  incorporates priority information requirements into  collection management; develops concepts to meet  leadership's intent.
NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area   Work Role  All Source-Collection  Requirements Manager   Cyber Operational  Planning (OPL)   Cyber Intel Planner   Cyber Ops Planner   Partner Integration Planner   Cyber Operations  (OPS)   Cyber Operator      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  CO-CLO-002  Evaluates collection operations and develops effects-  Work Role Description   CO-OPL-001  Develops detailed intelligence plans to satisfy cyber   based collection requirements strategies using  available sources and methods to improve collection.
Develops, processes, validates, and coordinates  submission of collection requirements.
operations requirements.
Collaborates with cyber  operations planners to identify, validate, and levy  requirements for collection and analysis.
Participates  in targeting selection, validation, synchronization, and  execution of cyber actions.
Synchronizes intelligence  activities to support organization objectives in  cyberspace.
CO-OPL-002  Develops detailed plans for the conduct or support of   CO-OPL-003  Works to advance cooperation across organizational   the applicable range of cyber operations through  collaboration with other planners, operators and/or  analysts.
Participates in targeting selection,  validation, synchronization, and enables integration  during the execution of cyber actions.
or national borders between cyber operations partners.
Aids the integration of partner cyber teams by  providing guidance, resources, and collaboration to  develop best practices and facilitate organizational  support for achieving objectives in integrated cyber  actions.
Performs network navigation, tactical  forensic analysis, and, when directed, executes on-net  operations.
22   Work Role   Cyber Crime Investigator   Work Role ID  IN-INV-001   Work Role Description   Identifies, collects, examines, and preserves evidence  using controlled and documented analytical and  investigative techniques.
NICE FRAMEWORK   Law  Enforcement/Counterintelligence  Forensics Analyst   Cyber Defense Forensics  Analyst   IN-FOR-001  Conducts detailed investigations on computer-based   crimes establishing documentary or physical  evidence, to include digital media and logs associated  with cyber intrusion incidents.
IN-FOR-002  Analyzes digital evidence and investigates computer   security incidents to derive useful information in  support of system/network vulnerability mitigation.
NIST SP 800-181      Category  Investigate  (IN)     Specialty Area  Cyber  Investigation  (INV)  Digital Forensics  (FOR)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NIST SP 800-181      A.4   NICE Framework Tasks   NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 4 provides a listing of all the tasks that have been identified as being part of a  cybersecurity work role.
Each work role includes a subset of the tasks listed here.
Table 4 - NICE Framework Tasks   Task ID   T0001   T0002   T0003   T0004   T0005  T0006  T0007  T0008   T0009   T0010   T0011   T0012   T0013  T0014   T0015  T0016   T0017  T0018  T0019  T0020   T0021   T0022   T0023   Task Description   Acquire and manage the necessary resources, including leadership support, financial  resources, and key security personnel, to support information technology (IT) security goals  and objectives and reduce overall organizational risk.
Acquire necessary resources, including financial resources, to conduct an effective  enterprise continuity of operations program.
Advise senior management (e.g., Chief Information Officer [CIO]) on risk levels and  security posture.
Advise senior management (e.g., CIO) on cost/benefit analysis of information security  programs, policies, processes, systems, and elements.
Advise appropriate senior leadership or Authorizing Official of changes affecting the  organization's cybersecurity posture.
Advocate organization's official position in legal and legislative proceedings.
Analyze and define data requirements and specifications.
Analyze and plan for anticipated changes in data capacity requirements.
Analyze information to determine, recommend, and plan the development of a new  application or modification of an existing application.
Analyze organization's cyber defense policies and configurations and evaluate compliance  with regulations and organizational directives.
Analyze user needs and software requirements to determine feasibility of design within time  and cost constraints.
Analyze design constraints, analyze trade-offs and detailed system and security design, and  consider life cycle support.
Apply coding and testing standards, apply security testing tools including "'fuzzing" static- analysis code scanning tools, and conduct code reviews.
Apply secure code documentation.
Apply security policies to applications that interface with one another, such as Business-to- Business (B2B) applications.
Apply security policies to meet security objectives of the system.
Apply service-oriented security architecture principles to meet organization's  confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements.
Assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity measures utilized by system(s).
Assess threats to and vulnerabilities of computer system(s) to develop a security risk profile.
Develop content for cyber defense tools.
Build, test, and modify product prototypes using working models or theoretical models.
Capture security controls used during the requirements phase to integrate security within the  process, to identify key security objectives, and to maximize software security while  minimizing disruption to plans and schedules.
Characterize and analyze network traffic to identify anomalous activity and potential threats  to network resources.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0024   T0025   T0026   T0027  T0028  T0029  T0030   T0031   T0032   T0033   T0034   T0035   T0036   T0037  T0038  T0039  T0040   T0041   T0042  T0043   T0044   T0045   T0046   T0047   T0048  T0049   Task Description   Collect and maintain data needed to meet system cybersecurity reporting.
Communicate the value of information technology (IT) security throughout all levels of the  organization stakeholders.
Compile and write documentation of program development and subsequent revisions,  inserting comments in the coded instructions so others can understand the program.
Conduct analysis of log files, evidence, and other information to determine best methods for  identifying the perpetrator(s) of a network intrusion.
Conduct and/or support authorized penetration testing on enterprise network assets.
Conduct Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) of the application’s security design for the  appropriate security controls, which protect the confidentiality and integrity of Personally  Identifiable Information (PII).
Conduct risk analysis, feasibility study, and/or trade-off analysis to develop, document, and  refine functional requirements and specifications.
Confer with systems analysts, engineers, programmers, and others to design application and  to obtain information on project limitations and capabilities, performance requirements, and  interfaces.
Configure and optimize network hubs, routers, and switches (e.g., higher-level protocols,  tunneling).
Confirm what is known about an intrusion and discover new information, if possible, after  identifying intrusion via dynamic analysis.
Construct access paths to suites of information (e.g., link pages) to facilitate access by end- users.
Develop threat model based on customer interviews and requirements.
Consult with customers to evaluate functional requirements.
Coordinate and provide expert technical support to enterprise-wide cyber defense  technicians to resolve cyber defense incidents.
Coordinate with Cyber Defense Analysts to manage and administer the updating of rules  and signatures (e.g., intrusion detection/protection systems, antivirus, and content blacklists)  for specialized cyber defense applications.
Coordinate with enterprise-wide cyber defense staff to validate network alerts.
Coordinate with systems architects and developers, as needed, to provide oversight in the  development of design solutions.
This includes, but is not limited to, hard drives, floppy diskettes, CDs, PDAs,  mobile phones, GPS, and all tape formats.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0050   T0051  T0052  T0053   T0054   T0055   T0056   T0057  T0058   T0059  T0060  T0061   T0062  T0063   T0064  T0065  T0066  T0067  T0068   T0069   T0070   T0071  T0072   T0073  T0074  T0075   T0076  T0077   Task Description   Define and prioritize essential system capabilities or business functions required for partial  or full system restoration after a catastrophic failure event.
Define appropriate levels of system availability based on critical system functions and  ensure that system requirements identify appropriate disaster recovery and continuity of  operations requirements to include any appropriate fail-over/alternate site requirements,  backup requirements, and material supportability requirements for system  recover/restoration.
Define project scope and objectives based on customer requirements.
Design and develop cybersecurity or cybersecurity-enabled products.
Design group policies and access control lists to ensure compatibility with organizational  standards, business rules, and needs.
Design hardware, operating systems, and software applications to adequately address  cybersecurity requirements.
Design or integrate appropriate data backup capabilities into overall system designs, and  ensure that appropriate technical and procedural processes exist for secure system backups  and protected storage of backup data.
Design, develop, and modify software systems, using scientific analysis and mathematical  models to predict and measure outcome and consequences of design.
Determine level of assurance of developed capabilities based on test results.
Develop a plan to investigate alleged crime, violation, or suspicious activity utilizing  computers and the Internet.
Develop an understanding of the needs and requirements of information end-users.
Develop and direct system testing and validation procedures and documentation.
Develop and document requirements, capabilities, and constraints for design procedures and  processes.
Develop and document systems administration standard operating procedures.
Review and validate data mining and data warehousing programs, processes, and  requirements.
Develop and implement network backup and recovery procedures.
Develop and maintain strategic plans.
Develop architectures or system components consistent with technical specifications.
Develop data standards, policies, and procedures.
Develop detailed security design documentation for component and interface specifications  to support system design and development.
Develop Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations plans for systems under  development and ensure testing prior to systems entering a production environment.
Develop/integrate cybersecurity designs for systems and networks with multilevel security  requirements or requirements for the processing of multiple classification levels of data  primarily applicable to government organizations (e.g., UNCLASSIFIED, SECRET, and  TOP SECRET).
Develop methods to monitor and measure risk, compliance, and assurance efforts.
Develop new or identify existing awareness and training materials that are appropriate for  intended audiences.
Develop policy, programs, and guidelines for implementation.
Develop risk mitigation strategies to resolve vulnerabilities and recommend security  changes to system or system components as needed.
Develop secure code and error handling.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0078   T0079  T0080  T0081   T0082  T0083  T0084   T0085   T0086   T0087   T0088   T0089   T0090   T0091   T0092   T0093  T0094   T0095   T0096   T0097  T0098  T0099   T0100  T0101  T0102  T0103   T0104   Task Description   Develop specific cybersecurity countermeasures and risk mitigation strategies for systems  and/or applications.
Develop specifications to ensure that risk, compliance, and assurance efforts conform with  security, resilience, and dependability requirements at the software application, system, and  network environment level.
Develop test plans to address specifications and requirements.
Diagnose network connectivity problem.
Document and address organization's information security, cybersecurity architecture, and  systems security engineering requirements throughout the acquisition life cycle.
Draft statements of preliminary or residual security risks for system operation.
Employ secure configuration management processes.
Ensure all systems security operations and maintenance activities are properly documented  and updated as necessary.
Ensure that the application of security patches for commercial products integrated into  system design meet the timelines dictated by the management authority for the intended  operational environment.
Ensure that cybersecurity-enabled products or other compensating security control  technologies reduce identified risk to an acceptable level.
Ensure that security improvement actions are evaluated, validated, and implemented as  required.
Ensure that acquired or developed system(s) and architecture(s) are consistent with  organization's cybersecurity architecture guidelines.
Ensure that cybersecurity inspections, tests, and reviews are coordinated for the network  environment.
Ensure that cybersecurity requirements are integrated into the continuity planning for that  system and/or organization(s).
Ensure that protection and detection capabilities are acquired or developed using the IS  security engineering approach and are consistent with organization-level cybersecurity  architecture.
Establish overall enterprise information security architecture (EISA) with the organization’s  overall security strategy.
Establish relationships, if applicable, between the incident response team and other groups,  both internal (e.g., legal department) and external (e.g., law enforcement agencies, vendors,  public relations professionals).
Evaluate and approve development efforts to ensure that baseline security safeguards are  appropriately installed.
Evaluate contracts to ensure compliance with funding, legal, and program requirements.
Evaluate factors such as reporting formats required, cost constraints, and need for security  restrictions to determine hardware configuration.
Evaluate the effectiveness of laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
Examine recovered data for information of relevance to the issue at hand.
Fuse computer network attack analyses with criminal and counterintelligence investigations  and operations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0105   T0106   T0107   T0108   T0109   T0110  T0111   T0112   T0113  T0114   T0115  T0116   T0117   T0118   T0119   T0120  T0121  T0122  T0123   T0124   T0125  T0126   T0127   T0128  T0129   Task Description   Identify components or elements, allocate security functions to those elements, and describe  the relationships between the elements.
Identify alternative information security strategies to address organizational security  objective.
Identify and direct the remediation of technical problems encountered during testing and  implementation of new systems (e.g., identify and find work-arounds for communication  protocols that are not interoperable).
Identify and prioritize essential system functions or sub-systems required to support  essential capabilities or business functions for restoration or recovery after a system failure  or during a system recovery event based on overall system requirements for continuity and  availability.
Identify and/or determine whether a security incident is indicative of a violation of law that  requires specific legal action.
Identify information technology (IT) security program implications of new technologies or  technology upgrades.
Identify security implications and apply methodologies within centralized and decentralized  environments across the enterprise’s computer systems in software development.
Identify security issues around steady state operation and management of software and  incorporate security measures that must be taken when a product reaches its end of life.
Identify, assess, and recommend cybersecurity or cybersecurity-enabled products for use  within a system and ensure that recommended products are in compliance with  organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Identify, collect, and seize documentary or physical evidence, to include digital media and  logs associated with cyber intrusion incidents, investigations, and operations.
Implement new system design procedures, test procedures, and quality standards.
Implement security designs for new or existing system(s).
Implement specific cybersecurity countermeasures for systems and/or applications.
Incorporate cybersecurity vulnerability solutions into system designs (e.g., Cybersecurity  Vulnerability Alerts).
Install and maintain network infrastructure device operating system software (e.g., IOS,  firmware).
Install or replace network hubs, routers, and switches.
Integrate and align information security and/or cybersecurity policies to ensure that system  analysis meets security requirements.
Integrate automated capabilities for updating or patching system software where practical  and develop processes and procedures for manual updating and patching of system software  based on current and projected patch timeline requirements for the operational environment  of the system.
Integrate new systems into existing network architecture.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   Task Description   T0132   T0130  T0131   Interface with external organizations (e.g., public affairs, law enforcement, Command or  Component Inspector General) to ensure appropriate and accurate dissemination of incident  and other Computer Network Defense information.
Interpret and apply laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures to specific issues.
Interpret and/or approve security requirements relative to the capabilities of new  information technologies.
Interpret patterns of noncompliance to determine their impact on levels of risk and/or  overall effectiveness of the enterprise’s cybersecurity program.
T0133  Lead and align information technology (IT) security priorities with the security strategy.
T0134  T0135  Lead and oversee information security budget, staffing, and contracting.
T0136  Maintain baseline system security according to organizational policies.
T0137  Maintain database management systems software.
T0138   T0139   Maintain deployable cyber defense audit toolkit (e.g., specialized cyber defense software  and hardware) to support cyber defense audit missions.
Maintain directory replication services that enable information to replicate automatically  from rear servers to forward units via optimized routing.
Maintain information exchanges through publish, subscribe, and alert functions that enable  users to send and receive critical information as required.
T0140  T0141  Maintain information systems assurance and accreditation materials.
Maintain knowledge of applicable cyber defense policies, regulations, and compliance  documents specifically related to cyber defense auditing.
T0144  Manage accounts, network rights, and access to systems and equipment.
T0145  Manage and approve Accreditation Packages (e.g., ISO/IEC 15026-2).
T0146  Manage the compilation, cataloging, caching, distribution, and retrieval of data.
Manage the monitoring of information security data sources to maintain organizational  situational awareness.
Manage the publishing of Computer Network Defense guidance (e.g., TCNOs, Concept of  Operations, Net Analyst Reports, NTSM, MTOs) for the enterprise constituency.
Manage threat or target analysis of cyber defense information and production of threat  information within the enterprise.
Monitor and evaluate a system's compliance with information technology (IT) security,  resilience, and dependability requirements.
Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the enterprise's cybersecurity safeguards to ensure  that they provide the intended level of protection.
T0153  Monitor network capacity and performance.
T0154  Monitor and report the usage of knowledge management assets and resources.
Document and escalate incidents (including event’s history, status, and potential impact for  further action) that may cause ongoing and immediate impact to the environment.
Oversee and make recommendations regarding configuration management.
Oversee the information security training and awareness program.
Participate in an information security risk assessment during the Security Assessment and  Authorization process.
Participate in the development or modification of the computer environment cybersecurity  program plans and requirements.
Patch network vulnerabilities to ensure that information is safeguarded against outside  parties.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0161  T0162   T0163  T0164   T0165   T0166  T0167  T0168  T0169   T0170  T0171  T0172  T0173   T0174   T0175   T0176   T0177   T0178  T0179   T0180   T0181  T0182   T0183   T0184  T0185  T0186   T0187   T0188   Task Description   Perform analysis of log files from a variety of sources (e.g., individual host logs, network  traffic logs, firewall logs, and intrusion detection system [IDS] logs) to identify possible  threats to network security.
Perform cyber defense incident triage, to include determining scope, urgency, and potential  impact, identifying the specific vulnerability, and making recommendations that enable  expeditious remediation.
Perform cyber defense trend analysis and reporting.
Perform event correlation using information gathered from a variety of sources within the  enterprise to gain situational awareness and determine the effectiveness of an observed  attack.
Perform cybersecurity testing of developed applications and/or systems.
Perform integrated quality assurance testing for security functionality and resiliency attack.
Perform real-time cyber defense incident handling (e.g., forensic collections, intrusion  correlation and tracking, threat analysis, and direct system remediation) tasks to support  deployable Incident Response Teams (IRTs).
Perform secure programming and identify potential flaws in codes to mitigate  vulnerabilities.
Perform security reviews, identify gaps in security architecture, and develop a security risk  management plan.
Perform security reviews and identify security gaps in security architecture resulting in  recommendations for inclusion in the risk mitigation strategy.
Perform system administration on specialized cyber defense applications and systems (e.g.,  antivirus, audit and remediation) or Virtual Private Network (VPN) devices, to include  installation, configuration, maintenance, backup, and restoration.
Plan and conduct security authorization reviews and assurance case development for initial  installation of systems and networks.
Plan and manage the delivery of knowledge management projects.
Prepare digital media for imaging by ensuring data integrity (e.g., write blockers in  accordance with standard operating procedures).
Prepare use cases to justify the need for specific information technology (IT) solutions.
Prepare, distribute, and maintain plans, instructions, guidance, and standard operating  procedures concerning the security of network system(s) operations.
Properly document all systems security implementation, operations, and maintenance  activities and update as necessary.
Provide a managed flow of relevant information (via web-based portals or other means)  based on mission requirements.
Provide an accurate technical evaluation of the software application, system, or network,  documenting the security posture, capabilities, and vulnerabilities against relevant  cybersecurity compliances.
Provide daily summary reports of network events and activity relevant to cyber defense  practices.
Provide enterprise cybersecurity and supply chain risk management guidance for  development of the Continuity of Operations Plans.
Provide feedback on network requirements, including network architecture and  infrastructure.
Provide guidelines for implementing developed systems to customers or installation teams.
Provide cybersecurity guidance to leadership.
Provide input on security requirements to be included in statements of work and other  appropriate procurement documents.
Provide input to implementation plans and standard operating procedures.
Provide input to the Risk Management Framework process activities and related  documentation (e.g., system life-cycle support plans, concept of operations, operational  procedures, and maintenance training materials).
Provide leadership and direction to information technology (IT) personnel by ensuring that  cybersecurity awareness, basics, literacy, and training are provided to operations personnel  commensurate with their responsibilities.
Provide recommendations on data structures and databases that ensure correct and quality  production of reports/management information.
Provide recommendations on new database technologies and architectures.
Provide system-related input on cybersecurity requirements to be included in statements of  work and other appropriate procurement documents.
Provide technical documents, incident reports, findings from computer examinations,  summaries, and other situational awareness information to higher headquarters.
Receive and analyze network alerts from various sources within the enterprise and  determine possible causes of such alerts.
Recognize a possible security violation and take appropriate action to report the incident, as  required.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0217   T0218   T0219  T0220   T0221  T0222  T0223   T0224  T0225  T0226  T0227  T0228   T0229  T0230  T0231  T0232  T0233   T0234  T0235   T0236  T0237  T0238   T0239   T0240   T0241   T0242   T0243   T0244   T0245   T0246   Task Description   Address security implications in the software acceptance phase including completion  criteria, risk acceptance and documentation, common criteria, and methods of independent  testing.
Recommend new or revised security, resilience, and dependability measures based on the  results of reviews.
Recommend resource allocations required to securely operate and maintain an  organization’s cybersecurity requirements.
Resolve conflicts in laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
Review authorization and assurance documents to confirm that the level of risk is within  acceptable limits for each software application, system, and network.
Review or conduct audits of information technology (IT) programs and projects.
Secure the electronic device or information source.
Store, retrieve, and manipulate data for analysis of system capabilities and requirements.
Supervise or manage protective or corrective measures when a cybersecurity incident or  vulnerability is discovered.
Test and maintain network infrastructure including software and hardware devices.
Track and document cyber defense incidents from initial detection through final resolution.
Translate functional requirements into technical solutions.
Translate security requirements into application design elements including documenting the  elements of the software attack surfaces, conducting threat modeling, and defining any  specific security criteria.
Use federal and organization-specific published documents to manage operations of their  computing environment system(s).
Capture and analyze network traffic associated with malicious activities using network  monitoring tools.
Verify and update security documentation reflecting the application/system security design  features.
Verify that application software/network/system security postures are implemented as  stated, document deviations, and recommend required actions to correct those deviations.
Write and publish cyber defense techniques, guidance, and reports on incident findings to  appropriate constituencies.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0247   T0248  T0249   T0250   T0251   T0252  T0253   T0254   T0255   T0256   T0257   T0258   T0259   T0260   T0261   T0262   T0263   T0264   T0265  T0266   T0267   T0268  T0269  T0270   T0271   Task Description   Write instructional materials (e.g., standard operating procedures, production manual) to  provide detailed guidance to relevant portion of the workforce.
Promote awareness of security issues among management and ensure sound security  principles are reflected in the organization's vision and goals.
Research current technology to understand capabilities of required system or network.
Identify cyber capabilities strategies for custom hardware and software development based  on mission requirements.
Develop security compliance processes and/or audits for external services (e.g., cloud  service providers, data centers).
Conduct required reviews as appropriate within environment (e.g., Technical Surveillance,  Countermeasure Reviews [TSCM], TEMPEST countermeasure reviews).
Oversee policy standards and implementation strategies to ensure procedures and guidelines  comply with cybersecurity policies.
Participate in Risk Governance process to provide security risks, mitigations, and input on  other technical risk.
Evaluate the effectiveness of procurement function in addressing information security  requirements and supply chain risks through procurement activities and recommend  improvements.
Determine scope, infrastructure, resources, and data sample size to ensure system  requirements are adequately demonstrated.
Use cyber defense tools for continual monitoring and analysis of system activity to identify  malicious activity.
Analyze identified malicious activity to determine weaknesses exploited, exploitation  methods, effects on system and information.
Assist in identifying, prioritizing, and coordinating the protection of critical cyber defense  infrastructure and key resources.
Employ approved defense-in-depth principles and practices (e.g., defense-in-multiple  places, layered defenses, security robustness).
Identify security requirements specific to an information technology (IT) system in all  phases of the system life cycle.
Assure successful implementation and functionality of security requirements and  appropriate information technology (IT) policies and procedures that are consistent with the  organization's mission and goals.
Perform penetration testing as required for new or updated applications.
Define and document how the implementation of a new system or new interfaces between  systems impacts the security posture of the current environment.
Design and develop key management functions (as related to cybersecurity).
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan and conduct system security development.
Develop cybersecurity designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental factors  (e.g., access controls, automated applications, networked operations, high integrity and   33      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0272  T0273  T0274   T0275   T0276   T0277   T0278   T0279   T0280   T0281   T0282  T0283  T0284  T0285  T0286   T0287  T0288  T0289  T0290  T0291  T0292  T0293   T0294   T0295  T0296  T0297  T0298  T0299   T0300   T0301   Task Description   availability requirements, multilevel security/processing of multiple classification levels,  and processing Sensitive Compartmented Information).
Ensure that security design and cybersecurity development activities are properly  documented (providing a functional description of security implementation) and updated as  necessary.
Develop and document supply chain risks for critical system elements, as appropriate.
Create auditable evidence of security measures.
Support necessary compliance activities (e.g., ensure that system security configuration  guidelines are followed, compliance monitoring occurs).
Participate in the acquisition process as necessary, following appropriate supply chain risk  management practices.
Ensure that all acquisitions, procurements, and outsourcing efforts address information  security requirements consistent with organization goals.
Collect intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, Trojans) and use discovered data to  enable mitigation of potential cyber defense incidents within the enterprise.
Serve as technical expert and liaison to law enforcement personnel and explain incident  details as required.
Continuously validate the organization against  policies/guidelines/procedures/regulations/laws to ensure compliance.
Forecast ongoing service demands and ensure that security assumptions are reviewed as  necessary.
Define and/or implement policies and procedures to ensure protection of critical  infrastructure as appropriate.
Collaborate with stakeholders to identify and/or develop appropriate solutions technology.
Design and develop new tools/technologies as related to cybersecurity.
Examine network topologies to understand data flows through the network.
Identify and analyze anomalies in network traffic using metadata.
Validate intrusion detection system (IDS) alerts against network traffic using packet  analysis tools.
Identify applications and operating systems of a network device based on network traffic.
Reconstruct a malicious attack or activity based off network traffic.
Identify network mapping and operating system (OS) fingerprinting activities.
Develop and document User Experience (UX) requirements including information  architecture and user interface requirements.
Develop and implement cybersecurity independent audit processes for application  software/networks/systems and oversee ongoing independent audits to ensure that  operational and Research and Design (R&D) processes and procedures are in compliance  with organizational and mandatory cybersecurity requirements and accurately followed by   34   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0302   T0303   T0304   T0305   T0306  T0307  T0308  T0309   T0310  T0311  T0312  T0313   T0314  T0315  T0316  T0317  T0318  T0319   T0320  T0321  T0322   T0323  T0324  T0325  T0326  T0327      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
Task Description   Systems Administrators and other cybersecurity staff when performing their day-to-day  activities.
Develop contract language to ensure supply chain, system, network, and operational  security are met.
Identify and leverage the enterprise-wide version control system while designing and  developing secure applications.
Implement and integrate system development life cycle (SDLC) methodologies (e.g., IBM  Rational Unified Process) into development environment.
Performs configuration management, problem management, capacity management, and  financial management for databases and data management systems.
Supports incident management, service-level management, change management, release  management, continuity management, and availability management for databases and data  management systems.
Analyze candidate architectures, allocate security services, and select security mechanisms.
Assess the effectiveness of security controls.
Assist in the construction of signatures which can be implemented on cyber defense network  tools in response to new or observed threats within the network environment or enclave.
Design and document quality standards.
Develop a system security context, a preliminary system security Concept of Operations  (CONOPS), and define baseline system security requirements in accordance with applicable  cybersecurity requirements.
Develop and deliver technical training to educate others or meet customer needs.
Develop or assist in the development of computer based training modules or classes.
Develop or assist in the development of course assignments.
Develop or assist in the development of course evaluations.
Develop or assist in the development of grading and proficiency standards.
Assist in the development of individual/collective development, training, and/or remediation  plans.
Develop or assist in the development of learning objectives and goals.
Develop or assist in the development of on-the-job training materials or programs.
Develop or assist in the development of written tests for measuring and assessing learner  proficiency.
Direct software programming and development of documentation.
Document a system's purpose and preliminary system security concept of operations.
Employ configuration management processes.
Evaluate network infrastructure vulnerabilities to enhance capabilities being developed.
Evaluate security architectures and designs to determine the adequacy of security design and  architecture proposed or provided in response to requirements contained in acquisition  documents.
Follow software and systems engineering life cycle standards and processes.
T0332   Notify designated managers, cyber incident responders, and cybersecurity service provider  team members of suspected cyber incidents and articulate the event's history, status, and   35   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   Task Description   potential impact for further action in accordance with the organization's cyber incident  response plan.
Build, install, configure, and test dedicated cyber defense hardware.
T0334  T0335  T0336  Withdrawn: Integrated with T0228   Supervise and assign work to programmers, designers, technologists and technicians, and  other engineering and scientific personnel.
T0337  T0338  Write detailed functional specifications that document the architecture development process.
T0339   T0340   T0341  T0342  T0343   T0344   T0345   T0346  T0347   T0348  T0349   T0350  T0351  T0352  T0353  T0354   T0355   T0356  T0357   T0358   T0359   T0360  T0361   T0362   Lead efforts to promote the organization's use of knowledge management and information  sharing.
Act as a primary stakeholder in the underlying information technology (IT) operational  processes and functions that support the service, provide direction and monitor all  significant activities so the service is delivered successfully.
Advocate for adequate funding for cyber training resources, to include both internal and  industry-provided courses, instructors, and related materials.
Assess all the configuration management (change configuration/release management)  processes.
Assess effectiveness and efficiency of instruction according to ease of instructional  technology use and student learning, knowledge transfer, and satisfaction.
Assist in assessing the impact of implementing and sustaining a dedicated cyber defense  infrastructure.
Conduct a market analysis to identify, assess, and recommend commercial, Government off- the-shelf, and open source products for use within a system and ensure recommended  products are in compliance with organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Conduct learning needs assessments and identify requirements.
Coordinate and manage the overall service provided to a customer end-to-end.
Coordinate with internal and external subject matter experts to ensure existing qualification  standards reflect organizational functional requirements and meet industry standards.
Design and develop system administration and management functionality for privileged  access users.
Design, implement, test, and evaluate secure interfaces between information systems,  physical systems, and/or embedded technologies.
Develop and facilitate data-gathering methods.
Develop and implement standardized position descriptions based on established cyber work  roles.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0363   T0364  T0365  T0366  T0367   T0368   T0369   T0370  T0371   T0372   T0373   T0374   T0375   T0376   T0377   T0378   T0379   T0380  T0381  T0382  T0383   T0384   T0385  T0386  T0387  T0388   Task Description   Develop and review recruiting, hiring, and retention procedures in accordance with current  HR policies.
Develop cyber career field classification structure to include establishing career field entry  requirements and other nomenclature such as codes and identifiers.
Develop or assist in the development of training policies and protocols for cyber training.
Develop strategic insights from large data sets.
Develop the goals and objectives for cyber curriculum.
Ensure that cyber career fields are managed in accordance with organizational HR policies  and directives.
Ensure that cyber workforce management policies and processes comply with legal and  organizational requirements regarding equal opportunity, diversity, and fair  hiring/employment practices.
Ensure that appropriate Service-Level Agreements (SLAs) and underpinning contracts have  been defined that clearly set out for the customer a description of the service and the  measures for monitoring the service.
Establish acceptable limits for the software application, network, or system.
Establish and collect metrics to monitor and validate cyber workforce readiness including  analysis of cyber workforce data to assess the status of positions identified, filled, and filled  with qualified personnel.
Establish and oversee waiver processes for cyber career field entry and training qualification  requirements.
Establish cyber career paths to allow career progression, deliberate development, and  growth within and between cyber career fields.
Establish manpower, personnel, and qualification data element standards to support cyber  workforce management and reporting requirements.
Establish, resource, implement, and assess cyber workforce management programs in  accordance with organizational requirements.
Gather feedback on customer satisfaction and internal service performance to foster  continual improvement.
Manage the internal relationship with information technology (IT) process owners  supporting the service, assisting with the definition and agreement of Operating Level  Agreements (OLAs).
Present technical information to technical and nontechnical audiences.
Promote awareness of cyber policy and strategy as appropriate among management and  ensure sound principles are reflected in the organization's mission, vision, and goals.
Review and apply cyber career field qualification standards.
Review and apply organizational policies related to or influencing the cyber workforce.
Review/Assess cyber workforce effectiveness to adjust skill and/or qualification standards.
Support integration of qualified cyber workforce personnel into information systems life  cycle development processes.
Utilize technical documentation or resources to implement a new mathematical, data  science, or computer science method.
Validate specifications and requirements for testability.
Work with other service managers and product owners to balance and prioritize services to  meet overall customer requirements, constraints, and objectives.
Enter media information into tracking database (e.g., Product Tracker Tool) for digital  media that has been acquired.
Correlate incident data and perform cyber defense reporting.
Maintain deployable cyber defense toolkit (e.g., specialized cyber defense  software/hardware) to support Incident Response Team mission.
Effectively allocate storage capacity in the design of data management systems.
Ensure that design and development activities are properly documented (providing a  functional description of implementation) and updated as necessary.
Troubleshoot prototype design and process issues throughout the product design,  development, and pre-launch phases.
Identify functional- and security-related features to find opportunities for new capability  development to exploit or mitigate vulnerabilities.
Identify and/or develop reverse engineering tools to enhance capabilities and detect  vulnerabilities.
Develop data management capabilities (e.g., cloud-based, centralized cryptographic key  management) to include support to the mobile workforce.
Develop supply chain, system, network, performance, and cybersecurity requirements.
Ensure that supply chain, system, network, performance, and cybersecurity requirements are  included in contract language and delivered.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0416   T0417  T0418   T0419   T0420   T0421  T0422  T0423   T0424  T0425  T0426  T0427   T0428   T0429  T0430  T0431   T0432   T0433   T0434   T0435   T0436  T0437   T0438   T0439   T0440  T0441  T0442  T0443   Task Description   Enable applications with public keying by leveraging existing public key infrastructure  (PKI) libraries and incorporating certificate management and encryption functionalities  when appropriate.
Identify and leverage the enterprise-wide security services while designing and developing  secure applications (e.g., Enterprise PKI, Federated Identity server, Enterprise Antivirus  solution) when appropriate.
Acquire and maintain a working knowledge of constitutional issues which arise in relevant  laws, regulations, policies, agreements, standards, procedures, or other issuances.
Administer test bed(s), and test and evaluate applications, hardware infrastructure,  rules/signatures, access controls, and configurations of platforms managed by service  provider(s).
Manage the indexing/cataloguing, storage, and access of explicit organizational knowledge  (e.g., hard copy documents, digital files).
Implement data management standards, requirements, and specifications.
Analyze and provide information to stakeholders that will support the development of  security application or modification of an existing security application.
Analyze organizational cyber policy.
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan architecture.
Analyze security needs and software requirements to determine feasibility of design within  time and cost constraints and security mandates.
Assess policy needs and collaborate with stakeholders to develop policies to govern cyber  activities.
Collect and analyze intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, and system  configuration) and use discovered data to enable mitigation of potential cyber defense  incidents within the enterprise.
Conduct analysis of log files, evidence, and other information to determine best methods for  identifying the perpetrator(s) of a network intrusion or other crimes.
Conduct periodic system maintenance including cleaning (both physically and  electronically), disk checks, routine reboots, data dumps, and testing.
Conduct trial runs of programs and software applications to ensure that the desired  information is produced and instructions and security levels are correct.
Correlate training and learning to business or mission requirements.
Create, edit, and manage network access control lists on specialized cyber defense systems  (e.g., firewalls and intrusion prevention systems).
Capture and integrate essential system capabilities or business functions required for partial  or full system restoration after a catastrophic failure event.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0444   T0445   T0446   T0447  T0448   T0449  T0450  T0451   T0452   T0453  T0454   T0455  T0456  T0457  T0458  T0459  T0460  T0461   T0462  T0463   T0464  T0465  T0466   T0467  T0468  T0469  T0470   T0471  T0472  T0473   T0474  T0475  T0476  T0477   Task Description   Apply concepts, procedures, software, equipment, and/or technology applications to  students.
Design/integrate a cyber strategy that outlines the vision, mission, and goals that align with  the organization’s strategic plan.
Design, develop, integrate, and update system security measures that provide  confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, and non-repudiation.
Design hardware, operating systems, and software applications to adequately address  requirements.
Develop enterprise architecture or system components required to meet user needs.
Design to security requirements to ensure requirements are met for all systems and/or  applications.
Design training curriculum and course content based on requirements.
Participate in development of training curriculum and course content.
Design, build, implement, and maintain a knowledge management framework that provides  end-users access to the organization’s intellectual capital.
Determine and develop leads and identify sources of information to identify and/or  prosecute the responsible parties to an intrusion or other crimes.
Define baseline security requirements in accordance with applicable guidelines.
Develop software system testing and validation procedures, programming, and  documentation.
Develop secure software testing and validation procedures.
Develop system testing and validation procedures, programming, and documentation.
Comply with organization systems administration standard operating procedures.
Implement data mining and data warehousing applications.
Develop and implement data mining and data warehousing programs.
Implement and enforce local network usage policies and procedures.
Develop procedures and test fail-over for system operations transfer to an alternate site  based on system availability requirements.
Develop cost estimates for new or modified system(s).
Develop detailed design documentation for component and interface specifications to  support system design and development.
Develop guidelines for implementation.
Develop mitigation strategies to address cost, schedule, performance, and security risks.
Ensure that training meets the goals and objectives for cybersecurity training, education, or  awareness.
Analyze and report organizational security posture trends.
Analyze and report system security posture trends.
Draft, staff, and publish cyber policy.
Provide legal analysis and decisions to inspectors general, privacy officers, oversight and  compliance personnel regarding compliance with cybersecurity policies and relevant legal  and regulatory requirements.
Assess adequate access controls based on principles of least privilege and need-to-know.
Evaluate the impact of changes to laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0478   T0479   T0480   T0481   T0482   T0483   T0484   T0485   T0486   T0487  T0488   T0489  T0490   T0491   Task Description   Provide guidance on laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures to management,  personnel, or clients.
Employ information technology (IT) systems and digital storage media to solve, investigate,  and/or prosecute cybercrimes and fraud committed against people and property.
Identify components or elements, allocate comprehensive functional components to include  security functions, and describe the relationships between the elements.
Identify and address cyber workforce planning and management issues (e.g.
Identify potential conflicts with implementation of any cyber defense tools (e.g., tool and  signature testing and optimization).
Determine the protection needs (i.e., security controls) for the information system(s) and  network(s) and document appropriately.
Implement security measures to resolve vulnerabilities, mitigate risks, and recommend  security changes to system or system components as needed.
Implement Risk Management Framework (RMF)/Security Assessment and Authorization  (SA&A) requirements for dedicated cyber defense systems within the enterprise, and  document and maintain records for them.
Facilitate implementation of new or revised laws, regulations, executive orders, policies,  standards, or procedures.
Implement designs for new or existing system(s).
Implement system security measures in accordance with established procedures to ensure  confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, and non-repudiation.
Install and configure database management systems and software.
Install and configure hardware, software, and peripheral equipment for system users in  accordance with organizational standards.
Ensure the integration and implementation of Cross-Domain Solutions (CDS) in a secure  environment.
Administer accounts, network rights, and access to systems and equipment.
T0492  T0493  T0494  T0495  Manage Accreditation Packages (e.g., ISO/IEC 15026-2).
T0496   T0497   T0498   T0499   Perform asset management/inventory of information technology (IT) resources.
Manage the information technology (IT) planning process to ensure that developed solutions  meet customer requirements.
Manage system/server resources including performance, capacity, availability,  serviceability, and recoverability.
Mitigate/correct security deficiencies identified during security/certification testing and/or  recommend risk acceptance for the appropriate senior leader or authorized representative.
Monitor external data sources (e.g., cyber defense vendor sites, Computer Emergency  Response Teams, Security Focus) to maintain currency of cyber defense threat condition  and determine which security issues may have an impact on the enterprise.
Assess and monitor cybersecurity related to system implementation and testing practices.
Monitor the rigorous application of cyber policies, principles, and practices in the delivery  of planning and management services.
Oversee installation, implementation, configuration, and support of system components.
Verify minimum security requirements are in place for all applications.
Perform an information security risk assessment.
Perform developmental testing on systems under development.
Perform interoperability testing on systems exchanging electronic information with other  systems.
Perform secure program testing, review, and/or assessment to identify potential flaws in  codes and mitigate vulnerabilities.
Integrate results regarding the identification of gaps in security architecture.
Perform security reviews and identify security gaps in architecture.
Plan implementation strategy to ensure that enterprise components can be integrated and  aligned.
Prepare reports to document the investigation following legal standards and requirements.
Promote knowledge sharing between information owners/users through an organization’s  operational processes and systems.
Provide enterprise cybersecurity and supply chain risk management guidance.
Provides cybersecurity recommendations to leadership based on significant threats and  vulnerabilities.
Provide input to implementation plans and standard operating procedures as they relate to  information systems security.
Provide input to implementation plans, standard operating procedures, maintenance  documentation, and maintenance training materials  Provide policy guidance to cyber management, staff, and users.
Develop a trend analysis and impact report.
Review forensic images and other data sources (e.g., volatile data) for recovery of  potentially relevant information.
Review, conduct, or participate in audits of cyber programs and projects.
Serve as an internal consultant and advisor in own area of expertise (e.g., technical,  copyright, print media, electronic media).
Test, evaluate, and verify hardware and/or software to determine compliance with defined  specifications and requirements.
Record and manage test data.
Trace system requirements to design components and perform gap analysis.
Translate proposed capabilities into technical requirements.
Work with stakeholders to resolve computer security incidents and vulnerability  compliance.
Write and publish cyber defense recommendations, reports, and white papers on incident  findings to appropriate constituencies.
Research and evaluate available technologies and standards to meet customer requirements.
Perform technical (evaluation of technology) and nontechnical (evaluation of people and  operations) risk and vulnerability assessments of relevant technology focus areas (e.g., local  computing environment, network and infrastructure, enclave boundary, supporting  infrastructure, and applications).
Make recommendations regarding the selection of cost-effective security controls to  mitigate risk (e.g., protection of information, systems and processes).
Draft and publish supply chain security and risk management documents.
Review and approve a supply chain security/risk management policy.
Apply cybersecurity functions (e.g., encryption, access control, and identity management) to  reduce exploitation opportunities.
Document how the implementation of a new system or new interface between systems  impacts the current and target environment including but not limited to security posture.
Assess and design security management functions as related to cyberspace.
Integrate key management functions as related to cyberspace.
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan and conduct system development.
Develop designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental factors (e.g., access  controls, automated applications, networked operations.
Collaborate on cybersecurity designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental  factors (e.g., access controls, automated applications, networked operations, high integrity  and availability requirements, multilevel security/processing of multiple classification  levels, and processing Sensitive Compartmented Information).
Adjust collection operations or collection plan to address identified issues/challenges and to  synchronize collections with overall operational requirements.
Provide input to the analysis, design, development or acquisition of capabilities used for  meeting objectives.
Analyze feedback to determine extent to which collection products and services are meeting  requirements.
Analyze internal operational architecture, tools, and procedures for ways to improve  performance.
Analyze target operational architecture for ways to gain access.
T0585   Task Description   Analyze plans, directives, guidance and policy for factors that would influence collection  management's operational structure and requirement s (e.g., duration, scope, communication  requirements, interagency/international agreements).
Answer requests for information.
Apply and utilize authorized cyber capabilities to enable access to targeted networks.
Apply expertise in policy and processes to facilitate the development, negotiation, and  internal staffing of plans and/or memorandums of agreement.
Apply cyber collection, environment preparation and engagement expertise to enable new  exploitation and/or continued collection operations, or in support of customer requirements.
Assess and apply operational environment factors and risks to collection management  process.
Assess all-source intelligence and recommend targets to support cyber operation objectives.
Assess efficiency of existing information exchange and management systems.
Assess the effectiveness of collections in satisfying priority information gaps, using  available capabilities and methods, and adjust collection strategies and collection  requirements accordingly.
Assist and advise interagency partners in identifying and developing best practices for  facilitating operational support to achievement of organization objectives.
Provide expertise to course of action development.
Provide subject matter expertise to the development of a common operational picture.
Provide subject matter expertise to the development of cyber operations specific indicators.
Assist in the coordination, validation, and management of all-source collection  requirements, plans, and/or activities.
Assist in the development and refinement of priority information requirements.
Provide expertise to the development of measures of effectiveness and measures of  performance.
Enable synchronization of intelligence support plans across partner organizations as  required.
Close requests for information once satisfied.
Collaborate with intelligence analysts/targeting organizations involved in related areas.
Collaborate with development organizations to create and deploy the tools needed to  achieve objectives.
Collaborate with other customer, Intelligence and targeting organizations involved in related  cyber areas.
Collaborate with other internal and external partner organizations on target access and  operational issues.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0601  T0602   T0603   T0604   T0605   T0606   T0607   T0608  T0609  T0610  T0611  T0612   T0613   T0614  T0615  T0616  T0617  T0618   T0619  T0620   T0621   T0622  T0623  T0624   T0625  T0626  T0627  T0628   T0629  T0630   T0631  T0632   Task Description   Collaborate with other team members or partner organizations to develop a diverse program  of information materials (e.g., web pages, briefings, print materials).
Collaborate with customer to define information requirements.
Communicate new developments, breakthroughs, challenges and lessons learned to  leadership, and internal and external customers.
Compare allocated and available assets to collection demand as expressed through  requirements.
Compile lessons learned from collection management activity's execution of organization  collection objectives.
Identify and conduct analysis of target communications to identify information essential to  support operations.
Conduct analysis of physical and logical digital technologies (e.g., wireless, SCADA,  telecom) to identify potential avenues of access.
Conduct access enabling of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct collection and processing of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct exploitation of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct formal and informal coordination of collection requirements in accordance with  established guidelines and procedures.
Conduct independent in-depth target and technical analysis including target-specific  information (e.g., cultural, organizational, political) that results in access.
Conduct network scouting and vulnerability analyses of systems within a network.
Conduct on-net activities to control and exfiltrate data from deployed technologies.
Conduct on-net and off-net activities to control, and exfiltrate data from deployed,  automated technologies.
Conduct quality control to determine validity and relevance of information gathered about  networks.
Develop, review and implement all levels of planning guidance in support of cyber  operations.
Conduct survey of computer and digital networks.
Consider efficiency and effectiveness of collection assets and resources if/when applied  against priority information requirements.
Contribute to crisis action planning for cyber operations.
Contribute to the development of the organization's decision support tools if necessary.
Contribute to the development, staffing, and coordination of cyber operations policies,  performance standards, plans and approval packages with appropriate internal and/or  external decision makers.
Incorporate intelligence equities into the overall design of cyber operations plans.
Coordinate resource allocation of collection assets against prioritized collection  requirements with collection discipline leads.
Coordinate with intelligence and cyber defense partners to obtain relevant essential  information.
Coordinate with intelligence planners to ensure that collection managers receive information  requirements.
Coordinate, produce, and track intelligence requirements.
Coordinate, synchronize and draft applicable intelligence sections of cyber operations plans.
Maintain awareness of internal and external cyber organization structures, strengths, and  employments of staffing and technology.
Detect exploits against targeted networks and hosts and react accordingly.
Determine existing collection management webpage databases, libraries and storehouses.
Determine indicators (e.g., measures of effectiveness) that are best suited to specific cyber  operation objectives.
Determine organizations and/or echelons with collection authority over all accessible  collection assets.
Determine what technologies are used by a given target.
Develop a method for comparing collection reports to outstanding requirements to identify  information gaps.
Develop all-source intelligence targeting materials.
Apply analytic techniques to gain more target information.
Develop and maintain deliberate and/or crisis plans.
Develop and review specific cyber operations guidance for integration into broader planning  activities.
Develop and review intelligence guidance for integration into supporting cyber operations  planning and execution.
Develop coordinating instructions by collection discipline for each phase of an operation.
Develop cyber operations plans and guidance to ensure that execution and resource  allocation decisions align with organization objectives.
Develop detailed intelligence support to cyber operations requirements.
Develop information requirements necessary for answering priority information requests.
Develop measures of effectiveness and measures of performance.
Develop munitions effectiveness assessment or operational assessment materials.
Develop new techniques for gaining and keeping access to target systems.
Develop or participate in the development of standards for providing, requesting, and/or  obtaining support from external partners to synchronize cyber operations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0666  T0667   T0668   T0669   T0670  T0671  T0672  T0673  T0674  T0675  T0676  T0677  T0678  T0679   T0680   T0681   T0682   T0683  T0684  T0685  T0686  T0687  T0688   T0689  T0690  T0691  T0692   T0693  T0694   T0695   T0696  T0697   T0698   T0699   Task Description   Develop or shape international cyber engagement strategies, policies, and activities to meet  organization objectives.
Develop potential courses of action.
Develop procedures for providing feedback to collection managers, asset managers, and  processing, exploitation and dissemination centers.
Develop strategy and processes for partner planning, operations, and capability  development.
Develop, implement, and recommend changes to appropriate planning procedures and  policies.
Develop, maintain, and assess cyber cooperation security agreements with external partners.
Devise, document, and validate cyber operation strategy and planning documents.
Disseminate reports to inform decision makers on collection issues.
Draft cyber intelligence collection and production requirements.
Validate the link between collection requests and critical information requirements and  priority intelligence requirements of leadership.
Establish processing, exploitation and dissemination management activity using approved  guidance and/or procedures.
Estimate operational effects generated through cyber activities.
Evaluate extent to which collected information and/or produced intelligence satisfy  information requests.
Evaluate the conditions that affect employment of available cyber intelligence capabilities.
Generate and evaluate the effectiveness of network analysis strategies.
Evaluate extent to which collection operations are synchronized with operational  requirements.
Exploit network devices, security devices, and/or terminals or environments using various  methods or tools.
Facilitate access enabling by physical and/or wireless means.
Facilitate continuously updated intelligence, surveillance, and visualization input to  common operational picture managers.
Facilitate interactions between internal and external partner decision makers to synchronize  and integrate courses of action in support of objectives.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0700   T0701   T0702   T0703   T0704  T0705   T0706  T0707  T0708   T0709  T0710  T0711  T0712   T0713   T0714  T0715  T0716  T0717  T0718  T0719   T0720   T0721   T0722   T0723  T0724   T0725   T0726  T0727  T0728   T0729   T0730   Task Description   Facilitate the sharing of “best practices” and “lessons learned” throughout the cyber  operations community.
Collaborate with developers, conveying target and technical knowledge in tool requirements  submissions, to enhance tool development.
Formulate collection strategies based on knowledge of available intelligence discipline  capabilities and gathering methods that align multi-discipline collection capabilities and  accesses with targets and their observables.
Gather and analyze data (e.g., measures of effectiveness) to determine effectiveness, and  provide reporting for follow-on activities.
Incorporate cyber operations and communications security support plans into organization  objectives.
Incorporate intelligence and counterintelligence to support plan development.
Gather information about networks through traditional and alternative techniques, (e.g.,  social network analysis, call-chaining, traffic analysis.)
Generate requests for information.
Identify all available partner intelligence capabilities and limitations supporting cyber  operations.
Identify and evaluate threat critical capabilities, requirements, and vulnerabilities.
Identify, draft, evaluate, and prioritize relevant intelligence or information requirements.
Identify and manage security cooperation priorities with external partners.
Identify and submit intelligence requirements for the purposes of designating priority  information requirements.
Identify collaboration forums that can serve as mechanisms for coordinating processes,  functions, and outputs with specified organizations and functional groups.
Identify coordination requirements and procedures with designated collection authorities.
Identify cyber intelligence gaps and shortfalls for cyber operational planning.
Identify gaps in our understanding of target technology and developing innovative  collection approaches.
Identify network components and their functionality to enable analysis and target  development.
Identify potential collection disciplines for application against priority information  requirements.
Identify potential points of strength and vulnerability within a network.
Identify and mitigate risks to collection management ability to support the plan, operations  and target cycle.
Provide input to or develop courses of action based on threat factors.
Inform external partners of the potential effects of new or revised policy and guidance on  cyber operations partnering activities.
Inform stakeholders (e.g., collection managers, asset managers, processing, exploitation and  dissemination centers) of evaluation results using established procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0731  T0732  T0733  T0734  T0735   T0736  T0737   T0738   Task Description   Initiate requests to guide tasking and assist with collection management.
Integrate cyber planning/targeting efforts with other organizations.
Issue requests for information.
Lead or enable exploitation operations in support of organization objectives and target  requirements.
Link priority collection requirements to optimal assets and resources.
Maintain awareness of advancements in hardware and software technologies (e.g., attend  training or conferences, reading) and their potential implications.
Maintain relationships with internal and external partners involved in cyber planning or  related areas.
T0739  T0740  Maintain situational awareness and functionality of organic operational infrastructure.
Maintain situational awareness of cyber-related intelligence requirements and associated  tasking.
Maintain situational awareness to determine if changes to the operating environment require  review of the plan.
T0745  Make recommendations to guide collection in support of customer requirements.
T0746  Modify collection requirements as necessary.
Monitor and evaluate integrated cyber operations to identify opportunities to meet  organization objectives.
as related to designated cyber operations warning problem sets.
Monitor operational environment and report on adversarial activities which fulfill  leadership’s priority information requirements.
Monitor target networks to provide indications and warning of target communications  changes or processing failures.
Monitor the operational environment for potential factors and risks to the collection  operation management process.
Operate and maintain automated systems for gaining and maintaining access to target  systems.
Optimize mix of collection assets and resources to increase effectiveness and efficiency  against essential information associated with priority intelligence requirements.
Produce timely, fused, all-source cyber operations intelligence and/or indications and  warnings intelligence products (e.g., threat assessments, briefings, intelligence studies,  country studies).
Contribute to the review and refinement of policy, to include assessments of the  consequences of endorsing or not endorsing such policy.
Provide subject matter expertise to planning teams, coordination groups, and task forces as  necessary.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0761   T0763   T0764  T0765  T0766  T0767   T0768  T0769  T0770  T0771  T0772  T0773  T0774  T0775  T0776  T0777  T0778   T0779   T0780  T0781  T0782  T0783  T0784   T0785   T0786   T0787  T0788  T0789  T0790  T0791   T0792  T0793  T0794  T0795  T0796  T0797  T0798   Task Description   Provide subject-matter expertise and support to planning/developmental forums and  working groups as appropriate.
Conduct long-range, strategic planning efforts with internal and external partners in cyber  activities.
Provide subject matter expertise to planning efforts with internal and external cyber  operations partners.
Provide subject matter expertise to development of exercises.
Propose policy which governs interactions with external coordination groups.
Perform content and/or metadata analysis to meet organization objectives.
Conduct cyber activities to degrade/remove information resident in computers and computer  networks.
Prioritize collection requirements for collection platforms based on platform capabilities.
Produce network reconstructions.
Profile network or system administrators and their activities.
Provide cyber focused guidance and advice on intelligence support plan inputs.
Provide evaluation and feedback necessary for improving intelligence production,  intelligence reporting, collection requirements, and operations.
Provide information and assessments for the purposes of informing leadership and  customers; developing and refining objectives; supporting operation planning and  execution; and assessing the effects of operations.
Provide input for the development and refinement of the cyber operations objectives,  priorities, strategies, plans, and programs.
Provide input and assist in the development of plans and guidance.
Provide planning support between internal and external partners.
Provide real-time actionable geolocation information.
Provide timely notice of imminent or hostile intentions or activities which may impact  organization objectives, resources, or capabilities.
Review appropriate information sources to determine validity and relevance of information  gathered.
Reconstruct networks in diagram or report format.
Record information collection and/or environment preparation activities against targets  during operations designed to achieve cyber effects.
Report intelligence-derived significant network events and intrusions.
Request discipline-specific processing, exploitation, and disseminate information collected  using discipline's collection assets and resources in accordance with approved guidance  and/or procedures.
Research communications trends in emerging technologies (in computer and telephony  networks, satellite, cable, and wireless) in both open and classified sources.
Review list of prioritized collection requirements and essential information.
Review and update overarching collection plan, as required.
Review, approve, prioritize, and submit operational requirements for research, development,  and/or acquisition of cyber capabilities.
Sanitize and minimize information to protect sources and methods.
Scope the cyber intelligence planning effort.
Serve as a conduit of information from partner teams by identifying subject matter experts  who can assist in the investigation of complex or unusual situations.
Solicit and manage to completion feedback from requestors on quality, timeliness, and  effectiveness of collection against collection requirements.
Submit information requests to collection requirement management section for processing  as collection requests.
Submit or respond to requests for deconfliction of cyber operations.
Synchronize cyber international engagement activities and associated resource requirements  as appropriate.
Synchronize cyber portions of security cooperation plans.
Synchronize the integrated employment of all available organic and partner intelligence  collection assets using available collaboration capabilities and techniques.
Test and evaluate locally developed tools for operational use.
Test internal developed tools and techniques against target tools.
Track status of information requests, including those processed as collection requests and  production requirements, using established procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0831   T0832  T0833   T0834   T0835  T0836   T0837  T0838   T0839   T0840   T0841   T0842  T0843   T0844  T0845  T0846   T0847  T0848  T0849  T0850   T0851  T0852   T0853  T0854  T0855  T0856  T0857   T0858  T0859  T0860   T0861   T0862   Task Description   Translate collection requests into applicable discipline-specific collection requirements.
Use feedback results (e.g., lesson learned) to identify opportunities to improve collection  management efficiency and effectiveness.
Validate requests for information according to established criteria.
Work closely with planners, intelligence analysts, and collection managers to ensure  intelligence requirements and collection plans are accurate and up-to-date.
Work closely with planners, analysts, and collection managers to identify intelligence gaps  and ensure intelligence requirements are accurate and up-to-date.
Advise managers and operators on language and cultural issues that impact organization  objectives.
Analyze and process information using language and/or cultural expertise.
Collaborate across internal and/or external organizational lines to enhance collection,  analysis and dissemination.
Conduct all-source target research to include the use of open source materials in the target  language.
Conduct analysis of target communications to identify essential information in support of  organization objectives.
Identify cyber threat tactics and methodologies.
Identify target communications within the global network.
Maintain awareness of target communication tools, techniques, and the characteristics of  target communication networks (e.g., capacity, functionality, paths, critical nodes) and their  potential implications for targeting, collection, and analysis.
Provide feedback to collection managers to enhance future collection and analysis.
Perform or support technical network analysis and mapping.
Provide requirements and feedback to optimize the development of language processing  tools.
Perform social network analysis and document as appropriate.
Scan, identify and prioritize target graphic (including machine-to-machine communications)  and/or voice language material.
Tip critical or time-sensitive information to appropriate customers.
Work with the general counsel, external affairs and businesses to ensure both existing and  new services comply with privacy and data security obligations.
Work with legal counsel and management, key departments and committees to ensure the  organization has and maintains appropriate privacy and confidentiality consent,   52      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0863  T0864   T0865   T0866   T0867   T0868   T0869  T0870  T0871   T0872   T0873   T0874   T0875   T0876   T0877  T0878  T0879   T0880   T0881  T0882   T0883   T0884   T0885   Task Description   authorization forms and information notices and materials reflecting current organization  and legal practices and requirements.
Work with external affairs to develop relationships with regulators and other government  officials responsible for privacy and data security issues.
Maintain current knowledge of applicable federal and state privacy laws and accreditation  standards, and monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure  organizational adaptation and compliance.
Ensure all processing and/or databases are registered with the local privacy/data protection  authorities where required.
Work with business teams and senior management to ensure awareness of “best practices”  on privacy and data security issues.
Work with organization senior management to establish an organization-wide Privacy  Oversight Committee  Serve in a leadership role for Privacy Oversight Committee activities  Collaborate on cyber privacy and security policies and procedures  Collaborate with cybersecurity personnel on the security risk assessment process to address  privacy compliance and risk mitigation  Interface with Senior Management to develop strategic plans for the collection, use and  sharing of information in a manner that maximizes its value while complying with  applicable privacy regulations  Provide strategic guidance to corporate officers regarding information resources and  technology  Assist the Security Officer with the development and implementation of an information  infrastructure  Coordinate with the Corporate Compliance Officer regarding procedures for documenting  and reporting self-disclosures of any evidence of privacy violations.
Work cooperatively with applicable organization units in overseeing consumer information  access rights  Serve as the information privacy liaison for users of technology systems  Act as a liaison to the information systems department  Develop privacy training materials and other communications to increase employee  understanding of company privacy policies, data handling practices and procedures and  legal obligations  Oversee, direct, deliver or ensure delivery of initial privacy training and orientation to all  employees, volunteers, contractors, alliances, business associates and other appropriate third  parties  Conduct on-going privacy training and awareness activities  Work with external affairs to develop relationships with consumer organizations and other  NGOs with an interest in privacy and data security issues—and to manage company  participation in public events related to privacy and data security  Work with organization administration, legal counsel and other related parties to represent  the organization’s information privacy interests with external parties, including government  bodies, which undertake to adopt or amend privacy legislation, regulation or standard.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0886  T0887   T0888   T0889   T0890   T0891  T0892   T0893   T0894   T0895   T0896   T0897  T0898   T0899   T0900   Task Description   Work with External Affairs to respond to press and other inquiries regarding concern over  consumer and employee data  Provide leadership for the organization’s privacy program  Direct and oversee privacy specialists and coordinate privacy and data security programs  with senior executives globally to ensure consistency across the organization  Ensure compliance with privacy practices and consistent application of sanctions for failure  to comply with privacy policies for all individuals in the organization’s workforce, extended  workforce and for all business associates in cooperation with Human Resources, the  information security officer, administration and legal counsel as applicable  Develop appropriate sanctions for failure to comply with the corporate privacy policies and  procedures  Resolve allegations of noncompliance with the corporate privacy policies or notice of  information practices  Develop and coordinate a risk management and compliance framework for privacy  Undertake a comprehensive review of the company’s data and privacy projects and ensure  that they are consistent with corporate privacy and data security goals and policies.
Develop and manage enterprise-wide procedures to ensure the development of new products  and services is consistent with company privacy policies and legal obligations  Establish a process for receiving, documenting, tracking, investigating and acting on all  complaints concerning the organization’s privacy policies and procedures  Establish with management and operations a mechanism to track access to protected health  information, within the purview of the organization and as required by law and to allow  qualified individuals to review or receive a report on such activity  Provide leadership in the planning, design and evaluation of privacy and security related  projects  Establish an internal privacy audit program  Periodically revise the privacy program considering changes in laws, regulatory or company  policy  Provide development guidance and assist in the identification, implementation and  maintenance of organization information privacy policies and procedures in coordination  with organization management and administration and legal counsel  Assure that the use of technologies maintains, and does not erode, privacy protections on  use, collection and disclosure of personal information   T0904   T0903   T0901  T0902  Monitor systems development and operations for security and privacy compliance  Conduct privacy impact assessments of proposed rules on the privacy of personal  information, including the type of personal information collected and the number of people  affected  Conduct periodic information privacy impact assessments and ongoing compliance  monitoring activities in coordination with the organization’s other compliance and  operational assessment functions  Review all system-related information security plans to ensure alignment between security  and privacy practices  Work with all organization personnel involved with any aspect of release of protected  information to ensure coordination with the organization’s policies, procedures and legal  requirements  Account for and administer individual requests for release or disclosure of personal and/or  protected information  Develop and manage procedures for vetting and auditing vendors for compliance with the  privacy and data security policies and legal requirements   T0905   T0906   T0907   T0908   54      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0909  T0910   T0911  T0912   T0913   T0914   T0915   T0916   T0917   T0918   T0919   T0920  T0921   T0922   T0923  T0924   T0925   T0926  T0927  T0928   T0929   T0930   T0931   T0932   Task Description   Participate in the implementation and ongoing compliance monitoring of all trading partner  and business associate agreements, to ensure all privacy concerns, requirements and  responsibilities are addressed  Act as, or work with, counsel relating to business partner contracts  Mitigate effects of a use or disclosure of personal information by employees or business  partners  Develop and apply corrective action procedures  Administer action on all complaints concerning the organization’s privacy policies and  procedures in coordination and collaboration with other similar functions and, when  necessary, legal counsel  Support the organization’s privacy compliance program, working closely with the Privacy  Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, and other business leaders to ensure compliance  with federal and state privacy laws and regulations   Identify and correct potential company compliance gaps and/or areas of risk to ensure full  compliance with privacy regulations  Manage privacy incidents and breaches in conjunction with the Privacy Officer, Chief  Information Security Officer, legal counsel and the business units  Coordinate with the Chief Information Security Officer to ensure alignment between  security and privacy practices  Establish, implement and maintains organization-wide policies and procedures to comply  with privacy regulations  Ensure that the company maintains appropriate privacy and confidentiality notices, consent  and authorization forms, and materials  Develop and maintain appropriate communications and training to promote and educate all  workforce members and members of the Board regarding privacy compliance issues and  requirements, and the consequences of noncompliance  Determine business partner requirements related to the organization’s privacy program.
Cooperate with the relevant regulatory agencies and other legal entities, and organization  officers, in any compliance reviews or investigations.
Monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure organization adoption  and compliance.
Develop or assist with the development of privacy training materials and other  communications to increase employee understanding of company privacy policies, data  handling practices and procedures and legal obligations.
Appoint and guide a team of IT security experts.
Collaborate with key stakeholders to establish a cybersecurity risk management program.
Identify and assign individuals to specific roles associated with the execution of the Risk  Management Framework.
Establish a risk management strategy for the organization that includes a determination of  risk tolerance.
Identify stakeholders who have a security interest in the development, implementation,  operation, or sustainment of a system.
Task Description   Identify stakeholders who have a security interest in the development, implementation,  operation, or sustainment of a system.
Identify stakeholder assets that require protection.
Define the stakeholder protection needs and stakeholder security requirements.
Identify organization-wide common controls that are available for inheritance by  organizational systems.
Conduct a second-level security categorization for organizational systems with the same  impact level.
Identify the security requirements allocated to a system and to the organization.
Identify the types of information to be processed, stored, or transmitted by a system.
Categorize the system and document the security categorization results as part of system  requirements.
Select the security controls for a system and document the functional description of the  planned control implementations in a security plan.
Develop a strategy for monitoring security control effectiveness; coordinate the system- level strategy with the organization and mission/business process-level monitoring strategy.
Review and approve security plans.
Implement the security controls specified in a security plan or other system documentation.
Document changes to planned security control implementation and establish the  configuration baseline for a system.
Develop, review, and approve a plan to assess the security controls in a system and the  organization.
Assess the security controls in accordance with the assessment procedures defined in a  security assessment plan.
Prepare a security assessment report documenting the issues, findings, and  recommendations from the security control assessment.
Conduct initial remediation actions on security controls based on the findings and  recommendations of a security assessment report; reassess remediated controls.
Prepare a plan of action and milestones based on the findings and recommendations of a  security assessment report excluding any remediation actions taken.
Determine the risk from the operation or use of a system or the provision or use of common  controls.
Identify and implement a preferred course of action in response to the risk determined.
Determine if the risk from the operation or use of the system or the provision or use of  common controls, is acceptable.
T0961   T0962   Assess the security controls employed within and inherited by the system in accordance  with an organization-defined monitoring strategy.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0963   T0964   T0965   T0966  T0967  T0968  T0969   T0970   T0971   T0972   T0973   T0974   T0975   T0976  T0977   T0978   T0980   T0981   T0982   T0983   T0984   T0985   T0986  T0987   T0988   T0989   T0990   Task Description   Update a security plan, security assessment report, and plan of action and milestones based  on the results of a continuous monitoring process.
Report the security status of a system (including the effectiveness of security controls) to an  authorizing official on an ongoing basis in accordance with the monitoring strategy.
Review the security status of a system (including the effectiveness of security controls) on  an ongoing basis to determine whether the risk remains acceptable.
Implement a system disposal strategy which executes required actions when a system is  removed from service.
Sponsor and promote continuous monitoring within the organization.
Assign staff as needed to appropriate continuous monitoring working groups.
Identify reporting requirements to support continuous monitoring activities.
Establish scoring and grading metrics to measure effectiveness of continuous monitoring  program.
Determine how to integrate a continuous monitoring program into the organization’s  broader information security governance structures and policies.
Use continuous monitoring scoring and grading metrics to make information security  investment decisions to address persistent issues.
Work with organizational risk analysts to ensure that continuous monitoring reporting  covers appropriate levels of the organization.
Work with the organizational risk analysts to ensure risk metrics are defining realistically to  support continuous monitoring.
Work with organizational officials to ensure continuous monitoring tool data provides  situation awareness of risk levels.
Work with organizational officials to establish system level reporting categories that can be  used by the organization’s continuous monitoring program.
Designate a qualified person to be responsible for the management and implementation of  the continuous monitoring program.
Identify the continuous monitoring stakeholders and establish a process to keep them  informed about the program.
Identify security oriented organization reporting requirements that are fulfilled by the  continuous monitoring program.
Use the continuous monitoring data to make information security investment decisions to  address persistent issues.
Establish scoring and grading metrics to measure effectiveness of continuous monitoring  program.
Work with security managers to establish appropriate continuous monitoring reporting  requirements at the system level.
Use the continuous monitoring tools and technologies to assess risk on an ongoing basis.
Establish appropriate reporting requirements in adherence to the criteria identified in the  continuous monitoring program for use in automated control assessment.
Use non-automated assessment methods where the data from the continuous monitoring  tools and technologies is not yet of adequate sufficiency or quality.
Develop processes with the external audit group on how to share information regarding the  continuous monitoring program and its impact on security control assessment.
57   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task Description   Identify reporting requirements for use in automated control assessment to support  continuous monitoring.
Establish continuous monitoring tools and technologies access control process and  procedures.
Ensure that continuous monitoring tools and technologies access control is managed  adequately.
Coordinate continuous monitoring reporting requirements across various users.
Establish responsibilities for supporting implementation of each continuous monitoring tool  or technology.
Establish liaison with scoring and metrics working group to support continuous monitoring.
Establish and operate a process to manage introduction of new risk to support continuous  monitoring.
Establish continuous monitoring tools and technologies performance  measurement/management requirements.
Using scores and grades to motivate and assess performance while addressing concerns to  support continuous monitoring  Work with security managers (i.e., system owners, information system security managers,  information system security officers, etc.)
to establish appropriate reporting requirements  for continuous monitoring at the system level.
Use the continuous monitoring data to make information security investment decisions to  address persistent issues.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.5   NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions   Table 5 provides a listing of the various kinds of information applied directly to the performance  of a function.
Selected knowledge ID/descriptions from this list are included for every work role  in the Detailed work role Listing in Appendix B.
The first six are common to all the  cybersecurity work roles.
Table 5 - NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions   KSA ID   K0001  K0002   K0003  K0004  K0005  K0006  K0007  K0008  K0009   K0010   K0011  K0012  K0013  K0014  K0015  K0016  K0017  K0018  K0019  K0020  K0021  K0022   K0023  K0024  K0025  K0026  K0027  K0028  K0029   K0030  K0031   Description   Knowledge of computer networking concepts and protocols, and network security  methodologies.
Knowledge of risk management processes (e.g., methods for assessing and mitigating risk).
Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies, and ethics as they relate to cybersecurity and  privacy.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles.
Knowledge of cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of specific operational impacts of cybersecurity lapses.
Knowledge of authentication, authorization, and access control methods.
Knowledge of applicable business processes and operations of customer organizations.
Knowledge of communication methods, principles, and concepts that support the network  infrastructure.
Knowledge of capabilities and applications of network equipment including routers,  switches, bridges, servers, transmission media, and related hardware.
Knowledge of capabilities and requirements analysis.
Knowledge of cyber defense and vulnerability assessment tools and their capabilities.
Knowledge of computer programming principles   Knowledge of concepts and practices of processing digital forensic data.
Knowledge of encryption algorithms   Knowledge of cryptography and cryptographic key management concepts   Knowledge of data administration and data standardization policies.
Knowledge of database management systems, query languages, table relationships, and  views.
Knowledge of digital rights management.
Knowledge of organization's enterprise information security architecture.
Knowledge of organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Knowledge of organization's Local and Wide Area Network connections.
Knowledge of host/network access control mechanisms (e.g., access control list, capabilities  lists).
Knowledge of network services and protocols interactions that provide network  communications.
Knowledge of Security Assessment and Authorization process.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles used to manage risks related to the use,  processing, storage, and transmission of information or data.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles and methods that apply to software  development.
Knowledge of vulnerability information dissemination sources (e.g., alerts, advisories,  errata, and bulletins).
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles and organizational requirements  (relevant to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
Knowledge of information security systems engineering principles (NIST SP 800-160).
Knowledge of information technology (IT) architectural concepts and frameworks.
Knowledge of Risk Management Framework (RMF) requirements.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) security principles and methods (e.g., firewalls,  demilitarized zones, encryption).
Knowledge of local area and wide area networking principles and concepts including  bandwidth management.
Knowledge of measures or indicators of system performance and availability.
Knowledge of current industry methods for evaluating, implementing, and disseminating  information technology (IT) security assessment, monitoring, detection, and remediation  tools and procedures utilizing standards-based concepts and capabilities.
Knowledge of network access, identity, and access management (e.g., public key  infrastructure, Oauth, OpenID, SAML, SPML).
Knowledge of network hardware devices and functions.
Knowledge of network traffic analysis methods.
Knowledge of new and emerging information technology (IT) and cybersecurity  technologies.
Knowledge of how traffic flows across the network (e.g., Transmission Control Protocol  [TCP] and Internet Protocol [IP], Open System Interconnection Model [OSI], Information  Technology Infrastructure Library, current version [ITIL]).
Knowledge of policy-based and risk adaptive access controls.
Knowledge of system and application security threats and vulnerabilities (e.g., buffer  overflow, mobile code, cross-site scripting, Procedural Language/Structured Query  Language [PL/SQL] and injections, race conditions, covert channel, replay, return-oriented  attacks, malicious code).
Knowledge of remote access technology concepts.
Knowledge of resource management principles and techniques.
Knowledge of secure configuration management techniques.
(e.g., Security Technical  Implementation Guides (STIGs), cybersecurity best practices on cisecurity.org).
Knowledge of key concepts in security management (e.g., Release Management, Patch  Management).
Knowledge of security system design tools, methods, and techniques.
Knowledge of software development models (e.g., Waterfall Model, Spiral Model).
Knowledge of sources, characteristics, and uses of the organization’s data assets.
Knowledge of system design tools, methods, and techniques, including automated systems  analysis and design tools.
Knowledge of system software and organizational design standards, policies, and authorized  approaches (e.g., International Organization for Standardization [ISO] guidelines) relating  to system design.
Knowledge of system life cycle management principles, including software security and  usability.
Knowledge of technology integration processes.
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality associated with content creation  technologies (e.g., wikis, social networking, content management systems, blogs).
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality associated with various technologies for  organizing and managing information (e.g., databases, bookmarking engines).
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality of various collaborative technologies (e.g.,  groupware, SharePoint).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0098  K0100   K0101  K0102  K0103  K0104   K0105   K0106   K0107   K0108   K0109  K0110  K0111  K0112   K0113   K0114  K0115  K0116   K0117  K0118  K0119   K0120   K0121   K0122  K0123   K0124   K0125  K0126   K0127  K0128   Description   Knowledge of the cyber defense Service Provider reporting structure and processes within  one’s own organization.
Knowledge of the enterprise information technology (IT) architecture.
Knowledge of the organization’s enterprise information technology (IT) goals and  objectives.
Knowledge of Virtual Private Network (VPN) security.
Knowledge of web services (e.g., service-oriented architecture, Simple Object Access  Protocol, and web service description language).
Knowledge of what constitutes a network attack and a network attack’s relationship to both  threats and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of concepts, terminology, and operations of a wide range of communications  media (computer and telephone networks, satellite, fiber, wireless).
Knowledge of physical computer components and architectures, including the functions of  various components and peripherals (e.g., CPUs, Network Interface Cards, data storage).
Knowledge of network tools (e.g., ping, traceroute, nslookup)   Knowledge of defense-in-depth principles and network security architecture.
Knowledge of different types of network communication (e.g., LAN, WAN, MAN, WLAN,  WWAN).
Knowledge of electronic devices (e.g., computer systems/components, access control  devices, digital cameras, digital scanners, electronic organizers, hard drives, memory cards,  modems, network components, networked appliances, networked home control devices,  printers, removable storage devices, telephones, copiers, facsimile machines, etc.).
Knowledge that technology that can be exploited.
Knowledge of file system implementations (e.g., New Technology File System [NTFS],  File Allocation Table [FAT], File Extension [EXT]).
Knowledge of how information needs and collection requirements are translated, tracked,  and prioritized across the extended enterprise.
Knowledge of information security program management and project management  principles and techniques.
Knowledge of investigative implications of hardware, Operating Systems, and network  technologies.
Knowledge of Supply Chain Risk Management Practices (NIST SP 800-161)  Knowledge of the nature and function of the relevant information structure (e.g., National  Information Infrastructure).
Knowledge of virtualization technologies and virtual machine development and  maintenance.
Knowledge of which system files (e.g., log files, registry files, configuration files) contain  relevant information and where to find those system files.
Knowledge of web filtering technologies.
Knowledge of the range of existing networks (e.g., PBX, LANs, WANs, WIFI, SCADA).
Knowledge of secure coding techniques.
K0136  K0137  K0138  K0139  K0140  K0141  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0420  K0142   Knowledge of collection management processes, capabilities, and limitations.
Knowledge of front-end collection systems, including traffic collection, filtering, and  selection.
Knowledge of security event correlation tools.
Knowledge of the organization's core business/mission processes.
Knowledge of emerging security issues, risks, and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of import/export control regulations and responsible agencies for the purposes  of reducing supply chain risk.
Knowledge of organization's risk tolerance and/or risk management approach.
Knowledge of software related information technology (IT) security principles and methods  (e.g., modularization, layering, abstraction, data hiding, simplicity/minimization).
Knowledge of supply chain risk management standards, processes, and practices.
Knowledge of cyber defense and information security policies, procedures, and regulations.
Knowledge of organizational information technology (IT) user security policies (e.g.,  account creation, password rules, access control).
Knowledge of the common attack vectors on the network layer.
Knowledge of cyber attackers (e.g., script kiddies, insider threat, non-nation state  sponsored, and nation sponsored).
Knowledge of critical information technology (IT) procurement requirements.
Knowledge of functionality, quality, and security requirements and how these will apply to  specific items of supply (i.e., elements and processes).
Knowledge of system administration, network, and operating system hardening techniques.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) supply chain security and supply chain risk  management policies, requirements, and procedures.
Knowledge of critical infrastructure systems with information communication technology  that were designed without system security considerations.
Knowledge of networking protocols.
Knowledge of cyber attack stages (e.g., reconnaissance, scanning, enumeration, gaining  access, escalation of privileges, maintaining access, network exploitation, covering tracks).
Knowledge of secure software deployment methodologies, tools, and practices.
Knowledge of network security architecture concepts including topology, protocols,  components, and principles (e.g., application of defense-in-depth).
Knowledge of network systems management principles, models, methods (e.g., end-to-end  systems performance monitoring), and tools.
virtual aware malware,  debugger aware malware, and unpacked malware that looks for VM-related strings in your  computer’s display device).
Signature implementation impact for viruses, malware, and attacks.
Knowledge of advanced data remediation security features in databases.
Knowledge of Cloud-based knowledge management technologies and concepts related to  security, governance, procurement, and administration.
Knowledge of data classification standards and methodologies based on sensitivity and  other risk factors.
Knowledge of Import/Export Regulations related to cryptography and other security  technologies.
Knowledge of database access application programming interfaces (e.g., Java Database  Connectivity [JDBC]).
Knowledge of organizational process improvement concepts and process maturity models  (e.g., Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) for Development, CMMI for Services,  and CMMI for Acquisitions).
Knowledge of security architecture concepts and enterprise architecture reference models  (e.g., Zachman, Federal Enterprise Architecture [FEA]).
KSA ID   K0200  K0201   K0202   K0203  K0204  K0205  K0206  K0207  K0208  K0209  K0210  K0211  K0212   K0213  K0214  K0215  K0216  K0217  K0218  K0220  K0221   K0224  K0226  K0227  K0228   K0229  K0230  K0231   K0233  K0234   K0235  K0236  K0237  K0238   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Knowledge of service management concepts for networks and related standards (e.g.,  Information Technology Infrastructure Library, current version [ITIL]).
Knowledge of the application firewall concepts and functions (e.g., Single point of  authentication/audit/policy enforcement, message scanning for malicious content, data  anonymization for PCI and PII compliance, data loss protection scanning, accelerated  cryptographic operations, SSL security, REST/JSON processing).
Knowledge of security models (e.g., Bell-LaPadula model, Biba integrity model, Clark- Wilson integrity model).
Knowledge of basic system, network, and OS hardening techniques.
Knowledge of confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements.
Knowledge of the Risk Management Framework Assessment Methodology.
Knowledge of Learning Management Systems and their use in managing learning.
Knowledge of OSI model and underlying network protocols (e.g., TCP/IP).
Knowledge of relevant laws, legal authorities, restrictions, and regulations pertaining to  cyber defense activities.
Knowledge of crisis management protocols, processes, and techniques.
Knowledge of the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, work roles, and  associated tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities.
Knowledge of full spectrum cyber capabilities (e.g., defense, attack, exploitation).
Knowledge of how to leverage research and development centers, think tanks, academic  research, and industry systems.
Knowledge of industry best practices for service desk.
KSA ID   K0239  K0240  K0241  K0242  K0243   K0244   K0245   K0246  K0247  K0248  K0249  K0250  K0251   K0255  K0257   K0258  K0259  K0260  K0261  K0262   K0263   K0264   K0265  K0266   K0267  K0268  K0269  K0270   K0271   K0272   Description   Knowledge of media production, communication, and dissemination techniques and  methods, including alternative ways to inform via written, oral, and visual media.
Knowledge of multi-level security systems and cross domain solutions.
Knowledge of organizational security policies.
Knowledge of relevant concepts, procedures, software, equipment, and technology  applications.
Knowledge of remote access processes, tools, and capabilities related to customer support.
Knowledge of strategic theory and practice.
Knowledge of sustainment technologies, processes and strategies.
Knowledge of the judicial process, including the presentation of facts and evidence.
Knowledge of training and education principles and methods for curriculum design,  teaching and instruction for individuals and groups, and the measurement of training and  education effects.
Knowledge of network architecture concepts including topology, protocols, and  components.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) acquisition/procurement requirements.
Knowledge of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) data security standards.
Knowledge of Payment Card Industry (PCI) data security standards.
Knowledge of Personal Health Information (PHI) data security standards.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) risk management policies, requirements, and  procedures.
information technology (IT) supply chain  security/risk management policies, anti-tampering techniques, and requirements).
Knowledge of infrastructure supporting information technology (IT) for safety,  performance, and reliability.
Knowledge of laws, policies, procedures, or governance relevant to cybersecurity for critical  infrastructures.
Knowledge of operating system structures and internals (e.g., process management,  directory structure, installed applications).
Knowledge of network analysis tools used to identify software communications  vulnerabilities.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   KSA ID   K0274  K0275  K0276   Knowledge of transmission records (e.g., Bluetooth, Radio Frequency Identification  (RFID), Infrared Networking (IR), Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi).
paging, cellular, satellite  dishes, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)), and jamming techniques that enable  transmission of undesirable information, or prevent installed systems from operating  correctly.
Knowledge of configuration management techniques.
Knowledge of security management.
Knowledge of current and emerging data encryption (e.g., Column and Tablespace  Encryption, file and disk encryption) security features in databases (e.g.
built-in  cryptographic key management features).
Knowledge of current and emerging data remediation security features in databases.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) service catalogues.
Knowledge of developing and applying user credential management system.
Knowledge of implementing enterprise key escrow systems to support data-at-rest  encryption.
including server and client operating systems).
Knowledge of an organization's information classification program and procedures for  information compromise.
Knowledge of industry standard security models.
Knowledge of systems security testing and evaluation methods.
Knowledge of the enterprise information technology (IT) architectural concepts and patterns  (e.g., baseline, validated design, and target architectures.)
Knowledge of the operations and processes for incident, problem, and event management.
Knowledge of integrating the organization’s goals and objectives into the architecture.
Knowledge of IT system operation, maintenance, and security needed to keep equipment  functioning properly.
Knowledge of capabilities, applications, and potential vulnerabilities of network equipment  including hubs, routers, switches, bridges, servers, transmission media, and related  hardware.
Knowledge of countermeasure design for identified security risks.
Knowledge of countermeasures for identified security risks.
Knowledge in determining how a security system should work (including its resilience and  dependability capabilities) and how changes in conditions, operations, or the environment  will affect these outcomes.
Knowledge of network mapping and recreating network topologies.
Knowledge of concepts and practices of processing digital forensic data.
Knowledge of emerging technologies that have potential for exploitation.
Knowledge of industry indicators useful for identifying technology trends.
Knowledge of intelligence gathering principles, policies, and procedures including legal  authorities and restrictions.
Knowledge of external organizations and academic institutions with cyber focus (e.g., cyber  curriculum/training and Research & Development).
Knowledge of industry technologies’ potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of the principal methods, procedures, and techniques of gathering information  and producing, reporting, and sharing information.
Knowledge of organization's evaluation and validation criteria.
Knowledge of Information Theory (e.g., source coding, channel coding, algorithm  complexity theory, and data compression).
Knowledge of network protocols such as TCP/IP, Dynamic Host Configuration, Domain  Name System (DNS), and directory services.
Knowledge of network design processes, to include understanding of security objectives,  operational objectives, and trade-offs.
Knowledge of network traffic analysis (tools, methodologies, processes).
Knowledge of current and emerging cyber technologies.
Knowledge of access authentication methods.
Knowledge of how to use network analysis tools to identify vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of foreign disclosure policies and import/export control regulations as related to  cybersecurity.
Knowledge of an organization’s threat environment.
Knowledge of website types, administration, functions, and content management system  (CMS).
Knowledge of accepted organization planning systems.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0351  K0352   K0353  K0354  K0355  K0356  K0357  K0358  K0359  K0361  K0362  K0363   K0364  K0367  K0368   K0371   K0372   K0373  K0375   K0376  K0377   K0379  K0380  K0381  K0382   K0383   Description   Knowledge of applicable statutes, laws, regulations and policies governing cyber targeting  and exploitation.
Knowledge of possible circumstances that would result in changing collection management  authorities.
Knowledge of analytical standards and the purpose of intelligence confidence levels.
Knowledge of auditing and logging procedures (including server-based logging).
Knowledge of implants that enable cyber collection and/or preparation activities.
Knowledge of principles of the collection development processes (e.g., Dialed Number  Recognition, Social Network Analysis).
Knowledge of internal and external customers and partner organizations, including  information needs, objectives, structure, capabilities, etc.
Knowledge of classification and control markings standards, policies and procedures.
Knowledge of client organizations, including information needs, objectives, structure,  capabilities, etc.
Knowledge of collection capabilities, accesses, performance specifications, and constraints  utilized to satisfy collection plan.
Knowledge of collection management functionality (e.g., positions, functions,  responsibilities, products, reporting requirements).
K0384  K0385  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0142  K0386  K0387   Knowledge of collection management tools.
Knowledge of collection searching/analyzing techniques and tools for chat/buddy list,  emerging technologies, VOIP, Media Over IP, VPN, VSAT/wireless, web mail and cookies.
Knowledge of collection sources including conventional and non-conventional sources.
Knowledge of common networking devices and their configurations.
Knowledge of computer networking fundamentals (i.e., basic computer components of a  network, types of networks, etc.).
Knowledge of computer programming concepts, including computer languages,  programming, testing, debugging, and file types.
Knowledge of security concepts in operating systems (e.g., Linux, Unix.)
Knowledge of crisis action planning for cyber operations.
Knowledge of criticality and vulnerability factors (e.g., value, recuperation, cushion,  countermeasures) for target selection and applicability to the cyber domain.
Knowledge of cryptologic capabilities, limitations, and contributions to cyber operations.
Knowledge of current collection requirements.
Knowledge of customer information needs.
Knowledge of cyber actions (i.e.
cyber defense, information gathering, environment  preparation, cyber-attack) principles, capabilities, limitations, and effects.
Knowledge of cyber intelligence/information collection capabilities and repositories.
Knowledge of cyber laws and their effect on Cyber planning.
Knowledge of cyber laws and legal considerations and their effect on cyber planning.
Knowledge of cyber lexicon/terminology  Knowledge of cyber operation objectives, policies, and legalities.
Knowledge of cyber operations support or enabling processes.
Knowledge of cyber operations terminology/lexicon.
Knowledge of cyber operations.
Knowledge of data communications terminology (e.g., networking protocols, Ethernet, IP,  encryption, optical devices, removable media).
Knowledge of deconfliction reporting to include external organization interaction.
Knowledge of different organization objectives at all levels, including subordinate, lateral  and higher.
Knowledge of encryption algorithms and cyber capabilities/tools (e.g., SSL, PGP).
Knowledge of encryption algorithms and tools for wireless local area networks (WLANs).
Knowledge of enterprise-wide information management.
Knowledge of evolving/emerging communications technologies.
Knowledge of existing, emerging, and long-range issues related to cyber operations  strategy, policy, and organization.
70   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID  K0435   K0436   K0437   K0438  K0439   K0440   K0442  K0443   K0444  K0445  K0446   Description   Knowledge of fundamental cyber concepts, principles, limitations, and effects.
Knowledge of fundamental cyber operations concepts, terminology/lexicon (i.e.,  environment preparation, cyber-attack, cyber defense), principles, capabilities, limitations,  and effects.
Knowledge of general Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system  components.
Knowledge of host-based security products and how those products affect exploitation and  reduce vulnerability.
Knowledge of how converged technologies impact cyber operations (e.g., digital, telephony,  wireless).
Knowledge of how hubs, switches, routers work together in the design of a network.
Knowledge of how Internet applications work (SMTP email, web-based email, chat clients,  VOIP).
Knowledge of how modern digital and telephony networks impact cyber operations.
Knowledge of how modern wireless communications systems impact cyber operations.
Knowledge of how to collect, view, and identify essential information on targets of interest  from metadata (e.g., email, http).
Knowledge of implementing Unix and Windows systems that provide radius authentication  and logging, DNS, mail, web service, FTP server, DHCP, firewall, and SNMP.
Knowledge of information needs.
Knowledge of information security concepts, facilitating technologies and methods.
Knowledge of intelligence employment requirements (i.e., logistical, communications  support, maneuverability, legal restrictions, etc.).
Knowledge of intelligence reporting principles, policies, procedures, and vehicles, including  report formats, reportability criteria (requirements and priorities), dissemination practices,  and legal authorities and restrictions.
Knowledge of intelligence requirements tasking systems.
Knowledge of internal and external partner cyber operations capabilities and tools.
Knowledge of internal and external partner intelligence processes and the development of  information requirements and essential information.
Knowledge of internal and external partner organization capabilities and limitations (those  with tasking, collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination responsibilities).
Knowledge of internal and external partner reporting.
Knowledge of internal tactics to anticipate and/or emulate threat capabilities and actions.
71   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID  K0470   K0471  K0472  K0473  K0474  K0475  K0476  K0477  K0478  K0479  K0480  K0481  K0482  K0483  K0484  K0485  K0486   K0487   Description   Knowledge of Internet and routing protocols.
Knowledge of Internet network addressing (IP addresses, classless inter-domain routing,  TCP/UDP port numbering).
Knowledge of intrusion detection systems and signature development.
Knowledge of key cyber threat actors and their equities.
Knowledge of methods to integrate and summarize information from any potential sources.
Knowledge of midpoint collection (process, objectives, organization, targets, etc.).
Knowledge of network administration.
Knowledge of network construction and topology.
Knowledge of network security (e.g., encryption, firewalls, authentication, honey pots,  perimeter protection).
Knowledge of network security implementations (e.g., host-based IDS, IPS, access control  lists), including their function and placement in a network.
Knowledge of network topology.
K0491  K0492   K0493   K0494  K0495  K0496  K0497  K0498  K0499   K0500  K0501  K0502   K0503   K0504  K0505  K0506  K0507   Knowledge of networking and Internet communications fundamentals (i.e.
devices, device  configuration, hardware, software, applications, ports/protocols, addressing, network  architecture and infrastructure, routing, operating systems, etc.).
Knowledge of objectives, situation, operational environment, and the status and disposition  of internal and external partner collection capabilities available to support planning.
Knowledge of operations security.
Knowledge of organization and/or partner collection systems, capabilities, and processes  (e.g., collection and protocol processors).
Knowledge of organization cyber operations programs, strategies, and resources.
Knowledge of organization decision support tools and/or methods.
Knowledge of organization formats of resource and asset readiness reporting, its operational  relevance and intelligence collection impact.
Knowledge of organization issues, objectives, and operations in cyber as well as regulations  and policy directives governing cyber operations.
Knowledge of organization objectives and associated demand on collection management.
Knowledge of organization objectives, leadership priorities, and decision-making risks.
Knowledge of organization or partner exploitation of digital networks.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0508   K0509  K0510  K0511  K0512   K0513  K0514   K0516  K0517  K0518  K0519   K0520   K0521  K0522   K0523  K0524   K0525  K0526  K0527  K0528  K0529   K0530  K0531   K0532  K0533  K0534  K0535   K0536   K0538   K0539  K0540  K0541  K0542   Description   Knowledge of organization policies and planning concepts for partnering with internal  and/or external organizations.
Knowledge of organizational hierarchy and cyber decision-making processes.
Knowledge of organizational priorities, legal authorities and requirements submission  processes.
Knowledge of physical and logical network devices and infrastructure to include hubs,  switches, routers, firewalls, etc.
Knowledge of post implementation review (PIR) approval process.
Knowledge of principles and practices related to target development such as target  knowledge, associations, communication systems, and infrastructure.
Knowledge of priority information, how it is derived, where it is published, how to access,  etc.
Knowledge of products and nomenclature of major vendors (e.g., security suites - Trend  Micro, Symantec, McAfee, Outpost, and Panda) and how those products affect exploitation  and reduce vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of required intelligence planning products associated with cyber operational  planning.
Knowledge of research strategies and knowledge management.
Knowledge of risk management and mitigation strategies.
Knowledge of scripting  Knowledge of security hardware and software options, including the network artifacts they  induce and their effects on exploitation.
Knowledge of security implications of software configurations.
Knowledge of staff management, assignment, and allocation processes.
Knowledge of structure, approach, and strategy of exploitation tools (e.g., sniffers,  keyloggers) and techniques (e.g., gaining backdoor access, collecting/exfiltrating data,  conducting vulnerability analysis of other systems in the network).
Knowledge of target and threat organization structures, critical capabilities, and critical  vulnerabilities  Knowledge of target communication profiles and their key elements (e.g., target  associations, activities, communication infrastructure).
Knowledge of target development (i.e., concepts, roles, responsibilities, products, etc.).
Knowledge of target list development (i.e.
Knowledge of target or threat cyber actors and procedures.
Knowledge of target, including related current events, communication profile, actors, and  history (language, culture) and/or frame of reference.
Knowledge of tasking processes for organic and subordinate collection assets.
Knowledge of TCP/IP networking protocols.
Knowledge of terminal or environmental collection (process, objectives, organization,  targets, etc.).
Knowledge of the available tools and applications associated with collection requirements  and collection management.
Knowledge of the basic structure, architecture, and design of modern communication  networks.
Knowledge of the basics of network security (e.g., encryption, firewalls, authentication,  honey pots, perimeter protection).
Knowledge of the capabilities and limitations of new and emerging collection capabilities,  accesses and/or processes.
Knowledge of the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of internal and  external collections as they apply to planned cyber activities.
Knowledge of the characteristics of targeted communication networks (e.g., capacity,  functionality, paths, critical nodes).
Knowledge of the common networking and routing protocols (e.g.
TCP/IP), services (e.g.,  web, mail, DNS), and how they interact to provide network communications.
Knowledge of the critical information requirements and how they're used in planning.
Knowledge of the definition of collection management and collection management  authority.
Knowledge of the functions and capabilities of internal teams that emulate threat activities  to benefit the organization.
Knowledge of the impacts of internal and external partner staffing estimates.
Knowledge of the information environment.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0578   K0579  K0580  K0581  K0582  K0583   K0584   K0585  K0586   K0587   K0588  K0589   K0590   K0591  K0592   K0593   K0594   K0595  K0596   K0597   K0598   K0599   K0600  K0601  K0602  K0603  K0604  K0605   K0606  K0607   Description   Knowledge of the intelligence requirements development and request for information  processes.
Knowledge of the organization, roles and responsibilities of higher, lower and adjacent sub- elements.
Knowledge of the organization’s established format for collection plan.
Knowledge of the organization’s planning, operations and targeting cycles.
Knowledge of the organizational structure as it pertains to full spectrum cyber operations,  including the functions, responsibilities, and interrelationships among distinct internal  elements.
Knowledge of the priority information requirements from subordinate, lateral and higher  levels of the organization.
Knowledge of the processes to synchronize operational assessment procedures with the  critical information requirement process.
Knowledge of the production responsibilities and organic analysis and production  capabilities.
Knowledge of the range of cyber operations and their underlying intelligence support needs,  topics, and focus areas.
Knowledge of the relationships of operational objectives, intelligence requirements, and  intelligence production tasks.
Knowledge of the request for information process.
Knowledge of the role of network operations in supporting and facilitating other  organization operations.
Knowledge of the structure and intent of organization specific plans, guidance and  authorizations.
Knowledge of the structure, architecture, and design of modern digital and telephony  networks.
Knowledge of the ways in which targets or threats use the Internet.
Knowledge of transcript development processes and techniques (e.g., verbatim, gist,  summaries).
75   KSA ID   Description   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Knowledge of Unix/Linux and Windows operating systems structures and internals (e.g.,  process management, directory structure, installed applications).
Knowledge of virtual machine technologies.
K0608  K0609  K0610  K0611  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0131  K0612   Knowledge of what constitutes a “threat” to a network.
Knowledge of who the organization’s operational planners are, how and where they can be  contacted, and what are their expectations.
Knowledge of wireless technologies (e.g., cellular, satellite, GSM) to include the basic  structure, architecture, and design of modern wireless communications systems.
Knowledge of Automated security control assessments  Knowledge of hardware asset management and the value of tracking the location and  configuration of networked devices and software across departments, locations, facilities  and, potentially, supporting business functions.
Knowledge of software asset management and the value of tracking the location and  configuration of networked devices and software across departments, locations, facilities  and, potentially, supporting business functions.
Knowledge of continuous monitoring technologies and tools.
Knowledge of controls related to the use, processing, storage, and transmission of data.
Knowledge of Application Security Risks (e.g.
Open Web Application Security Project Top  10 list)  Knowledge that patching and software updates are impractical for some networked devices.
Knowledge of secure update mechanisms.
Knowledge of the importance of ingress filtering to protect against automated threats that  rely on spoofed network addresses.
Knowledge of cyber competitions as a way of developing skills by providing hands-on  experience in simulated, real-world situations.
Knowledge of white/black listing  Knowledge of the latest intrusion techniques, methods and documented intrusions external  to the organization.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.6   NICE Framework Skills Descriptions   Table 6 provides a listing of cybersecurity skills.
Selected skills descriptions from this list are included for  each work role in the Detailed work role Listing in Appendix B.
Table 6 - NICE Framework Skills Descriptions    Skill ID  S0001  S0002  S0003  S0004  S0005  S0006  S0007  S0008  S0009  S0010  S0011  S0012  S0013  S0014  S0015  S0016  S0017  S0018   S0019  S0020   S0021  S0022  S0023  S0024   S0025  S0026   S0027  S0028  S0029  S0030  S0031   S0032   Description   Skill in conducting vulnerability scans and recognizing vulnerabilities in security systems.
Skill in allocating storage capacity in the design of data management systems.
Skill in analyzing network traffic capacity and performance characteristics.
Skill in applying and incorporating information technologies into proposed solutions.
Skill in applying host/network access controls (e.g., access control list).
Skill in assessing the robustness of security systems and designs.
Skill in conducting capabilities and requirements analysis.
Skill in conducting information searches.
Skill in conducting queries and developing algorithms to analyze data structures.
Skill in creating policies that reflect system security objectives.
Skill in creating programs that validate and process multiple inputs including command  line arguments, environmental variables, and input streams.
Skill in developing and deploying signatures.
Skill in designing countermeasures to identified security risks.
Skill in designing security controls based on cybersecurity principles and tenets.
Skill in detecting host and network based intrusions via intrusion detection technologies  (e.g., Snort).
Skill in determining how a security system should work (including its resilience and  dependability capabilities) and how changes in conditions, operations, or the environment  will affect these outcomes.
Skill in developing data dictionaries.
Skill in developing data models.
Skill in developing operations-based testing scenarios.
Skill in developing and applying security system access controls.
Skill in developing, testing, and implementing network infrastructure contingency and  recovery plans.
Skill in discerning the protection needs (i.e., security controls) of information systems and  networks.
Skill in evaluating the adequacy of security designs.
Skill in identifying measures or indicators of system performance and the actions needed to  improve or correct performance, relative to the goals of the system.
Skill in implementing, maintaining, and improving established network security practices.
Skill in preserving evidence integrity according to standard operating procedures or  national standards.
Skill in the measuring and reporting of intellectual capital.
Skill in using knowledge management technologies.
Skill in using network management tools to analyze network traffic patterns (e.g., simple  network management protocol).
Skill in using Virtual Private Network (VPN) devices and encryption.
Skill in analyzing memory dumps to extract information.
Skill in collecting data from a variety of cyber defense resources.
Skill in developing and executing technical training programs and curricula.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID  S0070  S0071  S0072   S0073  S0074   S0075   S0076  S0077  S0078   S0079  S0080  S0081  S0082   S0083   S0084  S0085  S0086  S0087  S0088   S0089  S0090  S0091  S0092  S0093  S0094   S0095  S0096  S0097   S0100   S0101  S0102  S0103  S0104   S0106  S0107  S0108   Description   Skill in talking to others to convey information effectively.
Skill in conducting forensic analyses in multiple operating system environments (e.g.,  mobile device systems).
Skill in securing network communications.
Skill in protecting a network against malware.
(e.g., NIPS, anti-malware, restrict/prevent  external devices, spam filters).
Skill in using network analysis tools to identify vulnerabilities.
Skill in integrating black box security testing tools into quality assurance process of  software releases.
Skill in configuring and utilizing network protection components (e.g., Firewalls, VPNs,  network intrusion detection systems).
Skill in one-way hash functions (e.g., Secure Hash Algorithm [SHA], Message Digest  Algorithm [MD5]).
Skill in identifying common encoding techniques (e.g., Exclusive Disjunction [XOR],  American Standard Code for Information Interchange [ASCII], Unicode, Base64,  Uuencode, Uniform Resource Locator [URL] encode).
Skill in applying security controls.
Skill in utilizing or developing learning activities (e.g., scenarios, instructional games,  interactive exercises).
Skill in utilizing technologies (e.g., SmartBoards, websites, computers, projectors) for  instructional purposes.
Skill in developing workforce and position qualification standards.
Skill in identifying Test & Evaluation infrastructure (people, ranges, tools,  instrumentation) requirements.
Skill in managing test assets, test resources, and test personnel to ensure effective  completion of test events.
Skill in performing format conversions to create a standard representation of the data.
Skill in developing machine understandable semantic ontologies.
Skill in system, network, and OS hardening techniques.
(e.g., remove unnecessary services,  password policies, network segmentation, enable logging, least privilege, etc.).
Skill in troubleshooting and diagnosing cyber defense infrastructure anomalies and work  through resolution.
Skill in processing digital evidence, to include protecting and making legally sound copies  of evidence.
Skill in secure test plan design (e. g. unit, integration, system, acceptance).
Skill in network systems management principles, models, methods (e.g., end-to-end  systems performance monitoring), and tools.
Skill in applying security models (e.g., Bell-LaPadula model, Biba integrity model, Clark- Wilson integrity model).
Skill in assessing security systems designs.
Skill in conducting system/server planning, management, and maintenance.
Skill in integrating and applying policies that meet system security objectives.
Skill in assessing security controls based on cybersecurity principles and tenets.
(e.g., CIS  CSC, NIST SP 800-53, Cybersecurity Framework, etc.).
Skill in designing the integration of technology processes and solutions, including legacy  systems and modern programming languages.
Skill in developing applications that can log and handle errors, exceptions, and application  faults and logging.
Skill in implementing and testing network infrastructure contingency and recovery plans.
Skill in troubleshooting failed system components (i.e., servers)  Skill in translating operational requirements into protection needs (i.e., security controls).
(i.e., servers, appliances, network  devices).
Skill in configuring and validating network workstations and peripherals in accordance  with approved standards and/or specifications.
S0167   S0168  S0169   S0170  S0171  S0172  S0173  S0174  S0175   S0176  S0177  S0178   Skill in assessing the application of cryptographic standards.
Skill in recognizing vulnerabilities in security systems.
Skill in setting up physical or logical sub-networks that separate an internal local area  network (LAN) from other untrusted networks.
Skill in applying secure coding techniques.
Skill in using security event correlation tools.
Skill in administrative planning activities, to include preparation of functional and specific  support plans, preparing and managing correspondence, and staffing procedures.
Skill in analyzing a target's communication networks.
Skill in analyzing essential network data (e.g., router configuration files, routing protocols).
Skill in analyzing language processing tools to provide feedback to enhance tool  development.
Skill in analyzing target communications internals and externals collected from wireless  LANs.
Skill in analyzing traffic to identify network devices.
Skill in assessing and/or estimating effects generated during and after cyber operations.
Skill in complying with the legal restrictions for targeted information.
Skill in conducting social network analysis, buddy list analysis, and/or cookie analysis.
Skill in conducting social network analysis.
Skill in creating and extracting important information from packet captures.
Skill in creating collection requirements in support of data acquisition activities.
Skill in depicting source or collateral data on a network map.
Skill in determining the effect of various router and firewall configurations on traffic  patterns and network performance in both LAN and WAN environments.
Skill in determining the physical location of network devices.
Skill in developing and executing comprehensive cyber operations assessment programs  for assessing and validating operational performance characteristics.
Skill in developing intelligence reports.
Skill in developing or recommending analytic approaches or solutions to problems and  situations for which information is incomplete or for which no precedent exists.
Skill in documenting and communicating complex technical and programmatic  information.
Skill in evaluating accesses for intelligence value.
Skill in evaluating information for reliability, validity, and relevance.
Skill in evaluating information to recognize relevance, priority, etc.
Skill in extracting information from packet captures.
Skill in fusion analysis   Skill in generating operation plans in support of mission and target requirements.
Skill in identifying a target’s communications networks.
Skill in identifying a target's network characteristics.
Skill in identifying critical target elements, to include critical target elements for the cyber  domain.
Skill in identifying cyber threats which may jeopardize organization and/or partner  interests.
Skill in identifying language issues that may have an impact on organization objectives.
Skill in identifying leads for target development.
Skill in identifying non-target regional languages and dialects  Skill in identifying the devices that work at each level of protocol models.
Skill in identifying, locating, and tracking targets via geospatial analysis techniques  Skill in information prioritization as it relates to operations.
Skill in interpreting traceroute results, as they apply to network analysis and reconstruction.
Skill in knowledge management, including technical documentation techniques (e.g., Wiki  page).
Skill in managing client relationships, including determining client needs/requirements,  managing client expectations, and demonstrating commitment to delivering quality results.
Skill in navigating network visualization software.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0255   S0256   S0257  S0258  S0259  S0260  S0261  S0262  S0263   S0264   S0265  S0266  S0267  S0268  S0269   S0270  S0271   S0272  S0273  S0274  S0275  S0276  S0277  S0278  S0279   S0280  S0281  S0282  S0283  S0284  S0285  S0286  S0287   S0288   S0289  S0290   Description   Skill in providing real-time, actionable geolocation information utilizing target  infrastructures.
Skill in recognizing and interpreting malicious network activity in traffic.
Skill in recognizing midpoint opportunities and essential information.
Skill in recognizing relevance of information.
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for leads for metadata analysis.
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for leads to enable remote  operations (data includes users, passwords, email addresses, IP ranges of the target,  frequency in DNI behavior, mail servers, domain servers, SMTP header information).
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for target development  including intelligence development.
Skill in researching essential information.
Skill in reviewing and editing intelligence products from various sources for cyber  operations.
Skill in target development in direct support of collection operations.
Skill in target network anomaly identification (e.g., intrusions, dataflow or processing,  target implementation of new technologies).
Skill in testing and evaluating tools for implementation.
Skill in using databases to identify target-relevant information.
Skill in using non-attributable networks.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0291  S0292   S0293   S0294  S0295  S0296   S0297   S0298  S0299  S0300  S0301  S0302   S0303  S0304  S0305   S0306  S0307  S0308   S0309  S0310   S0311  S0312   S0313  S0314  S0315  S0316  S0317   S0318  S0319  S0320  S0321  S0322   S0323  S0324   S0325   Description   Skill in using research methods including multiple, different sources to reconstruct a target  network.
Skill in using trace route tools and interpreting the results as they apply to network analysis  and reconstruction.
(e.g., checksums, Exclusive OR, secure hashes,  check constraints, etc.).
Skill in wireless network target analysis, templating, and geolocation.
Skill in writing (and submitting) requirements to meet gaps in technical capabilities.
Skill in writing about facts and ideas in a clear, convincing, and organized manner.
Skill to access information on current assets available, usage.
Skill to access the databases where plans/directives/guidance are maintained.
Skill to analyze strategic guidance for issues requiring clarification and/or additional  guidance.
Skill to anticipate intelligence capability employment requirements.
Skill to apply analytical standards to evaluate intelligence products.
Skill to apply the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of available  platforms, sensors, architectures and apparatus as they apply to organization objectives.
Skill to apply the process used to assess the performance and impact of cyber operations.
Skill to articulate a needs statement/requirement and integrate new and emerging collection  capabilities, accesses and/or processes into collection operations.
Skill to associate Intelligence gaps to priority information requirements and observables.
Skill to compare indicators/observables with requirements.
Skill to convert intelligence requirements into intelligence production tasks.
Skill to coordinate the development of tailored intelligence products.
Skill to develop a collection plan that clearly shows the discipline that can be used to  collect the information needed.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0326  S0327   S0328  S0329   S0330   S0331   S0332   S0333   S0334  S0335  S0336   S0337  S0338   S0339  S0340  S0341   S0342   S0343   S0344  S0345  S0346   S0347  S0348   S0349  S0350   S0351  S0352   S0353  S0354  S0355   Description   Skill to distinguish between notional and actual resources and their applicability to the plan  under development.
Skill to evaluate factors of the operational environment to objectives, and information  requirements.
Skill to evaluate requests for information to determine if response information exists.
Skill to evaluate the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of organic, theater,  national, coalition and other collection capabilities.
Skill to extract information from available tools and applications associated with collection  requirements and collection operations management.
Skill to identify when priority information requirements are satisfied.
Skill to implement established procedures for evaluating collection management and  operations activities.
Skill to interpret planning guidance to discern level of analytical support required.
Skill to prepare and deliver reports, presentations and briefings, to include using visual aids  or presentation technology.
Skill to relate intelligence resources/assets to anticipated intelligence requirements.
Skill to resolve conflicting collection requirements.
Skill to review performance specifications and historical information about collection  assets.
Skill to synchronize operational assessment procedures with the critical information  requirement process.
Skill to synchronize planning activities and required intelligence support.
Skill to translate the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of organic, theater,  national, coalition and other collection capabilities.
Skill to use systems and/or tools to track collection requirements and determine if they are  satisfied.
Skill in negotiating vendor agreements and evaluating vendor privacy practices.
86   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Skill in communicating with all levels of management including Board members (e.g.,  interpersonal skills, approachability, effective listening skills, appropriate use of style and  language for the audience).
Skill to anticipate new security threats.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner cyber operations capabilities and  tools.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner intelligence processes and the  development of information requirements and essential information.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner organization capabilities and  limitations (those with tasking, collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination  responsibilities).
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner reporting.
Skill to develop insights about the context of an organization’s threat environment  Skill to design incident response for cloud service models.
Skill to apply cybersecurity and privacy principles to organizational requirements (relevant  to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
Skill to use risk scoring to inform performance-based and cost-effective approaches to help  organizations to identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risk.
Skill to identify sources, characteristics, and uses of the organization’s data assets.
Skill to use cyber defense Service Provider reporting structure and processes within one’s  own organization.
Skill to translate, track, and prioritize information needs and intelligence collection  requirements across the extended enterprise.
Skill to ensure that accountability information is collected for information system and  information and communications technology supply chain infrastructure components.
Skill to identify cybersecurity and privacy issues that stem from connections with internal  and external customers and partner organizations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.7   NICE Framework Ability Descriptions   Table 7 provides a listing of cybersecurity abilities.
Selected ability  descriptions from this list are included in each work role in the Detailed work role Listing in  Appendix B.
Table 7 - NICE Framework Ability Descriptions   Description   Ability   ID   A0001   Ability to identify systemic security issues based on the analysis of vulnerability and  configuration data.
Ability to match the appropriate knowledge repository technology for a given application or  environment.
A0002  A0003  Ability to determine the validity of technology trend data.
Ability to develop curriculum that speaks to the topic at the appropriate level for the target  audience.
Ability to prepare and deliver education and awareness briefings to ensure that systems,  network, and data users are aware of and adhere to systems security policies and procedures.
Ability to apply the methods, standards, and approaches for describing, analyzing, and  documenting an organization's enterprise information technology (IT) architecture (e.g.,  Open Group Architecture Framework [TOGAF], Department of Defense Architecture  Framework [DoDAF], Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework [FEAF]).
A0008  A0009  Ability to apply supply chain risk management standards.
Ability to communicate complex information, concepts, or ideas in a confident and well- organized manner through verbal, written, and/or visual means.
A0015  Ability to conduct vulnerability scans and recognize vulnerabilities in security systems.
A0016  Ability to facilitate small group discussions.
A0024  Ability to develop clear directions and instructional materials.
A0027  Ability to apply an organization's goals and objectives to develop and maintain architecture.
A0028  Ability to assess and forecast manpower requirements to meet organizational objectives.
Ability to conduct and implement market research to understand government and industry  capabilities and appropriate pricing.
A0031  A0032  Ability to develop curriculum for use within a virtual environment.
Ability to develop policy, plans, and strategy in compliance with laws, regulations, policies,  and standards in support of organizational cyber activities.
A0033  A0034  Ability to develop, update, and/or maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs).
Ability to leverage best practices and lessons learned of external organizations and academic  institutions dealing with cyber issues.
A0037  A0038  Ability to optimize systems to meet enterprise performance requirements.
A0039  Ability to oversee the development and update of the life cycle cost estimate.
A0041  A0042  Ability to develop career path opportunities.
A0046   A0047   Ability to monitor and assess the potential impact of emerging technologies on laws,  regulations, and/or policies.
Ability to develop secure software according to secure software deployment methodologies,  tools, and practices.
Ability to apply network security architecture concepts including topology, protocols,  components, and principles (e.g., application of defense-in-depth).
A0048  A0049  Ability to apply secure system design tools, methods and techniques.
Ability to apply system design tools, methods, and techniques, including automated systems  analysis and design tools.
A0050  A0051  Ability to execute technology integration processes.
Ability to operate network equipment including hubs, routers, switches, bridges, servers,  transmission media, and related hardware.
A0055  Ability to operate common network tools (e.g., ping, traceroute, nslookup).
A0056  Ability to ensure security practices are followed throughout the acquisition process.
A0059  Ability to operate the organization's LAN/WAN pathways.
A0062  Ability to monitor measures or indicators of system performance and availability.
A0063  A0064  Ability to interpret and translate customer requirements into operational capabilities.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability   ID   A0066   A0065  Ability to monitor traffic flows across the network.
Ability to adjust to and operate in a diverse, unpredictable, challenging, and fast-paced work  environment.
A0067  A0068  Ability to apply approved planning development and staffing processes.
A0072   Ability to clearly articulate intelligence requirements into well-formulated research questions  and data tracking variables for inquiry tracking purposes.
Ability to clearly articulate intelligence requirements into well-formulated research questions  and requests for information.
Ability to coordinate and collaborate with analysts regarding surveillance requirements and  essential information development.
A0076  A0077  Ability to coordinate cyber operations with other organization functions or support activities.
Ability to coordinate, collaborate and disseminate information to subordinate, lateral and  higher-level organizations.
A0078  A0079  Ability to correctly employ each organization or element into the collection plan and matrix.
Ability to develop or recommend analytic approaches or solutions to problems and situations  for which information is incomplete or for which no precedent exists.
Ability to develop or recommend planning solutions to problems and situations for which no  precedent exists.
A0083  Ability to evaluate information for reliability, validity, and relevance.
Ability to expand network access by conducting target analysis and collection to identify  targets of interest.
Ability to function in a collaborative environment, seeking continuous consultation with  other analysts and experts—both internal and external to the organization—to leverage  analytical and technical expertise.
A0089  A0090  Ability to identify external partners with common cyber operations interests.
Ability to interpret and apply laws, regulations, policies, and guidance relevant to  organization cyber objectives.
A0094  A0095  Ability to interpret and translate customer requirements into operational action.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability to participate as a member of planning teams, coordination groups, and task forces as  necessary.
Ability to perform network collection tactics, techniques, and procedures to include  decryption capabilities/tools.
A0099  A0100  Ability to perform wireless collection procedures to include decryption capabilities/tools.
A0105  Ability to tailor technical and planning information to a customer’s level of understanding.
Ability to monitor advancements in information privacy laws to ensure organizational  adaptation and compliance.
Ability to work across departments and business units to implement organization’s privacy  principles and programs, and align privacy objectives with security objectives.
Ability to monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure  organizational adaptation and compliance.
Ability to determine whether a security incident violates a privacy principle or legal standard  requiring specific legal action.
Ability to develop or procure curriculum that speaks to the topic at the appropriate level for  the target.
Ability to work across departments and business units to implement organization’s privacy  principles and programs, and align privacy objectives with security objectives.
A0119   A0118   A0115  A0116  Ability to prioritize and allocate cybersecurity resources correctly and efficiently.
A0117  Ability to relate strategy, business, and technology in the context of organizational dynamics.
Ability to understand technology, management, and leadership issues related to organization  processes and problem solving.
Ability to understand the basic concepts and issues related to cyber and its organizational  impact.
Ability to share meaningful insights about the context of an organization’s threat  environment that improve its risk management posture.
Ability to apply cybersecurity and privacy principles to organizational requirements (relevant  to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
A0123  A0124  Ability to establish and maintain automated security control assessments  A0125  Ability to author a privacy disclosure statement based on current laws.
A0122   Ability to track the location and configuration of networked devices and software across  departments, locations, facilities and, potentially, supporting business functions.
A0126  A0127  Ability to deploy continuous monitoring technologies and tools.
A0128   Ability to apply techniques for detecting host and network-based intrusions using intrusion  detection technologies.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Ability   ID   A0129   A0130   A0131   A0132   A0133   A0134   A0135   A0136   A0137   A0138   A0139   A0140   A0141   A0142   A0143   A0144   A0145   Description   Ability to ensure information security management processes are integrated with strategic  and operational planning processes.
Ability to ensure that senior officials within the organization provide information security for  the information and systems that support the operations and assets under their control.
Ability to ensure the organization has adequately trained personnel to assist in complying  with security requirements in legislation, Executive Orders, policies, directives, instructions,  standards, and guidelines.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide a comprehensive,  organization-wide, holistic approach for addressing risk—an approach that provides a greater  understanding of the integrated operations of the organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to develop a risk management  strategy for the organization providing a strategic view of security-related risks for the  organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to facilitate the sharing of risk- related information among authorizing officials and other senior leaders within the  organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide oversight for all  risk management-related activities across the organization to help ensure consistent and  effective risk acceptance decisions.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to ensure that authorization  decisions consider all factors necessary for mission and business success.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide an organization- wide forum to consider all sources of risk (including aggregated risk) to organizational  operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to promote cooperation and  collaboration among authorizing officials to include authorization actions requiring shared  responsibility.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to ensure that the shared  responsibility for supporting organizational mission/business functions using external  providers of systems, services, and applications receives the needed visibility and is elevated  to the appropriate decision-making authorities.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to identify the organizational  risk posture based on the aggregated risk from the operation and use of the systems for which  the organization is responsible.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that an organization-wide security program is effectively implemented resulting in  adequate security for all organizational systems and environments of operation.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that security considerations are integrated into programming/planning/budgeting  cycles, enterprise architectures, and acquisition/system development life cycles.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that organizational systems and common controls are covered by approved security  plans and possess current authorizations.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that security-related activities required across the organization are accomplished in an  efficient, cost-effective, and timely manner.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that there is centralized reporting of security-related activities.
92   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability   ID   A0146   A0147   A0148   T h s    i  p u b  Ability to establish the rules for appropriate use and protection of the information and retains  that responsibility even when the information is shared with or provided to other  organizations.
Ability to approve security plans, memorandums of agreement or understanding, plans of  action and milestones, and determine whether significant changes in the systems or  environments of operation require reauthorization.
Ability to serve as the primary liaison between the enterprise architect and the systems  security engineer and coordinates with system owners, common control providers, and  system security officers on the allocation of security controls as system-specific, hybrid, or  common controls.
Ability, in close coordination with system security officers, advise authorizing officials, chief  information officers, senior information security officers, and the senior accountable official  for risk management/risk executive (function), on a range of security-related issues (e.g.
establishing system boundaries; assessing the severity of weaknesses and deficiencies in the  system; plans of action and milestones; risk mitigation approaches; security alerts; and  potential adverse effects of identified vulnerabilities).
A0149  A0150  Ability to conduct systems security engineering activities (NIST SP 800-16).
Ability to capture and refine security requirements and ensure that the requirements are  effectively integrated into the component products and systems through purposeful security  architecting, design, development, and configuration.
Ability to employ best practices when implementing security controls within a system  including software engineering methodologies; system and security engineering principles;  secure design, secure architecture, and secure coding techniques.
Ability to coordinate their security-related activities with security architects, senior  information security officers, system owners, common control providers, and system security  officers.
Ability to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the management, operational, and  technical security controls and control enhancements employed within or inherited by a  system to determine the effectiveness of the controls (i.e., the extent to which the security  controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired  outcome with respect to meeting the security requirements for the system).
Ability to prepare the final security assessment report containing the results and findings  from the assessment.
Ability to assesses a security plan to help ensure that the plan provides a set of security  controls for the system that meet the stated security requirements.
Ability to ensure that functional and security requirements are appropriately addressed in a  contract and that the contractor meets the functional and security requirements as stated in the  contract.
Ability to interpret the information collected by network tools (e.g.
Ability to translate, track, and prioritize information needs and intelligence collection  requirements across the extended enterprise.
93   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Ability   ID   Description   A0163   A0162   A0161   A0162   Ability to integrate information security requirements into the acquisition process; using  applicable baseline security controls as one of the sources for security requirements; ensuring  a robust software quality control process; and establishing multiple sources (e.g., delivery  routes, for critical system elements).
Ability to ensure information system security, acquisition personnel, legal counsel, and other  appropriate advisors and stakeholders are participating in decision making from system  concept definition/review and are involved in, or approve of, each milestone decision through  the entire system life cycle for systems.
Ability to recognize the unique aspects of the Communications Security (COMSEC)  environment and hierarchy.
Ability to interpret Communications Security (COMSEC) terminology, guidelines and  procedures.
Ability to identify the roles and responsibilities for appointed Communications Security  (COMSEC) personnel.
Ability to manage Communications Security (COMSEC) material accounting, control and  use procedure.
Ability to identify types of Communications Security (COMSEC) Incidents and how they’re  reported  Ability to recognize the importance of auditing Communications Security (COMSEC)  material and accounts.
Ability to Identify the requirements of In-Process accounting for Communications Security  (COMSEC)  Ability to identify critical infrastructure systems with information communication technology  A0170  that were designed without system security considerations.
A0164   A0165   A0166   A0167   A0168   A0172   A0173   Ability to set up a physical or logical sub-networks that separates an internal local area  network (LAN) from other untrusted networks.
Ability to Find and navigate the dark web using the TOR network to locate markets and  forums.
NIST SP 800-181      Appendix B – Work Role Detail Listing   NICE FRAMEWORK   This appendix provides a detailed description of each NICE Framework work role.
For each  work role, the listing below provides the following information:   •  The work role name;  •  A unique NICE Framework work role ID, based upon abbreviations of the NICE   Framework Category and Specialty Area to which that work role belongs;   •  The Specialty Area in which the work role resides;  •  The Category in which the work role resides;  •  A description of the work role;  •  A list of the NICE Framework Tasks that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to perform;   •  A list of the NICE Framework Knowledge areas that a person in a cybersecurity position   that includes the work role might be expected to exhibit;   •  A list of the NICE Framework Skills that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to possess; and   •  A list of the NICE Framework Abilities that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to demonstrate.
The following tables describe the NICE Framework work roles with a simple listing of tasks,  knowledge, skills, and abilities.
The work roles will be updated periodically [1].
B.1   Securely Provision (SP)   Work Role Name  Authorizing Official    Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Risk Management (RSK)   SP-RSK-001   Category  Work Role  Description   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities      Securely Provision (SP)  Senior official or executive with the authority to formally assume responsibility for  operating an information system at an acceptable level of risk to organizational  operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational  assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation (CNSSI 4009).
T0145, T0221, T0371, T0495  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0013, K0019, K0027, K0028,  K0037, K0038, K0040, K0044, K0048, K0049, K0054, K0059, K0070, K0084,  K0089, K0101, K0126, K0146, K0168, K0169, K0170, K0179, K0199, K0203,  K0260, K0261, K0262, K0267, K0295, K0322, K0342, K0622, K0624  S0034, S0367  A0028, A0033, A0077, A0090, A0094, A0111, A0117, A0118, A0119, A0123,  A0170   95   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Security Control Assessor   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-RSK-002  Risk Management (RSK)  Securely Provision (SP)  Conducts independent comprehensive assessments of the management, operational,  and technical security controls and control enhancements employed within or  inherited by an information technology (IT) system to determine the overall  effectiveness of the controls (as defined in NIST 800-37).
Work Role Name  Software Developer   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-DEV-001  Software Development (DEV)  Securely Provision (SP)  Develops, creates, maintains, and writes/codes new (or modifies existing)  computer applications, software, or specialized utility programs.
T0009, T0011, T0013, T0014, T0022, T0026, T0034, T0040, T0046, T0057,  T0077, T0100, T0111, T0117, T0118, T0171, T0176, T0181, T0189, T0217,  T0228, T0236, T0267, T0303, T0311, T0324, T0337, T0416, T0417, T0436,  T0455, T0500, T0553, T0554  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0014, K0016, K0027, K0028,  K0039, K0044, K0050, K0051, K0060, K0066, K0068, K0070, K0073, K0079,  K0080, K0081, K0082, K0084, K0086, K0105, K0139, K0140, K0152, K0153,  K0154, K0170, K0179, K0199, K0202, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0263, K0322,  K0332, K0342, K0343, K0624  S0001, S0014, S0017, S0019, S0022, S0031, S0034, S0060, S0135, S0138, S0149,  S0174, S0175, S0367  A0007, A0021, A0047, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   96   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Secure Software Assessor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-DEV-002  Software Development (DEV)  Securely Provision (SP)  Analyzes the security of new or existing computer applications, software, or  specialized utility programs and provides actionable results.
T0013, T0014, T0022, T0038, T0040, T0100, T0111, T0117, T0118, T0171,  T0181, T0217, T0228, T0236, T0266, T0311, T0324, T0337, T0424, T0428,  T0436, T0456, T0457, T0516, T0554  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0014, K0016, K0027, K0028,  K0039, K0044, K0050, K0051, K0060, K0066, K0068, K0070, K0073, K0079,  K0080, K0081, K0082, K0084, K0086, K0105, K0139, K0140, K0152, K0153,  K0154, K0170, K0178, K0179, K0199, K0202, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0263,  K0322, K0342, K0343, K0624  S0001, S0022, S0031, S0034, S0083, S0135, S0138, S0174, S0175, S0367  A0021, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities           T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Work Role Name  Enterprise Architect   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-ARC-001  Systems Architecture (ARC)  Securely Provision (SP)  Develops and maintains business, systems, and information processes to support  enterprise mission needs; develops information technology (IT) rules and  requirements that describe baseline and target architectures.
Skills  Abilities            97   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Security Architect   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-ARC-002  Systems Architecture (ARC)  Securely Provision (SP)  Ensures that the stakeholder security requirements necessary to protect the  organization’s mission and business processes are adequately addressed in all  aspects of enterprise architecture including reference models, segment and solution  architectures, and the resulting systems supporting those missions and business  processes.
Work Role Name  Research and Development Specialist   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-TRD-001  Technology R&D (TRD)  Securely Provision (SP)  Conducts software and systems engineering and software systems research to  develop new capabilities, ensuring cybersecurity is fully integrated.
Conducts  comprehensive technology research to evaluate potential vulnerabilities in  cyberspace systems.
Work Role Name  Systems Requirements Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-SRP-001  Systems Requirements Planning (SRP)  Securely Provision (SP)  Consults with customers to evaluate functional requirements and translate  functional requirements into technical solutions.
T0033, T0039, T0045, T0052, T0062, T0127, T0156, T0174, T0191, T0235,  T0273, T0300, T0313, T0325, T0334, T0454, T0463, T0497  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0008, K0012, K0018, K0019,  K0032, K0035, K0038, K0043, K0044, K0045, K0047, K0055, K0056, K0059,  K0060, K0061, K0063, K0066, K0067, K0073, K0074, K0086, K0087, K0090,  K0091, K0093, K0101, K0102, K0126, K0163, K0164, K0168, K0169, K0170,  K0180, K0200, K0267, K0287, K0325, K0332, K0333, K0622  S0005, S0006, S0008, S0010, S0050, S0134, S0367  A0064, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  System Test & Evaluation Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-TST-001  Test and Evaluation (TST)  Securely Provision (SP)  Plans, prepares, and executes tests of systems to evaluate results against  specifications and requirements as well as analyze/report test results.
T0058, T0080, T0125, T0143, T0257, T0274, T0393, T0426, T0511, T0512,  T0513, T0539, T0540  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0027, K0028, K0037, K0044,  K0057, K0088, K0091, K0102, K0139, K0126, K0169, K0170, K0179, K0199,  K0203, K0212, K0250, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0287, K0332  S0015, S0021, S0026, S0030, S0048, S0060, S0061, S0082, S0104, S0107, S0110,  S0112, S0115, S0117, S0367  A0026, A0030, A0040, A0123   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      99   NIST SP 800-181      Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   T h s    i  p u b  Skills  Abilities   NICE FRAMEWORK   Information Systems Security Developer  SP-SYS-001  Systems Development (SYS)  Securely Provision (SP)  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information system security throughout the  systems development life cycle.
Work Role Name  Systems Developer   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-SYS-002  Systems Development (SYS)  Securely Provision (SP)  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information systems throughout the systems  development life cycle.
Work Role Name  Database Administrator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-DTA-001  Data Administration (DTAA)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Administers databases and/or data management systems that allow for the secure  storage, query, and utilization of data.
T0008, T0137, T0139, T0140, T0146, T0152, T0162, T0210, T0305, T0306,  T0330, T0422, T0459, T0490  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0020, K0021, K0022, K0023,  K0025, K0031, K0056, K0060, K0065, K0069, K0083, K0097, K0197, K0260,  K0261, K0262, K0277, K0278, K0287, K0420  S0002, S0013, S0037, S0042, S0045  A0176   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Tasks   Work Role Name  Data Analyst   Work Role ID  OM-DTA-002  Data Administration (DTA)  Specialty Area  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Category  Work Role  Examines data from multiple disparate sources with the goal of providing security  Description  and privacy insight.
Designs and implements custom algorithms, workflow  processes and layouts for complex, enterprise-scale data sets used for modeling,  data mining, and research purposes.
T0007, T0008, T0068, T0146, T0195, T0210, T0342, T0347, T0349, T0351,  T0353, T0361, T0366, T0381, T0382, T0383, T0385, T0392, T0402, T0403,  T0404, T0405, T0460  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0015, K0016, K0020, K0022,  K0023, K0025, K0031, K0051, K0052, K0056, K0060, K0065, K0068, K0069,  K0083, K0095, K0129, K0139, K0140, K0193, K0197, K0229, K0236, K0238,  K0325, K0420  S0013, S0017, S0202, S0028, S0029, S0037, S0060, S0088, S0089, S0094, S0095,  S0103, S0106, S0109, S0113, S0114, S0118, S0119, S0123, S0125, S0126, S0127,  S0129, S0130, S0160, S0369  A0029, A0035, A0036, A0041, A0066   Knowledge   Abilities   Skills      101   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Knowledge Manager   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-KMG-001  Knowledge Management (KMG)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for the management and administration of processes and tools that  enable the organization to identify, document, and access intellectual capital and  information content.
T0037, T0060, T0154, T0185, T0209, T0339, T0421, T0452, T0524  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0013, K0094, K0095, K0096,  K0146, K0194, K0195, K0228, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0283, K0287, K0315,  K0338, K0420  S0011, S0012, S0049, S0055  A0002   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Technical Support Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-STS-001  Customer Service and Technical Support (STS)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Provides technical support to customers who need assistance utilizing client level  hardware and software in accordance with established or approved organizational  process components.
(i.e., Master Incident Management Plan, when applicable).
T0125, T0237, T0308, T0315, T0331, T0468, T0482, T0491, T0494, T0496,  T0502, T0530  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0053, K0088, K0109, K0114,  K0116, K0194, K0224, K0237, K0242, K0247, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0287,  K0292, K0294, K0302, K0317, K0330  S0039, S0058, S0142, S0159, S0365  A0025, A0034, A0122   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Network Operations Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-NET-001  Network Services (NET)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Plans, implements, and operates network services/systems, to include hardware and  virtual environments.
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  System Administrator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-ADM-001  Systems Administration (ADM)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for setting up and maintaining a system or specific components of a  system (e.g.
for example, installing, configuring, and updating hardware and  software; establishing and managing user accounts; overseeing or conducting  backup and recovery tasks; implementing operational and technical security  controls; and adhering to organizational security policies and procedures).
T0029, T0054, T0063, T0136, T0144, T0186, T0207, T0418, T0431, T0435,  T0458, T0461, T0498, T0501, T0507, T0514, T0515, T0531  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0049, K0050, K0053, K0064,  K0077, K0088, K0100, K0103, K0104, K0117, K0130, K0158, K0167, K0179,  K0260, K0261, K0262, K0274, K0280, K0289, K0318, K0332, K0346  S0016, S0033, S0043, S0073, S0076, S0111, S0143, S0144, S0151, S0153, S0154,  S0155, S0157, S0158  A0025, A0027, A0034, A0055, A0062, A0074, A0088, A0123, A0124  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Systems Security Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-ANA-001  Systems Analysis (ANA)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for the analysis and development of the integration, testing,  operations, and maintenance of systems security.
Work Role Name  Cyber Legal Advisor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-LGA-001  Legal Advice and Advocacy (LGA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Provides legal advice and recommendations on relevant topics related to cyber law.
Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   T0006, T0098, T0102, T0131, T0220, T0419, T0434, T0465, T0474, T0476,  T0478, T0487, T0522  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0017, K0059, K0107, K0157,  K0261, K0262, K0267, K0312, K0316, K0341, K0615  S0356  A0046   Work Role Name  Privacy Officer/Privacy Compliance Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-LGA-002  Legal Advice and Advocacy (LGA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and oversees privacy compliance program and privacy program staff,  supporting privacy compliance, governance/policy, and incident response needs of  privacy and security executives and their teams.
Work Role Name  Cyber Instructional Curriculum Developer  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-TEA-001  Training, Education, and Awareness (TEA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops, plans, coordinates, and evaluates cyber training/education courses,  methods, and techniques based on instructional needs.
T0230, T0247, T0248, T0249, T0345, T0352, T0357, T0365, T0367, T0380,  T0437, T0442, T0450, T0451, T0534, T0536, T0926  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0059, K0124, K0146, K0147,  K0204, K0208, K0213, K0216, K0217, K0220, K0243, K0239, K0245, K0246,  K0250, K0252, K0287, K0628  S0064, S0066, S0070, S0102, S0166, S0296  A0004, A0013, A0015, A0018, A0019, A0022, A0024, A0032, A0054, A0057,  A0055, A0057, A0058, A0063, A0070, A0083, A0089, A0105, A0106, A0112,  A0114, A0118, A0119, A0171   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Instructor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   OV-TEA-002  Training, Education, and Awareness (TEA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and conducts training or education of personnel within cyber domain.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK                  Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Information Systems Security Manager  OV-MGT-001  Cybersecurity Management (MGT)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Responsible for the cybersecurity of a program, organization, system, or enclave.
T0001, T0002, T0003, T0004, T0005, T0024, T0025, T0044, T0089, T0091,  T0092, T0093, T0095, T0097, T0099, T0106, T0115, T0130, T0132, T0133,  T0134, T0135, T0147, T0148, T0149, T0151, T0157, T0158, T0159, T0192,  T0199, T0206, T0211, T0213, T0215, T0219, T0227, T0229, T0234, T0239,  T0248, T0254, T0255, T0256, T0263, T0264, T0265, T0275, T0276, T0277,  T0280, T0281, T0282  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0008, K0018, K0021, K0026,  K0033, K0038, K0040, K0042, K0043, K0046, K0048, K0053, K0054, K0058,  K0059, K0061, K0070, K0072, K0076, K0077, K0087, K0090, K0092, K0101,  K0106, K0121, K0126, K0149, K0150, K0151, K0163, K0167, K0168, K0169,  K0170, K0179, K0180, K0199, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0267, K0287, K0332,  K0342, K0622, K0624  S0018, S0027, S0086  A0128, A0161, A0170   Work Role Name  Communications Security (COMSEC) Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-MGT-002  Cybersecurity Management (MGT)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Individual who manages the Communications Security (COMSEC) resources of an  organization (CNSSI  4009) or key custodian for a Crypto Key Management  System (CKMS).
Work Role Name  Cyber Workforce Developer and Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-SPP-001  Strategic Planning and Policy (SPP)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops cyberspace workforce plans, strategies and guidance to support  cyberspace workforce manpower, personnel, training and education requirements  and to address changes to cyberspace policy, doctrine, materiel, force structure, and  education and training requirements.
T0001, T0004, T0025, T0044, T0074, T0094, T0099, T0116, T0222, T0226,  T0341, T0352, T0355, T0356, T0362, T0363, T0364, T0365, T0368, T0369,  T0372, T0373, T0374, T0375, T0376, T0384, T0387, T0388, T0390, T0391,  T0408, T0425, T0429, T0437, T0441, T0445, T0472, T0481, T0505, T0506,  T0529, T0533, T0536, T0537, T0552  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0072, K0101, K0127, K0146,  K0147, K0168, K0169, K0204, K0215, K0233, K0234, K0241, K0243, K0309,  K0311, K0313, K0335  S0108, S0128  A0023, A0028, A0033, A0037, A0042, A0053   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Policy and Strategy Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-SPP-002  Strategic Planning and Policy Development (SPP)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and maintains cybersecurity plans, strategy and policy to support and  align with organizational cybersecurity initiatives and regulatory compliance.
T0074, T0094, T0222, T0226, T0341, T0369, T0384, T0390, T0408, T0425,  T0429, T0441, T0445, T0472, T0505, T0506, T0529, T0533, T0537  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0070, K0127, K0146, K0168,  K0234, K0248, K0309, K0311, K0313, K0335, K0624  S0176, S0250  A0003, A0033, A0037   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Executive Cyber Leadership  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-EXL-001  Executive Cyber Leadership (EXL)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Executes decision-making authorities and establishes vision and direction for an  organization's cyber and cyber-related resources and/or operations.
T0001, T0002, T0004, T0006, T0025, T0066, T0130, T0134, T0135, T0148,  T0151, T0227, T0229, T0229, T0248, T0254, T0263, T0264, T0282, T0337,  T0356, T0429, T0445, T0509, T0763, T0871, T0872, T0927, T0928  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0009, K0070, K0106, K0314,  K0296, K0147, K0624, K0628  S0018, S0356, S0357, S0358, S0359  A0033, A0070, A0085, A0094, A0105, A0106, A0116, A0117, A0118, A0119,  A0129, A0130, A0130   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   107   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Program Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-PMA-001  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Leads, coordinates, communicates, integrates, and is accountable for the overall  success of the program, ensuring alignment with agency or enterprise priorities.
Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Information Technology (IT) Project Manager  OV-PMA-002  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Directly manages information technology projects.
T0072, T0174, T0196, T0199, T0207, T0208, T0220, T0223, T0256, T0273,  T0277, T0340, T0354, T0370, T0377, T0379, T0389, T0394, T0407, T0412,  T0414, T0415, T0481, T0493, T0551  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0012, K0043, K0047, K0048,  K0059, K0072, K0090, K0101, K0120, K0126, K0146, K0148, K0154, K0164,  K0165, K0169, K0194, K0196, K0198, K0200, K0235, K0257, K0270  S0038, S0372  A0009, A0039, A0045, A0056   Work Role Name  Product Support Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-PMA-003  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Manages the package of support functions required to field and maintain the  readiness and operational capability of systems and components.
T0072, T0174, T0196, T0204, T0207, T0208, T0220, T0223, T0256, T0273,  T0277, T0302, T0340, T0354, T0370, T0377, T0389, T0394, T0412, T0414,  T0493, T0525, T0551, T0553  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0043, K0048, K0059, K0072,  K0090, K0120, K0126, K0148, K0150, K0154, K0164, K0165, K0169, K0194,  K0196, K0198, K0200, K0235, K0249, K0257, K0270  S0038, S0372  A0009, A0031, A0039, A0045, A0056    Knowledge   Skills  Abilities      108   NIST SP 800-181      Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   NICE FRAMEWORK   IT Investment/Portfolio Manager  OV-PMA-004  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Manages a portfolio of IT investments that align with the overall needs of mission  and enterprise priorities.
Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   IT Program Auditor  OV-PMA-005  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Conducts evaluations of an IT program or its individual components, to determine  compliance with published standards.
Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   PR-CDA-001  Cyber Defense Analysis (CDA)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Uses data collected from a variety of cyber defense tools (e.g., IDS alerts,  firewalls, network traffic logs.)
T0020, T0023, T0043, T0088, T0155, T0164, T0166, T0178, T0187, T0198,  T0214, T0258, T0259, T0260, T0290, T0291, T0292, T0293, T0294, T0295,  T0296, T0297, T0298, T0299, T0310, T0332, T0469, T0470, T0475, T0503,  T0504, T0526, T0545, T0548  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0007, K0013, K0015, K0018,  K0019, K0024, K0033, K0040, K0042, K0044, K0046, K0049, K0056, K0058,  K0059, K0060, K0061, K0065, K0070, K0074, K0075, K0093, K0098, K0104,  K0106, K0107, K0110, K0111, K0112, K0113, K0116, K0139, K0142, K0143,  K0157, K0160, K0161, K0162, K0167, K0168, K0177, K0179, K0180, K0190,  K0191, K0192, K0203, K0221, K0222, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0290, K0297,  K0300, K0301, K0303, K0318, K0322, K0324, K0332, K0339, K0342, K0624  S0020, S0025, S0027, S0036, S0054, S0057, S0063, S0078, S0096, S0147, S0156,  S0167, S0169, S0367, S0370  A0010, A0015, A0066, A0123, A0128, A0159   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Infrastructure Support Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   PR-INF-001  Cyber Defense Infrastructure Support (INF)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, and administers the infrastructure hardware  and software.
Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Incident Responder  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   PR-CIR-001  Incident Response (CIR)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Investigates, analyzes, and responds to cyber incidents within the network  environment or enclave.
T0041, T0047, T0161, T0163, T0164, T0170, T0175, T0214, T0233, T0246,  T0262, T0278, T0279, T0312, T0395, T0503, T0510  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0021, K0026, K0033, K0034,  K0041, K0042, K0046, K0058, K0062, K0070, K0106, K0157, K0161, K0162,  K0167, K0177, K0179, K0221, K0230, K0259, K0287, K0332, K0565, K0624  S0003, S0047, S0077, S0078, S0079, S0080, S0173, S0365  A0121, A0128   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Vulnerability Assessment Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   PR-VAM-001  Vulnerability Assessment and Management (VAM)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Performs assessments of systems and networks within the NE or enclave and  identifies where those systems/networks deviate from acceptable configurations,  enclave policy, or local policy.
Measures effectiveness of defense-in-depth  architecture against known vulnerabilities.
T0010, T0028, T0138, T0142, T0188, T0252, T0549, T0550  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0009, K0019, K0021, K0033,  K0044, K0056, K0061, K0068, K0070, K0089, K0106, K0139, K0161, K0162,  K0167, K0177, K0179, K0203, K0206, K0210, K0224, K0265, K0287, K0301,  K0308, K0332, K0342, K0344, K0624  S0001, S0009, S0025, S0044, S0051, S0052, S0081, S0120, S0137, S0171, S0364,  S0367  A0001, A0044, A0120, A0123   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      111   NIST SP 800-181      B.5   Analyze (AN)   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Threat/Warning Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-TWA-001  Warning/Threat Analysis (TWA)  Analyze (AN)  Develops cyber indicators to maintain awareness of the status of the highly  dynamic operating environment.
Collects, processes, analyzes, and disseminates  cyber threat/warning assessments.
Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Exploitation Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-EXP-001  Exploitation Analysis (EXP)  Analyze (AN)  Collaborates to identify access and collection gaps that can be satisfied through  cyber collection and/or preparation activities.
Leverages all authorized resources  and analytic techniques to penetrate targeted networks.
T0028, T0266, T0570, T0572, T0574, T0591, T0600, T0603, T0608, T0614,  T0641, T0695, T0701, T0720, T0727, T0736, T0738, T0754, T0775, T0777  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0108, K0109, K0131, K0142,  K0143, K0177, K0224, K0349, K0362, K0417, K0444, K0471, K0560, K0351,  K0354, K0368, K0371, K0376, K0379, K0388, K0393, K0394, K0397, K0418,  K0430, K0443, K0447, K0451, K0470, K0473, K0484, K0487, K0489, K0509,  K0510, K0523, K0529, K0535, K0544, K0557, K0559, K0608  S0066, S0184, S0199, S0200, S0201, S0204, S0207, S0214, S0223, S0236, S0237,  S0239, S0240, S0245, S0247, S0258, S0260, S0264, S0269, S0279, S0286, S0290,  S0294, S0300  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0074, A0086, A0092, A0093, A0104      112   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  All-Source Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-ASA-001  All-Source Analysis (ASA)  Analyze (AN)  Analyzes data/information from one or multiple sources to conduct preparation of  the environment, respond to requests for information, and submit intelligence  collection and production requirements in support of planning and operations.
Work Role Name  Mission Assessment Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-ASA-002  All-Source Analysis (ASA)  Analyze (AN)  Develops assessment plans and measures of performance/effectiveness.
Conducts  strategic and operational effectiveness assessments as required for cyber events.
T0582, T0583, T0585, T0586, T0588, T0589, T0593, T0597, T0611, T0615,  T0617, T0624, T0660, T0661, T0663, T0678, T0684, T0685, T0686, T0707,  T0718, T0748, T0749, T0752, T0758, T0761, T0782, T0783, T0785, T0786,  T0788, T0789, T0793, T0797, T0834  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0108, K0109,  K0177, K0349, K0362, K0377, K0392, K0395, K0405, K0409, K0410, K0414,  K0417, K0427, K0431, K0436, K0437, K0440, K0444, K0445, K0446, K0449,  K0457, K0460, K0464, K0465, K0469, K0471, K0480, K0507, K0511, K0516,  K0549, K0551, K0556, K0560, K0561, K0565, K0598, K0603, K0604, K0610,  K0612, K0614  S0189, S0194, S0203, S0211, S0216, S0218, S0227, S0228, S0229, S0249, S0254,  S0256, S0271, S0278, S0285, S0288, S0289, S0292, S0296, S0297, S0303, S0360  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0072, A0082, A0083, A0087, A0088, A0089,  A0091, A0101, A0102, A0106, A0107, A0109, A0085, A0108      113   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Target Developer  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   Work Role Name  Target Network Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-TGT-001  Targets (TGT)  Analyze (AN)  Performs target system analysis, builds and/or maintains electronic target folders to  include inputs from environment preparation, and/or internal or external  intelligence sources.
Coordinates with partner target activities and intelligence  organizations, and presents candidate targets for vetting and validation.
T0597, T0617, T0707, T0582, T0782, T0797, T0588, T0624, T0661, T0663,  T0684, T0642, T0710, T0561, T0594, T0599, T0633, T0650, T0652, T0688,  T0717, T0731, T0744, T0769, T0770, T0776, T0781, T0790, T0794, T0798,  T0799, T0802, T0815, T0824, T0835  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0108, K0109,  K0177, K0142, K0349, K0362, K0444, K0471, K0560, K0392, K0395, K0409,  K0427, K0431, K0436, K0437, K0440, K0445, K0446, K0449, K0460, K0464,  K0516, K0556, K0561, K0565, K0603, K0604, K0614, K0457, K0465, K0507,  K0549, K0551, K0598, K0417, K0458, K0357, K0533, K0542, K0351, K0379,  K0473, K0381, K0402, K0413, K0426, K0439, K0461, K0466, K0478, K0479,  K0497, K0499, K0543, K0546, K0547, K0555  S0194, S0203, S0218, S0227, S0229, S0249, S0256, S0278, S0285, S0288, S0289,  S0296, S0297, S0189, S0228, S0216, S0292, S0196, S0187, S0205, S0208, S0222,  S0248, S0274, S0287, S0302, S0360, S0361  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0087, A0088, A0089, A0091, A0101, A0102,  A0106, A0109, A0085, A0073   AN-TGT-002  Targets (TGT)  Analyze (AN)  Conducts advanced analysis of collection and open-source data to ensure target  continuity; to profile targets and their activities; and develop techniques to gain  more target information.
Determines how targets communicate, move, operate and  live based on knowledge of target technologies, digital networks and the  applications on them.
Work Role Name  Multi-Disciplined Language Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-LNG-001  Language Analysis (LNG)  Analyze (AN)  Applies language and culture expertise with target/threat and technical knowledge  to process, analyze, and/or disseminate intelligence information derived from  language, voice and/or graphic material.
Creates, and maintains language specific  databases and working aids to support cyber action execution and ensure critical  knowledge sharing.
Work Role Name  All Source-Collection Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-CLO-001  Collection Operations (CLO)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Identifies collection authorities and environment; incorporates priority information  requirements into collection management; develops concepts to meet leadership's  intent.
T0562, T0564, T0568, T0573, T0578, T0604, T0605, T0625, T0626, T0631,  T0632, T0634, T0645, T0646, T0647, T0649, T0651, T0657, T0662, T0674,  T0681, T0683, T0698, T0702, T0714, T0716, T0721, T0723, T0725, T0734,  T0737, T0750, T0753, T0755, T0757, T0773, T0779, T0806, T0809, T0810,  T0811, T0812, T0814, T0820, T0821, T0827  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0109, K0177,  K0431, K0449, K0417, K0579, K0596, K0444, K0471, K0392, K0395, K0440,  K0445, K0516, K0560, K0427, K0446, K0561, K0565, K0405, K0480, K0610,  K0612, K0353, K0361, K0364, K0380, K0382, K0383, K0386, K0387, K0390,  K0401, K0404, K0412, K0419, K0425, K0435, K0448, K0453, K0454, K0467,  K0474, K0475, K0477, K0482, K0492, K0495, K0496, K0498, K0503, K0505,  K0513, K0521, K0522, K0526, K0527, K0552, K0553, K0554, K0558, K0562,  K0563, K0569, K0570, K0580, K0581, K0583, K0584, K0587, K0588, K0601,  K0605, K0613  S0238, S0304, S0305, S0311, S0313, S0316, S0317, S0324, S0325, S0327, S0328,  S0330, S0332, S0334, S0335, S0336, S0339, S0342, S0344, S0347, S0351, S0352,  S0362  A0069, A0070, A0076, A0078, A0079   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      116   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  All Source-Collection Requirements Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-CLO-002  Collection Operations (CLO)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Evaluates collection operations and develops effects-based collection requirements  strategies using available sources and methods to improve collection.
Develops,  processes, validates, and coordinates submission of collection requirements.
117   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Intel Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-001  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Develops detailed intelligence plans to satisfy cyber operations requirements.
Collaborates with cyber operations planners to identify, validate, and levy  requirements for collection and analysis.
Participates in targeting selection,  validation, synchronization, and execution of cyber actions.
Synchronizes  intelligence activities to support organization objectives in cyberspace.
118   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Ops Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-002  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Develops detailed plans for the conduct or support of the applicable range of cyber  operations through collaboration with other planners, operators and/or analysts.
Participates in targeting selection, validation, synchronization, and enables  integration during the execution of cyber actions.
Work Role Name  Partner Integration Planner   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-003  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Works to advance cooperation across organizational or national borders between  cyber operations partners.
Aids the integration of partner cyber teams by providing  guidance, resources, and collaboration to develop best practices and facilitate  organizational support for achieving objectives in integrated cyber actions.
T0581, T0582, T0627, T0670, T0739, T0763, T0772, T0836, T0571, T0635,  T0665, T0699, T0732, T0747, T0764, T0787, T0795, T0823, T0601, T0760,  T0784, T0629, T0666, T0669, T0671, T0700, T0712, T0729, T0759, T0766,  T0817, T0818, T0825, T0826  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0108, K0109, K0431, K0417,  K0444, K0395, K0435, K0392, K0377, K0362, K0436, K0379, K0403, K0465,  K0507, K0598, K0511, K0414, K0350, K0400, K0408, K0411, K0422, K0432,  K0455, K0499, K0501, K0504, K0506, K0508, K0512, K0514, K0538, K0585,  K0599  S0218, S0249, S0296, S0297, S0185, S0186, S0213, S0250, S0326, S0360  A0013, A0066, A0070, A0089, A0085, A0082, A0074, A0067, A0068, A0077,  A0081, A0090, A0094, A0096, A0098, A0105      119   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Operator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPS-001  Cyber Operations (OPS)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Conducts collection, processing, and/or geolocation of systems to exploit, locate,  and/or track targets of interest.
Performs network navigation, tactical forensic  analysis, and, when directed, executing on-net operations.
Work Role Name  Cyber Crime Investigator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   IN-INV-001  Cyber Investigation (INV)  Investigate (IN)  Identifies, collects, examines, and preserves evidence using controlled and  documented analytical and investigative techniques.
T0031, T0059, T0096, T0103, T0104, T0110, T0112, T0113, T0114, T0120,  T0193, T0225, T0241, T0343, T0346, T0360, T0386, T0423, T0430, T0433,  T0453, T0471, T0479, T0523  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0046, K0070, K0107, K0110,  K0114, K0118, K0123, K0125, K0128, K0144, K0155, K0156, K0168, K0209,  K0231, K0244, K0251, K0351, K0624  S0047, S0068, S0072, S0086  A0174, A0175   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Law Enforcement/Counterintelligence Forensics Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   IN-FOR-001  Digital Forensics (FOR)  Investigate (IN)  Conducts deep-dive investigations on computer-based crimes establishing  documentary or physical evidence, to include digital media and logs associated  with cyber intrusion incidents.
T0059, T0096, T0220, T0308, T0398, T0419, T0401, T0403, T0411, T0425  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0017, K0021, K0042, K0060,  K0070, K0077, K0078, K0107, K0109, K0117, K0118, K0119, K0122, K0123,  K0125, K0128, K0131, K0132, K0133, K0134, K0145, K0155, K0156, K0167,  K0168, K0179, K0182, K0183, K0184, K0185, K0186, K0187, K0188, K0189,  K0305, K0624  S0032, S0046, S0047, S0062, S0065, S0067, S0068, S0069, S0071, S0073, S0074,  S0075, S0087, S0088, S0089, S0090, S0091, S0092, S0093  A0005, A0175   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      121   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Forensics Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   IN-FOR-002  Digital Forensics (FOR)  Investigate (IN)  Analyzes digital evidence and investigates computer security incidents to derive  useful information in support of system/network vulnerability mitigation.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix C – Workforce Development Tools    C.1   DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit   The DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit (CWDT) [8] helps any organization  understand its cybersecurity workforce and staffing needs to protect its information, customers,  and networks.
This toolkit includes cybersecurity career path templates and recruitment  resources to recruit and retain top cybersecurity talent.
The CWDT provides tools to help  understand an organization’s cybersecurity workforce risks and take inventory of an  organization’s workforce.
CWDT notes that the first step in preparing to build a cybersecurity  workforce is a shared vision for organizing one’s cybersecurity workforce.
Having a shared  vision supports leaders as they respond to changing environments and provides data to better  adjust resources, see patterns of work, and highlight areas of potential risk.
This understanding is  especially important in the ever-changing environment of cybersecurity.
The CWDT includes a  Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability Maturity Model (CMM), a self-assessment tool to  help an organization to evaluate the maturity of its cybersecurity workforce planning capability.
The (CWDT) offers profiles as a guide to focus on retaining staff at every level whether entry- level, mid-career, or seasoned cybersecurity professionals.
C.1.1   Proficiency Levels and Career Paths   Developing and sharing career paths with employees will help them identify their proficiency  levels and advance in cybersecurity career paths.
The CWDT includes a three-step process to develop cybersecurity career paths for one’s  organization.
•  Step 2 – Use a CWDT template to create custom cybersecurity-specific career paths for  your organization filling in “Suggested Experience & Credentials,” “Competencies and  Sample Skills / KSAs,” and “Suggested Training & Development Activities.”   •  Step 3 – Share career paths with cybersecurity managers and staff.
C.2   Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool   Once an organization has determined its cybersecurity requirements (such as through a  cybersecurity audit or an internal self-assessment), it can reference the NICE Framework to  identify the work roles and tasks that will help fulfill those requirements.
While general terms,  such as “cyber professionals,” have historically been used to measure needs, the specificity  provided by the NICE Framework provides a better approach to describe the dozens of discrete  job functions needed.
By identifying the required and available competencies, and by identifying  gaps between required and available skills, the organization can identify critical needs.
The  NICE Framework helps an organization to answer the following questions, drawn from the  Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool [9], regarding maintenance of an effective and  supportive workforce environment to achieve its cybersecurity goals:   123   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  How do you assess your workforce capability and capacity needs related to   •  How do you organize and manage your cybersecurity workforce to establish roles and   cybersecurity?
•  How do you prepare your workforce for changing cybersecurity capability and capacity   needs?
As more organizations assess their cybersecurity workforce, the common lexicon in the NICE  Framework enables capacity and capability assessment across multiple organizations, industry  sectors, and regions.
C.3   Position Description Drafting Tool   The DHS Cyberskills Management Support Initiative PushbuttonPD Tool [10] allows managers,  supervisors, and HR specialists to rapidly draft a federal employee position description (PD)  without the need for extensive training or prior knowledge of position classification.
It is  designed to present language from multiple, mission-critical authoritative sources and standards  for duties, tasks, and KSAs, rapidly capture the hiring official’s requirements, and present them  in a robust hiring package that can be easily integrated into existing agency HR processes.
Any  organization can experiment with the PushbuttonPD Tool to see how it pulls NICE Framework  material into a job description.
124   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix D – Cross Reference to Guidance and Guideline Documents   NICE Strategic Goal #3 Guide Career Development and Workforce Planning aims to support  employers to address market demands and enhance recruitment, hiring, development, and  retention of cybersecurity talent.
Adoption in this case means that the  NICE Framework is used as a reference resource for actions related to cybersecurity workforce,  training, and education.
One way to encourage adoption of the NICE Framework is to push authors of cybersecurity  guidance or guideline documents to cross reference some of the content of those documents to  components in the NICE Framework.
Appendix D includes examples of publication cross  referencing that could encourage adoption of the NICE Framework.
D.1   Cybersecurity Framework    In 2014, NIST released the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [11],  commonly referred to as the Cybersecurity Framework.
Developed in response to Executive  Order (EO) 13636 [12], the Cybersecurity Framework provides a performance-based and cost- effective approach to help organizations to identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risk.
It was  built through a series of public workshops that were convened by NIST to better understand what  standards and methodologies are helpful for achieving effective risk management, and how  voluntary existing good practices might be implemented to improve cybersecurity.
A companion document to the Cybersecurity Framework, the NIST Roadmap for Improving  Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [13] points to the need for a skilled cybersecurity  workforce to meet the unique cybersecurity needs of critical infrastructure.
It recognizes that, as  the cybersecurity threat and technology environments evolve, the workforce must continue to  adapt to design, develop, implement, maintain, and continuously improve the necessary  cybersecurity practices.
The Cybersecurity Framework consists of three parts: Framework Core, Framework  Implementation Tiers, and Framework Profiles.
Each Cybersecurity Framework component  reinforces the connection between business drivers and cybersecurity activities.
The Framework  Core elements work together as follows:   •  Functions organize basic cybersecurity activities at their highest level.
•  Categories are the subdivisions of a Function into groups of cybersecurity outcomes   closely tied to programmatic needs and activities.
•  Subcategories further divide a Category into specific outcomes of technical and/or   management activities.
•  Informative References are specific sections of standards, guidelines, and practices  common among critical infrastructure sectors that illustrate a method to achieve the   125      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
The Informative References presented in the  Framework Core are illustrative and not exhaustive.
They represent the cross-sector  guidance most frequently referenced during the Framework development process.
The Core Functions each contribute to a high-level understanding of the cybersecurity needs of  the organization:   •  Identify (ID) – Develop the organizational understanding to manage cybersecurity risk to   systems, assets, data, and capabilities.
•  Protect (PR) – Develop and implement the appropriate safeguards to ensure delivery of   critical infrastructure services.
•  Detect (DE) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to identify the   occurrence of a cybersecurity event.
•  Respond (RS) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to take action   regarding a detected cybersecurity event.
•  Recover (RC) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to maintain plans for   resilience and to restore any capabilities or services that were impaired due to a  cybersecurity event.
Table 8 describes  the relationships among the Cybersecurity Framework Functions and NICE Framework  Categories.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 8 - Crosswalk of NICE Framework Workforce Categories to Cybersecurity Framework   Functions   NICE Framework   Category   Securely Provision  (SP)   Operate and  Maintain (OM)   Oversee and Govern  (OV)   Protect and Defend  (PR)   Analyze (AN)   Collect and Operate  (CO)   Investigate (IN)      Category Description   Conceptualizes, designs, and/or builds  secure information technology (IT) systems,  with responsibility for aspects of system  and/or network development.
Provides the support, administration, and  maintenance necessary to ensure effective  and efficient information technology (IT)  system performance and security.
Provides leadership, management, direction,  or development and advocacy so that the  organization may effectively conduct  cybersecurity work.
Identifies, analyzes, and mitigates threats to  internal information technology (IT) systems  and/or networks.
Performs highly-specialized review and  evaluation of incoming cybersecurity  information to determine its usefulness for  intelligence.
Provides specialized denial and deception  operations and collection of cybersecurity  information that may be used to develop  intelligence.
Investigates cybersecurity events or crimes  related to information technology (IT)  systems, networks, and digital evidence.
Related Cybersecurity  Framework Function(s)   Identify (ID), Protect (PR)   Protect (PR), Detect (DE)   Identify (ID), Protect (PR),  Detect (DE), Recover (RC)   Protect (PR), Detect (DE),  Respond (RS)   Identify (ID), Detect (DE),  Respond (RS)   Detect (DE), Protect (PR),  Respond (RS)   Detect (DE), Respond (RS),  Recover (RC)   D.1.2   Example Integration of Cybersecurity Framework with NICE Framework   While the Cybersecurity Framework and the NICE Framework were developed separately, each  complements the other by describing a hierarchical approach to achieving cybersecurity goals.
Consider the following example:   Cybersecurity Framework’s Respond Function includes a Mitigation (RS.MI) Category.
The  Category includes a Subcategory, RS.MI-2, pointing to an outcome of, “Incidents are  mitigated.” While Cybersecurity Framework describes this outcome, and provides several  informative references regarding the security controls to achieve it, Cybersecurity Framework  does not provide any informative guidance regarding who should be responsible for attaining the  outcome, or what KSAs would apply.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Reviewing the NICE Framework, we identify the Cybersecurity Defense Incident Responder  (PR-IR-001) role in the Protect and Defend (PR) category, Incident Response (IR) specialty  area.
We can review the description of this role to ensure that it aligns with the Cybersecurity  Framework RS.MI-2 outcome:   Responds  to  disruptions  within  the  pertinent  domain  to  mitigate  immediate  and  potential threats.
Uses mitigation, preparedness, and response and recovery approaches  to  maximize  survival  of  life,  preservation  of  property,  and  information  security.
Investigates and analyzes relevant response activities and evaluates the effectiveness  of and improvements to existing practices.
Investigates,  analyzes,  and  responds  to  cybersecurity  incidents  within  the  network  environment or enclave.
We learn from Appendix A of this document that the person whose position includes this work  role might be expected to perform many of the following Tasks, which align with the desired  Cybersecurity Framework outcome:   •  T0041 - Coordinate and provide expert technical support to enterprise-wide cybersecurity   defense technicians to resolve cybersecurity defense incidents.
•  T0161 - Perform analysis of log files from a variety of sources (e.g., individual host logs,  network traffic logs, firewall logs, and intrusion detection system [IDS] logs) to identify  possible threats to network security.
•  T0163 - Perform cybersecurity defense incident triage, to include determining scope,   urgency, and potential impact; identify the specific vulnerability; and make  recommendations that enable expeditious remediation.
•  T0175 - Perform real-time cybersecurity defense incident handling (e.g., forensic  collections, intrusion correlation and tracking, threat analysis, and direct system  remediation) tasks to support deployable Incident Response Teams (IRTs).
•  T0214 - Receive and analyze network alerts from various sources within the enterprise   and determine possible causes of such alerts.
•  T0233 - Track and document cybersecurity defense incidents from initial detection   through final resolution.
•  T0246 - Write and publish cybersecurity defense techniques, guidance, and reports on   incident findings to appropriate constituencies.
•  T0262 - Employ approved defense-in-depth principles and practices (e.g., defense-in-  multiple places, layered defenses, security robustness).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  T0278 - Collect intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, Trojans) and use   discovered data to enable mitigation of potential cybersecurity defense incidents within  the enterprise.
•  T0279 - Serve as technical expert and liaison to law enforcement personnel and explain   incident details as required.
•  T0164 - Perform cybersecurity defense trend analysis and reporting.
•  T0503 - Monitor external data sources (e.g., cybersecurity defense vendor sites,   Computer Emergency Response Teams, Security Focus) to maintain the currency of  cybersecurity defense threat condition and determine which security issues may have an  impact on the enterprise.
Furthermore, from Appendix B, we can learn the broad range of KSAs that might be needed by a  person whose cybersecurity position includes this work role.
Armed with this information, an organization seeking to achieve the outcome described by  Cybersecurity Framework   RS.MI-2 may determine whether one or more existing staff have the necessary skills to complete  the tasks described.
If one or more KSAs are lacking, the employee desiring to fill that work role  will know specifically what areas need improvement and can seek academic classes or industry  training to gain the necessary knowledge.
If no such staff are found, the employer has specific  Task descriptions and KSA requirements that may be advertised in a job posting, or that may be  used for contractor staff to augment existing personnel.
D.2   Systems Security Engineering   NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-160, Systems Security Engineering - Considerations for a  Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems [14], addresses  the engineering-driven actions necessary to develop more defensible and survivable systems— including the components that compose those systems and the services that depend on them.
It  starts with and builds upon a set of well-established International Standards for systems and  software engineering, and infuses systems security engineering techniques, methods, and  practices into those systems and software engineering activities.
The ultimate objective is to  address security issues from a stakeholder requirements and protection needs perspective, and to  use established engineering processes to ensure that such requirements and needs are addressed  with the appropriate fidelity and rigor across the entire life cycle of the system.
Increasing the  trustworthiness of systems is a significant undertaking that requires a substantial investment in  the requirements, architecture, design, and development of systems, components, applications,  and networks—and a fundamental cultural change to the current “business as usual” approach.
Introducing a disciplined, structured, and standards-based set of systems security engineering  activities and tasks provides an important starting point and forcing function to initiate needed   129      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
The ultimate objective is to obtain trustworthy secure systems that are fully capable of  supporting critical missions and business operations while protecting stakeholder assets, and to  do so with a level of assurance that is consistent with the risk tolerance of those stakeholders.
Practitioners of the system security engineering  specialty discipline will likely become subject matter experts who can justify additional KSAs  and tasks to be added to the NICE Framework.
D.3   U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Cybersecurity Codes   On January 4, 2017, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued a memorandum  [15] titled “Guidance for federal agencies assigning new cybersecurity codes to positions with  information technology, cybersecurity, and cyber-related functions”.
The memorandum notes  that the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 [16] requires OPM to  establish procedures to implement the NICE coding structure and to identify all Federal civilian  positions that require the performance of information technology, cybersecurity, or other cyber- related functions.
Table 9 shows the mapping of NICE Framework Work Role IDs which  represent the interdisciplinary nature of cybersecurity work to OPM cybersecurity codes which  are compatible with the OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration system.
130   NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 9 – Crosswalk of Work Role IDs to OPM Cybersecurity Codes   Work Role ID  OPM   Code  Work Role ID  OPM   Code  Work Role ID  OPM  Code   SP-RSK-001   611  OV-LGA-001   731  AN-TWA-001   141   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      Appendix E – Acronyms    Selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this paper are defined below:   NICE FRAMEWORK   Application programming interface   Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation   Cross-Domain Solutions   Chief Information Officer   Crypto Key Management System  Capability Maturity Model Integration   Content Management System  Committee on National Security Systems Instruction    API  CDM  CDS  CIO  CKMS  CMMI  CMS  CNSSI  COMSEC  Communications Security   COTR  DNS  EISA  FISMA  FOIA  HR  IDS  IP  IPS  IR  IRT  ISD  ITL  KSA  LAN  NICE  OLA  OMB  OPM  OS  OSI  P.L.
PCI  PHI  PIA  PII  PKI  R&D  RFID  RMF  SA&A  SDLC  SLA  SOP   Contracting Officer's Technical Representative   Domain Name System   Enterprise Information Security Architecture   Federal Information Security Modernization Act   Freedom of Information Act   Human Resource   Intrusion detection system   Internet Protocol   Intrusion Prevention System   Incident Response   Incident Response Teams   Instructional System Design   Information Technology Laboratory   Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities   Local area network   National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education   Operating-Level Agreement  Office of Management and Budget   Office of Personnel Management   Operating system   Open System Interconnection   Public Law   Payment Card Industry   Personal Health Information   Privacy Impact Assessments   Personally Identifiable Information   Public key infrastructure   Research and Design  Radio Frequency Identification   Risk Management Framework   Security Assessment and Authorization   System development life cycle   Service-Level Agreements   Standard operating procedures    132   NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST SP 800-181      SQL  TCP  TTP  URL  VPN  WAN        Structured query language   Transmission Control Protocol   Tactics, techniques, and procedures   Uniform Resource Locator   Virtual Private Network   Wide Area Network         T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix F– References   [1]  [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9]  [10]  [11]  [12]  [13]  NICE Framework Revision webpage, National Institute of Standards and Technology  [Website], https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/nice-cybersecurity- workforce-framework-revisions National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, National Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework, ver.
1.0, https://www.nist.gov/file/359276 National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, National Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework, ver.
2.0, https://www.nist.gov/file/359261 Reference Spreadsheet for NIST Special Publication 800-181 https://www.nist.gov/file/372581 NICE Framework, National Institute of Standards and Technology [Website], https:// www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/resources/nice-cybersecurity-workforce- framework U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (ETA) [Website].
https://www.doleta.gov Competency Model Clearinghouse, Cybersecurity Competency Model, https://www.careeronestop.org/competencymodel/competency- models/cybersecurity.aspx U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Cybersecurity Workforce Development  Toolkit (CWDT), https://niccs.us-cert.gov/workforce-development/cybersecurity- workforce-development-toolkit Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Program, National Institute of Standards and  Technology [Website], https://www.nist.gov/baldrige/products-services/baldrige- cybersecurity-initiative U.S. Department of Homeland Security, CMSI PushButtonPDTM Tool Website,  https://niccs.us-cert.gov/workforce-development/dhs-cmsi-pushbuttonpd-tool Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.0, National  Institute of Standards and Technology February 12, 2014, https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/cybersecurity- framework-021214.pdf Executive Order no.
13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,  DCPD-201300091, February 12, 2013. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-02- 19/pdf/2013-03915.pdf NIST Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, National Institute  of Standards and Technology, February 12, 2014, https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/ roadmap-021214.pdf   134      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-160, Systems Security Engineering - Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy  Secure Systems, National Institute of Standards and Technology, November 2016,  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-160   Memorandum on Guidance for Assigning New Cybersecurity Codes to Positions  with Information Technology, Cybersecurity, and Cyber-Related Functions, January  2017, https://www.chcoc.gov/content/guidance-assigning-new-cybersecurity-codes- positions-information-technology-cybersecurity   H.R.2029 - Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 which contains Division N-  Cybersecurity Act of 2015, https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ113/PLAW- 114publ113.pdf    [14]   [15]   [16]      135   NIST Special Publication 800-181   National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE)   Cybersecurity Workforce Framework   William Newhouse  Stephanie Keith  Benjamin Scribner  Greg Witte          This publication is available free of charge from:  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181                          NIST Special Publication 800-181  National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE)   Cybersecurity Workforce Framework      William Newhouse  Applied Cybersecurity Division  Information Technology Laboratory  Stephanie Keith  Cyber Workforce Strategy & Policy Division  Office of the Deputy DoD Chief Information Officer  Benjamin Scribner  Cyber Education and Awareness Branch  DHS National Protection and Programs Directorate  Greg Witte  G2, Inc.  Annapolis Junction, MD      This publication is available free of charge from:  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181    August 2017           U.S. Department of Commerce  Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary    National Institute of Standards and Technology   Kent Rochford, Acting NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology            Authority   This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the  Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C.
NIST is responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines,  including minimum requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall  not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials  exercising policy authority over such systems.
This guideline is consistent with the requirements of the  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.
Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made mandatory  and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority.
This publication may be used by  nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-181   Natl.
There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under development by NIST in  accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities.
The information in this publication, including concepts and  methodologies, may be used by federal agencies even before the completion of such companion publications.
Thus,  until each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines, and procedures, where they exist, remain  operative.
For planning and transition purposes, federal agencies may wish to closely follow the development of  these new publications by NIST.
Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment periods and provide feedback  to NIST.
Many NIST cybersecurity publications, other than the ones noted above, are available at  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications.
Comments on this publication may be submitted to:   Attn: NICE, Applied Cybersecurity Division, Information Technology Laboratory   100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 2000) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-2000   National Institute of Standards and Technology   Email: ncwf@nist.gov    All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Reports on Computer Systems Technology   The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at NIST promotes the U.S. economy and public  welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards  infrastructure.
ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept  implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of  information technology.
ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management,  administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security  and privacy of other than national security-related information in federal information systems.
The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in  information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and  academic organizations.
Abstract   This publication describes the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)  Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NICE Framework), a reference structure that describes  the interdisciplinary nature of the cybersecurity work.
It serves as a fundamental reference  resource for describing and sharing information about cybersecurity work and the knowledge,  skills, and abilities (KSAs) needed to complete tasks that can strengthen the cybersecurity  posture of an organization.
As a common, consistent lexicon that categorizes and describes  cybersecurity work, the NICE Framework improves communication about how to identify,  recruit, develop, and retain cybersecurity talent.
The NICE Framework is a reference source from  which organizations or sectors can develop additional publications or tools that meet their needs  to define or provide guidance on different aspects of cybersecurity workforce development,  planning, training, and education.
Keywords      Ability; cybersecurity; cyberspace; education; knowledge; role; skill; specialty area; task;  training; work role.
ii   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Acknowledgements   The authors gratefully acknowledge and appreciate the significant contributions from individuals  and organizations in the public and private sectors, whose thoughtful and constructive comments  improved the overall quality, thoroughness, and usefulness of this publication.
We appreciate the  leadership and work of Rodney Petersen, Director of the National Initiative for Cybersecurity  Education (NICE) at NIST.
The first NICE Framework was posted for public comment in September 2012 and published as  final in April 2013 as the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 1.0 [2].
The  authors recognize Dr. Jane Homeyer, Anne Quigley, Rex Min, Noel Kyle, Maya Yankelevich,  and Peggy Maxson for leading its development, along with Montana Williams and Roy Burgess  for their leadership in the development of National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version  2.0 which was posted in April 2014 [3].
Finally, the authors respectfully acknowledge the seminal work in computer security that dates to  the 1960s.
The vision, insights, and dedicated efforts of those early pioneers in computer security  serve as the philosophical and technical foundation for the tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities  noted in this publication.
All trademarks or registered trademarks belong to their respective organizations.
Trademark Information   I  /  .
NIST SP 800-181      Executive Summary   NICE FRAMEWORK   The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), led by the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST) of the U.S. Department of Commerce, is a partnership  between government, academia, and the private sector working to energize and promote a robust  network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development.
NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and  industry partners to build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and  bring leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping  to keep our nation secure.
NICE is committed to cultivating an integrated cybersecurity workforce that is globally  competitive from hire to retire and prepared to protect our nation from existing and emerging  cybersecurity challenges.
NICE promotes nationwide initiatives that increase the number of  people with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform the tasks required for cybersecurity  work.
As threats that exploit vulnerabilities in our cyberinfrastructure grow and evolve, an integrated  cybersecurity workforce must be capable of designing, developing, implementing, and  maintaining defensive and offensive cyber strategies.
An integrated cybersecurity workforce  includes technical and nontechnical roles that are staffed with knowledgeable and experienced  people.
An integrated cybersecurity workforce can address the cybersecurity challenges inherent  to preparing their organizations to successfully implement aspects of their missions and business  processes connected to cyberspace.
This publication provides a fundamental reference in support of a workforce capable of meeting  an organization’s cybersecurity needs by using a common, consistent lexicon to describe  cybersecurity work by category, specialty area, and work role.
It provides a superset of  cybersecurity Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) and Tasks for each work role.
The NICE  Framework supports consistent organizational and sector communication for cybersecurity  education, training, and workforce development.
A user of the NICE Framework will reference it for different aspects of workforce development,  education, and/or training purposes, and when that material is used at organizational levels, the  user should customize what is pulled from the NICE Framework to standards, regulations, needs,  and mission of the user’s organization.
The NICE Framework is a resource that will strengthen an organization’s ability to communicate  consistently and clearly about cybersecurity work and its cybersecurity workforce.
Organizations  or sectors can develop additional publications or tools that meet their needs to define or provide  guidance on different aspects of workforce development, planning, training, and education.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table of Contents   Executive Summary ..................................................................................................... iv  1  Introduction ............................................................................................................ 1  1.1  NICE Framework Background ........................................................................ 1  1.2  Purpose and Applicability ................................................................................ 2  1.3  Audience/Users .............................................................................................. 2  1.3.1  Employers ............................................................................................ 2  1.3.2  Current and Future Cybersecurity Workers .......................................... 3  1.3.3  Educators/Trainers ............................................................................... 3  1.3.4  Technology Providers ........................................................................... 4  1.4  Organization of this Special Publication .......................................................... 4  2  NICE Framework Components and Relationships .............................................. 5  2.1  Components of the NICE Framework ............................................................. 5  2.1.1  Categories ............................................................................................ 5  2.1.2  Specialty Areas .................................................................................... 5  2.1.3  Work Roles ........................................................................................... 5  2.1.4  Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) ................................................ 5  2.1.5  Tasks .................................................................................................... 6  2.2  NICE Framework Component Relationships .................................................. 6  3  Using the NICE Framework ................................................................................... 7  Identification of Cybersecurity Workforce Needs ............................................ 7  3.1  3.2  Recruitment and Hiring of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent ....................... 8  3.3  Education and Training of Cybersecurity Workforce Members ....................... 8  3.4  Retention and Development of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent ............... 8  4  Extensions ............................................................................................................ 10  4.1  Competencies ............................................................................................... 10  4.2  Job Titles ...................................................................................................... 10  4.3  Cybersecurity Guidance and Guideline documents ...................................... 10      List of Appendices   Appendix A – Listing of NICE Framework Elements ................................................ 11  A.1  NICE Framework Workforce Categories ....................................................... 11  A.2  NICE Framework Specialty Areas................................................................. 12   v      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.3  NICE Framework Work Roles ....................................................................... 15  A.4  NICE Framework Tasks ................................................................................ 24  A.5  NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions ................................................... 59  A.6  NICE Framework Skills Descriptions ............................................................ 77  A.7  NICE Framework Ability Descriptions ........................................................... 88  Appendix B – Work Role Detail Listing ..................................................................... 95  B.1  Securely Provision (SP) ................................................................................ 95  B.2  Operate and Maintain (OM) ........................................................................ 101  B.3  Oversee and Govern (OV) .......................................................................... 104  B.4  Protect and Defend (PR) ............................................................................. 110  B.5  Analyze (AN) ............................................................................................... 112  B.6  Collect and Operate (CO) ........................................................................... 116  B.7  Investigate (IN) ........................................................................................... 121  Appendix C – Workforce Development Tools ......................................................... 123  C.1  DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit ................................... 123  C.1.1  Proficiency Levels and Career Paths ................................................ 123  C.2  Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool ......................................... 123  C.3  Position Description Drafting Tool ............................................................... 124  Appendix D – Cross Reference to Guidance and Guideline Documents ............. 125  D.1  Cybersecurity Framework ........................................................................... 125   D.1.2  Example Integration of Cybersecurity Framework with NICE  Framework .................................................................................................. 127  D.2  Systems Security Engineering .................................................................... 129  D.3  U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Cybersecurity Codes ........ 130  Appendix E – Acronyms ........................................................................................... 132  Appendix F – References ......................................................................................... 134     List of Tables   Table 1 - NICE Framework Workforce Categories ........................................................ 11  Table 2 - NICE Framework Specialty Areas .................................................................. 12  Table 3 - NICE Framework Work Roles ........................................................................ 16  Table 4 - NICE Framework Tasks ................................................................................. 24  Table 5 - NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions .................................................... 59   vi   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 6 - NICE Framework Skills Descriptions .............................................................. 77  Table 7 - NICE Framework Ability Descriptions ............................................................ 88  Table 8 - Crosswalk of NICE Framework Workforce Categories to Cybersecurity   Framework Functions ........................................................................................... 127  Table 9 – Crosswalk of Work Role IDs to OPM Cybersecurity Codes ......................... 131   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      1   Introduction   NICE FRAMEWORK   The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), led by the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST) in the U.S. Department of Commerce, is a partnership  between government, academia, and the private sector that seeks to energize and promote a  robust network and an ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce  development.
NICE fulfills this mission by coordinating with government, academic, and  industry partners to build on existing successful programs, facilitate change and innovation, and  bring leadership and vision to increase the number of skilled cybersecurity professionals helping  to keep our nation secure and economically competitive.
NICE is committed to cultivating an integrated cybersecurity workforce that is globally  competitive from hire to retire, prepared to protect our nation from existing and emerging  cybersecurity challenges.
Throughout this document, the combined terms “cybersecurity workforce” is shorthand for a  workforce with work roles that have an impact on an organization’s ability to protect its data,  systems, and operations.
Included are new work roles that have been known traditionally as  information technology (IT) security roles.
Those roles have been added to this workforce  framework to highlight their importance to the overall cybersecurity posture of an organization.
Additionally, some of the work roles described herein include the shorter term cyber to be  inclusive of sectors where cyber has become the conversational norm for this field.
A cybersecurity workforce includes not only technically focused staff, but also those who apply  knowledge of cybersecurity when preparing their organization to successfully implement its  mission.
A knowledgeable and skilled cybersecurity workforce is needed to address  cybersecurity risks within an organization’s overall risk management process.
1.1  NICE Framework Background   The concept for the NICE Framework began before the establishment of NICE in 2010 and grew  out of the recognition that the cybersecurity workforce had not been defined and assessed.
To  address this challenge, the Federal Chief Information Officers (CIO) Council took on the task in  2008 to provide a standard framework to understand the cybersecurity roles within the federal  government.
Input from focus groups with subject matter experts from numerous federal  agencies helped the Federal CIO Council produce a research report that referenced where other  information technology professional development efforts were already under way, and thirteen  specific roles were identified as needed by agencies to conduct cybersecurity work.
Building on this inherently multidisciplinary exploration of the “field” of cybersecurity, the  Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative’s included a focus on workforce that tasked  several agencies to work together to develop a cybersecurity workforce framework.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) gathered input and validated final   1      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   recommendations via focus groups with subject matter experts from around the country and  across industry, academia, and government resulting in a second version of the NICE  Framework, version 2.0 [3], shared publicly in 2014.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) expanded on version 2.0 through internal  engagements with service components and external engagements with the private sector.
The  DHS and NIST co-authors worked with OSD to refine their expansion to become this publication  with a goal to emphasize private sector applicability and to reinforce the vision that the NICE  Framework is a reference resource for both the public and private sectors.
1.2  Purpose and Applicability   This publication serves as a fundamental reference resource to support a workforce capable of  meeting an organization’s cybersecurity needs.
It provides organizations with a common,  consistent lexicon that categorizes and describes cybersecurity work.
Using the NICE Framework as a fundamental reference will improve the communication needed  to identify, recruit, and develop cybersecurity talent.
The NICE Framework will allow employers  to use focused, consistent language in professional development programs, in their use of  industry certifications and academic credentials, and in their selection of relevant training  opportunities for their workforce.
The NICE Framework facilitates the use of a more consistent, comparable, and repeatable  approach to select and specify cybersecurity roles for positions within organizations.
It also  provides a common lexicon that academic institutions can use to develop cybersecurity curricula  that better prepares students for current and anticipated cybersecurity workforce needs.
The application of the NICE Framework offers the ability to describe all cybersecurity work.
An  applicability goal of the NICE Framework is that any cybersecurity job or position can be  described by identifying the relevant material from one or more components of the NICE  Framework.
Organizations or sectors can use the NICE Framework to develop additional publications or tools  that meet their needs to define or provide guidance on different aspects of workforce  development, planning, training, and education.
1.3  Audience/Users   The NICE Framework can be viewed as a non-prescriptive cybersecurity workforce dictionary.
Users of the NICE Framework who reference it should implement it locally for different  workforce development, education, or training purposes.
1.3.1  Employers   Use of the NICE Framework’s common lexicon enables employers to inventory and develop  their cybersecurity workforce.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •   •   •   •   Inventory and track their cybersecurity workforce to gain a greater understanding of the  strengths and gaps in Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities and Tasks performed;  Identify training and qualification requirements to develop critical Knowledge, Skills,  and Abilities to perform cybersecurity Tasks;  Improve position descriptions and job vacancy announcements selecting relevant KSAs  and Tasks, once work roles and tasks are identified;  Identify the most relevant work roles and develop career paths to guide staff in gaining  the requisite skills for those roles; and   •  Establish a shared terminology between hiring managers and human resources (HR) staff   for the recruiting, retention, and training of a highly-specialized workforce.
1.3.2  Current and Future Cybersecurity Workers   The NICE Framework supports those in the cybersecurity field and those who might wish to  enter the cybersecurity field, to explore Tasks within cybersecurity Categories and work roles.
It  also assists those who support these workers, such as human resource staffing specialists and  guidance counselors, to help job seekers and students understand which cybersecurity work roles  and which associated Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities are being valued by employers for in- demand cybersecurity jobs and positions.
These workers are further supported when vacancy announcements and open position  descriptions use the NICE Framework’s common lexicon to provide clear and consistent  descriptions of the cybersecurity tasks and training that are needed for those positions.
When training providers and industry certification providers use the common lexicon of the  NICE Framework, those in the cybersecurity field, or those who might wish to enter the  cybersecurity field, can find training and/or certification providers that can teach the tasks  necessary to secure a cybersecurity job or to progress into new positions.
Use of the common  lexicon helps students and professionals to obtain KSAs that are typically demonstrated by a  person whose cybersecurity position includes a given work role.
This understanding helps them  to find academic programs that include learning outcomes and knowledge units that map to the  KSAs and Tasks that are valued by employers.
1.3.3  Educators/Trainers   The NICE Framework provides a reference for educators to develop curriculum, certificate or  degree programs, training programs, courses, seminars, and exercises or challenges that cover the  KSAs and Tasks described in the NICE Framework.
3   NIST SP 800-181      1.3.4  Technology Providers   NICE FRAMEWORK   The NICE Framework allows a technology provider to identify the cybersecurity work roles and  the KSAs and Tasks associated with hardware and software products and services they provide.
A technology provider can then create appropriate support materials to assist members of the  cybersecurity workforce in the proper configuration and management of their products.
1.4  Organization of this Special Publication   The remainder of this special publication is organized as follows:    T h s    i  p u b  •  Chapter 2 defines the components of the NICE Framework: (i) Categories; (ii) Specialty  Areas; (iii) Work Roles; (iv) associated supersets of Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities; and  (v) Tasks for each work role.
•  Appendix A describes the NICE Framework list of Categories, Specialty Areas, Work   Roles, KSAs, and Tasks.
•  Appendix B provides a detailed listing of each work role, including the associated KSAs   and Tasks.
•  Appendix C provides some examples of workforce development tools  •  Appendix D provides some examples of guidance or guideline documents that cross   reference some of the content of those documents to components in the NICE Framework   •  Appendix E gives selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this document.
4   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   2   NICE Framework Components and Relationships   2.1  Components of the NICE Framework   The NICE Framework organizes cybersecurity and related work.
There are  seven Categories and all are composed of Specialty Areas and work roles.
This organizational  structure is based on extensive job analyses, which group together work and workers that share  common major functions, regardless of job titles or other occupational terms.
2.1.2  Specialty Areas   Categories contain groupings of cybersecurity work, which are called Specialty Areas.
There  were 31 specialty areas called out in National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 1.0  [2] and 32 in National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework version 2.0 [3].
Each specialty area  represents an area of concentrated work, or function, within cybersecurity and related work.
KSAs and Tasks are now associated with the work roles.
2.1.3  Work Roles   Work roles are the most detailed groupings of cybersecurity and related work which include a  list of attributes required to perform that role in the form of knowledge, skills, and abilities  (KSAs) and tasks performed in that role.
Work being performed in a job or position is described by selecting one or more work roles from  the NICE Framework relevant to that job or position, in support of mission or business  processes.
To aid in the organization and communication about cybersecurity responsibilities, work roles  are grouped into specific classes of categories and specialty areas as shown in Appendix A.
2.1.4  Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs)   Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) are the attributes required to perform work roles and are  generally demonstrated through relevant experience, education, or training.
Knowledge is a body of information applied directly to the performance of a function.
Skills needed for cybersecurity rely less on physical  manipulation of tools and instruments and more on applying tools, frameworks, processes,   5   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   and controls that have an impact on the cybersecurity posture of an organization or  individual.
2.1.5  Tasks   A Task is a specific defined piece of work that, combined with other identified Tasks, composes  the work in a specific specialty area or work role.
The NICE Framework components describe cybersecurity work.
As illustrated in Figure 1, each  Category is composed of Specialty Areas, each of which is composed of one or more work roles.
Each work role, in turn, includes KSAs and Tasks.
Grouping components in this manner simplifies communication about cybersecurity workforce  topics, and helps with alignment to other frameworks.
Specific associations of work roles to  KSAs and Tasks are shown in Appendix B and in a reference spreadsheet [4] posted to the NICE  Framework website [5].
NIST SP 800-181      3   Using the NICE Framework   NICE FRAMEWORK   Using the NICE Framework to understand organizational needs and assess the extent to which  those needs are met can help an organization to plan, implement, and monitor a successful  cybersecurity program.
3.1   Identification of Cybersecurity Workforce Needs   Cybersecurity is a rapidly changing and expanding field.
This expansion requires a cadre of  skilled workers to help organizations perform cybersecurity functions.
As organizations identify  what is needed to adequately manage current and future cybersecurity risk, leaders need to  consider the cybersecurity workforce capabilities and capacity needed.
Figure 2 illustrates how the NICE Framework is a central reference to help employers build a  capable and ready cybersecurity workforce.
Figure 2 - Building Blocks for a Capable and Ready Cybersecurity Workforce   The circular arrows on the left side of Figure 2 are activities that are likely to have an impact on  an organization’s ability to develop a capable and ready workforce:   •  Using the common lexicon of the NICE Framework clarifies communication between   cybersecurity educators, trainers/certifiers, employers, and employees.
•  Performing criticality analysis will identify those KSAs and tasks that are critical for   successful performance with a given work role and those that are key to multiple work  roles.
•  Running a proficiency analysis will inform an organization’s expectation of the level (e.g.
entry-level, expert) for positions, comprised often of more than one work role.
The  proficiency analysis should enable refinement of selection of the relevant tasks, and  KSAs needed for the work roles that make up that position.
7   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix C identifies some existing workforce development tools that support identification of  cybersecurity workforce needs.
3.2  Recruitment and Hiring of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent    Referencing the NICE Framework will help organizations to accomplish strategic workforce  planning and hiring.
Tasks used to describe  a position’s duties and responsibilities, and KSAs used to describe the position’s needed skills  and qualifications, should allow candidates and hiring managers to communicate more  effectively.
For organizations who are concerned with workforce gaps, a review of the NICE Framework’s  list of tasks can determine specific tasks which are not being performed by the organization.
Those tasks allow the organization to identify the work role(s) and specialty area(s) that are gaps.
The organization is better able to engage with the community of education, training, and  credential, and certification providers who map their offerings to the NICE Framework.
The  organization can identify training that will allow existing staff member to address the gaps.
The  organization’s hiring managers using data pulled from the NICE Framework in this manner can  recognize applicants who have the KSAs to perform the cybersecurity tasks.
3.3  Education and Training of Cybersecurity Workforce Members    The NICE Framework’ identification of tasks in work roles allows educators to prepare learners  with the specific KSAs from which they can demonstrate the ability to perform cybersecurity  tasks.
Academic institutions are a critical part of preparing and educating the cybersecurity workforce.
In turn,  developing and delivering curricula that are harmonized with the NICE Framework lexicon  allows institutions to prepare students with the skills needed by employers.
As the pipeline of  students finding desired jobs in cybersecurity increases, more students will be attracted to  academic cybersecurity programs as a pathway to a career.
3.4  Retention and Development of Highly Skilled Cybersecurity Talent   A critical aspect of a skilled cybersecurity workforce involves the development and retention of  the skilled talent already onboard.
The following list illustrates some of the ways that the NICE  Framework supports retention and development of cybersecurity talent:   8      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  Organizations can develop career pathways that describe the qualifications necessary for  progressively challenging and evolving sets of work roles, such as those enumerated by  the NICE Framework.
•  A detailed understanding of the KSAs and Tasks helps existing staff to understand the   specific steps needed to develop their capabilities, promoting readiness for a desired  position.
•  An organization might offer staff rotations to provide opportunities to develop and use   new skills.
•  Organizations can identify personnel that are diligent in improving KSAs in relevant   areas, recognizing those who perform well.
•  Organizations can create development/improvement plans for staff to help them map out   how they can obtain KSAs required for new work roles.
•  Group training opportunities can be identified to prepare staff members to enhance   common knowledge, skills, and abilities in the work roles of an organization.
•  Organizations can use training and examinations that are based for specific cybersecurity   skills and abilities to assess proficiency in a realistic environment.
•  Organizations can use existing personnel to fill critical cybersecurity staffing needs,   leveraging the ability to review resumes of existing staff to identify those with desirable  KSAs.
•  The NICE Framework is helpful for existing employees who desire to move into a   cybersecurity work role from another position.
An organization can describe the KSAs  needed to allow a reliable employee in a non-cybersecurity work role to become part of  the cybersecurity workforce taking on cybersecurity tasks.
NIST SP 800-181      4   Extensions   NICE FRAMEWORK   Organizations or sectors can use the NICE Framework to develop additional publications or tools  that meet their needs and define or provide guidance on different aspects of workforce  development, planning, training, and education.
The following areas are a few examples from which additional publications or tools could be  developed.
4.1  Competencies    The Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration [6] defines a competency  as the capability of applying or using knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviors, and personal  characteristics to successfully perform critical work tasks, specific functions, or operate in a  given role or position.
Additional information about these  considerations is available from the Department of Labor’s CareerOneStop Site [7].
4.2  Job Titles   Job titles are a description of an employee’s job or position in an organization.
A mapping of  sample job titles to specialty areas or work roles would help organizations to use the NICE  Framework.
4.3  Cybersecurity Guidance and Guideline documents   NICE Strategic Goal #3, Guide Career Development and Workforce Planning, aims to support  employers to address market demands and enhance recruitment, hiring, development, and  retention of cybersecurity talent.
Adoption in this case means that the  NICE Framework is used as a reference resource for actions related to cybersecurity workforce,  training, and education.
One way to encourage adoption of the NICE Framework is to encourage authors of cybersecurity  guidance or guideline documents to cross reference their content with components of the NICE  Framework.
Each includes a two-character abbreviation (e.g.,  SP) for quick reference of the Category and to support the creation of NICE Framework work role identifiers (see Table 3 - NICE  Framework work roles).
Table 1 - NICE Framework Workforce Categories   Categories   Securely Provision (SP)   Descriptions   Conceptualizes, designs, procures, and/or builds secure information  technology (IT) systems, with responsibility for aspects of system and/or  network development.
Operate and Maintain (OM)  Provides the support, administration, and maintenance necessary to   Oversee and Govern (OV)   Protect and Defend (PR)   Analyze (AN)   Collect and Operate (CO)   Investigate (IN)   ensure effective and efficient information technology (IT) system  performance and security.
Provides leadership, management, direction, or development and  advocacy so the organization may effectively conduct cybersecurity  work.
Identifies, analyzes, and mitigates threats to internal information  technology (IT) systems and/or networks.
Performs highly-specialized review and evaluation of incoming  cybersecurity information to determine its usefulness for intelligence.
Provides specialized denial and deception operations and collection of  cybersecurity information that may be used to develop intelligence.
Investigates cybersecurity events or crimes related to information  technology (IT) systems, networks, and digital evidence.
Each Specialty Area includes a three-character  abbreviation (e.g., RSK) for quick reference of the specialty area and to support the creation of NICE Framework work role identifiers  (see Table 3 - NICE Framework work roles).
Table 2 - NICE Framework Specialty Areas   Categories  Securely Provision  (SP)   Specialty Areas  Risk Management (RSK)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Software Development (DEV)   Systems Architecture (ARC)   Technology R&D (TRD)   Systems Requirements Planning  (SRP)   Test and Evaluation (TST)   Systems Development (SYS)  Data Administration (DTA)   :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Operate and Maintain   (OM)    Specialty Area Descriptions   Oversees, evaluates, and supports the documentation, validation, assessment, and  authorization processes necessary to assure that existing and new information  technology (IT) systems meet the organization's cybersecurity and risk  requirements.
Ensures appropriate treatment of risk, compliance, and assurance  from internal and external perspectives.
Develops and writes/codes new (or modifies existing) computer applications,  software, or specialized utility programs following software assurance best  practices.
Develops system concepts and works on the capabilities phases of the systems  development life cycle; translates technology and environmental conditions (e.g.,  law and regulation) into system and security designs and processes.
Conducts technology assessment and integration processes; provides and  supports a prototype capability and/or evaluates its utility.
Consults with customers to gather and evaluate functional requirements and  translates these requirements into technical solutions.
Provides guidance to  customers about applicability of information systems to meet business needs.
Develops and conducts tests of systems to evaluate compliance with  specifications and requirements by applying principles and methods for cost- effective planning, evaluating, verifying, and validating of technical, functional,  and performance characteristics (including interoperability) of systems or  elements of systems incorporating IT.
Works on the development phases of the systems development life cycle.
Develops and administers databases and/or data management systems that allow  for the storage, query, protection, and utilization of data.
Knowledge Management (KMG)  Manages and administers processes and tools that enable the organization to  identify, document, and access intellectual capital and information content.
12   NIST SP 800-181      Categories   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Specialty Areas   Customer Service and Technical  Support (STS)   Network Services (NET)   Systems Administration (ADM)   Systems Analysis (ANA)      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Oversee and Govern  (OV)   Legal Advice and Advocacy  (LGA)   Training, Education, and  Awareness (TEA)   Cybersecurity Management  (MGT)   Strategic Planning and Policy  (SPP)  Executive Cyber Leadership  (EXL)  Program/Project Management  (PMA) and Acquisition   NICE FRAMEWORK   Specialty Area Descriptions   Addresses problems; installs, configures, troubleshoots, and provides  maintenance and training in response to customer requirements or inquiries (e.g.,  tiered-level customer support).
Typically provides initial incident information to  the Incident Response (IR) Specialty.
Installs, configures, tests, operates, maintains, and manages networks and their  firewalls, including hardware (e.g., hubs, bridges, switches, multiplexers, routers,  cables, proxy servers, and protective distributor systems) and software that  permit the sharing and transmission of all spectrum transmissions of information  to support the security of information and information systems.
Manages accounts, firewalls, and patches.
Responsible for access  control, passwords, and account creation and administration.
Studies an organization's current computer systems and procedures, and designs  information systems solutions to help the organization operate more securely,  efficiently, and effectively.
Brings business and information technology (IT)  together by understanding the needs and limitations of both.
Advocates legal  and policy changes, and makes a case on behalf of client via a wide range of  written and oral work products, including legal briefs and proceedings.
Develops, plans,  coordinates, delivers and/or evaluates training courses, methods, and techniques  as appropriate.
Oversees the cybersecurity program of an information system or network,  including managing information security implications within the organization,  specific program, or other area of responsibility, to include strategic, personnel,  infrastructure, requirements, policy enforcement, emergency planning, security  awareness, and other resources.
Develops policies and plans and/or advocates for changes in policy that support  organizational cyberspace initiatives or required changes/enhancements.
Supervises, manages, and/or leads work and workers performing cyber and  cyber-related and/or cyber operations work.
Applies knowledge of data, information, processes, organizational interactions,  skills, and analytical expertise, as well as systems, networks, and information   13   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Categories   Specialty Areas   Protect and Defend  (PR)    Cyber Defense Analysis (CDA)  Cyber Defense  Infrastructure Support (INF)  Incident Response (CIR)   Vulnerability Assessment and  Management (VAM)   Threat Analysis (TWA)   Exploitation Analysis (EXP)   All-Source Analysis (ASA)   Targets (TGT)   Language Analysis (LNG)   Analyze  (AN)   Specialty Area Descriptions   exchange capabilities to manage acquisition programs.
Executes duties  governing hardware, software, and information system acquisition programs and  other program management policies.
Provides direct support for acquisitions that  use information technology (IT) (including National Security Systems), applying  IT-related laws and policies, and provides IT-related guidance throughout the  total acquisition life cycle.
Uses defensive measures and information collected from a variety of sources to  identify, analyze, and report events that occur or might occur within the network  to protect information, information systems, and networks from threats.
Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, reviews, and administers the  infrastructure hardware and software that are required to effectively manage the  computer network defense service provider network and resources.
Monitors  network to actively remediate unauthorized activities.
Uses mitigation, preparedness, and response and  recovery approaches, as needed, to maximize survival of life, preservation of  property, and information security.
Conducts assessments of threats and vulnerabilities; determines deviations from  acceptable configurations, enterprise or local policy; assesses the level of risk;  and develops and/or recommends appropriate mitigation countermeasures in  operational and nonoperational situations.
Identifies and assesses the capabilities and activities of cybersecurity criminals  or foreign intelligence entities; produces findings to help initialize or support law  enforcement and counterintelligence investigations or activities.
Analyzes collected information to identify vulnerabilities and potential for  exploitation.
Analyzes threat information from multiple sources, disciplines, and agencies  across the Intelligence Community.
Synthesizes and places intelligence  information in context; draws insights about the possible implications.
Applies current knowledge of one or more regions, countries, non-state entities,  and/or technologies.
Applies language, cultural, and technical expertise to support information  collection, analysis, and other cybersecurity activities.
14   NIST SP 800-181      Categories   Collect and Operate   (CO)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Specialty Areas   Collection Operations (CLO)   Cyber Operational Planning  (OPL)   Cyber Operations (OPS)   Investigate   (IN)    Cyber Investigation (INV)   Digital Forensics (FOR)      A.3   NICE Framework Work Roles      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Specialty Area Descriptions   Executes collection using appropriate strategies and within the priorities  established through the collection management process.
Performs in-depth joint targeting and cybersecurity planning process.
Gathers  information and develops detailed Operational Plans and Orders supporting  requirements.
Conducts strategic and operational-level planning across the full  range of operations for integrated information and cyberspace operations.
Performs activities to gather evidence on criminal or foreign intelligence entities  to mitigate possible or real-time threats, protect against espionage or insider  threats, foreign sabotage, international terrorist activities, or to support other  intelligence activities.
Applies tactics, techniques, and procedures for a full range of investigative tools  and processes to include, but not limited to, interview and interrogation  techniques, surveillance, counter surveillance, and surveillance detection, and  appropriately balances the benefits of prosecution versus intelligence gathering.
Collects, processes, preserves, analyzes, and presents computer-related evidence  in support of network vulnerability mitigation and/or criminal, fraud,  counterintelligence, or law enforcement investigations.
Table 3 provides a description of each of the work roles described by the NICE Framework.
Each work role is identified by the  Category and Specialty Area, followed by a sequential number (e.g., SP-RSK-001 is the first work role in the SP Category and RSK  Specialty Area).
Some of the work role Descriptions originate with external documents (e.g., Committee on National Security Systems  Instruction [CNSSI] 4009) and include that information in the description column.
15   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 3 - NICE Framework Work Roles   Category  Securely  Provision  (SP)   T h s    i  p u b  Specialty Area  Risk Management  (RSK)   Work Role   Authorizing Official/Designating  Representative    Work Role ID  SP-RSK-001   Work Role Description   Senior official or executive with the authority to  formally assume responsibility for operating an  information system at an acceptable level of risk to  organizational operations (including mission,  functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets,  individuals, other organizations, and the Nation  (CNSSI 4009).
Security Control Assessor   Software  Development  (DEV)   Systems  Architecture  (ARC)   Software Developer    Secure Software Assessor   Enterprise Architect   Security Architect   SP-RSK-002  Conducts independent comprehensive assessments of  the management, operational, and technical security  controls and control enhancements employed within  or inherited by an information technology (IT) system  to determine the overall effectiveness of the controls  (as defined in NIST SP 800-37).
SP-DEV-001  Develops, creates, maintains, and writes/codes new   (or modifies existing) computer applications,  software, or specialized utility programs.
SP-DEV-002  Analyzes the security of new or existing computer   applications, software, or specialized utility programs  and provides actionable results.
SP-ARC-001  Develops and maintains business, systems, and   information processes to support enterprise mission  needs; develops information technology (IT) rules  and requirements that describe baseline and target  architectures.
SP-ARC-002  Ensures that the stakeholder security requirements  necessary to protect the organization’s mission and  business processes are adequately addressed in all  aspects of enterprise architecture including reference  models, segment and solution architectures, and the  resulting systems supporting those missions and  business processes.
16   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Technology R&D  (TRD)   Work Role   Research & Development  Specialist   Systems  Requirements  Planning (SRP)  Test and  Evaluation (TST)   Systems  Development  (SYS)   Systems Requirements Planner    System Testing and Evaluation  Specialist   Information Systems Security  Developer   Systems Developer    Operate and  Maintain  (OM)   Data  Administration  (DTA)   Database Administrator   Data Analyst   Knowledge  Management  (KMG)   Knowledge Manager      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  SP-TRD-001  Conducts software and systems engineering and   Work Role Description   software systems research to develop new  capabilities, ensuring cybersecurity is fully integrated.
Conducts comprehensive technology research to  evaluate potential vulnerabilities in cyberspace  systems.
SP-SRP-001  Consults with customers to evaluate functional   SP-TST-001   requirements and translate functional requirements  into technical solutions.
Plans, prepares, and executes tests of systems to  evaluate results against specifications and  requirements as well as analyze/report test results.
SP-SYS-001  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information   system security throughout the systems development  life cycle.
SP-SYS-002  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information   systems throughout the systems development life  cycle.
OM-DTA-001  Administers databases and/or data management  systems that allow for the secure storage, query,  protection, and utilization of data.
OM-DTA-002  Examines data from multiple disparate sources with   the goal of providing security and privacy insight.
Designs and implements custom algorithms,  workflow processes, and layouts for complex,  enterprise-scale data sets used for modeling, data  mining, and research purposes.
OM-KMG-001  Responsible for the management and administration  of processes and tools that enable the organization to  identify, document, and access intellectual capital and  information content.
17   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Customer Service  and Technical  Support (STS)   Network Services  (NET)   Systems  Administration  (ADM)   Work Role   Technical Support Specialist   Network Operations Specialist   System Administrator   Systems Analysis  (ANA)   Legal Advice and  Advocacy (LGA)   Systems Security Analyst   Cyber Legal Advisor   Privacy Officer/Privacy  Compliance Manager   Oversee and  Govern  (OV)   Training,  Education, and  Awareness (TEA)   Cyber Instructional Curriculum  Developer   Cyber Instructor   Information Systems Security  Manager      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  OM-STS-001  Provides technical support to customers who need   Work Role Description   assistance utilizing client-level hardware and software  in accordance with established or approved  organizational process components (i.e., Master  Incident Management Plan, when applicable).
OM-NET-001  Plans, implements, and operates network   services/systems, to include hardware and virtual  environments.
for example,  installing, configuring, and updating hardware and  software; establishing and managing user accounts;  overseeing or conducting backup and recovery tasks;  implementing operational and technical security  controls; and adhering to organizational security  policies and procedures).
OM-ANA-001  Responsible for the analysis and development of the  integration, testing, operations, and maintenance of  systems security.
OV-LGA-001  Provides legal advice and recommendations on   relevant topics related to cyber law.
OV-LGA-002  Develops and oversees privacy compliance program   and privacy program staff, supporting privacy  compliance, governance/policy, and incident response  needs of privacy and security executives and their  teams.
OV-TEA-001  Develops, plans, coordinates, and evaluates cyber   training/education courses, methods, and techniques  based on instructional needs.
OV-TEA-002  Develops and conducts training or education of   personnel within cyber domain.
OV-MGT-001  Responsible for the cybersecurity of a program,   organization, system, or enclave.
18   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Cybersecurity  Management  (MGT)   Work Role   Communications Security  (COMSEC) Manager    Work Role ID  OV-MGT-002   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Description   Individual who manages the Communications  Security (COMSEC) resources of an organization  (CNSSI  4009) or key custodian for a Crypto Key  Management System (CKMS).
T h s    i  p u b  Strategic Planning  and Policy (SPP)   Cyber Workforce Developer and  Manager   l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Executive Cyber  Leadership (EXL)   Program/Project  Management  (PMA) and  Acquisition   Cyber Policy and Strategy  Planner   Executive Cyber Leadership   Program Manager   IT Project Manager  Product Support Manager    OV-SPP-001  Develops cyberspace workforce plans, strategies, and  guidance to support cyberspace workforce manpower,  personnel, training and education requirements and to  address changes to cyberspace policy, doctrine,  materiel, force structure, and education and training  requirements.
OV-SPP-002  Develops and maintains cybersecurity plans, strategy,   and policy to support and align with organizational  cybersecurity initiatives and regulatory compliance.
OV-EXL-001  Executes decision-making authorities and establishes   vision and direction for an organization's cyber and  cyber-related resources and/or operations.
OV-PMA-002  Directly manages information technology projects.
OV-PMA-003  Manages the package of support functions required to   field and maintain the readiness and operational  capability of systems and components.
Protect and  Defend (PR)   Cyber Defense  Analysis (CDA)   Cyber Defense Analyst   IT Investment/Portfolio Manager  OV-PMA-004  Manages a portfolio of IT investments that align with  the overall needs of mission and enterprise priorities.
IT Program Auditor   OV-PMA-005  Conducts evaluations of an IT program or its   individual components to determine compliance with  published standards.
PR-CDA-001  Uses data collected from a variety of cyber defense   tools (e.g., IDS alerts, firewalls, network traffic logs)  to analyze events that occur within their environments  for the purposes of mitigating threats.
19   Work Role   Cyber Defense Infrastructure  Support Specialist   Work Role ID  PR-INF-001   Work Role Description   Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, and  administers the infrastructure hardware and software.
NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Cyber Defense  Infrastructure  Support (INF)  Incident Response  (CIR)  Vulnerability  Assessment and  Management  (VAM)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    Cyber Defense Incident  Responder  Vulnerability Assessment  Analyst   Analyze  (AN)    Threat Analysis  (TWA)   Threat/Warning Analyst    Exploitation  Analysis (EXP)   Exploitation Analyst   All-Source  Analysis (ASA)   All-Source Analyst    Mission Assessment Specialist      a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
PR-CIR-001   Investigates, analyzes, and responds to cyber  incidents within the network environment or enclave.
PR-VAM-001  Performs assessments of systems and networks within   AN-TWA-001  Develops cyber indicators to maintain awareness of   the network environment or enclave and identifies  where those systems/networks deviate from  acceptable configurations, enclave policy, or local  policy.
Measures effectiveness of defense-in-depth  architecture against known vulnerabilities.
Collects, processes, analyzes, and  disseminates cyber threat/warning assessments.
AN-EXP-001  Collaborates to identify access and collection gaps  that can be satisfied through cyber collection and/or  preparation activities.
Leverages all authorized  resources and analytic techniques to penetrate  targeted networks.
AN-ASA-001  Analyzes data/information from one or multiple   AN-ASA-002  Develops assessment plans and measures of   sources to conduct preparation of the environment,  respond to requests for information, and submit  intelligence collection and production requirements in  support of planning and operations.
Conducts strategic and  operational effectiveness assessments as required for  cyber events.
20   NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area  Targets (TGT)   Work Role   Target Developer    T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Target Network Analyst   Language  Analysis (LNG)   Multi-Disciplined Language  Analyst   :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
Collect and  Operate  (CO)   Collection  Operations (CLO)   All Source-Collection Manager   CO-CLO-001   21   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  AN-TGT-001  Performs target system analysis, builds and/or   Work Role Description   maintains electronic target folders to include inputs  from environment preparation, and/or internal or  external intelligence sources.
Coordinates with  partner target activities and intelligence organizations,  and presents candidate targets for vetting and  validation.
AN-TGT-002  Conducts advanced analysis of collection and open-  AN-LNG-001  Applies language and culture expertise with   source data to ensure target continuity; to profile  targets and their activities; and develop techniques to  gain more target information.
Determines how targets  communicate, move, operate and live based on  knowledge of target technologies, digital networks,  and the applications on them.
target/threat and technical knowledge to process,  analyze, and/or disseminate intelligence information  derived from language, voice and/or graphic material.
Creates and maintains language-specific databases  and working aids to support cyber action execution  and ensure critical knowledge sharing.
Identifies collection authorities and environment;  incorporates priority information requirements into  collection management; develops concepts to meet  leadership's intent.
NIST SP 800-181      Category   Specialty Area   Work Role  All Source-Collection  Requirements Manager   Cyber Operational  Planning (OPL)   Cyber Intel Planner   Cyber Ops Planner   Partner Integration Planner   Cyber Operations  (OPS)   Cyber Operator      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role ID  CO-CLO-002  Evaluates collection operations and develops effects-  Work Role Description   CO-OPL-001  Develops detailed intelligence plans to satisfy cyber   based collection requirements strategies using  available sources and methods to improve collection.
Develops, processes, validates, and coordinates  submission of collection requirements.
operations requirements.
Collaborates with cyber  operations planners to identify, validate, and levy  requirements for collection and analysis.
Participates  in targeting selection, validation, synchronization, and  execution of cyber actions.
Synchronizes intelligence  activities to support organization objectives in  cyberspace.
CO-OPL-002  Develops detailed plans for the conduct or support of   CO-OPL-003  Works to advance cooperation across organizational   the applicable range of cyber operations through  collaboration with other planners, operators and/or  analysts.
Participates in targeting selection,  validation, synchronization, and enables integration  during the execution of cyber actions.
or national borders between cyber operations partners.
Aids the integration of partner cyber teams by  providing guidance, resources, and collaboration to  develop best practices and facilitate organizational  support for achieving objectives in integrated cyber  actions.
Performs network navigation, tactical  forensic analysis, and, when directed, executes on-net  operations.
22   Work Role   Cyber Crime Investigator   Work Role ID  IN-INV-001   Work Role Description   Identifies, collects, examines, and preserves evidence  using controlled and documented analytical and  investigative techniques.
NICE FRAMEWORK   Law  Enforcement/Counterintelligence  Forensics Analyst   Cyber Defense Forensics  Analyst   IN-FOR-001  Conducts detailed investigations on computer-based   crimes establishing documentary or physical  evidence, to include digital media and logs associated  with cyber intrusion incidents.
IN-FOR-002  Analyzes digital evidence and investigates computer   security incidents to derive useful information in  support of system/network vulnerability mitigation.
NIST SP 800-181      Category  Investigate  (IN)     Specialty Area  Cyber  Investigation  (INV)  Digital Forensics  (FOR)   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o i .
NIST SP 800-181      A.4   NICE Framework Tasks   NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 4 provides a listing of all the tasks that have been identified as being part of a  cybersecurity work role.
Each work role includes a subset of the tasks listed here.
Table 4 - NICE Framework Tasks   Task ID   T0001   T0002   T0003   T0004   T0005  T0006  T0007  T0008   T0009   T0010   T0011   T0012   T0013  T0014   T0015  T0016   T0017  T0018  T0019  T0020   T0021   T0022   T0023   Task Description   Acquire and manage the necessary resources, including leadership support, financial  resources, and key security personnel, to support information technology (IT) security goals  and objectives and reduce overall organizational risk.
Acquire necessary resources, including financial resources, to conduct an effective  enterprise continuity of operations program.
Advise senior management (e.g., Chief Information Officer [CIO]) on risk levels and  security posture.
Advise senior management (e.g., CIO) on cost/benefit analysis of information security  programs, policies, processes, systems, and elements.
Advise appropriate senior leadership or Authorizing Official of changes affecting the  organization's cybersecurity posture.
Advocate organization's official position in legal and legislative proceedings.
Analyze and define data requirements and specifications.
Analyze and plan for anticipated changes in data capacity requirements.
Analyze information to determine, recommend, and plan the development of a new  application or modification of an existing application.
Analyze organization's cyber defense policies and configurations and evaluate compliance  with regulations and organizational directives.
Analyze user needs and software requirements to determine feasibility of design within time  and cost constraints.
Analyze design constraints, analyze trade-offs and detailed system and security design, and  consider life cycle support.
Apply coding and testing standards, apply security testing tools including "'fuzzing" static- analysis code scanning tools, and conduct code reviews.
Apply secure code documentation.
Apply security policies to applications that interface with one another, such as Business-to- Business (B2B) applications.
Apply security policies to meet security objectives of the system.
Apply service-oriented security architecture principles to meet organization's  confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements.
Assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity measures utilized by system(s).
Assess threats to and vulnerabilities of computer system(s) to develop a security risk profile.
Develop content for cyber defense tools.
Build, test, and modify product prototypes using working models or theoretical models.
Capture security controls used during the requirements phase to integrate security within the  process, to identify key security objectives, and to maximize software security while  minimizing disruption to plans and schedules.
Characterize and analyze network traffic to identify anomalous activity and potential threats  to network resources.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0024   T0025   T0026   T0027  T0028  T0029  T0030   T0031   T0032   T0033   T0034   T0035   T0036   T0037  T0038  T0039  T0040   T0041   T0042  T0043   T0044   T0045   T0046   T0047   T0048  T0049   Task Description   Collect and maintain data needed to meet system cybersecurity reporting.
Communicate the value of information technology (IT) security throughout all levels of the  organization stakeholders.
Compile and write documentation of program development and subsequent revisions,  inserting comments in the coded instructions so others can understand the program.
Conduct analysis of log files, evidence, and other information to determine best methods for  identifying the perpetrator(s) of a network intrusion.
Conduct and/or support authorized penetration testing on enterprise network assets.
Conduct Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) of the application’s security design for the  appropriate security controls, which protect the confidentiality and integrity of Personally  Identifiable Information (PII).
Conduct risk analysis, feasibility study, and/or trade-off analysis to develop, document, and  refine functional requirements and specifications.
Confer with systems analysts, engineers, programmers, and others to design application and  to obtain information on project limitations and capabilities, performance requirements, and  interfaces.
Configure and optimize network hubs, routers, and switches (e.g., higher-level protocols,  tunneling).
Confirm what is known about an intrusion and discover new information, if possible, after  identifying intrusion via dynamic analysis.
Construct access paths to suites of information (e.g., link pages) to facilitate access by end- users.
Develop threat model based on customer interviews and requirements.
Consult with customers to evaluate functional requirements.
Coordinate and provide expert technical support to enterprise-wide cyber defense  technicians to resolve cyber defense incidents.
Coordinate with Cyber Defense Analysts to manage and administer the updating of rules  and signatures (e.g., intrusion detection/protection systems, antivirus, and content blacklists)  for specialized cyber defense applications.
Coordinate with enterprise-wide cyber defense staff to validate network alerts.
Coordinate with systems architects and developers, as needed, to provide oversight in the  development of design solutions.
This includes, but is not limited to, hard drives, floppy diskettes, CDs, PDAs,  mobile phones, GPS, and all tape formats.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0050   T0051  T0052  T0053   T0054   T0055   T0056   T0057  T0058   T0059  T0060  T0061   T0062  T0063   T0064  T0065  T0066  T0067  T0068   T0069   T0070   T0071  T0072   T0073  T0074  T0075   T0076  T0077   Task Description   Define and prioritize essential system capabilities or business functions required for partial  or full system restoration after a catastrophic failure event.
Define appropriate levels of system availability based on critical system functions and  ensure that system requirements identify appropriate disaster recovery and continuity of  operations requirements to include any appropriate fail-over/alternate site requirements,  backup requirements, and material supportability requirements for system  recover/restoration.
Define project scope and objectives based on customer requirements.
Design and develop cybersecurity or cybersecurity-enabled products.
Design group policies and access control lists to ensure compatibility with organizational  standards, business rules, and needs.
Design hardware, operating systems, and software applications to adequately address  cybersecurity requirements.
Design or integrate appropriate data backup capabilities into overall system designs, and  ensure that appropriate technical and procedural processes exist for secure system backups  and protected storage of backup data.
Design, develop, and modify software systems, using scientific analysis and mathematical  models to predict and measure outcome and consequences of design.
Determine level of assurance of developed capabilities based on test results.
Develop a plan to investigate alleged crime, violation, or suspicious activity utilizing  computers and the Internet.
Develop an understanding of the needs and requirements of information end-users.
Develop and direct system testing and validation procedures and documentation.
Develop and document requirements, capabilities, and constraints for design procedures and  processes.
Develop and document systems administration standard operating procedures.
Review and validate data mining and data warehousing programs, processes, and  requirements.
Develop and implement network backup and recovery procedures.
Develop and maintain strategic plans.
Develop architectures or system components consistent with technical specifications.
Develop data standards, policies, and procedures.
Develop detailed security design documentation for component and interface specifications  to support system design and development.
Develop Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations plans for systems under  development and ensure testing prior to systems entering a production environment.
Develop/integrate cybersecurity designs for systems and networks with multilevel security  requirements or requirements for the processing of multiple classification levels of data  primarily applicable to government organizations (e.g., UNCLASSIFIED, SECRET, and  TOP SECRET).
Develop methods to monitor and measure risk, compliance, and assurance efforts.
Develop new or identify existing awareness and training materials that are appropriate for  intended audiences.
Develop policy, programs, and guidelines for implementation.
Develop risk mitigation strategies to resolve vulnerabilities and recommend security  changes to system or system components as needed.
Develop secure code and error handling.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0078   T0079  T0080  T0081   T0082  T0083  T0084   T0085   T0086   T0087   T0088   T0089   T0090   T0091   T0092   T0093  T0094   T0095   T0096   T0097  T0098  T0099   T0100  T0101  T0102  T0103   T0104   Task Description   Develop specific cybersecurity countermeasures and risk mitigation strategies for systems  and/or applications.
Develop specifications to ensure that risk, compliance, and assurance efforts conform with  security, resilience, and dependability requirements at the software application, system, and  network environment level.
Develop test plans to address specifications and requirements.
Diagnose network connectivity problem.
Document and address organization's information security, cybersecurity architecture, and  systems security engineering requirements throughout the acquisition life cycle.
Draft statements of preliminary or residual security risks for system operation.
Employ secure configuration management processes.
Ensure all systems security operations and maintenance activities are properly documented  and updated as necessary.
Ensure that the application of security patches for commercial products integrated into  system design meet the timelines dictated by the management authority for the intended  operational environment.
Ensure that cybersecurity-enabled products or other compensating security control  technologies reduce identified risk to an acceptable level.
Ensure that security improvement actions are evaluated, validated, and implemented as  required.
Ensure that acquired or developed system(s) and architecture(s) are consistent with  organization's cybersecurity architecture guidelines.
Ensure that cybersecurity inspections, tests, and reviews are coordinated for the network  environment.
Ensure that cybersecurity requirements are integrated into the continuity planning for that  system and/or organization(s).
Ensure that protection and detection capabilities are acquired or developed using the IS  security engineering approach and are consistent with organization-level cybersecurity  architecture.
Establish overall enterprise information security architecture (EISA) with the organization’s  overall security strategy.
Establish relationships, if applicable, between the incident response team and other groups,  both internal (e.g., legal department) and external (e.g., law enforcement agencies, vendors,  public relations professionals).
Evaluate and approve development efforts to ensure that baseline security safeguards are  appropriately installed.
Evaluate contracts to ensure compliance with funding, legal, and program requirements.
Evaluate factors such as reporting formats required, cost constraints, and need for security  restrictions to determine hardware configuration.
Evaluate the effectiveness of laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
Examine recovered data for information of relevance to the issue at hand.
Fuse computer network attack analyses with criminal and counterintelligence investigations  and operations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0105   T0106   T0107   T0108   T0109   T0110  T0111   T0112   T0113  T0114   T0115  T0116   T0117   T0118   T0119   T0120  T0121  T0122  T0123   T0124   T0125  T0126   T0127   T0128  T0129   Task Description   Identify components or elements, allocate security functions to those elements, and describe  the relationships between the elements.
Identify alternative information security strategies to address organizational security  objective.
Identify and direct the remediation of technical problems encountered during testing and  implementation of new systems (e.g., identify and find work-arounds for communication  protocols that are not interoperable).
Identify and prioritize essential system functions or sub-systems required to support  essential capabilities or business functions for restoration or recovery after a system failure  or during a system recovery event based on overall system requirements for continuity and  availability.
Identify and/or determine whether a security incident is indicative of a violation of law that  requires specific legal action.
Identify information technology (IT) security program implications of new technologies or  technology upgrades.
Identify security implications and apply methodologies within centralized and decentralized  environments across the enterprise’s computer systems in software development.
Identify security issues around steady state operation and management of software and  incorporate security measures that must be taken when a product reaches its end of life.
Identify, assess, and recommend cybersecurity or cybersecurity-enabled products for use  within a system and ensure that recommended products are in compliance with  organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Identify, collect, and seize documentary or physical evidence, to include digital media and  logs associated with cyber intrusion incidents, investigations, and operations.
Implement new system design procedures, test procedures, and quality standards.
Implement security designs for new or existing system(s).
Implement specific cybersecurity countermeasures for systems and/or applications.
Incorporate cybersecurity vulnerability solutions into system designs (e.g., Cybersecurity  Vulnerability Alerts).
Install and maintain network infrastructure device operating system software (e.g., IOS,  firmware).
Install or replace network hubs, routers, and switches.
Integrate and align information security and/or cybersecurity policies to ensure that system  analysis meets security requirements.
Integrate automated capabilities for updating or patching system software where practical  and develop processes and procedures for manual updating and patching of system software  based on current and projected patch timeline requirements for the operational environment  of the system.
Integrate new systems into existing network architecture.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   Task Description   T0132   T0130  T0131   Interface with external organizations (e.g., public affairs, law enforcement, Command or  Component Inspector General) to ensure appropriate and accurate dissemination of incident  and other Computer Network Defense information.
Interpret and apply laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures to specific issues.
Interpret and/or approve security requirements relative to the capabilities of new  information technologies.
Interpret patterns of noncompliance to determine their impact on levels of risk and/or  overall effectiveness of the enterprise’s cybersecurity program.
T0133  Lead and align information technology (IT) security priorities with the security strategy.
T0134  T0135  Lead and oversee information security budget, staffing, and contracting.
T0136  Maintain baseline system security according to organizational policies.
T0137  Maintain database management systems software.
T0138   T0139   Maintain deployable cyber defense audit toolkit (e.g., specialized cyber defense software  and hardware) to support cyber defense audit missions.
Maintain directory replication services that enable information to replicate automatically  from rear servers to forward units via optimized routing.
Maintain information exchanges through publish, subscribe, and alert functions that enable  users to send and receive critical information as required.
T0140  T0141  Maintain information systems assurance and accreditation materials.
Maintain knowledge of applicable cyber defense policies, regulations, and compliance  documents specifically related to cyber defense auditing.
T0144  Manage accounts, network rights, and access to systems and equipment.
T0145  Manage and approve Accreditation Packages (e.g., ISO/IEC 15026-2).
T0146  Manage the compilation, cataloging, caching, distribution, and retrieval of data.
Manage the monitoring of information security data sources to maintain organizational  situational awareness.
Manage the publishing of Computer Network Defense guidance (e.g., TCNOs, Concept of  Operations, Net Analyst Reports, NTSM, MTOs) for the enterprise constituency.
Manage threat or target analysis of cyber defense information and production of threat  information within the enterprise.
Monitor and evaluate a system's compliance with information technology (IT) security,  resilience, and dependability requirements.
Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the enterprise's cybersecurity safeguards to ensure  that they provide the intended level of protection.
T0153  Monitor network capacity and performance.
T0154  Monitor and report the usage of knowledge management assets and resources.
Document and escalate incidents (including event’s history, status, and potential impact for  further action) that may cause ongoing and immediate impact to the environment.
Oversee and make recommendations regarding configuration management.
Oversee the information security training and awareness program.
Participate in an information security risk assessment during the Security Assessment and  Authorization process.
Participate in the development or modification of the computer environment cybersecurity  program plans and requirements.
Patch network vulnerabilities to ensure that information is safeguarded against outside  parties.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0161  T0162   T0163  T0164   T0165   T0166  T0167  T0168  T0169   T0170  T0171  T0172  T0173   T0174   T0175   T0176   T0177   T0178  T0179   T0180   T0181  T0182   T0183   T0184  T0185  T0186   T0187   T0188   Task Description   Perform analysis of log files from a variety of sources (e.g., individual host logs, network  traffic logs, firewall logs, and intrusion detection system [IDS] logs) to identify possible  threats to network security.
Perform cyber defense incident triage, to include determining scope, urgency, and potential  impact, identifying the specific vulnerability, and making recommendations that enable  expeditious remediation.
Perform cyber defense trend analysis and reporting.
Perform event correlation using information gathered from a variety of sources within the  enterprise to gain situational awareness and determine the effectiveness of an observed  attack.
Perform cybersecurity testing of developed applications and/or systems.
Perform integrated quality assurance testing for security functionality and resiliency attack.
Perform real-time cyber defense incident handling (e.g., forensic collections, intrusion  correlation and tracking, threat analysis, and direct system remediation) tasks to support  deployable Incident Response Teams (IRTs).
Perform secure programming and identify potential flaws in codes to mitigate  vulnerabilities.
Perform security reviews, identify gaps in security architecture, and develop a security risk  management plan.
Perform security reviews and identify security gaps in security architecture resulting in  recommendations for inclusion in the risk mitigation strategy.
Perform system administration on specialized cyber defense applications and systems (e.g.,  antivirus, audit and remediation) or Virtual Private Network (VPN) devices, to include  installation, configuration, maintenance, backup, and restoration.
Plan and conduct security authorization reviews and assurance case development for initial  installation of systems and networks.
Plan and manage the delivery of knowledge management projects.
Prepare digital media for imaging by ensuring data integrity (e.g., write blockers in  accordance with standard operating procedures).
Prepare use cases to justify the need for specific information technology (IT) solutions.
Prepare, distribute, and maintain plans, instructions, guidance, and standard operating  procedures concerning the security of network system(s) operations.
Properly document all systems security implementation, operations, and maintenance  activities and update as necessary.
Provide a managed flow of relevant information (via web-based portals or other means)  based on mission requirements.
Provide an accurate technical evaluation of the software application, system, or network,  documenting the security posture, capabilities, and vulnerabilities against relevant  cybersecurity compliances.
Provide daily summary reports of network events and activity relevant to cyber defense  practices.
Provide enterprise cybersecurity and supply chain risk management guidance for  development of the Continuity of Operations Plans.
Provide feedback on network requirements, including network architecture and  infrastructure.
Provide guidelines for implementing developed systems to customers or installation teams.
Provide cybersecurity guidance to leadership.
Provide input on security requirements to be included in statements of work and other  appropriate procurement documents.
Provide input to implementation plans and standard operating procedures.
Provide input to the Risk Management Framework process activities and related  documentation (e.g., system life-cycle support plans, concept of operations, operational  procedures, and maintenance training materials).
Provide leadership and direction to information technology (IT) personnel by ensuring that  cybersecurity awareness, basics, literacy, and training are provided to operations personnel  commensurate with their responsibilities.
Provide recommendations on data structures and databases that ensure correct and quality  production of reports/management information.
Provide recommendations on new database technologies and architectures.
Provide system-related input on cybersecurity requirements to be included in statements of  work and other appropriate procurement documents.
Provide technical documents, incident reports, findings from computer examinations,  summaries, and other situational awareness information to higher headquarters.
Receive and analyze network alerts from various sources within the enterprise and  determine possible causes of such alerts.
Recognize a possible security violation and take appropriate action to report the incident, as  required.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0217   T0218   T0219  T0220   T0221  T0222  T0223   T0224  T0225  T0226  T0227  T0228   T0229  T0230  T0231  T0232  T0233   T0234  T0235   T0236  T0237  T0238   T0239   T0240   T0241   T0242   T0243   T0244   T0245   T0246   Task Description   Address security implications in the software acceptance phase including completion  criteria, risk acceptance and documentation, common criteria, and methods of independent  testing.
Recommend new or revised security, resilience, and dependability measures based on the  results of reviews.
Recommend resource allocations required to securely operate and maintain an  organization’s cybersecurity requirements.
Resolve conflicts in laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
Review authorization and assurance documents to confirm that the level of risk is within  acceptable limits for each software application, system, and network.
Review or conduct audits of information technology (IT) programs and projects.
Secure the electronic device or information source.
Store, retrieve, and manipulate data for analysis of system capabilities and requirements.
Supervise or manage protective or corrective measures when a cybersecurity incident or  vulnerability is discovered.
Test and maintain network infrastructure including software and hardware devices.
Track and document cyber defense incidents from initial detection through final resolution.
Translate functional requirements into technical solutions.
Translate security requirements into application design elements including documenting the  elements of the software attack surfaces, conducting threat modeling, and defining any  specific security criteria.
Use federal and organization-specific published documents to manage operations of their  computing environment system(s).
Capture and analyze network traffic associated with malicious activities using network  monitoring tools.
Verify and update security documentation reflecting the application/system security design  features.
Verify that application software/network/system security postures are implemented as  stated, document deviations, and recommend required actions to correct those deviations.
Write and publish cyber defense techniques, guidance, and reports on incident findings to  appropriate constituencies.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0247   T0248  T0249   T0250   T0251   T0252  T0253   T0254   T0255   T0256   T0257   T0258   T0259   T0260   T0261   T0262   T0263   T0264   T0265  T0266   T0267   T0268  T0269  T0270   T0271   Task Description   Write instructional materials (e.g., standard operating procedures, production manual) to  provide detailed guidance to relevant portion of the workforce.
Promote awareness of security issues among management and ensure sound security  principles are reflected in the organization's vision and goals.
Research current technology to understand capabilities of required system or network.
Identify cyber capabilities strategies for custom hardware and software development based  on mission requirements.
Develop security compliance processes and/or audits for external services (e.g., cloud  service providers, data centers).
Conduct required reviews as appropriate within environment (e.g., Technical Surveillance,  Countermeasure Reviews [TSCM], TEMPEST countermeasure reviews).
Oversee policy standards and implementation strategies to ensure procedures and guidelines  comply with cybersecurity policies.
Participate in Risk Governance process to provide security risks, mitigations, and input on  other technical risk.
Evaluate the effectiveness of procurement function in addressing information security  requirements and supply chain risks through procurement activities and recommend  improvements.
Determine scope, infrastructure, resources, and data sample size to ensure system  requirements are adequately demonstrated.
Use cyber defense tools for continual monitoring and analysis of system activity to identify  malicious activity.
Analyze identified malicious activity to determine weaknesses exploited, exploitation  methods, effects on system and information.
Assist in identifying, prioritizing, and coordinating the protection of critical cyber defense  infrastructure and key resources.
Employ approved defense-in-depth principles and practices (e.g., defense-in-multiple  places, layered defenses, security robustness).
Identify security requirements specific to an information technology (IT) system in all  phases of the system life cycle.
Assure successful implementation and functionality of security requirements and  appropriate information technology (IT) policies and procedures that are consistent with the  organization's mission and goals.
Perform penetration testing as required for new or updated applications.
Define and document how the implementation of a new system or new interfaces between  systems impacts the security posture of the current environment.
Design and develop key management functions (as related to cybersecurity).
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan and conduct system security development.
Develop cybersecurity designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental factors  (e.g., access controls, automated applications, networked operations, high integrity and   33      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0272  T0273  T0274   T0275   T0276   T0277   T0278   T0279   T0280   T0281   T0282  T0283  T0284  T0285  T0286   T0287  T0288  T0289  T0290  T0291  T0292  T0293   T0294   T0295  T0296  T0297  T0298  T0299   T0300   T0301   Task Description   availability requirements, multilevel security/processing of multiple classification levels,  and processing Sensitive Compartmented Information).
Ensure that security design and cybersecurity development activities are properly  documented (providing a functional description of security implementation) and updated as  necessary.
Develop and document supply chain risks for critical system elements, as appropriate.
Create auditable evidence of security measures.
Support necessary compliance activities (e.g., ensure that system security configuration  guidelines are followed, compliance monitoring occurs).
Participate in the acquisition process as necessary, following appropriate supply chain risk  management practices.
Ensure that all acquisitions, procurements, and outsourcing efforts address information  security requirements consistent with organization goals.
Collect intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, Trojans) and use discovered data to  enable mitigation of potential cyber defense incidents within the enterprise.
Serve as technical expert and liaison to law enforcement personnel and explain incident  details as required.
Continuously validate the organization against  policies/guidelines/procedures/regulations/laws to ensure compliance.
Forecast ongoing service demands and ensure that security assumptions are reviewed as  necessary.
Define and/or implement policies and procedures to ensure protection of critical  infrastructure as appropriate.
Collaborate with stakeholders to identify and/or develop appropriate solutions technology.
Design and develop new tools/technologies as related to cybersecurity.
Examine network topologies to understand data flows through the network.
Identify and analyze anomalies in network traffic using metadata.
Validate intrusion detection system (IDS) alerts against network traffic using packet  analysis tools.
Identify applications and operating systems of a network device based on network traffic.
Reconstruct a malicious attack or activity based off network traffic.
Identify network mapping and operating system (OS) fingerprinting activities.
Develop and document User Experience (UX) requirements including information  architecture and user interface requirements.
Develop and implement cybersecurity independent audit processes for application  software/networks/systems and oversee ongoing independent audits to ensure that  operational and Research and Design (R&D) processes and procedures are in compliance  with organizational and mandatory cybersecurity requirements and accurately followed by   34   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0302   T0303   T0304   T0305   T0306  T0307  T0308  T0309   T0310  T0311  T0312  T0313   T0314  T0315  T0316  T0317  T0318  T0319   T0320  T0321  T0322   T0323  T0324  T0325  T0326  T0327      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
Task Description   Systems Administrators and other cybersecurity staff when performing their day-to-day  activities.
Develop contract language to ensure supply chain, system, network, and operational  security are met.
Identify and leverage the enterprise-wide version control system while designing and  developing secure applications.
Implement and integrate system development life cycle (SDLC) methodologies (e.g., IBM  Rational Unified Process) into development environment.
Performs configuration management, problem management, capacity management, and  financial management for databases and data management systems.
Supports incident management, service-level management, change management, release  management, continuity management, and availability management for databases and data  management systems.
Analyze candidate architectures, allocate security services, and select security mechanisms.
Assess the effectiveness of security controls.
Assist in the construction of signatures which can be implemented on cyber defense network  tools in response to new or observed threats within the network environment or enclave.
Design and document quality standards.
Develop a system security context, a preliminary system security Concept of Operations  (CONOPS), and define baseline system security requirements in accordance with applicable  cybersecurity requirements.
Develop and deliver technical training to educate others or meet customer needs.
Develop or assist in the development of computer based training modules or classes.
Develop or assist in the development of course assignments.
Develop or assist in the development of course evaluations.
Develop or assist in the development of grading and proficiency standards.
Assist in the development of individual/collective development, training, and/or remediation  plans.
Develop or assist in the development of learning objectives and goals.
Develop or assist in the development of on-the-job training materials or programs.
Develop or assist in the development of written tests for measuring and assessing learner  proficiency.
Direct software programming and development of documentation.
Document a system's purpose and preliminary system security concept of operations.
Employ configuration management processes.
Evaluate network infrastructure vulnerabilities to enhance capabilities being developed.
Evaluate security architectures and designs to determine the adequacy of security design and  architecture proposed or provided in response to requirements contained in acquisition  documents.
Follow software and systems engineering life cycle standards and processes.
T0332   Notify designated managers, cyber incident responders, and cybersecurity service provider  team members of suspected cyber incidents and articulate the event's history, status, and   35   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   Task Description   potential impact for further action in accordance with the organization's cyber incident  response plan.
Build, install, configure, and test dedicated cyber defense hardware.
T0334  T0335  T0336  Withdrawn: Integrated with T0228   Supervise and assign work to programmers, designers, technologists and technicians, and  other engineering and scientific personnel.
T0337  T0338  Write detailed functional specifications that document the architecture development process.
T0339   T0340   T0341  T0342  T0343   T0344   T0345   T0346  T0347   T0348  T0349   T0350  T0351  T0352  T0353  T0354   T0355   T0356  T0357   T0358   T0359   T0360  T0361   T0362   Lead efforts to promote the organization's use of knowledge management and information  sharing.
Act as a primary stakeholder in the underlying information technology (IT) operational  processes and functions that support the service, provide direction and monitor all  significant activities so the service is delivered successfully.
Advocate for adequate funding for cyber training resources, to include both internal and  industry-provided courses, instructors, and related materials.
Assess all the configuration management (change configuration/release management)  processes.
Assess effectiveness and efficiency of instruction according to ease of instructional  technology use and student learning, knowledge transfer, and satisfaction.
Assist in assessing the impact of implementing and sustaining a dedicated cyber defense  infrastructure.
Conduct a market analysis to identify, assess, and recommend commercial, Government off- the-shelf, and open source products for use within a system and ensure recommended  products are in compliance with organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Conduct learning needs assessments and identify requirements.
Coordinate and manage the overall service provided to a customer end-to-end.
Coordinate with internal and external subject matter experts to ensure existing qualification  standards reflect organizational functional requirements and meet industry standards.
Design and develop system administration and management functionality for privileged  access users.
Design, implement, test, and evaluate secure interfaces between information systems,  physical systems, and/or embedded technologies.
Develop and facilitate data-gathering methods.
Develop and implement standardized position descriptions based on established cyber work  roles.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0363   T0364  T0365  T0366  T0367   T0368   T0369   T0370  T0371   T0372   T0373   T0374   T0375   T0376   T0377   T0378   T0379   T0380  T0381  T0382  T0383   T0384   T0385  T0386  T0387  T0388   Task Description   Develop and review recruiting, hiring, and retention procedures in accordance with current  HR policies.
Develop cyber career field classification structure to include establishing career field entry  requirements and other nomenclature such as codes and identifiers.
Develop or assist in the development of training policies and protocols for cyber training.
Develop strategic insights from large data sets.
Develop the goals and objectives for cyber curriculum.
Ensure that cyber career fields are managed in accordance with organizational HR policies  and directives.
Ensure that cyber workforce management policies and processes comply with legal and  organizational requirements regarding equal opportunity, diversity, and fair  hiring/employment practices.
Ensure that appropriate Service-Level Agreements (SLAs) and underpinning contracts have  been defined that clearly set out for the customer a description of the service and the  measures for monitoring the service.
Establish acceptable limits for the software application, network, or system.
Establish and collect metrics to monitor and validate cyber workforce readiness including  analysis of cyber workforce data to assess the status of positions identified, filled, and filled  with qualified personnel.
Establish and oversee waiver processes for cyber career field entry and training qualification  requirements.
Establish cyber career paths to allow career progression, deliberate development, and  growth within and between cyber career fields.
Establish manpower, personnel, and qualification data element standards to support cyber  workforce management and reporting requirements.
Establish, resource, implement, and assess cyber workforce management programs in  accordance with organizational requirements.
Gather feedback on customer satisfaction and internal service performance to foster  continual improvement.
Manage the internal relationship with information technology (IT) process owners  supporting the service, assisting with the definition and agreement of Operating Level  Agreements (OLAs).
Present technical information to technical and nontechnical audiences.
Promote awareness of cyber policy and strategy as appropriate among management and  ensure sound principles are reflected in the organization's mission, vision, and goals.
Review and apply cyber career field qualification standards.
Review and apply organizational policies related to or influencing the cyber workforce.
Review/Assess cyber workforce effectiveness to adjust skill and/or qualification standards.
Support integration of qualified cyber workforce personnel into information systems life  cycle development processes.
Utilize technical documentation or resources to implement a new mathematical, data  science, or computer science method.
Validate specifications and requirements for testability.
Work with other service managers and product owners to balance and prioritize services to  meet overall customer requirements, constraints, and objectives.
Enter media information into tracking database (e.g., Product Tracker Tool) for digital  media that has been acquired.
Correlate incident data and perform cyber defense reporting.
Maintain deployable cyber defense toolkit (e.g., specialized cyber defense  software/hardware) to support Incident Response Team mission.
Effectively allocate storage capacity in the design of data management systems.
Ensure that design and development activities are properly documented (providing a  functional description of implementation) and updated as necessary.
Troubleshoot prototype design and process issues throughout the product design,  development, and pre-launch phases.
Identify functional- and security-related features to find opportunities for new capability  development to exploit or mitigate vulnerabilities.
Identify and/or develop reverse engineering tools to enhance capabilities and detect  vulnerabilities.
Develop data management capabilities (e.g., cloud-based, centralized cryptographic key  management) to include support to the mobile workforce.
Develop supply chain, system, network, performance, and cybersecurity requirements.
Ensure that supply chain, system, network, performance, and cybersecurity requirements are  included in contract language and delivered.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0416   T0417  T0418   T0419   T0420   T0421  T0422  T0423   T0424  T0425  T0426  T0427   T0428   T0429  T0430  T0431   T0432   T0433   T0434   T0435   T0436  T0437   T0438   T0439   T0440  T0441  T0442  T0443   Task Description   Enable applications with public keying by leveraging existing public key infrastructure  (PKI) libraries and incorporating certificate management and encryption functionalities  when appropriate.
Identify and leverage the enterprise-wide security services while designing and developing  secure applications (e.g., Enterprise PKI, Federated Identity server, Enterprise Antivirus  solution) when appropriate.
Acquire and maintain a working knowledge of constitutional issues which arise in relevant  laws, regulations, policies, agreements, standards, procedures, or other issuances.
Administer test bed(s), and test and evaluate applications, hardware infrastructure,  rules/signatures, access controls, and configurations of platforms managed by service  provider(s).
Manage the indexing/cataloguing, storage, and access of explicit organizational knowledge  (e.g., hard copy documents, digital files).
Implement data management standards, requirements, and specifications.
Analyze and provide information to stakeholders that will support the development of  security application or modification of an existing security application.
Analyze organizational cyber policy.
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan architecture.
Analyze security needs and software requirements to determine feasibility of design within  time and cost constraints and security mandates.
Assess policy needs and collaborate with stakeholders to develop policies to govern cyber  activities.
Collect and analyze intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, and system  configuration) and use discovered data to enable mitigation of potential cyber defense  incidents within the enterprise.
Conduct analysis of log files, evidence, and other information to determine best methods for  identifying the perpetrator(s) of a network intrusion or other crimes.
Conduct periodic system maintenance including cleaning (both physically and  electronically), disk checks, routine reboots, data dumps, and testing.
Conduct trial runs of programs and software applications to ensure that the desired  information is produced and instructions and security levels are correct.
Correlate training and learning to business or mission requirements.
Create, edit, and manage network access control lists on specialized cyber defense systems  (e.g., firewalls and intrusion prevention systems).
Capture and integrate essential system capabilities or business functions required for partial  or full system restoration after a catastrophic failure event.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0444   T0445   T0446   T0447  T0448   T0449  T0450  T0451   T0452   T0453  T0454   T0455  T0456  T0457  T0458  T0459  T0460  T0461   T0462  T0463   T0464  T0465  T0466   T0467  T0468  T0469  T0470   T0471  T0472  T0473   T0474  T0475  T0476  T0477   Task Description   Apply concepts, procedures, software, equipment, and/or technology applications to  students.
Design/integrate a cyber strategy that outlines the vision, mission, and goals that align with  the organization’s strategic plan.
Design, develop, integrate, and update system security measures that provide  confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, and non-repudiation.
Design hardware, operating systems, and software applications to adequately address  requirements.
Develop enterprise architecture or system components required to meet user needs.
Design to security requirements to ensure requirements are met for all systems and/or  applications.
Design training curriculum and course content based on requirements.
Participate in development of training curriculum and course content.
Design, build, implement, and maintain a knowledge management framework that provides  end-users access to the organization’s intellectual capital.
Determine and develop leads and identify sources of information to identify and/or  prosecute the responsible parties to an intrusion or other crimes.
Define baseline security requirements in accordance with applicable guidelines.
Develop software system testing and validation procedures, programming, and  documentation.
Develop secure software testing and validation procedures.
Develop system testing and validation procedures, programming, and documentation.
Comply with organization systems administration standard operating procedures.
Implement data mining and data warehousing applications.
Develop and implement data mining and data warehousing programs.
Implement and enforce local network usage policies and procedures.
Develop procedures and test fail-over for system operations transfer to an alternate site  based on system availability requirements.
Develop cost estimates for new or modified system(s).
Develop detailed design documentation for component and interface specifications to  support system design and development.
Develop guidelines for implementation.
Develop mitigation strategies to address cost, schedule, performance, and security risks.
Ensure that training meets the goals and objectives for cybersecurity training, education, or  awareness.
Analyze and report organizational security posture trends.
Analyze and report system security posture trends.
Draft, staff, and publish cyber policy.
Provide legal analysis and decisions to inspectors general, privacy officers, oversight and  compliance personnel regarding compliance with cybersecurity policies and relevant legal  and regulatory requirements.
Assess adequate access controls based on principles of least privilege and need-to-know.
Evaluate the impact of changes to laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0478   T0479   T0480   T0481   T0482   T0483   T0484   T0485   T0486   T0487  T0488   T0489  T0490   T0491   Task Description   Provide guidance on laws, regulations, policies, standards, or procedures to management,  personnel, or clients.
Employ information technology (IT) systems and digital storage media to solve, investigate,  and/or prosecute cybercrimes and fraud committed against people and property.
Identify components or elements, allocate comprehensive functional components to include  security functions, and describe the relationships between the elements.
Identify and address cyber workforce planning and management issues (e.g.
Identify potential conflicts with implementation of any cyber defense tools (e.g., tool and  signature testing and optimization).
Determine the protection needs (i.e., security controls) for the information system(s) and  network(s) and document appropriately.
Implement security measures to resolve vulnerabilities, mitigate risks, and recommend  security changes to system or system components as needed.
Implement Risk Management Framework (RMF)/Security Assessment and Authorization  (SA&A) requirements for dedicated cyber defense systems within the enterprise, and  document and maintain records for them.
Facilitate implementation of new or revised laws, regulations, executive orders, policies,  standards, or procedures.
Implement designs for new or existing system(s).
Implement system security measures in accordance with established procedures to ensure  confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, and non-repudiation.
Install and configure database management systems and software.
Install and configure hardware, software, and peripheral equipment for system users in  accordance with organizational standards.
Ensure the integration and implementation of Cross-Domain Solutions (CDS) in a secure  environment.
Administer accounts, network rights, and access to systems and equipment.
T0492  T0493  T0494  T0495  Manage Accreditation Packages (e.g., ISO/IEC 15026-2).
T0496   T0497   T0498   T0499   Perform asset management/inventory of information technology (IT) resources.
Manage the information technology (IT) planning process to ensure that developed solutions  meet customer requirements.
Manage system/server resources including performance, capacity, availability,  serviceability, and recoverability.
Mitigate/correct security deficiencies identified during security/certification testing and/or  recommend risk acceptance for the appropriate senior leader or authorized representative.
Monitor external data sources (e.g., cyber defense vendor sites, Computer Emergency  Response Teams, Security Focus) to maintain currency of cyber defense threat condition  and determine which security issues may have an impact on the enterprise.
Assess and monitor cybersecurity related to system implementation and testing practices.
Monitor the rigorous application of cyber policies, principles, and practices in the delivery  of planning and management services.
Oversee installation, implementation, configuration, and support of system components.
Verify minimum security requirements are in place for all applications.
Perform an information security risk assessment.
Perform developmental testing on systems under development.
Perform interoperability testing on systems exchanging electronic information with other  systems.
Perform secure program testing, review, and/or assessment to identify potential flaws in  codes and mitigate vulnerabilities.
Integrate results regarding the identification of gaps in security architecture.
Perform security reviews and identify security gaps in architecture.
Plan implementation strategy to ensure that enterprise components can be integrated and  aligned.
Prepare reports to document the investigation following legal standards and requirements.
Promote knowledge sharing between information owners/users through an organization’s  operational processes and systems.
Provide enterprise cybersecurity and supply chain risk management guidance.
Provides cybersecurity recommendations to leadership based on significant threats and  vulnerabilities.
Provide input to implementation plans and standard operating procedures as they relate to  information systems security.
Provide input to implementation plans, standard operating procedures, maintenance  documentation, and maintenance training materials  Provide policy guidance to cyber management, staff, and users.
Develop a trend analysis and impact report.
Review forensic images and other data sources (e.g., volatile data) for recovery of  potentially relevant information.
Review, conduct, or participate in audits of cyber programs and projects.
Serve as an internal consultant and advisor in own area of expertise (e.g., technical,  copyright, print media, electronic media).
Test, evaluate, and verify hardware and/or software to determine compliance with defined  specifications and requirements.
Record and manage test data.
Trace system requirements to design components and perform gap analysis.
Translate proposed capabilities into technical requirements.
Work with stakeholders to resolve computer security incidents and vulnerability  compliance.
Write and publish cyber defense recommendations, reports, and white papers on incident  findings to appropriate constituencies.
Research and evaluate available technologies and standards to meet customer requirements.
Perform technical (evaluation of technology) and nontechnical (evaluation of people and  operations) risk and vulnerability assessments of relevant technology focus areas (e.g., local  computing environment, network and infrastructure, enclave boundary, supporting  infrastructure, and applications).
Make recommendations regarding the selection of cost-effective security controls to  mitigate risk (e.g., protection of information, systems and processes).
Draft and publish supply chain security and risk management documents.
Review and approve a supply chain security/risk management policy.
Apply cybersecurity functions (e.g., encryption, access control, and identity management) to  reduce exploitation opportunities.
Document how the implementation of a new system or new interface between systems  impacts the current and target environment including but not limited to security posture.
Assess and design security management functions as related to cyberspace.
Integrate key management functions as related to cyberspace.
Analyze user needs and requirements to plan and conduct system development.
Develop designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental factors (e.g., access  controls, automated applications, networked operations.
Collaborate on cybersecurity designs to meet specific operational needs and environmental  factors (e.g., access controls, automated applications, networked operations, high integrity  and availability requirements, multilevel security/processing of multiple classification  levels, and processing Sensitive Compartmented Information).
Adjust collection operations or collection plan to address identified issues/challenges and to  synchronize collections with overall operational requirements.
Provide input to the analysis, design, development or acquisition of capabilities used for  meeting objectives.
Analyze feedback to determine extent to which collection products and services are meeting  requirements.
Analyze internal operational architecture, tools, and procedures for ways to improve  performance.
Analyze target operational architecture for ways to gain access.
T0585   Task Description   Analyze plans, directives, guidance and policy for factors that would influence collection  management's operational structure and requirement s (e.g., duration, scope, communication  requirements, interagency/international agreements).
Answer requests for information.
Apply and utilize authorized cyber capabilities to enable access to targeted networks.
Apply expertise in policy and processes to facilitate the development, negotiation, and  internal staffing of plans and/or memorandums of agreement.
Apply cyber collection, environment preparation and engagement expertise to enable new  exploitation and/or continued collection operations, or in support of customer requirements.
Assess and apply operational environment factors and risks to collection management  process.
Assess all-source intelligence and recommend targets to support cyber operation objectives.
Assess efficiency of existing information exchange and management systems.
Assess the effectiveness of collections in satisfying priority information gaps, using  available capabilities and methods, and adjust collection strategies and collection  requirements accordingly.
Assist and advise interagency partners in identifying and developing best practices for  facilitating operational support to achievement of organization objectives.
Provide expertise to course of action development.
Provide subject matter expertise to the development of a common operational picture.
Provide subject matter expertise to the development of cyber operations specific indicators.
Assist in the coordination, validation, and management of all-source collection  requirements, plans, and/or activities.
Assist in the development and refinement of priority information requirements.
Provide expertise to the development of measures of effectiveness and measures of  performance.
Enable synchronization of intelligence support plans across partner organizations as  required.
Close requests for information once satisfied.
Collaborate with intelligence analysts/targeting organizations involved in related areas.
Collaborate with development organizations to create and deploy the tools needed to  achieve objectives.
Collaborate with other customer, Intelligence and targeting organizations involved in related  cyber areas.
Collaborate with other internal and external partner organizations on target access and  operational issues.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0601  T0602   T0603   T0604   T0605   T0606   T0607   T0608  T0609  T0610  T0611  T0612   T0613   T0614  T0615  T0616  T0617  T0618   T0619  T0620   T0621   T0622  T0623  T0624   T0625  T0626  T0627  T0628   T0629  T0630   T0631  T0632   Task Description   Collaborate with other team members or partner organizations to develop a diverse program  of information materials (e.g., web pages, briefings, print materials).
Collaborate with customer to define information requirements.
Communicate new developments, breakthroughs, challenges and lessons learned to  leadership, and internal and external customers.
Compare allocated and available assets to collection demand as expressed through  requirements.
Compile lessons learned from collection management activity's execution of organization  collection objectives.
Identify and conduct analysis of target communications to identify information essential to  support operations.
Conduct analysis of physical and logical digital technologies (e.g., wireless, SCADA,  telecom) to identify potential avenues of access.
Conduct access enabling of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct collection and processing of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct exploitation of wireless computer and digital networks.
Conduct formal and informal coordination of collection requirements in accordance with  established guidelines and procedures.
Conduct independent in-depth target and technical analysis including target-specific  information (e.g., cultural, organizational, political) that results in access.
Conduct network scouting and vulnerability analyses of systems within a network.
Conduct on-net activities to control and exfiltrate data from deployed technologies.
Conduct on-net and off-net activities to control, and exfiltrate data from deployed,  automated technologies.
Conduct quality control to determine validity and relevance of information gathered about  networks.
Develop, review and implement all levels of planning guidance in support of cyber  operations.
Conduct survey of computer and digital networks.
Consider efficiency and effectiveness of collection assets and resources if/when applied  against priority information requirements.
Contribute to crisis action planning for cyber operations.
Contribute to the development of the organization's decision support tools if necessary.
Contribute to the development, staffing, and coordination of cyber operations policies,  performance standards, plans and approval packages with appropriate internal and/or  external decision makers.
Incorporate intelligence equities into the overall design of cyber operations plans.
Coordinate resource allocation of collection assets against prioritized collection  requirements with collection discipline leads.
Coordinate with intelligence and cyber defense partners to obtain relevant essential  information.
Coordinate with intelligence planners to ensure that collection managers receive information  requirements.
Coordinate, produce, and track intelligence requirements.
Coordinate, synchronize and draft applicable intelligence sections of cyber operations plans.
Maintain awareness of internal and external cyber organization structures, strengths, and  employments of staffing and technology.
Detect exploits against targeted networks and hosts and react accordingly.
Determine existing collection management webpage databases, libraries and storehouses.
Determine indicators (e.g., measures of effectiveness) that are best suited to specific cyber  operation objectives.
Determine organizations and/or echelons with collection authority over all accessible  collection assets.
Determine what technologies are used by a given target.
Develop a method for comparing collection reports to outstanding requirements to identify  information gaps.
Develop all-source intelligence targeting materials.
Apply analytic techniques to gain more target information.
Develop and maintain deliberate and/or crisis plans.
Develop and review specific cyber operations guidance for integration into broader planning  activities.
Develop and review intelligence guidance for integration into supporting cyber operations  planning and execution.
Develop coordinating instructions by collection discipline for each phase of an operation.
Develop cyber operations plans and guidance to ensure that execution and resource  allocation decisions align with organization objectives.
Develop detailed intelligence support to cyber operations requirements.
Develop information requirements necessary for answering priority information requests.
Develop measures of effectiveness and measures of performance.
Develop munitions effectiveness assessment or operational assessment materials.
Develop new techniques for gaining and keeping access to target systems.
Develop or participate in the development of standards for providing, requesting, and/or  obtaining support from external partners to synchronize cyber operations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0666  T0667   T0668   T0669   T0670  T0671  T0672  T0673  T0674  T0675  T0676  T0677  T0678  T0679   T0680   T0681   T0682   T0683  T0684  T0685  T0686  T0687  T0688   T0689  T0690  T0691  T0692   T0693  T0694   T0695   T0696  T0697   T0698   T0699   Task Description   Develop or shape international cyber engagement strategies, policies, and activities to meet  organization objectives.
Develop potential courses of action.
Develop procedures for providing feedback to collection managers, asset managers, and  processing, exploitation and dissemination centers.
Develop strategy and processes for partner planning, operations, and capability  development.
Develop, implement, and recommend changes to appropriate planning procedures and  policies.
Develop, maintain, and assess cyber cooperation security agreements with external partners.
Devise, document, and validate cyber operation strategy and planning documents.
Disseminate reports to inform decision makers on collection issues.
Draft cyber intelligence collection and production requirements.
Validate the link between collection requests and critical information requirements and  priority intelligence requirements of leadership.
Establish processing, exploitation and dissemination management activity using approved  guidance and/or procedures.
Estimate operational effects generated through cyber activities.
Evaluate extent to which collected information and/or produced intelligence satisfy  information requests.
Evaluate the conditions that affect employment of available cyber intelligence capabilities.
Generate and evaluate the effectiveness of network analysis strategies.
Evaluate extent to which collection operations are synchronized with operational  requirements.
Exploit network devices, security devices, and/or terminals or environments using various  methods or tools.
Facilitate access enabling by physical and/or wireless means.
Facilitate continuously updated intelligence, surveillance, and visualization input to  common operational picture managers.
Facilitate interactions between internal and external partner decision makers to synchronize  and integrate courses of action in support of objectives.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0700   T0701   T0702   T0703   T0704  T0705   T0706  T0707  T0708   T0709  T0710  T0711  T0712   T0713   T0714  T0715  T0716  T0717  T0718  T0719   T0720   T0721   T0722   T0723  T0724   T0725   T0726  T0727  T0728   T0729   T0730   Task Description   Facilitate the sharing of “best practices” and “lessons learned” throughout the cyber  operations community.
Collaborate with developers, conveying target and technical knowledge in tool requirements  submissions, to enhance tool development.
Formulate collection strategies based on knowledge of available intelligence discipline  capabilities and gathering methods that align multi-discipline collection capabilities and  accesses with targets and their observables.
Gather and analyze data (e.g., measures of effectiveness) to determine effectiveness, and  provide reporting for follow-on activities.
Incorporate cyber operations and communications security support plans into organization  objectives.
Incorporate intelligence and counterintelligence to support plan development.
Gather information about networks through traditional and alternative techniques, (e.g.,  social network analysis, call-chaining, traffic analysis.)
Generate requests for information.
Identify all available partner intelligence capabilities and limitations supporting cyber  operations.
Identify and evaluate threat critical capabilities, requirements, and vulnerabilities.
Identify, draft, evaluate, and prioritize relevant intelligence or information requirements.
Identify and manage security cooperation priorities with external partners.
Identify and submit intelligence requirements for the purposes of designating priority  information requirements.
Identify collaboration forums that can serve as mechanisms for coordinating processes,  functions, and outputs with specified organizations and functional groups.
Identify coordination requirements and procedures with designated collection authorities.
Identify cyber intelligence gaps and shortfalls for cyber operational planning.
Identify gaps in our understanding of target technology and developing innovative  collection approaches.
Identify network components and their functionality to enable analysis and target  development.
Identify potential collection disciplines for application against priority information  requirements.
Identify potential points of strength and vulnerability within a network.
Identify and mitigate risks to collection management ability to support the plan, operations  and target cycle.
Provide input to or develop courses of action based on threat factors.
Inform external partners of the potential effects of new or revised policy and guidance on  cyber operations partnering activities.
Inform stakeholders (e.g., collection managers, asset managers, processing, exploitation and  dissemination centers) of evaluation results using established procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0731  T0732  T0733  T0734  T0735   T0736  T0737   T0738   Task Description   Initiate requests to guide tasking and assist with collection management.
Integrate cyber planning/targeting efforts with other organizations.
Issue requests for information.
Lead or enable exploitation operations in support of organization objectives and target  requirements.
Link priority collection requirements to optimal assets and resources.
Maintain awareness of advancements in hardware and software technologies (e.g., attend  training or conferences, reading) and their potential implications.
Maintain relationships with internal and external partners involved in cyber planning or  related areas.
T0739  T0740  Maintain situational awareness and functionality of organic operational infrastructure.
Maintain situational awareness of cyber-related intelligence requirements and associated  tasking.
Maintain situational awareness to determine if changes to the operating environment require  review of the plan.
T0745  Make recommendations to guide collection in support of customer requirements.
T0746  Modify collection requirements as necessary.
Monitor and evaluate integrated cyber operations to identify opportunities to meet  organization objectives.
as related to designated cyber operations warning problem sets.
Monitor operational environment and report on adversarial activities which fulfill  leadership’s priority information requirements.
Monitor target networks to provide indications and warning of target communications  changes or processing failures.
Monitor the operational environment for potential factors and risks to the collection  operation management process.
Operate and maintain automated systems for gaining and maintaining access to target  systems.
Optimize mix of collection assets and resources to increase effectiveness and efficiency  against essential information associated with priority intelligence requirements.
Produce timely, fused, all-source cyber operations intelligence and/or indications and  warnings intelligence products (e.g., threat assessments, briefings, intelligence studies,  country studies).
Contribute to the review and refinement of policy, to include assessments of the  consequences of endorsing or not endorsing such policy.
Provide subject matter expertise to planning teams, coordination groups, and task forces as  necessary.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0761   T0763   T0764  T0765  T0766  T0767   T0768  T0769  T0770  T0771  T0772  T0773  T0774  T0775  T0776  T0777  T0778   T0779   T0780  T0781  T0782  T0783  T0784   T0785   T0786   T0787  T0788  T0789  T0790  T0791   T0792  T0793  T0794  T0795  T0796  T0797  T0798   Task Description   Provide subject-matter expertise and support to planning/developmental forums and  working groups as appropriate.
Conduct long-range, strategic planning efforts with internal and external partners in cyber  activities.
Provide subject matter expertise to planning efforts with internal and external cyber  operations partners.
Provide subject matter expertise to development of exercises.
Propose policy which governs interactions with external coordination groups.
Perform content and/or metadata analysis to meet organization objectives.
Conduct cyber activities to degrade/remove information resident in computers and computer  networks.
Prioritize collection requirements for collection platforms based on platform capabilities.
Produce network reconstructions.
Profile network or system administrators and their activities.
Provide cyber focused guidance and advice on intelligence support plan inputs.
Provide evaluation and feedback necessary for improving intelligence production,  intelligence reporting, collection requirements, and operations.
Provide information and assessments for the purposes of informing leadership and  customers; developing and refining objectives; supporting operation planning and  execution; and assessing the effects of operations.
Provide input for the development and refinement of the cyber operations objectives,  priorities, strategies, plans, and programs.
Provide input and assist in the development of plans and guidance.
Provide planning support between internal and external partners.
Provide real-time actionable geolocation information.
Provide timely notice of imminent or hostile intentions or activities which may impact  organization objectives, resources, or capabilities.
Review appropriate information sources to determine validity and relevance of information  gathered.
Reconstruct networks in diagram or report format.
Record information collection and/or environment preparation activities against targets  during operations designed to achieve cyber effects.
Report intelligence-derived significant network events and intrusions.
Request discipline-specific processing, exploitation, and disseminate information collected  using discipline's collection assets and resources in accordance with approved guidance  and/or procedures.
Research communications trends in emerging technologies (in computer and telephony  networks, satellite, cable, and wireless) in both open and classified sources.
Review list of prioritized collection requirements and essential information.
Review and update overarching collection plan, as required.
Review, approve, prioritize, and submit operational requirements for research, development,  and/or acquisition of cyber capabilities.
Sanitize and minimize information to protect sources and methods.
Scope the cyber intelligence planning effort.
Serve as a conduit of information from partner teams by identifying subject matter experts  who can assist in the investigation of complex or unusual situations.
Solicit and manage to completion feedback from requestors on quality, timeliness, and  effectiveness of collection against collection requirements.
Submit information requests to collection requirement management section for processing  as collection requests.
Submit or respond to requests for deconfliction of cyber operations.
Synchronize cyber international engagement activities and associated resource requirements  as appropriate.
Synchronize cyber portions of security cooperation plans.
Synchronize the integrated employment of all available organic and partner intelligence  collection assets using available collaboration capabilities and techniques.
Test and evaluate locally developed tools for operational use.
Test internal developed tools and techniques against target tools.
Track status of information requests, including those processed as collection requests and  production requirements, using established procedures.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID  T0831   T0832  T0833   T0834   T0835  T0836   T0837  T0838   T0839   T0840   T0841   T0842  T0843   T0844  T0845  T0846   T0847  T0848  T0849  T0850   T0851  T0852   T0853  T0854  T0855  T0856  T0857   T0858  T0859  T0860   T0861   T0862   Task Description   Translate collection requests into applicable discipline-specific collection requirements.
Use feedback results (e.g., lesson learned) to identify opportunities to improve collection  management efficiency and effectiveness.
Validate requests for information according to established criteria.
Work closely with planners, intelligence analysts, and collection managers to ensure  intelligence requirements and collection plans are accurate and up-to-date.
Work closely with planners, analysts, and collection managers to identify intelligence gaps  and ensure intelligence requirements are accurate and up-to-date.
Advise managers and operators on language and cultural issues that impact organization  objectives.
Analyze and process information using language and/or cultural expertise.
Collaborate across internal and/or external organizational lines to enhance collection,  analysis and dissemination.
Conduct all-source target research to include the use of open source materials in the target  language.
Conduct analysis of target communications to identify essential information in support of  organization objectives.
Identify cyber threat tactics and methodologies.
Identify target communications within the global network.
Maintain awareness of target communication tools, techniques, and the characteristics of  target communication networks (e.g., capacity, functionality, paths, critical nodes) and their  potential implications for targeting, collection, and analysis.
Provide feedback to collection managers to enhance future collection and analysis.
Perform or support technical network analysis and mapping.
Provide requirements and feedback to optimize the development of language processing  tools.
Perform social network analysis and document as appropriate.
Scan, identify and prioritize target graphic (including machine-to-machine communications)  and/or voice language material.
Tip critical or time-sensitive information to appropriate customers.
Work with the general counsel, external affairs and businesses to ensure both existing and  new services comply with privacy and data security obligations.
Work with legal counsel and management, key departments and committees to ensure the  organization has and maintains appropriate privacy and confidentiality consent,   52      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0863  T0864   T0865   T0866   T0867   T0868   T0869  T0870  T0871   T0872   T0873   T0874   T0875   T0876   T0877  T0878  T0879   T0880   T0881  T0882   T0883   T0884   T0885   Task Description   authorization forms and information notices and materials reflecting current organization  and legal practices and requirements.
Work with external affairs to develop relationships with regulators and other government  officials responsible for privacy and data security issues.
Maintain current knowledge of applicable federal and state privacy laws and accreditation  standards, and monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure  organizational adaptation and compliance.
Ensure all processing and/or databases are registered with the local privacy/data protection  authorities where required.
Work with business teams and senior management to ensure awareness of “best practices”  on privacy and data security issues.
Work with organization senior management to establish an organization-wide Privacy  Oversight Committee  Serve in a leadership role for Privacy Oversight Committee activities  Collaborate on cyber privacy and security policies and procedures  Collaborate with cybersecurity personnel on the security risk assessment process to address  privacy compliance and risk mitigation  Interface with Senior Management to develop strategic plans for the collection, use and  sharing of information in a manner that maximizes its value while complying with  applicable privacy regulations  Provide strategic guidance to corporate officers regarding information resources and  technology  Assist the Security Officer with the development and implementation of an information  infrastructure  Coordinate with the Corporate Compliance Officer regarding procedures for documenting  and reporting self-disclosures of any evidence of privacy violations.
Work cooperatively with applicable organization units in overseeing consumer information  access rights  Serve as the information privacy liaison for users of technology systems  Act as a liaison to the information systems department  Develop privacy training materials and other communications to increase employee  understanding of company privacy policies, data handling practices and procedures and  legal obligations  Oversee, direct, deliver or ensure delivery of initial privacy training and orientation to all  employees, volunteers, contractors, alliances, business associates and other appropriate third  parties  Conduct on-going privacy training and awareness activities  Work with external affairs to develop relationships with consumer organizations and other  NGOs with an interest in privacy and data security issues—and to manage company  participation in public events related to privacy and data security  Work with organization administration, legal counsel and other related parties to represent  the organization’s information privacy interests with external parties, including government  bodies, which undertake to adopt or amend privacy legislation, regulation or standard.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0886  T0887   T0888   T0889   T0890   T0891  T0892   T0893   T0894   T0895   T0896   T0897  T0898   T0899   T0900   Task Description   Work with External Affairs to respond to press and other inquiries regarding concern over  consumer and employee data  Provide leadership for the organization’s privacy program  Direct and oversee privacy specialists and coordinate privacy and data security programs  with senior executives globally to ensure consistency across the organization  Ensure compliance with privacy practices and consistent application of sanctions for failure  to comply with privacy policies for all individuals in the organization’s workforce, extended  workforce and for all business associates in cooperation with Human Resources, the  information security officer, administration and legal counsel as applicable  Develop appropriate sanctions for failure to comply with the corporate privacy policies and  procedures  Resolve allegations of noncompliance with the corporate privacy policies or notice of  information practices  Develop and coordinate a risk management and compliance framework for privacy  Undertake a comprehensive review of the company’s data and privacy projects and ensure  that they are consistent with corporate privacy and data security goals and policies.
Develop and manage enterprise-wide procedures to ensure the development of new products  and services is consistent with company privacy policies and legal obligations  Establish a process for receiving, documenting, tracking, investigating and acting on all  complaints concerning the organization’s privacy policies and procedures  Establish with management and operations a mechanism to track access to protected health  information, within the purview of the organization and as required by law and to allow  qualified individuals to review or receive a report on such activity  Provide leadership in the planning, design and evaluation of privacy and security related  projects  Establish an internal privacy audit program  Periodically revise the privacy program considering changes in laws, regulatory or company  policy  Provide development guidance and assist in the identification, implementation and  maintenance of organization information privacy policies and procedures in coordination  with organization management and administration and legal counsel  Assure that the use of technologies maintains, and does not erode, privacy protections on  use, collection and disclosure of personal information   T0904   T0903   T0901  T0902  Monitor systems development and operations for security and privacy compliance  Conduct privacy impact assessments of proposed rules on the privacy of personal  information, including the type of personal information collected and the number of people  affected  Conduct periodic information privacy impact assessments and ongoing compliance  monitoring activities in coordination with the organization’s other compliance and  operational assessment functions  Review all system-related information security plans to ensure alignment between security  and privacy practices  Work with all organization personnel involved with any aspect of release of protected  information to ensure coordination with the organization’s policies, procedures and legal  requirements  Account for and administer individual requests for release or disclosure of personal and/or  protected information  Develop and manage procedures for vetting and auditing vendors for compliance with the  privacy and data security policies and legal requirements   T0905   T0906   T0907   T0908   54      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0909  T0910   T0911  T0912   T0913   T0914   T0915   T0916   T0917   T0918   T0919   T0920  T0921   T0922   T0923  T0924   T0925   T0926  T0927  T0928   T0929   T0930   T0931   T0932   Task Description   Participate in the implementation and ongoing compliance monitoring of all trading partner  and business associate agreements, to ensure all privacy concerns, requirements and  responsibilities are addressed  Act as, or work with, counsel relating to business partner contracts  Mitigate effects of a use or disclosure of personal information by employees or business  partners  Develop and apply corrective action procedures  Administer action on all complaints concerning the organization’s privacy policies and  procedures in coordination and collaboration with other similar functions and, when  necessary, legal counsel  Support the organization’s privacy compliance program, working closely with the Privacy  Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, and other business leaders to ensure compliance  with federal and state privacy laws and regulations   Identify and correct potential company compliance gaps and/or areas of risk to ensure full  compliance with privacy regulations  Manage privacy incidents and breaches in conjunction with the Privacy Officer, Chief  Information Security Officer, legal counsel and the business units  Coordinate with the Chief Information Security Officer to ensure alignment between  security and privacy practices  Establish, implement and maintains organization-wide policies and procedures to comply  with privacy regulations  Ensure that the company maintains appropriate privacy and confidentiality notices, consent  and authorization forms, and materials  Develop and maintain appropriate communications and training to promote and educate all  workforce members and members of the Board regarding privacy compliance issues and  requirements, and the consequences of noncompliance  Determine business partner requirements related to the organization’s privacy program.
Cooperate with the relevant regulatory agencies and other legal entities, and organization  officers, in any compliance reviews or investigations.
Monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure organization adoption  and compliance.
Develop or assist with the development of privacy training materials and other  communications to increase employee understanding of company privacy policies, data  handling practices and procedures and legal obligations.
Appoint and guide a team of IT security experts.
Collaborate with key stakeholders to establish a cybersecurity risk management program.
Identify and assign individuals to specific roles associated with the execution of the Risk  Management Framework.
Establish a risk management strategy for the organization that includes a determination of  risk tolerance.
Identify stakeholders who have a security interest in the development, implementation,  operation, or sustainment of a system.
Task Description   Identify stakeholders who have a security interest in the development, implementation,  operation, or sustainment of a system.
Identify stakeholder assets that require protection.
Define the stakeholder protection needs and stakeholder security requirements.
Identify organization-wide common controls that are available for inheritance by  organizational systems.
Conduct a second-level security categorization for organizational systems with the same  impact level.
Identify the security requirements allocated to a system and to the organization.
Identify the types of information to be processed, stored, or transmitted by a system.
Categorize the system and document the security categorization results as part of system  requirements.
Select the security controls for a system and document the functional description of the  planned control implementations in a security plan.
Develop a strategy for monitoring security control effectiveness; coordinate the system- level strategy with the organization and mission/business process-level monitoring strategy.
Review and approve security plans.
Implement the security controls specified in a security plan or other system documentation.
Document changes to planned security control implementation and establish the  configuration baseline for a system.
Develop, review, and approve a plan to assess the security controls in a system and the  organization.
Assess the security controls in accordance with the assessment procedures defined in a  security assessment plan.
Prepare a security assessment report documenting the issues, findings, and  recommendations from the security control assessment.
Conduct initial remediation actions on security controls based on the findings and  recommendations of a security assessment report; reassess remediated controls.
Prepare a plan of action and milestones based on the findings and recommendations of a  security assessment report excluding any remediation actions taken.
Determine the risk from the operation or use of a system or the provision or use of common  controls.
Identify and implement a preferred course of action in response to the risk determined.
Determine if the risk from the operation or use of the system or the provision or use of  common controls, is acceptable.
T0961   T0962   Assess the security controls employed within and inherited by the system in accordance  with an organization-defined monitoring strategy.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task ID   T0963   T0964   T0965   T0966  T0967  T0968  T0969   T0970   T0971   T0972   T0973   T0974   T0975   T0976  T0977   T0978   T0980   T0981   T0982   T0983   T0984   T0985   T0986  T0987   T0988   T0989   T0990   Task Description   Update a security plan, security assessment report, and plan of action and milestones based  on the results of a continuous monitoring process.
Report the security status of a system (including the effectiveness of security controls) to an  authorizing official on an ongoing basis in accordance with the monitoring strategy.
Review the security status of a system (including the effectiveness of security controls) on  an ongoing basis to determine whether the risk remains acceptable.
Implement a system disposal strategy which executes required actions when a system is  removed from service.
Sponsor and promote continuous monitoring within the organization.
Assign staff as needed to appropriate continuous monitoring working groups.
Identify reporting requirements to support continuous monitoring activities.
Establish scoring and grading metrics to measure effectiveness of continuous monitoring  program.
Determine how to integrate a continuous monitoring program into the organization’s  broader information security governance structures and policies.
Use continuous monitoring scoring and grading metrics to make information security  investment decisions to address persistent issues.
Work with organizational risk analysts to ensure that continuous monitoring reporting  covers appropriate levels of the organization.
Work with the organizational risk analysts to ensure risk metrics are defining realistically to  support continuous monitoring.
Work with organizational officials to ensure continuous monitoring tool data provides  situation awareness of risk levels.
Work with organizational officials to establish system level reporting categories that can be  used by the organization’s continuous monitoring program.
Designate a qualified person to be responsible for the management and implementation of  the continuous monitoring program.
Identify the continuous monitoring stakeholders and establish a process to keep them  informed about the program.
Identify security oriented organization reporting requirements that are fulfilled by the  continuous monitoring program.
Use the continuous monitoring data to make information security investment decisions to  address persistent issues.
Establish scoring and grading metrics to measure effectiveness of continuous monitoring  program.
Work with security managers to establish appropriate continuous monitoring reporting  requirements at the system level.
Use the continuous monitoring tools and technologies to assess risk on an ongoing basis.
Establish appropriate reporting requirements in adherence to the criteria identified in the  continuous monitoring program for use in automated control assessment.
Use non-automated assessment methods where the data from the continuous monitoring  tools and technologies is not yet of adequate sufficiency or quality.
Develop processes with the external audit group on how to share information regarding the  continuous monitoring program and its impact on security control assessment.
57   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Task Description   Identify reporting requirements for use in automated control assessment to support  continuous monitoring.
Establish continuous monitoring tools and technologies access control process and  procedures.
Ensure that continuous monitoring tools and technologies access control is managed  adequately.
Coordinate continuous monitoring reporting requirements across various users.
Establish responsibilities for supporting implementation of each continuous monitoring tool  or technology.
Establish liaison with scoring and metrics working group to support continuous monitoring.
Establish and operate a process to manage introduction of new risk to support continuous  monitoring.
Establish continuous monitoring tools and technologies performance  measurement/management requirements.
Using scores and grades to motivate and assess performance while addressing concerns to  support continuous monitoring  Work with security managers (i.e., system owners, information system security managers,  information system security officers, etc.)
to establish appropriate reporting requirements  for continuous monitoring at the system level.
Use the continuous monitoring data to make information security investment decisions to  address persistent issues.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.5   NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions   Table 5 provides a listing of the various kinds of information applied directly to the performance  of a function.
Selected knowledge ID/descriptions from this list are included for every work role  in the Detailed work role Listing in Appendix B.
The first six are common to all the  cybersecurity work roles.
Table 5 - NICE Framework Knowledge Descriptions   KSA ID   K0001  K0002   K0003  K0004  K0005  K0006  K0007  K0008  K0009   K0010   K0011  K0012  K0013  K0014  K0015  K0016  K0017  K0018  K0019  K0020  K0021  K0022   K0023  K0024  K0025  K0026  K0027  K0028  K0029   K0030  K0031   Description   Knowledge of computer networking concepts and protocols, and network security  methodologies.
Knowledge of risk management processes (e.g., methods for assessing and mitigating risk).
Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies, and ethics as they relate to cybersecurity and  privacy.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles.
Knowledge of cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of specific operational impacts of cybersecurity lapses.
Knowledge of authentication, authorization, and access control methods.
Knowledge of applicable business processes and operations of customer organizations.
Knowledge of communication methods, principles, and concepts that support the network  infrastructure.
Knowledge of capabilities and applications of network equipment including routers,  switches, bridges, servers, transmission media, and related hardware.
Knowledge of capabilities and requirements analysis.
Knowledge of cyber defense and vulnerability assessment tools and their capabilities.
Knowledge of computer programming principles   Knowledge of concepts and practices of processing digital forensic data.
Knowledge of encryption algorithms   Knowledge of cryptography and cryptographic key management concepts   Knowledge of data administration and data standardization policies.
Knowledge of database management systems, query languages, table relationships, and  views.
Knowledge of digital rights management.
Knowledge of organization's enterprise information security architecture.
Knowledge of organization's evaluation and validation requirements.
Knowledge of organization's Local and Wide Area Network connections.
Knowledge of host/network access control mechanisms (e.g., access control list, capabilities  lists).
Knowledge of network services and protocols interactions that provide network  communications.
Knowledge of Security Assessment and Authorization process.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles used to manage risks related to the use,  processing, storage, and transmission of information or data.
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles and methods that apply to software  development.
Knowledge of vulnerability information dissemination sources (e.g., alerts, advisories,  errata, and bulletins).
Knowledge of cybersecurity and privacy principles and organizational requirements  (relevant to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
Knowledge of information security systems engineering principles (NIST SP 800-160).
Knowledge of information technology (IT) architectural concepts and frameworks.
Knowledge of Risk Management Framework (RMF) requirements.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) security principles and methods (e.g., firewalls,  demilitarized zones, encryption).
Knowledge of local area and wide area networking principles and concepts including  bandwidth management.
Knowledge of measures or indicators of system performance and availability.
Knowledge of current industry methods for evaluating, implementing, and disseminating  information technology (IT) security assessment, monitoring, detection, and remediation  tools and procedures utilizing standards-based concepts and capabilities.
Knowledge of network access, identity, and access management (e.g., public key  infrastructure, Oauth, OpenID, SAML, SPML).
Knowledge of network hardware devices and functions.
Knowledge of network traffic analysis methods.
Knowledge of new and emerging information technology (IT) and cybersecurity  technologies.
Knowledge of how traffic flows across the network (e.g., Transmission Control Protocol  [TCP] and Internet Protocol [IP], Open System Interconnection Model [OSI], Information  Technology Infrastructure Library, current version [ITIL]).
Knowledge of policy-based and risk adaptive access controls.
Knowledge of system and application security threats and vulnerabilities (e.g., buffer  overflow, mobile code, cross-site scripting, Procedural Language/Structured Query  Language [PL/SQL] and injections, race conditions, covert channel, replay, return-oriented  attacks, malicious code).
Knowledge of remote access technology concepts.
Knowledge of resource management principles and techniques.
Knowledge of secure configuration management techniques.
(e.g., Security Technical  Implementation Guides (STIGs), cybersecurity best practices on cisecurity.org).
Knowledge of key concepts in security management (e.g., Release Management, Patch  Management).
Knowledge of security system design tools, methods, and techniques.
Knowledge of software development models (e.g., Waterfall Model, Spiral Model).
Knowledge of sources, characteristics, and uses of the organization’s data assets.
Knowledge of system design tools, methods, and techniques, including automated systems  analysis and design tools.
Knowledge of system software and organizational design standards, policies, and authorized  approaches (e.g., International Organization for Standardization [ISO] guidelines) relating  to system design.
Knowledge of system life cycle management principles, including software security and  usability.
Knowledge of technology integration processes.
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality associated with content creation  technologies (e.g., wikis, social networking, content management systems, blogs).
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality associated with various technologies for  organizing and managing information (e.g., databases, bookmarking engines).
Knowledge of the capabilities and functionality of various collaborative technologies (e.g.,  groupware, SharePoint).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0098  K0100   K0101  K0102  K0103  K0104   K0105   K0106   K0107   K0108   K0109  K0110  K0111  K0112   K0113   K0114  K0115  K0116   K0117  K0118  K0119   K0120   K0121   K0122  K0123   K0124   K0125  K0126   K0127  K0128   Description   Knowledge of the cyber defense Service Provider reporting structure and processes within  one’s own organization.
Knowledge of the enterprise information technology (IT) architecture.
Knowledge of the organization’s enterprise information technology (IT) goals and  objectives.
Knowledge of Virtual Private Network (VPN) security.
Knowledge of web services (e.g., service-oriented architecture, Simple Object Access  Protocol, and web service description language).
Knowledge of what constitutes a network attack and a network attack’s relationship to both  threats and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of concepts, terminology, and operations of a wide range of communications  media (computer and telephone networks, satellite, fiber, wireless).
Knowledge of physical computer components and architectures, including the functions of  various components and peripherals (e.g., CPUs, Network Interface Cards, data storage).
Knowledge of network tools (e.g., ping, traceroute, nslookup)   Knowledge of defense-in-depth principles and network security architecture.
Knowledge of different types of network communication (e.g., LAN, WAN, MAN, WLAN,  WWAN).
Knowledge of electronic devices (e.g., computer systems/components, access control  devices, digital cameras, digital scanners, electronic organizers, hard drives, memory cards,  modems, network components, networked appliances, networked home control devices,  printers, removable storage devices, telephones, copiers, facsimile machines, etc.).
Knowledge that technology that can be exploited.
Knowledge of file system implementations (e.g., New Technology File System [NTFS],  File Allocation Table [FAT], File Extension [EXT]).
Knowledge of how information needs and collection requirements are translated, tracked,  and prioritized across the extended enterprise.
Knowledge of information security program management and project management  principles and techniques.
Knowledge of investigative implications of hardware, Operating Systems, and network  technologies.
Knowledge of Supply Chain Risk Management Practices (NIST SP 800-161)  Knowledge of the nature and function of the relevant information structure (e.g., National  Information Infrastructure).
Knowledge of virtualization technologies and virtual machine development and  maintenance.
Knowledge of which system files (e.g., log files, registry files, configuration files) contain  relevant information and where to find those system files.
Knowledge of web filtering technologies.
Knowledge of the range of existing networks (e.g., PBX, LANs, WANs, WIFI, SCADA).
Knowledge of secure coding techniques.
K0136  K0137  K0138  K0139  K0140  K0141  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0420  K0142   Knowledge of collection management processes, capabilities, and limitations.
Knowledge of front-end collection systems, including traffic collection, filtering, and  selection.
Knowledge of security event correlation tools.
Knowledge of the organization's core business/mission processes.
Knowledge of emerging security issues, risks, and vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of import/export control regulations and responsible agencies for the purposes  of reducing supply chain risk.
Knowledge of organization's risk tolerance and/or risk management approach.
Knowledge of software related information technology (IT) security principles and methods  (e.g., modularization, layering, abstraction, data hiding, simplicity/minimization).
Knowledge of supply chain risk management standards, processes, and practices.
Knowledge of cyber defense and information security policies, procedures, and regulations.
Knowledge of organizational information technology (IT) user security policies (e.g.,  account creation, password rules, access control).
Knowledge of the common attack vectors on the network layer.
Knowledge of cyber attackers (e.g., script kiddies, insider threat, non-nation state  sponsored, and nation sponsored).
Knowledge of critical information technology (IT) procurement requirements.
Knowledge of functionality, quality, and security requirements and how these will apply to  specific items of supply (i.e., elements and processes).
Knowledge of system administration, network, and operating system hardening techniques.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) supply chain security and supply chain risk  management policies, requirements, and procedures.
Knowledge of critical infrastructure systems with information communication technology  that were designed without system security considerations.
Knowledge of networking protocols.
Knowledge of cyber attack stages (e.g., reconnaissance, scanning, enumeration, gaining  access, escalation of privileges, maintaining access, network exploitation, covering tracks).
Knowledge of secure software deployment methodologies, tools, and practices.
Knowledge of network security architecture concepts including topology, protocols,  components, and principles (e.g., application of defense-in-depth).
Knowledge of network systems management principles, models, methods (e.g., end-to-end  systems performance monitoring), and tools.
virtual aware malware,  debugger aware malware, and unpacked malware that looks for VM-related strings in your  computer’s display device).
Signature implementation impact for viruses, malware, and attacks.
Knowledge of advanced data remediation security features in databases.
Knowledge of Cloud-based knowledge management technologies and concepts related to  security, governance, procurement, and administration.
Knowledge of data classification standards and methodologies based on sensitivity and  other risk factors.
Knowledge of Import/Export Regulations related to cryptography and other security  technologies.
Knowledge of database access application programming interfaces (e.g., Java Database  Connectivity [JDBC]).
Knowledge of organizational process improvement concepts and process maturity models  (e.g., Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) for Development, CMMI for Services,  and CMMI for Acquisitions).
Knowledge of security architecture concepts and enterprise architecture reference models  (e.g., Zachman, Federal Enterprise Architecture [FEA]).
KSA ID   K0200  K0201   K0202   K0203  K0204  K0205  K0206  K0207  K0208  K0209  K0210  K0211  K0212   K0213  K0214  K0215  K0216  K0217  K0218  K0220  K0221   K0224  K0226  K0227  K0228   K0229  K0230  K0231   K0233  K0234   K0235  K0236  K0237  K0238   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Knowledge of service management concepts for networks and related standards (e.g.,  Information Technology Infrastructure Library, current version [ITIL]).
Knowledge of the application firewall concepts and functions (e.g., Single point of  authentication/audit/policy enforcement, message scanning for malicious content, data  anonymization for PCI and PII compliance, data loss protection scanning, accelerated  cryptographic operations, SSL security, REST/JSON processing).
Knowledge of security models (e.g., Bell-LaPadula model, Biba integrity model, Clark- Wilson integrity model).
Knowledge of basic system, network, and OS hardening techniques.
Knowledge of confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements.
Knowledge of the Risk Management Framework Assessment Methodology.
Knowledge of Learning Management Systems and their use in managing learning.
Knowledge of OSI model and underlying network protocols (e.g., TCP/IP).
Knowledge of relevant laws, legal authorities, restrictions, and regulations pertaining to  cyber defense activities.
Knowledge of crisis management protocols, processes, and techniques.
Knowledge of the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, work roles, and  associated tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities.
Knowledge of full spectrum cyber capabilities (e.g., defense, attack, exploitation).
Knowledge of how to leverage research and development centers, think tanks, academic  research, and industry systems.
Knowledge of industry best practices for service desk.
KSA ID   K0239  K0240  K0241  K0242  K0243   K0244   K0245   K0246  K0247  K0248  K0249  K0250  K0251   K0255  K0257   K0258  K0259  K0260  K0261  K0262   K0263   K0264   K0265  K0266   K0267  K0268  K0269  K0270   K0271   K0272   Description   Knowledge of media production, communication, and dissemination techniques and  methods, including alternative ways to inform via written, oral, and visual media.
Knowledge of multi-level security systems and cross domain solutions.
Knowledge of organizational security policies.
Knowledge of relevant concepts, procedures, software, equipment, and technology  applications.
Knowledge of remote access processes, tools, and capabilities related to customer support.
Knowledge of strategic theory and practice.
Knowledge of sustainment technologies, processes and strategies.
Knowledge of the judicial process, including the presentation of facts and evidence.
Knowledge of training and education principles and methods for curriculum design,  teaching and instruction for individuals and groups, and the measurement of training and  education effects.
Knowledge of network architecture concepts including topology, protocols, and  components.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) acquisition/procurement requirements.
Knowledge of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) data security standards.
Knowledge of Payment Card Industry (PCI) data security standards.
Knowledge of Personal Health Information (PHI) data security standards.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) risk management policies, requirements, and  procedures.
information technology (IT) supply chain  security/risk management policies, anti-tampering techniques, and requirements).
Knowledge of infrastructure supporting information technology (IT) for safety,  performance, and reliability.
Knowledge of laws, policies, procedures, or governance relevant to cybersecurity for critical  infrastructures.
Knowledge of operating system structures and internals (e.g., process management,  directory structure, installed applications).
Knowledge of network analysis tools used to identify software communications  vulnerabilities.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   KSA ID   K0274  K0275  K0276   Knowledge of transmission records (e.g., Bluetooth, Radio Frequency Identification  (RFID), Infrared Networking (IR), Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi).
paging, cellular, satellite  dishes, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)), and jamming techniques that enable  transmission of undesirable information, or prevent installed systems from operating  correctly.
Knowledge of configuration management techniques.
Knowledge of security management.
Knowledge of current and emerging data encryption (e.g., Column and Tablespace  Encryption, file and disk encryption) security features in databases (e.g.
built-in  cryptographic key management features).
Knowledge of current and emerging data remediation security features in databases.
Knowledge of information technology (IT) service catalogues.
Knowledge of developing and applying user credential management system.
Knowledge of implementing enterprise key escrow systems to support data-at-rest  encryption.
including server and client operating systems).
Knowledge of an organization's information classification program and procedures for  information compromise.
Knowledge of industry standard security models.
Knowledge of systems security testing and evaluation methods.
Knowledge of the enterprise information technology (IT) architectural concepts and patterns  (e.g., baseline, validated design, and target architectures.)
Knowledge of the operations and processes for incident, problem, and event management.
Knowledge of integrating the organization’s goals and objectives into the architecture.
Knowledge of IT system operation, maintenance, and security needed to keep equipment  functioning properly.
Knowledge of capabilities, applications, and potential vulnerabilities of network equipment  including hubs, routers, switches, bridges, servers, transmission media, and related  hardware.
Knowledge of countermeasure design for identified security risks.
Knowledge of countermeasures for identified security risks.
Knowledge in determining how a security system should work (including its resilience and  dependability capabilities) and how changes in conditions, operations, or the environment  will affect these outcomes.
Knowledge of network mapping and recreating network topologies.
Knowledge of concepts and practices of processing digital forensic data.
Knowledge of emerging technologies that have potential for exploitation.
Knowledge of industry indicators useful for identifying technology trends.
Knowledge of intelligence gathering principles, policies, and procedures including legal  authorities and restrictions.
Knowledge of external organizations and academic institutions with cyber focus (e.g., cyber  curriculum/training and Research & Development).
Knowledge of industry technologies’ potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of the principal methods, procedures, and techniques of gathering information  and producing, reporting, and sharing information.
Knowledge of organization's evaluation and validation criteria.
Knowledge of Information Theory (e.g., source coding, channel coding, algorithm  complexity theory, and data compression).
Knowledge of network protocols such as TCP/IP, Dynamic Host Configuration, Domain  Name System (DNS), and directory services.
Knowledge of network design processes, to include understanding of security objectives,  operational objectives, and trade-offs.
Knowledge of network traffic analysis (tools, methodologies, processes).
Knowledge of current and emerging cyber technologies.
Knowledge of access authentication methods.
Knowledge of how to use network analysis tools to identify vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of foreign disclosure policies and import/export control regulations as related to  cybersecurity.
Knowledge of an organization’s threat environment.
Knowledge of website types, administration, functions, and content management system  (CMS).
Knowledge of accepted organization planning systems.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0351  K0352   K0353  K0354  K0355  K0356  K0357  K0358  K0359  K0361  K0362  K0363   K0364  K0367  K0368   K0371   K0372   K0373  K0375   K0376  K0377   K0379  K0380  K0381  K0382   K0383   Description   Knowledge of applicable statutes, laws, regulations and policies governing cyber targeting  and exploitation.
Knowledge of possible circumstances that would result in changing collection management  authorities.
Knowledge of analytical standards and the purpose of intelligence confidence levels.
Knowledge of auditing and logging procedures (including server-based logging).
Knowledge of implants that enable cyber collection and/or preparation activities.
Knowledge of principles of the collection development processes (e.g., Dialed Number  Recognition, Social Network Analysis).
Knowledge of internal and external customers and partner organizations, including  information needs, objectives, structure, capabilities, etc.
Knowledge of classification and control markings standards, policies and procedures.
Knowledge of client organizations, including information needs, objectives, structure,  capabilities, etc.
Knowledge of collection capabilities, accesses, performance specifications, and constraints  utilized to satisfy collection plan.
Knowledge of collection management functionality (e.g., positions, functions,  responsibilities, products, reporting requirements).
K0384  K0385  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0142  K0386  K0387   Knowledge of collection management tools.
Knowledge of collection searching/analyzing techniques and tools for chat/buddy list,  emerging technologies, VOIP, Media Over IP, VPN, VSAT/wireless, web mail and cookies.
Knowledge of collection sources including conventional and non-conventional sources.
Knowledge of common networking devices and their configurations.
Knowledge of computer networking fundamentals (i.e., basic computer components of a  network, types of networks, etc.).
Knowledge of computer programming concepts, including computer languages,  programming, testing, debugging, and file types.
Knowledge of security concepts in operating systems (e.g., Linux, Unix.)
Knowledge of crisis action planning for cyber operations.
Knowledge of criticality and vulnerability factors (e.g., value, recuperation, cushion,  countermeasures) for target selection and applicability to the cyber domain.
Knowledge of cryptologic capabilities, limitations, and contributions to cyber operations.
Knowledge of current collection requirements.
Knowledge of customer information needs.
Knowledge of cyber actions (i.e.
cyber defense, information gathering, environment  preparation, cyber-attack) principles, capabilities, limitations, and effects.
Knowledge of cyber intelligence/information collection capabilities and repositories.
Knowledge of cyber laws and their effect on Cyber planning.
Knowledge of cyber laws and legal considerations and their effect on cyber planning.
Knowledge of cyber lexicon/terminology  Knowledge of cyber operation objectives, policies, and legalities.
Knowledge of cyber operations support or enabling processes.
Knowledge of cyber operations terminology/lexicon.
Knowledge of cyber operations.
Knowledge of data communications terminology (e.g., networking protocols, Ethernet, IP,  encryption, optical devices, removable media).
Knowledge of deconfliction reporting to include external organization interaction.
Knowledge of different organization objectives at all levels, including subordinate, lateral  and higher.
Knowledge of encryption algorithms and cyber capabilities/tools (e.g., SSL, PGP).
Knowledge of encryption algorithms and tools for wireless local area networks (WLANs).
Knowledge of enterprise-wide information management.
Knowledge of evolving/emerging communications technologies.
Knowledge of existing, emerging, and long-range issues related to cyber operations  strategy, policy, and organization.
70   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID  K0435   K0436   K0437   K0438  K0439   K0440   K0442  K0443   K0444  K0445  K0446   Description   Knowledge of fundamental cyber concepts, principles, limitations, and effects.
Knowledge of fundamental cyber operations concepts, terminology/lexicon (i.e.,  environment preparation, cyber-attack, cyber defense), principles, capabilities, limitations,  and effects.
Knowledge of general Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system  components.
Knowledge of host-based security products and how those products affect exploitation and  reduce vulnerability.
Knowledge of how converged technologies impact cyber operations (e.g., digital, telephony,  wireless).
Knowledge of how hubs, switches, routers work together in the design of a network.
Knowledge of how Internet applications work (SMTP email, web-based email, chat clients,  VOIP).
Knowledge of how modern digital and telephony networks impact cyber operations.
Knowledge of how modern wireless communications systems impact cyber operations.
Knowledge of how to collect, view, and identify essential information on targets of interest  from metadata (e.g., email, http).
Knowledge of implementing Unix and Windows systems that provide radius authentication  and logging, DNS, mail, web service, FTP server, DHCP, firewall, and SNMP.
Knowledge of information needs.
Knowledge of information security concepts, facilitating technologies and methods.
Knowledge of intelligence employment requirements (i.e., logistical, communications  support, maneuverability, legal restrictions, etc.).
Knowledge of intelligence reporting principles, policies, procedures, and vehicles, including  report formats, reportability criteria (requirements and priorities), dissemination practices,  and legal authorities and restrictions.
Knowledge of intelligence requirements tasking systems.
Knowledge of internal and external partner cyber operations capabilities and tools.
Knowledge of internal and external partner intelligence processes and the development of  information requirements and essential information.
Knowledge of internal and external partner organization capabilities and limitations (those  with tasking, collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination responsibilities).
Knowledge of internal and external partner reporting.
Knowledge of internal tactics to anticipate and/or emulate threat capabilities and actions.
71   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID  K0470   K0471  K0472  K0473  K0474  K0475  K0476  K0477  K0478  K0479  K0480  K0481  K0482  K0483  K0484  K0485  K0486   K0487   Description   Knowledge of Internet and routing protocols.
Knowledge of Internet network addressing (IP addresses, classless inter-domain routing,  TCP/UDP port numbering).
Knowledge of intrusion detection systems and signature development.
Knowledge of key cyber threat actors and their equities.
Knowledge of methods to integrate and summarize information from any potential sources.
Knowledge of midpoint collection (process, objectives, organization, targets, etc.).
Knowledge of network administration.
Knowledge of network construction and topology.
Knowledge of network security (e.g., encryption, firewalls, authentication, honey pots,  perimeter protection).
Knowledge of network security implementations (e.g., host-based IDS, IPS, access control  lists), including their function and placement in a network.
Knowledge of network topology.
K0491  K0492   K0493   K0494  K0495  K0496  K0497  K0498  K0499   K0500  K0501  K0502   K0503   K0504  K0505  K0506  K0507   Knowledge of networking and Internet communications fundamentals (i.e.
devices, device  configuration, hardware, software, applications, ports/protocols, addressing, network  architecture and infrastructure, routing, operating systems, etc.).
Knowledge of objectives, situation, operational environment, and the status and disposition  of internal and external partner collection capabilities available to support planning.
Knowledge of operations security.
Knowledge of organization and/or partner collection systems, capabilities, and processes  (e.g., collection and protocol processors).
Knowledge of organization cyber operations programs, strategies, and resources.
Knowledge of organization decision support tools and/or methods.
Knowledge of organization formats of resource and asset readiness reporting, its operational  relevance and intelligence collection impact.
Knowledge of organization issues, objectives, and operations in cyber as well as regulations  and policy directives governing cyber operations.
Knowledge of organization objectives and associated demand on collection management.
Knowledge of organization objectives, leadership priorities, and decision-making risks.
Knowledge of organization or partner exploitation of digital networks.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0508   K0509  K0510  K0511  K0512   K0513  K0514   K0516  K0517  K0518  K0519   K0520   K0521  K0522   K0523  K0524   K0525  K0526  K0527  K0528  K0529   K0530  K0531   K0532  K0533  K0534  K0535   K0536   K0538   K0539  K0540  K0541  K0542   Description   Knowledge of organization policies and planning concepts for partnering with internal  and/or external organizations.
Knowledge of organizational hierarchy and cyber decision-making processes.
Knowledge of organizational priorities, legal authorities and requirements submission  processes.
Knowledge of physical and logical network devices and infrastructure to include hubs,  switches, routers, firewalls, etc.
Knowledge of post implementation review (PIR) approval process.
Knowledge of principles and practices related to target development such as target  knowledge, associations, communication systems, and infrastructure.
Knowledge of priority information, how it is derived, where it is published, how to access,  etc.
Knowledge of products and nomenclature of major vendors (e.g., security suites - Trend  Micro, Symantec, McAfee, Outpost, and Panda) and how those products affect exploitation  and reduce vulnerabilities.
Knowledge of required intelligence planning products associated with cyber operational  planning.
Knowledge of research strategies and knowledge management.
Knowledge of risk management and mitigation strategies.
Knowledge of scripting  Knowledge of security hardware and software options, including the network artifacts they  induce and their effects on exploitation.
Knowledge of security implications of software configurations.
Knowledge of staff management, assignment, and allocation processes.
Knowledge of structure, approach, and strategy of exploitation tools (e.g., sniffers,  keyloggers) and techniques (e.g., gaining backdoor access, collecting/exfiltrating data,  conducting vulnerability analysis of other systems in the network).
Knowledge of target and threat organization structures, critical capabilities, and critical  vulnerabilities  Knowledge of target communication profiles and their key elements (e.g., target  associations, activities, communication infrastructure).
Knowledge of target development (i.e., concepts, roles, responsibilities, products, etc.).
Knowledge of target list development (i.e.
Knowledge of target or threat cyber actors and procedures.
Knowledge of target, including related current events, communication profile, actors, and  history (language, culture) and/or frame of reference.
Knowledge of tasking processes for organic and subordinate collection assets.
Knowledge of TCP/IP networking protocols.
Knowledge of terminal or environmental collection (process, objectives, organization,  targets, etc.).
Knowledge of the available tools and applications associated with collection requirements  and collection management.
Knowledge of the basic structure, architecture, and design of modern communication  networks.
Knowledge of the basics of network security (e.g., encryption, firewalls, authentication,  honey pots, perimeter protection).
Knowledge of the capabilities and limitations of new and emerging collection capabilities,  accesses and/or processes.
Knowledge of the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of internal and  external collections as they apply to planned cyber activities.
Knowledge of the characteristics of targeted communication networks (e.g., capacity,  functionality, paths, critical nodes).
Knowledge of the common networking and routing protocols (e.g.
TCP/IP), services (e.g.,  web, mail, DNS), and how they interact to provide network communications.
Knowledge of the critical information requirements and how they're used in planning.
Knowledge of the definition of collection management and collection management  authority.
Knowledge of the functions and capabilities of internal teams that emulate threat activities  to benefit the organization.
Knowledge of the impacts of internal and external partner staffing estimates.
Knowledge of the information environment.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   KSA ID   K0578   K0579  K0580  K0581  K0582  K0583   K0584   K0585  K0586   K0587   K0588  K0589   K0590   K0591  K0592   K0593   K0594   K0595  K0596   K0597   K0598   K0599   K0600  K0601  K0602  K0603  K0604  K0605   K0606  K0607   Description   Knowledge of the intelligence requirements development and request for information  processes.
Knowledge of the organization, roles and responsibilities of higher, lower and adjacent sub- elements.
Knowledge of the organization’s established format for collection plan.
Knowledge of the organization’s planning, operations and targeting cycles.
Knowledge of the organizational structure as it pertains to full spectrum cyber operations,  including the functions, responsibilities, and interrelationships among distinct internal  elements.
Knowledge of the priority information requirements from subordinate, lateral and higher  levels of the organization.
Knowledge of the processes to synchronize operational assessment procedures with the  critical information requirement process.
Knowledge of the production responsibilities and organic analysis and production  capabilities.
Knowledge of the range of cyber operations and their underlying intelligence support needs,  topics, and focus areas.
Knowledge of the relationships of operational objectives, intelligence requirements, and  intelligence production tasks.
Knowledge of the request for information process.
Knowledge of the role of network operations in supporting and facilitating other  organization operations.
Knowledge of the structure and intent of organization specific plans, guidance and  authorizations.
Knowledge of the structure, architecture, and design of modern digital and telephony  networks.
Knowledge of the ways in which targets or threats use the Internet.
Knowledge of transcript development processes and techniques (e.g., verbatim, gist,  summaries).
75   KSA ID   Description   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Knowledge of Unix/Linux and Windows operating systems structures and internals (e.g.,  process management, directory structure, installed applications).
Knowledge of virtual machine technologies.
K0608  K0609  K0610  K0611  Withdrawn – Integrated into K0131  K0612   Knowledge of what constitutes a “threat” to a network.
Knowledge of who the organization’s operational planners are, how and where they can be  contacted, and what are their expectations.
Knowledge of wireless technologies (e.g., cellular, satellite, GSM) to include the basic  structure, architecture, and design of modern wireless communications systems.
Knowledge of Automated security control assessments  Knowledge of hardware asset management and the value of tracking the location and  configuration of networked devices and software across departments, locations, facilities  and, potentially, supporting business functions.
Knowledge of software asset management and the value of tracking the location and  configuration of networked devices and software across departments, locations, facilities  and, potentially, supporting business functions.
Knowledge of continuous monitoring technologies and tools.
Knowledge of controls related to the use, processing, storage, and transmission of data.
Knowledge of Application Security Risks (e.g.
Open Web Application Security Project Top  10 list)  Knowledge that patching and software updates are impractical for some networked devices.
Knowledge of secure update mechanisms.
Knowledge of the importance of ingress filtering to protect against automated threats that  rely on spoofed network addresses.
Knowledge of cyber competitions as a way of developing skills by providing hands-on  experience in simulated, real-world situations.
Knowledge of white/black listing  Knowledge of the latest intrusion techniques, methods and documented intrusions external  to the organization.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.6   NICE Framework Skills Descriptions   Table 6 provides a listing of cybersecurity skills.
Selected skills descriptions from this list are included for  each work role in the Detailed work role Listing in Appendix B.
Table 6 - NICE Framework Skills Descriptions    Skill ID  S0001  S0002  S0003  S0004  S0005  S0006  S0007  S0008  S0009  S0010  S0011  S0012  S0013  S0014  S0015  S0016  S0017  S0018   S0019  S0020   S0021  S0022  S0023  S0024   S0025  S0026   S0027  S0028  S0029  S0030  S0031   S0032   Description   Skill in conducting vulnerability scans and recognizing vulnerabilities in security systems.
Skill in allocating storage capacity in the design of data management systems.
Skill in analyzing network traffic capacity and performance characteristics.
Skill in applying and incorporating information technologies into proposed solutions.
Skill in applying host/network access controls (e.g., access control list).
Skill in assessing the robustness of security systems and designs.
Skill in conducting capabilities and requirements analysis.
Skill in conducting information searches.
Skill in conducting queries and developing algorithms to analyze data structures.
Skill in creating policies that reflect system security objectives.
Skill in creating programs that validate and process multiple inputs including command  line arguments, environmental variables, and input streams.
Skill in developing and deploying signatures.
Skill in designing countermeasures to identified security risks.
Skill in designing security controls based on cybersecurity principles and tenets.
Skill in detecting host and network based intrusions via intrusion detection technologies  (e.g., Snort).
Skill in determining how a security system should work (including its resilience and  dependability capabilities) and how changes in conditions, operations, or the environment  will affect these outcomes.
Skill in developing data dictionaries.
Skill in developing data models.
Skill in developing operations-based testing scenarios.
Skill in developing and applying security system access controls.
Skill in developing, testing, and implementing network infrastructure contingency and  recovery plans.
Skill in discerning the protection needs (i.e., security controls) of information systems and  networks.
Skill in evaluating the adequacy of security designs.
Skill in identifying measures or indicators of system performance and the actions needed to  improve or correct performance, relative to the goals of the system.
Skill in implementing, maintaining, and improving established network security practices.
Skill in preserving evidence integrity according to standard operating procedures or  national standards.
Skill in the measuring and reporting of intellectual capital.
Skill in using knowledge management technologies.
Skill in using network management tools to analyze network traffic patterns (e.g., simple  network management protocol).
Skill in using Virtual Private Network (VPN) devices and encryption.
Skill in analyzing memory dumps to extract information.
Skill in collecting data from a variety of cyber defense resources.
Skill in developing and executing technical training programs and curricula.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID  S0070  S0071  S0072   S0073  S0074   S0075   S0076  S0077  S0078   S0079  S0080  S0081  S0082   S0083   S0084  S0085  S0086  S0087  S0088   S0089  S0090  S0091  S0092  S0093  S0094   S0095  S0096  S0097   S0100   S0101  S0102  S0103  S0104   S0106  S0107  S0108   Description   Skill in talking to others to convey information effectively.
Skill in conducting forensic analyses in multiple operating system environments (e.g.,  mobile device systems).
Skill in securing network communications.
Skill in protecting a network against malware.
(e.g., NIPS, anti-malware, restrict/prevent  external devices, spam filters).
Skill in using network analysis tools to identify vulnerabilities.
Skill in integrating black box security testing tools into quality assurance process of  software releases.
Skill in configuring and utilizing network protection components (e.g., Firewalls, VPNs,  network intrusion detection systems).
Skill in one-way hash functions (e.g., Secure Hash Algorithm [SHA], Message Digest  Algorithm [MD5]).
Skill in identifying common encoding techniques (e.g., Exclusive Disjunction [XOR],  American Standard Code for Information Interchange [ASCII], Unicode, Base64,  Uuencode, Uniform Resource Locator [URL] encode).
Skill in applying security controls.
Skill in utilizing or developing learning activities (e.g., scenarios, instructional games,  interactive exercises).
Skill in utilizing technologies (e.g., SmartBoards, websites, computers, projectors) for  instructional purposes.
Skill in developing workforce and position qualification standards.
Skill in identifying Test & Evaluation infrastructure (people, ranges, tools,  instrumentation) requirements.
Skill in managing test assets, test resources, and test personnel to ensure effective  completion of test events.
Skill in performing format conversions to create a standard representation of the data.
Skill in developing machine understandable semantic ontologies.
Skill in system, network, and OS hardening techniques.
(e.g., remove unnecessary services,  password policies, network segmentation, enable logging, least privilege, etc.).
Skill in troubleshooting and diagnosing cyber defense infrastructure anomalies and work  through resolution.
Skill in processing digital evidence, to include protecting and making legally sound copies  of evidence.
Skill in secure test plan design (e. g. unit, integration, system, acceptance).
Skill in network systems management principles, models, methods (e.g., end-to-end  systems performance monitoring), and tools.
Skill in applying security models (e.g., Bell-LaPadula model, Biba integrity model, Clark- Wilson integrity model).
Skill in assessing security systems designs.
Skill in conducting system/server planning, management, and maintenance.
Skill in integrating and applying policies that meet system security objectives.
Skill in assessing security controls based on cybersecurity principles and tenets.
(e.g., CIS  CSC, NIST SP 800-53, Cybersecurity Framework, etc.).
Skill in designing the integration of technology processes and solutions, including legacy  systems and modern programming languages.
Skill in developing applications that can log and handle errors, exceptions, and application  faults and logging.
Skill in implementing and testing network infrastructure contingency and recovery plans.
Skill in troubleshooting failed system components (i.e., servers)  Skill in translating operational requirements into protection needs (i.e., security controls).
(i.e., servers, appliances, network  devices).
Skill in configuring and validating network workstations and peripherals in accordance  with approved standards and/or specifications.
S0167   S0168  S0169   S0170  S0171  S0172  S0173  S0174  S0175   S0176  S0177  S0178   Skill in assessing the application of cryptographic standards.
Skill in recognizing vulnerabilities in security systems.
Skill in setting up physical or logical sub-networks that separate an internal local area  network (LAN) from other untrusted networks.
Skill in applying secure coding techniques.
Skill in using security event correlation tools.
Skill in administrative planning activities, to include preparation of functional and specific  support plans, preparing and managing correspondence, and staffing procedures.
Skill in analyzing a target's communication networks.
Skill in analyzing essential network data (e.g., router configuration files, routing protocols).
Skill in analyzing language processing tools to provide feedback to enhance tool  development.
Skill in analyzing target communications internals and externals collected from wireless  LANs.
Skill in analyzing traffic to identify network devices.
Skill in assessing and/or estimating effects generated during and after cyber operations.
Skill in complying with the legal restrictions for targeted information.
Skill in conducting social network analysis, buddy list analysis, and/or cookie analysis.
Skill in conducting social network analysis.
Skill in creating and extracting important information from packet captures.
Skill in creating collection requirements in support of data acquisition activities.
Skill in depicting source or collateral data on a network map.
Skill in determining the effect of various router and firewall configurations on traffic  patterns and network performance in both LAN and WAN environments.
Skill in determining the physical location of network devices.
Skill in developing and executing comprehensive cyber operations assessment programs  for assessing and validating operational performance characteristics.
Skill in developing intelligence reports.
Skill in developing or recommending analytic approaches or solutions to problems and  situations for which information is incomplete or for which no precedent exists.
Skill in documenting and communicating complex technical and programmatic  information.
Skill in evaluating accesses for intelligence value.
Skill in evaluating information for reliability, validity, and relevance.
Skill in evaluating information to recognize relevance, priority, etc.
Skill in extracting information from packet captures.
Skill in fusion analysis   Skill in generating operation plans in support of mission and target requirements.
Skill in identifying a target’s communications networks.
Skill in identifying a target's network characteristics.
Skill in identifying critical target elements, to include critical target elements for the cyber  domain.
Skill in identifying cyber threats which may jeopardize organization and/or partner  interests.
Skill in identifying language issues that may have an impact on organization objectives.
Skill in identifying leads for target development.
Skill in identifying non-target regional languages and dialects  Skill in identifying the devices that work at each level of protocol models.
Skill in identifying, locating, and tracking targets via geospatial analysis techniques  Skill in information prioritization as it relates to operations.
Skill in interpreting traceroute results, as they apply to network analysis and reconstruction.
Skill in knowledge management, including technical documentation techniques (e.g., Wiki  page).
Skill in managing client relationships, including determining client needs/requirements,  managing client expectations, and demonstrating commitment to delivering quality results.
Skill in navigating network visualization software.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0255   S0256   S0257  S0258  S0259  S0260  S0261  S0262  S0263   S0264   S0265  S0266  S0267  S0268  S0269   S0270  S0271   S0272  S0273  S0274  S0275  S0276  S0277  S0278  S0279   S0280  S0281  S0282  S0283  S0284  S0285  S0286  S0287   S0288   S0289  S0290   Description   Skill in providing real-time, actionable geolocation information utilizing target  infrastructures.
Skill in recognizing and interpreting malicious network activity in traffic.
Skill in recognizing midpoint opportunities and essential information.
Skill in recognizing relevance of information.
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for leads for metadata analysis.
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for leads to enable remote  operations (data includes users, passwords, email addresses, IP ranges of the target,  frequency in DNI behavior, mail servers, domain servers, SMTP header information).
Skill in recognizing technical information that may be used for target development  including intelligence development.
Skill in researching essential information.
Skill in reviewing and editing intelligence products from various sources for cyber  operations.
Skill in target development in direct support of collection operations.
Skill in target network anomaly identification (e.g., intrusions, dataflow or processing,  target implementation of new technologies).
Skill in testing and evaluating tools for implementation.
Skill in using databases to identify target-relevant information.
Skill in using non-attributable networks.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0291  S0292   S0293   S0294  S0295  S0296   S0297   S0298  S0299  S0300  S0301  S0302   S0303  S0304  S0305   S0306  S0307  S0308   S0309  S0310   S0311  S0312   S0313  S0314  S0315  S0316  S0317   S0318  S0319  S0320  S0321  S0322   S0323  S0324   S0325   Description   Skill in using research methods including multiple, different sources to reconstruct a target  network.
Skill in using trace route tools and interpreting the results as they apply to network analysis  and reconstruction.
(e.g., checksums, Exclusive OR, secure hashes,  check constraints, etc.).
Skill in wireless network target analysis, templating, and geolocation.
Skill in writing (and submitting) requirements to meet gaps in technical capabilities.
Skill in writing about facts and ideas in a clear, convincing, and organized manner.
Skill to access information on current assets available, usage.
Skill to access the databases where plans/directives/guidance are maintained.
Skill to analyze strategic guidance for issues requiring clarification and/or additional  guidance.
Skill to anticipate intelligence capability employment requirements.
Skill to apply analytical standards to evaluate intelligence products.
Skill to apply the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of available  platforms, sensors, architectures and apparatus as they apply to organization objectives.
Skill to apply the process used to assess the performance and impact of cyber operations.
Skill to articulate a needs statement/requirement and integrate new and emerging collection  capabilities, accesses and/or processes into collection operations.
Skill to associate Intelligence gaps to priority information requirements and observables.
Skill to compare indicators/observables with requirements.
Skill to convert intelligence requirements into intelligence production tasks.
Skill to coordinate the development of tailored intelligence products.
Skill to develop a collection plan that clearly shows the discipline that can be used to  collect the information needed.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK    Skill ID   S0326  S0327   S0328  S0329   S0330   S0331   S0332   S0333   S0334  S0335  S0336   S0337  S0338   S0339  S0340  S0341   S0342   S0343   S0344  S0345  S0346   S0347  S0348   S0349  S0350   S0351  S0352   S0353  S0354  S0355   Description   Skill to distinguish between notional and actual resources and their applicability to the plan  under development.
Skill to evaluate factors of the operational environment to objectives, and information  requirements.
Skill to evaluate requests for information to determine if response information exists.
Skill to evaluate the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of organic, theater,  national, coalition and other collection capabilities.
Skill to extract information from available tools and applications associated with collection  requirements and collection operations management.
Skill to identify when priority information requirements are satisfied.
Skill to implement established procedures for evaluating collection management and  operations activities.
Skill to interpret planning guidance to discern level of analytical support required.
Skill to prepare and deliver reports, presentations and briefings, to include using visual aids  or presentation technology.
Skill to relate intelligence resources/assets to anticipated intelligence requirements.
Skill to resolve conflicting collection requirements.
Skill to review performance specifications and historical information about collection  assets.
Skill to synchronize operational assessment procedures with the critical information  requirement process.
Skill to synchronize planning activities and required intelligence support.
Skill to translate the capabilities, limitations and tasking methodologies of organic, theater,  national, coalition and other collection capabilities.
Skill to use systems and/or tools to track collection requirements and determine if they are  satisfied.
Skill in negotiating vendor agreements and evaluating vendor privacy practices.
86   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Skill in communicating with all levels of management including Board members (e.g.,  interpersonal skills, approachability, effective listening skills, appropriate use of style and  language for the audience).
Skill to anticipate new security threats.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner cyber operations capabilities and  tools.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner intelligence processes and the  development of information requirements and essential information.
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner organization capabilities and  limitations (those with tasking, collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination  responsibilities).
Skill to analyze and assess internal and external partner reporting.
Skill to develop insights about the context of an organization’s threat environment  Skill to design incident response for cloud service models.
Skill to apply cybersecurity and privacy principles to organizational requirements (relevant  to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
Skill to use risk scoring to inform performance-based and cost-effective approaches to help  organizations to identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risk.
Skill to identify sources, characteristics, and uses of the organization’s data assets.
Skill to use cyber defense Service Provider reporting structure and processes within one’s  own organization.
Skill to translate, track, and prioritize information needs and intelligence collection  requirements across the extended enterprise.
Skill to ensure that accountability information is collected for information system and  information and communications technology supply chain infrastructure components.
Skill to identify cybersecurity and privacy issues that stem from connections with internal  and external customers and partner organizations.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   A.7   NICE Framework Ability Descriptions   Table 7 provides a listing of cybersecurity abilities.
Selected ability  descriptions from this list are included in each work role in the Detailed work role Listing in  Appendix B.
Table 7 - NICE Framework Ability Descriptions   Description   Ability   ID   A0001   Ability to identify systemic security issues based on the analysis of vulnerability and  configuration data.
Ability to match the appropriate knowledge repository technology for a given application or  environment.
A0002  A0003  Ability to determine the validity of technology trend data.
Ability to develop curriculum that speaks to the topic at the appropriate level for the target  audience.
Ability to prepare and deliver education and awareness briefings to ensure that systems,  network, and data users are aware of and adhere to systems security policies and procedures.
Ability to apply the methods, standards, and approaches for describing, analyzing, and  documenting an organization's enterprise information technology (IT) architecture (e.g.,  Open Group Architecture Framework [TOGAF], Department of Defense Architecture  Framework [DoDAF], Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework [FEAF]).
A0008  A0009  Ability to apply supply chain risk management standards.
Ability to communicate complex information, concepts, or ideas in a confident and well- organized manner through verbal, written, and/or visual means.
A0015  Ability to conduct vulnerability scans and recognize vulnerabilities in security systems.
A0016  Ability to facilitate small group discussions.
A0024  Ability to develop clear directions and instructional materials.
A0027  Ability to apply an organization's goals and objectives to develop and maintain architecture.
A0028  Ability to assess and forecast manpower requirements to meet organizational objectives.
Ability to conduct and implement market research to understand government and industry  capabilities and appropriate pricing.
A0031  A0032  Ability to develop curriculum for use within a virtual environment.
Ability to develop policy, plans, and strategy in compliance with laws, regulations, policies,  and standards in support of organizational cyber activities.
A0033  A0034  Ability to develop, update, and/or maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs).
Ability to leverage best practices and lessons learned of external organizations and academic  institutions dealing with cyber issues.
A0037  A0038  Ability to optimize systems to meet enterprise performance requirements.
A0039  Ability to oversee the development and update of the life cycle cost estimate.
A0041  A0042  Ability to develop career path opportunities.
A0046   A0047   Ability to monitor and assess the potential impact of emerging technologies on laws,  regulations, and/or policies.
Ability to develop secure software according to secure software deployment methodologies,  tools, and practices.
Ability to apply network security architecture concepts including topology, protocols,  components, and principles (e.g., application of defense-in-depth).
A0048  A0049  Ability to apply secure system design tools, methods and techniques.
Ability to apply system design tools, methods, and techniques, including automated systems  analysis and design tools.
A0050  A0051  Ability to execute technology integration processes.
Ability to operate network equipment including hubs, routers, switches, bridges, servers,  transmission media, and related hardware.
A0055  Ability to operate common network tools (e.g., ping, traceroute, nslookup).
A0056  Ability to ensure security practices are followed throughout the acquisition process.
A0059  Ability to operate the organization's LAN/WAN pathways.
A0062  Ability to monitor measures or indicators of system performance and availability.
A0063  A0064  Ability to interpret and translate customer requirements into operational capabilities.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability   ID   A0066   A0065  Ability to monitor traffic flows across the network.
Ability to adjust to and operate in a diverse, unpredictable, challenging, and fast-paced work  environment.
A0067  A0068  Ability to apply approved planning development and staffing processes.
A0072   Ability to clearly articulate intelligence requirements into well-formulated research questions  and data tracking variables for inquiry tracking purposes.
Ability to clearly articulate intelligence requirements into well-formulated research questions  and requests for information.
Ability to coordinate and collaborate with analysts regarding surveillance requirements and  essential information development.
A0076  A0077  Ability to coordinate cyber operations with other organization functions or support activities.
Ability to coordinate, collaborate and disseminate information to subordinate, lateral and  higher-level organizations.
A0078  A0079  Ability to correctly employ each organization or element into the collection plan and matrix.
Ability to develop or recommend analytic approaches or solutions to problems and situations  for which information is incomplete or for which no precedent exists.
Ability to develop or recommend planning solutions to problems and situations for which no  precedent exists.
A0083  Ability to evaluate information for reliability, validity, and relevance.
Ability to expand network access by conducting target analysis and collection to identify  targets of interest.
Ability to function in a collaborative environment, seeking continuous consultation with  other analysts and experts—both internal and external to the organization—to leverage  analytical and technical expertise.
A0089  A0090  Ability to identify external partners with common cyber operations interests.
Ability to interpret and apply laws, regulations, policies, and guidance relevant to  organization cyber objectives.
A0094  A0095  Ability to interpret and translate customer requirements into operational action.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability to participate as a member of planning teams, coordination groups, and task forces as  necessary.
Ability to perform network collection tactics, techniques, and procedures to include  decryption capabilities/tools.
A0099  A0100  Ability to perform wireless collection procedures to include decryption capabilities/tools.
A0105  Ability to tailor technical and planning information to a customer’s level of understanding.
Ability to monitor advancements in information privacy laws to ensure organizational  adaptation and compliance.
Ability to work across departments and business units to implement organization’s privacy  principles and programs, and align privacy objectives with security objectives.
Ability to monitor advancements in information privacy technologies to ensure  organizational adaptation and compliance.
Ability to determine whether a security incident violates a privacy principle or legal standard  requiring specific legal action.
Ability to develop or procure curriculum that speaks to the topic at the appropriate level for  the target.
Ability to work across departments and business units to implement organization’s privacy  principles and programs, and align privacy objectives with security objectives.
A0119   A0118   A0115  A0116  Ability to prioritize and allocate cybersecurity resources correctly and efficiently.
A0117  Ability to relate strategy, business, and technology in the context of organizational dynamics.
Ability to understand technology, management, and leadership issues related to organization  processes and problem solving.
Ability to understand the basic concepts and issues related to cyber and its organizational  impact.
Ability to share meaningful insights about the context of an organization’s threat  environment that improve its risk management posture.
Ability to apply cybersecurity and privacy principles to organizational requirements (relevant  to confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation).
A0123  A0124  Ability to establish and maintain automated security control assessments  A0125  Ability to author a privacy disclosure statement based on current laws.
A0122   Ability to track the location and configuration of networked devices and software across  departments, locations, facilities and, potentially, supporting business functions.
A0126  A0127  Ability to deploy continuous monitoring technologies and tools.
A0128   Ability to apply techniques for detecting host and network-based intrusions using intrusion  detection technologies.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Ability   ID   A0129   A0130   A0131   A0132   A0133   A0134   A0135   A0136   A0137   A0138   A0139   A0140   A0141   A0142   A0143   A0144   A0145   Description   Ability to ensure information security management processes are integrated with strategic  and operational planning processes.
Ability to ensure that senior officials within the organization provide information security for  the information and systems that support the operations and assets under their control.
Ability to ensure the organization has adequately trained personnel to assist in complying  with security requirements in legislation, Executive Orders, policies, directives, instructions,  standards, and guidelines.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide a comprehensive,  organization-wide, holistic approach for addressing risk—an approach that provides a greater  understanding of the integrated operations of the organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to develop a risk management  strategy for the organization providing a strategic view of security-related risks for the  organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to facilitate the sharing of risk- related information among authorizing officials and other senior leaders within the  organization.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide oversight for all  risk management-related activities across the organization to help ensure consistent and  effective risk acceptance decisions.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to ensure that authorization  decisions consider all factors necessary for mission and business success.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to provide an organization- wide forum to consider all sources of risk (including aggregated risk) to organizational  operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to promote cooperation and  collaboration among authorizing officials to include authorization actions requiring shared  responsibility.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to ensure that the shared  responsibility for supporting organizational mission/business functions using external  providers of systems, services, and applications receives the needed visibility and is elevated  to the appropriate decision-making authorities.
Ability to coordinate with senior leadership of an organization to identify the organizational  risk posture based on the aggregated risk from the operation and use of the systems for which  the organization is responsible.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that an organization-wide security program is effectively implemented resulting in  adequate security for all organizational systems and environments of operation.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that security considerations are integrated into programming/planning/budgeting  cycles, enterprise architectures, and acquisition/system development life cycles.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that organizational systems and common controls are covered by approved security  plans and possess current authorizations.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that security-related activities required across the organization are accomplished in an  efficient, cost-effective, and timely manner.
Ability to work closely with authorizing officials and their designated representatives to help  ensure that there is centralized reporting of security-related activities.
92   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Description   Ability   ID   A0146   A0147   A0148   T h s    i  p u b  Ability to establish the rules for appropriate use and protection of the information and retains  that responsibility even when the information is shared with or provided to other  organizations.
Ability to approve security plans, memorandums of agreement or understanding, plans of  action and milestones, and determine whether significant changes in the systems or  environments of operation require reauthorization.
Ability to serve as the primary liaison between the enterprise architect and the systems  security engineer and coordinates with system owners, common control providers, and  system security officers on the allocation of security controls as system-specific, hybrid, or  common controls.
Ability, in close coordination with system security officers, advise authorizing officials, chief  information officers, senior information security officers, and the senior accountable official  for risk management/risk executive (function), on a range of security-related issues (e.g.
establishing system boundaries; assessing the severity of weaknesses and deficiencies in the  system; plans of action and milestones; risk mitigation approaches; security alerts; and  potential adverse effects of identified vulnerabilities).
A0149  A0150  Ability to conduct systems security engineering activities (NIST SP 800-16).
Ability to capture and refine security requirements and ensure that the requirements are  effectively integrated into the component products and systems through purposeful security  architecting, design, development, and configuration.
Ability to employ best practices when implementing security controls within a system  including software engineering methodologies; system and security engineering principles;  secure design, secure architecture, and secure coding techniques.
Ability to coordinate their security-related activities with security architects, senior  information security officers, system owners, common control providers, and system security  officers.
Ability to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the management, operational, and  technical security controls and control enhancements employed within or inherited by a  system to determine the effectiveness of the controls (i.e., the extent to which the security  controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired  outcome with respect to meeting the security requirements for the system).
Ability to prepare the final security assessment report containing the results and findings  from the assessment.
Ability to assesses a security plan to help ensure that the plan provides a set of security  controls for the system that meet the stated security requirements.
Ability to ensure that functional and security requirements are appropriately addressed in a  contract and that the contractor meets the functional and security requirements as stated in the  contract.
Ability to interpret the information collected by network tools (e.g.
Ability to translate, track, and prioritize information needs and intelligence collection  requirements across the extended enterprise.
93   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Ability   ID   Description   A0163   A0162   A0161   A0162   Ability to integrate information security requirements into the acquisition process; using  applicable baseline security controls as one of the sources for security requirements; ensuring  a robust software quality control process; and establishing multiple sources (e.g., delivery  routes, for critical system elements).
Ability to ensure information system security, acquisition personnel, legal counsel, and other  appropriate advisors and stakeholders are participating in decision making from system  concept definition/review and are involved in, or approve of, each milestone decision through  the entire system life cycle for systems.
Ability to recognize the unique aspects of the Communications Security (COMSEC)  environment and hierarchy.
Ability to interpret Communications Security (COMSEC) terminology, guidelines and  procedures.
Ability to identify the roles and responsibilities for appointed Communications Security  (COMSEC) personnel.
Ability to manage Communications Security (COMSEC) material accounting, control and  use procedure.
Ability to identify types of Communications Security (COMSEC) Incidents and how they’re  reported  Ability to recognize the importance of auditing Communications Security (COMSEC)  material and accounts.
Ability to Identify the requirements of In-Process accounting for Communications Security  (COMSEC)  Ability to identify critical infrastructure systems with information communication technology  A0170  that were designed without system security considerations.
A0164   A0165   A0166   A0167   A0168   A0172   A0173   Ability to set up a physical or logical sub-networks that separates an internal local area  network (LAN) from other untrusted networks.
Ability to Find and navigate the dark web using the TOR network to locate markets and  forums.
NIST SP 800-181      Appendix B – Work Role Detail Listing   NICE FRAMEWORK   This appendix provides a detailed description of each NICE Framework work role.
For each  work role, the listing below provides the following information:   •  The work role name;  •  A unique NICE Framework work role ID, based upon abbreviations of the NICE   Framework Category and Specialty Area to which that work role belongs;   •  The Specialty Area in which the work role resides;  •  The Category in which the work role resides;  •  A description of the work role;  •  A list of the NICE Framework Tasks that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to perform;   •  A list of the NICE Framework Knowledge areas that a person in a cybersecurity position   that includes the work role might be expected to exhibit;   •  A list of the NICE Framework Skills that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to possess; and   •  A list of the NICE Framework Abilities that a person in a cybersecurity position that   includes the work role might be expected to demonstrate.
The following tables describe the NICE Framework work roles with a simple listing of tasks,  knowledge, skills, and abilities.
The work roles will be updated periodically [1].
B.1   Securely Provision (SP)   Work Role Name  Authorizing Official    Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Risk Management (RSK)   SP-RSK-001   Category  Work Role  Description   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities      Securely Provision (SP)  Senior official or executive with the authority to formally assume responsibility for  operating an information system at an acceptable level of risk to organizational  operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational  assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation (CNSSI 4009).
T0145, T0221, T0371, T0495  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0013, K0019, K0027, K0028,  K0037, K0038, K0040, K0044, K0048, K0049, K0054, K0059, K0070, K0084,  K0089, K0101, K0126, K0146, K0168, K0169, K0170, K0179, K0199, K0203,  K0260, K0261, K0262, K0267, K0295, K0322, K0342, K0622, K0624  S0034, S0367  A0028, A0033, A0077, A0090, A0094, A0111, A0117, A0118, A0119, A0123,  A0170   95   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Security Control Assessor   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-RSK-002  Risk Management (RSK)  Securely Provision (SP)  Conducts independent comprehensive assessments of the management, operational,  and technical security controls and control enhancements employed within or  inherited by an information technology (IT) system to determine the overall  effectiveness of the controls (as defined in NIST 800-37).
Work Role Name  Software Developer   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-DEV-001  Software Development (DEV)  Securely Provision (SP)  Develops, creates, maintains, and writes/codes new (or modifies existing)  computer applications, software, or specialized utility programs.
T0009, T0011, T0013, T0014, T0022, T0026, T0034, T0040, T0046, T0057,  T0077, T0100, T0111, T0117, T0118, T0171, T0176, T0181, T0189, T0217,  T0228, T0236, T0267, T0303, T0311, T0324, T0337, T0416, T0417, T0436,  T0455, T0500, T0553, T0554  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0014, K0016, K0027, K0028,  K0039, K0044, K0050, K0051, K0060, K0066, K0068, K0070, K0073, K0079,  K0080, K0081, K0082, K0084, K0086, K0105, K0139, K0140, K0152, K0153,  K0154, K0170, K0179, K0199, K0202, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0263, K0322,  K0332, K0342, K0343, K0624  S0001, S0014, S0017, S0019, S0022, S0031, S0034, S0060, S0135, S0138, S0149,  S0174, S0175, S0367  A0007, A0021, A0047, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   96   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Secure Software Assessor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-DEV-002  Software Development (DEV)  Securely Provision (SP)  Analyzes the security of new or existing computer applications, software, or  specialized utility programs and provides actionable results.
T0013, T0014, T0022, T0038, T0040, T0100, T0111, T0117, T0118, T0171,  T0181, T0217, T0228, T0236, T0266, T0311, T0324, T0337, T0424, T0428,  T0436, T0456, T0457, T0516, T0554  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0014, K0016, K0027, K0028,  K0039, K0044, K0050, K0051, K0060, K0066, K0068, K0070, K0073, K0079,  K0080, K0081, K0082, K0084, K0086, K0105, K0139, K0140, K0152, K0153,  K0154, K0170, K0178, K0179, K0199, K0202, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0263,  K0322, K0342, K0343, K0624  S0001, S0022, S0031, S0034, S0083, S0135, S0138, S0174, S0175, S0367  A0021, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities           T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     Work Role Name  Enterprise Architect   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-ARC-001  Systems Architecture (ARC)  Securely Provision (SP)  Develops and maintains business, systems, and information processes to support  enterprise mission needs; develops information technology (IT) rules and  requirements that describe baseline and target architectures.
Skills  Abilities            97   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Security Architect   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-ARC-002  Systems Architecture (ARC)  Securely Provision (SP)  Ensures that the stakeholder security requirements necessary to protect the  organization’s mission and business processes are adequately addressed in all  aspects of enterprise architecture including reference models, segment and solution  architectures, and the resulting systems supporting those missions and business  processes.
Work Role Name  Research and Development Specialist   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   SP-TRD-001  Technology R&D (TRD)  Securely Provision (SP)  Conducts software and systems engineering and software systems research to  develop new capabilities, ensuring cybersecurity is fully integrated.
Conducts  comprehensive technology research to evaluate potential vulnerabilities in  cyberspace systems.
Work Role Name  Systems Requirements Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-SRP-001  Systems Requirements Planning (SRP)  Securely Provision (SP)  Consults with customers to evaluate functional requirements and translate  functional requirements into technical solutions.
T0033, T0039, T0045, T0052, T0062, T0127, T0156, T0174, T0191, T0235,  T0273, T0300, T0313, T0325, T0334, T0454, T0463, T0497  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0008, K0012, K0018, K0019,  K0032, K0035, K0038, K0043, K0044, K0045, K0047, K0055, K0056, K0059,  K0060, K0061, K0063, K0066, K0067, K0073, K0074, K0086, K0087, K0090,  K0091, K0093, K0101, K0102, K0126, K0163, K0164, K0168, K0169, K0170,  K0180, K0200, K0267, K0287, K0325, K0332, K0333, K0622  S0005, S0006, S0008, S0010, S0050, S0134, S0367  A0064, A0123, A0170   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  System Test & Evaluation Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-TST-001  Test and Evaluation (TST)  Securely Provision (SP)  Plans, prepares, and executes tests of systems to evaluate results against  specifications and requirements as well as analyze/report test results.
T0058, T0080, T0125, T0143, T0257, T0274, T0393, T0426, T0511, T0512,  T0513, T0539, T0540  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0027, K0028, K0037, K0044,  K0057, K0088, K0091, K0102, K0139, K0126, K0169, K0170, K0179, K0199,  K0203, K0212, K0250, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0287, K0332  S0015, S0021, S0026, S0030, S0048, S0060, S0061, S0082, S0104, S0107, S0110,  S0112, S0115, S0117, S0367  A0026, A0030, A0040, A0123   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      99   NIST SP 800-181      Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   T h s    i  p u b  Skills  Abilities   NICE FRAMEWORK   Information Systems Security Developer  SP-SYS-001  Systems Development (SYS)  Securely Provision (SP)  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information system security throughout the  systems development life cycle.
Work Role Name  Systems Developer   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   SP-SYS-002  Systems Development (SYS)  Securely Provision (SP)  Designs, develops, tests, and evaluates information systems throughout the systems  development life cycle.
Work Role Name  Database Administrator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-DTA-001  Data Administration (DTAA)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Administers databases and/or data management systems that allow for the secure  storage, query, and utilization of data.
T0008, T0137, T0139, T0140, T0146, T0152, T0162, T0210, T0305, T0306,  T0330, T0422, T0459, T0490  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0020, K0021, K0022, K0023,  K0025, K0031, K0056, K0060, K0065, K0069, K0083, K0097, K0197, K0260,  K0261, K0262, K0277, K0278, K0287, K0420  S0002, S0013, S0037, S0042, S0045  A0176   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Tasks   Work Role Name  Data Analyst   Work Role ID  OM-DTA-002  Data Administration (DTA)  Specialty Area  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Category  Work Role  Examines data from multiple disparate sources with the goal of providing security  Description  and privacy insight.
Designs and implements custom algorithms, workflow  processes and layouts for complex, enterprise-scale data sets used for modeling,  data mining, and research purposes.
T0007, T0008, T0068, T0146, T0195, T0210, T0342, T0347, T0349, T0351,  T0353, T0361, T0366, T0381, T0382, T0383, T0385, T0392, T0402, T0403,  T0404, T0405, T0460  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0015, K0016, K0020, K0022,  K0023, K0025, K0031, K0051, K0052, K0056, K0060, K0065, K0068, K0069,  K0083, K0095, K0129, K0139, K0140, K0193, K0197, K0229, K0236, K0238,  K0325, K0420  S0013, S0017, S0202, S0028, S0029, S0037, S0060, S0088, S0089, S0094, S0095,  S0103, S0106, S0109, S0113, S0114, S0118, S0119, S0123, S0125, S0126, S0127,  S0129, S0130, S0160, S0369  A0029, A0035, A0036, A0041, A0066   Knowledge   Abilities   Skills      101   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Knowledge Manager   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-KMG-001  Knowledge Management (KMG)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for the management and administration of processes and tools that  enable the organization to identify, document, and access intellectual capital and  information content.
T0037, T0060, T0154, T0185, T0209, T0339, T0421, T0452, T0524  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0013, K0094, K0095, K0096,  K0146, K0194, K0195, K0228, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0283, K0287, K0315,  K0338, K0420  S0011, S0012, S0049, S0055  A0002   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Technical Support Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-STS-001  Customer Service and Technical Support (STS)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Provides technical support to customers who need assistance utilizing client level  hardware and software in accordance with established or approved organizational  process components.
(i.e., Master Incident Management Plan, when applicable).
T0125, T0237, T0308, T0315, T0331, T0468, T0482, T0491, T0494, T0496,  T0502, T0530  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0053, K0088, K0109, K0114,  K0116, K0194, K0224, K0237, K0242, K0247, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0287,  K0292, K0294, K0302, K0317, K0330  S0039, S0058, S0142, S0159, S0365  A0025, A0034, A0122   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Network Operations Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-NET-001  Network Services (NET)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Plans, implements, and operates network services/systems, to include hardware and  virtual environments.
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  System Administrator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OM-ADM-001  Systems Administration (ADM)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for setting up and maintaining a system or specific components of a  system (e.g.
for example, installing, configuring, and updating hardware and  software; establishing and managing user accounts; overseeing or conducting  backup and recovery tasks; implementing operational and technical security  controls; and adhering to organizational security policies and procedures).
T0029, T0054, T0063, T0136, T0144, T0186, T0207, T0418, T0431, T0435,  T0458, T0461, T0498, T0501, T0507, T0514, T0515, T0531  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0049, K0050, K0053, K0064,  K0077, K0088, K0100, K0103, K0104, K0117, K0130, K0158, K0167, K0179,  K0260, K0261, K0262, K0274, K0280, K0289, K0318, K0332, K0346  S0016, S0033, S0043, S0073, S0076, S0111, S0143, S0144, S0151, S0153, S0154,  S0155, S0157, S0158  A0025, A0027, A0034, A0055, A0062, A0074, A0088, A0123, A0124  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Systems Security Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OM-ANA-001  Systems Analysis (ANA)  Operate and Maintain (OM)  Responsible for the analysis and development of the integration, testing,  operations, and maintenance of systems security.
Work Role Name  Cyber Legal Advisor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-LGA-001  Legal Advice and Advocacy (LGA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Provides legal advice and recommendations on relevant topics related to cyber law.
Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   T0006, T0098, T0102, T0131, T0220, T0419, T0434, T0465, T0474, T0476,  T0478, T0487, T0522  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0017, K0059, K0107, K0157,  K0261, K0262, K0267, K0312, K0316, K0341, K0615  S0356  A0046   Work Role Name  Privacy Officer/Privacy Compliance Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-LGA-002  Legal Advice and Advocacy (LGA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and oversees privacy compliance program and privacy program staff,  supporting privacy compliance, governance/policy, and incident response needs of  privacy and security executives and their teams.
Work Role Name  Cyber Instructional Curriculum Developer  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-TEA-001  Training, Education, and Awareness (TEA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops, plans, coordinates, and evaluates cyber training/education courses,  methods, and techniques based on instructional needs.
T0230, T0247, T0248, T0249, T0345, T0352, T0357, T0365, T0367, T0380,  T0437, T0442, T0450, T0451, T0534, T0536, T0926  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0059, K0124, K0146, K0147,  K0204, K0208, K0213, K0216, K0217, K0220, K0243, K0239, K0245, K0246,  K0250, K0252, K0287, K0628  S0064, S0066, S0070, S0102, S0166, S0296  A0004, A0013, A0015, A0018, A0019, A0022, A0024, A0032, A0054, A0057,  A0055, A0057, A0058, A0063, A0070, A0083, A0089, A0105, A0106, A0112,  A0114, A0118, A0119, A0171   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Instructor  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   OV-TEA-002  Training, Education, and Awareness (TEA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and conducts training or education of personnel within cyber domain.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK                  Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Information Systems Security Manager  OV-MGT-001  Cybersecurity Management (MGT)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Responsible for the cybersecurity of a program, organization, system, or enclave.
T0001, T0002, T0003, T0004, T0005, T0024, T0025, T0044, T0089, T0091,  T0092, T0093, T0095, T0097, T0099, T0106, T0115, T0130, T0132, T0133,  T0134, T0135, T0147, T0148, T0149, T0151, T0157, T0158, T0159, T0192,  T0199, T0206, T0211, T0213, T0215, T0219, T0227, T0229, T0234, T0239,  T0248, T0254, T0255, T0256, T0263, T0264, T0265, T0275, T0276, T0277,  T0280, T0281, T0282  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0008, K0018, K0021, K0026,  K0033, K0038, K0040, K0042, K0043, K0046, K0048, K0053, K0054, K0058,  K0059, K0061, K0070, K0072, K0076, K0077, K0087, K0090, K0092, K0101,  K0106, K0121, K0126, K0149, K0150, K0151, K0163, K0167, K0168, K0169,  K0170, K0179, K0180, K0199, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0267, K0287, K0332,  K0342, K0622, K0624  S0018, S0027, S0086  A0128, A0161, A0170   Work Role Name  Communications Security (COMSEC) Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-MGT-002  Cybersecurity Management (MGT)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Individual who manages the Communications Security (COMSEC) resources of an  organization (CNSSI  4009) or key custodian for a Crypto Key Management  System (CKMS).
Work Role Name  Cyber Workforce Developer and Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   OV-SPP-001  Strategic Planning and Policy (SPP)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops cyberspace workforce plans, strategies and guidance to support  cyberspace workforce manpower, personnel, training and education requirements  and to address changes to cyberspace policy, doctrine, materiel, force structure, and  education and training requirements.
T0001, T0004, T0025, T0044, T0074, T0094, T0099, T0116, T0222, T0226,  T0341, T0352, T0355, T0356, T0362, T0363, T0364, T0365, T0368, T0369,  T0372, T0373, T0374, T0375, T0376, T0384, T0387, T0388, T0390, T0391,  T0408, T0425, T0429, T0437, T0441, T0445, T0472, T0481, T0505, T0506,  T0529, T0533, T0536, T0537, T0552  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0072, K0101, K0127, K0146,  K0147, K0168, K0169, K0204, K0215, K0233, K0234, K0241, K0243, K0309,  K0311, K0313, K0335  S0108, S0128  A0023, A0028, A0033, A0037, A0042, A0053   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Policy and Strategy Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-SPP-002  Strategic Planning and Policy Development (SPP)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Develops and maintains cybersecurity plans, strategy and policy to support and  align with organizational cybersecurity initiatives and regulatory compliance.
T0074, T0094, T0222, T0226, T0341, T0369, T0384, T0390, T0408, T0425,  T0429, T0441, T0445, T0472, T0505, T0506, T0529, T0533, T0537  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0070, K0127, K0146, K0168,  K0234, K0248, K0309, K0311, K0313, K0335, K0624  S0176, S0250  A0003, A0033, A0037   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Executive Cyber Leadership  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-EXL-001  Executive Cyber Leadership (EXL)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Executes decision-making authorities and establishes vision and direction for an  organization's cyber and cyber-related resources and/or operations.
T0001, T0002, T0004, T0006, T0025, T0066, T0130, T0134, T0135, T0148,  T0151, T0227, T0229, T0229, T0248, T0254, T0263, T0264, T0282, T0337,  T0356, T0429, T0445, T0509, T0763, T0871, T0872, T0927, T0928  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0009, K0070, K0106, K0314,  K0296, K0147, K0624, K0628  S0018, S0356, S0357, S0358, S0359  A0033, A0070, A0085, A0094, A0105, A0106, A0116, A0117, A0118, A0119,  A0129, A0130, A0130   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   107   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Program Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-PMA-001  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Leads, coordinates, communicates, integrates, and is accountable for the overall  success of the program, ensuring alignment with agency or enterprise priorities.
Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Information Technology (IT) Project Manager  OV-PMA-002  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Directly manages information technology projects.
T0072, T0174, T0196, T0199, T0207, T0208, T0220, T0223, T0256, T0273,  T0277, T0340, T0354, T0370, T0377, T0379, T0389, T0394, T0407, T0412,  T0414, T0415, T0481, T0493, T0551  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0012, K0043, K0047, K0048,  K0059, K0072, K0090, K0101, K0120, K0126, K0146, K0148, K0154, K0164,  K0165, K0169, K0194, K0196, K0198, K0200, K0235, K0257, K0270  S0038, S0372  A0009, A0039, A0045, A0056   Work Role Name  Product Support Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   OV-PMA-003  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Manages the package of support functions required to field and maintain the  readiness and operational capability of systems and components.
T0072, T0174, T0196, T0204, T0207, T0208, T0220, T0223, T0256, T0273,  T0277, T0302, T0340, T0354, T0370, T0377, T0389, T0394, T0412, T0414,  T0493, T0525, T0551, T0553  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0043, K0048, K0059, K0072,  K0090, K0120, K0126, K0148, K0150, K0154, K0164, K0165, K0169, K0194,  K0196, K0198, K0200, K0235, K0249, K0257, K0270  S0038, S0372  A0009, A0031, A0039, A0045, A0056    Knowledge   Skills  Abilities      108   NIST SP 800-181      Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   NICE FRAMEWORK   IT Investment/Portfolio Manager  OV-PMA-004  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Manages a portfolio of IT investments that align with the overall needs of mission  and enterprise priorities.
Work Role Name  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   IT Program Auditor  OV-PMA-005  Program/Project Management and Acquisition (PMA)  Oversee and Govern (OV)  Conducts evaluations of an IT program or its individual components, to determine  compliance with published standards.
Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   PR-CDA-001  Cyber Defense Analysis (CDA)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Uses data collected from a variety of cyber defense tools (e.g., IDS alerts,  firewalls, network traffic logs.)
T0020, T0023, T0043, T0088, T0155, T0164, T0166, T0178, T0187, T0198,  T0214, T0258, T0259, T0260, T0290, T0291, T0292, T0293, T0294, T0295,  T0296, T0297, T0298, T0299, T0310, T0332, T0469, T0470, T0475, T0503,  T0504, T0526, T0545, T0548  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0007, K0013, K0015, K0018,  K0019, K0024, K0033, K0040, K0042, K0044, K0046, K0049, K0056, K0058,  K0059, K0060, K0061, K0065, K0070, K0074, K0075, K0093, K0098, K0104,  K0106, K0107, K0110, K0111, K0112, K0113, K0116, K0139, K0142, K0143,  K0157, K0160, K0161, K0162, K0167, K0168, K0177, K0179, K0180, K0190,  K0191, K0192, K0203, K0221, K0222, K0260, K0261, K0262, K0290, K0297,  K0300, K0301, K0303, K0318, K0322, K0324, K0332, K0339, K0342, K0624  S0020, S0025, S0027, S0036, S0054, S0057, S0063, S0078, S0096, S0147, S0156,  S0167, S0169, S0367, S0370  A0010, A0015, A0066, A0123, A0128, A0159   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Infrastructure Support Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks  Knowledge   PR-INF-001  Cyber Defense Infrastructure Support (INF)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Tests, implements, deploys, maintains, and administers the infrastructure hardware  and software.
Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Incident Responder  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   PR-CIR-001  Incident Response (CIR)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Investigates, analyzes, and responds to cyber incidents within the network  environment or enclave.
T0041, T0047, T0161, T0163, T0164, T0170, T0175, T0214, T0233, T0246,  T0262, T0278, T0279, T0312, T0395, T0503, T0510  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0021, K0026, K0033, K0034,  K0041, K0042, K0046, K0058, K0062, K0070, K0106, K0157, K0161, K0162,  K0167, K0177, K0179, K0221, K0230, K0259, K0287, K0332, K0565, K0624  S0003, S0047, S0077, S0078, S0079, S0080, S0173, S0365  A0121, A0128   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Vulnerability Assessment Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   PR-VAM-001  Vulnerability Assessment and Management (VAM)  Protect and Defend (PR)  Performs assessments of systems and networks within the NE or enclave and  identifies where those systems/networks deviate from acceptable configurations,  enclave policy, or local policy.
Measures effectiveness of defense-in-depth  architecture against known vulnerabilities.
T0010, T0028, T0138, T0142, T0188, T0252, T0549, T0550  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0009, K0019, K0021, K0033,  K0044, K0056, K0061, K0068, K0070, K0089, K0106, K0139, K0161, K0162,  K0167, K0177, K0179, K0203, K0206, K0210, K0224, K0265, K0287, K0301,  K0308, K0332, K0342, K0344, K0624  S0001, S0009, S0025, S0044, S0051, S0052, S0081, S0120, S0137, S0171, S0364,  S0367  A0001, A0044, A0120, A0123   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      111   NIST SP 800-181      B.5   Analyze (AN)   NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Threat/Warning Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-TWA-001  Warning/Threat Analysis (TWA)  Analyze (AN)  Develops cyber indicators to maintain awareness of the status of the highly  dynamic operating environment.
Collects, processes, analyzes, and disseminates  cyber threat/warning assessments.
Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities   Work Role Name  Exploitation Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-EXP-001  Exploitation Analysis (EXP)  Analyze (AN)  Collaborates to identify access and collection gaps that can be satisfied through  cyber collection and/or preparation activities.
Leverages all authorized resources  and analytic techniques to penetrate targeted networks.
T0028, T0266, T0570, T0572, T0574, T0591, T0600, T0603, T0608, T0614,  T0641, T0695, T0701, T0720, T0727, T0736, T0738, T0754, T0775, T0777  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0108, K0109, K0131, K0142,  K0143, K0177, K0224, K0349, K0362, K0417, K0444, K0471, K0560, K0351,  K0354, K0368, K0371, K0376, K0379, K0388, K0393, K0394, K0397, K0418,  K0430, K0443, K0447, K0451, K0470, K0473, K0484, K0487, K0489, K0509,  K0510, K0523, K0529, K0535, K0544, K0557, K0559, K0608  S0066, S0184, S0199, S0200, S0201, S0204, S0207, S0214, S0223, S0236, S0237,  S0239, S0240, S0245, S0247, S0258, S0260, S0264, S0269, S0279, S0286, S0290,  S0294, S0300  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0074, A0086, A0092, A0093, A0104      112   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  All-Source Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-ASA-001  All-Source Analysis (ASA)  Analyze (AN)  Analyzes data/information from one or multiple sources to conduct preparation of  the environment, respond to requests for information, and submit intelligence  collection and production requirements in support of planning and operations.
Work Role Name  Mission Assessment Specialist  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-ASA-002  All-Source Analysis (ASA)  Analyze (AN)  Develops assessment plans and measures of performance/effectiveness.
Conducts  strategic and operational effectiveness assessments as required for cyber events.
T0582, T0583, T0585, T0586, T0588, T0589, T0593, T0597, T0611, T0615,  T0617, T0624, T0660, T0661, T0663, T0678, T0684, T0685, T0686, T0707,  T0718, T0748, T0749, T0752, T0758, T0761, T0782, T0783, T0785, T0786,  T0788, T0789, T0793, T0797, T0834  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0108, K0109,  K0177, K0349, K0362, K0377, K0392, K0395, K0405, K0409, K0410, K0414,  K0417, K0427, K0431, K0436, K0437, K0440, K0444, K0445, K0446, K0449,  K0457, K0460, K0464, K0465, K0469, K0471, K0480, K0507, K0511, K0516,  K0549, K0551, K0556, K0560, K0561, K0565, K0598, K0603, K0604, K0610,  K0612, K0614  S0189, S0194, S0203, S0211, S0216, S0218, S0227, S0228, S0229, S0249, S0254,  S0256, S0271, S0278, S0285, S0288, S0289, S0292, S0296, S0297, S0303, S0360  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0072, A0082, A0083, A0087, A0088, A0089,  A0091, A0101, A0102, A0106, A0107, A0109, A0085, A0108      113   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Target Developer  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   Work Role Name  Target Network Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-TGT-001  Targets (TGT)  Analyze (AN)  Performs target system analysis, builds and/or maintains electronic target folders to  include inputs from environment preparation, and/or internal or external  intelligence sources.
Coordinates with partner target activities and intelligence  organizations, and presents candidate targets for vetting and validation.
T0597, T0617, T0707, T0582, T0782, T0797, T0588, T0624, T0661, T0663,  T0684, T0642, T0710, T0561, T0594, T0599, T0633, T0650, T0652, T0688,  T0717, T0731, T0744, T0769, T0770, T0776, T0781, T0790, T0794, T0798,  T0799, T0802, T0815, T0824, T0835  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0108, K0109,  K0177, K0142, K0349, K0362, K0444, K0471, K0560, K0392, K0395, K0409,  K0427, K0431, K0436, K0437, K0440, K0445, K0446, K0449, K0460, K0464,  K0516, K0556, K0561, K0565, K0603, K0604, K0614, K0457, K0465, K0507,  K0549, K0551, K0598, K0417, K0458, K0357, K0533, K0542, K0351, K0379,  K0473, K0381, K0402, K0413, K0426, K0439, K0461, K0466, K0478, K0479,  K0497, K0499, K0543, K0546, K0547, K0555  S0194, S0203, S0218, S0227, S0229, S0249, S0256, S0278, S0285, S0288, S0289,  S0296, S0297, S0189, S0228, S0216, S0292, S0196, S0187, S0205, S0208, S0222,  S0248, S0274, S0287, S0302, S0360, S0361  A0013, A0066, A0080, A0084, A0087, A0088, A0089, A0091, A0101, A0102,  A0106, A0109, A0085, A0073   AN-TGT-002  Targets (TGT)  Analyze (AN)  Conducts advanced analysis of collection and open-source data to ensure target  continuity; to profile targets and their activities; and develop techniques to gain  more target information.
Determines how targets communicate, move, operate and  live based on knowledge of target technologies, digital networks and the  applications on them.
Work Role Name  Multi-Disciplined Language Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   AN-LNG-001  Language Analysis (LNG)  Analyze (AN)  Applies language and culture expertise with target/threat and technical knowledge  to process, analyze, and/or disseminate intelligence information derived from  language, voice and/or graphic material.
Creates, and maintains language specific  databases and working aids to support cyber action execution and ensure critical  knowledge sharing.
Work Role Name  All Source-Collection Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-CLO-001  Collection Operations (CLO)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Identifies collection authorities and environment; incorporates priority information  requirements into collection management; develops concepts to meet leadership's  intent.
T0562, T0564, T0568, T0573, T0578, T0604, T0605, T0625, T0626, T0631,  T0632, T0634, T0645, T0646, T0647, T0649, T0651, T0657, T0662, T0674,  T0681, T0683, T0698, T0702, T0714, T0716, T0721, T0723, T0725, T0734,  T0737, T0750, T0753, T0755, T0757, T0773, T0779, T0806, T0809, T0810,  T0811, T0812, T0814, T0820, T0821, T0827  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0036, K0058, K0109, K0177,  K0431, K0449, K0417, K0579, K0596, K0444, K0471, K0392, K0395, K0440,  K0445, K0516, K0560, K0427, K0446, K0561, K0565, K0405, K0480, K0610,  K0612, K0353, K0361, K0364, K0380, K0382, K0383, K0386, K0387, K0390,  K0401, K0404, K0412, K0419, K0425, K0435, K0448, K0453, K0454, K0467,  K0474, K0475, K0477, K0482, K0492, K0495, K0496, K0498, K0503, K0505,  K0513, K0521, K0522, K0526, K0527, K0552, K0553, K0554, K0558, K0562,  K0563, K0569, K0570, K0580, K0581, K0583, K0584, K0587, K0588, K0601,  K0605, K0613  S0238, S0304, S0305, S0311, S0313, S0316, S0317, S0324, S0325, S0327, S0328,  S0330, S0332, S0334, S0335, S0336, S0339, S0342, S0344, S0347, S0351, S0352,  S0362  A0069, A0070, A0076, A0078, A0079   Tasks   Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      116   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  All Source-Collection Requirements Manager  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-CLO-002  Collection Operations (CLO)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Evaluates collection operations and develops effects-based collection requirements  strategies using available sources and methods to improve collection.
Develops,  processes, validates, and coordinates submission of collection requirements.
117   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Intel Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-001  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Develops detailed intelligence plans to satisfy cyber operations requirements.
Collaborates with cyber operations planners to identify, validate, and levy  requirements for collection and analysis.
Participates in targeting selection,  validation, synchronization, and execution of cyber actions.
Synchronizes  intelligence activities to support organization objectives in cyberspace.
118   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Ops Planner  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-002  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Develops detailed plans for the conduct or support of the applicable range of cyber  operations through collaboration with other planners, operators and/or analysts.
Participates in targeting selection, validation, synchronization, and enables  integration during the execution of cyber actions.
Work Role Name  Partner Integration Planner   Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPL-003  Cyber Operational Planning (OPL)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Works to advance cooperation across organizational or national borders between  cyber operations partners.
Aids the integration of partner cyber teams by providing  guidance, resources, and collaboration to develop best practices and facilitate  organizational support for achieving objectives in integrated cyber actions.
T0581, T0582, T0627, T0670, T0739, T0763, T0772, T0836, T0571, T0635,  T0665, T0699, T0732, T0747, T0764, T0787, T0795, T0823, T0601, T0760,  T0784, T0629, T0666, T0669, T0671, T0700, T0712, T0729, T0759, T0766,  T0817, T0818, T0825, T0826  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0108, K0109, K0431, K0417,  K0444, K0395, K0435, K0392, K0377, K0362, K0436, K0379, K0403, K0465,  K0507, K0598, K0511, K0414, K0350, K0400, K0408, K0411, K0422, K0432,  K0455, K0499, K0501, K0504, K0506, K0508, K0512, K0514, K0538, K0585,  K0599  S0218, S0249, S0296, S0297, S0185, S0186, S0213, S0250, S0326, S0360  A0013, A0066, A0070, A0089, A0085, A0082, A0074, A0067, A0068, A0077,  A0081, A0090, A0094, A0096, A0098, A0105      119   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Operator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   CO-OPS-001  Cyber Operations (OPS)  Collect and Operate (CO)  Conducts collection, processing, and/or geolocation of systems to exploit, locate,  and/or track targets of interest.
Performs network navigation, tactical forensic  analysis, and, when directed, executing on-net operations.
Work Role Name  Cyber Crime Investigator  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   IN-INV-001  Cyber Investigation (INV)  Investigate (IN)  Identifies, collects, examines, and preserves evidence using controlled and  documented analytical and investigative techniques.
T0031, T0059, T0096, T0103, T0104, T0110, T0112, T0113, T0114, T0120,  T0193, T0225, T0241, T0343, T0346, T0360, T0386, T0423, T0430, T0433,  T0453, T0471, T0479, T0523  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0046, K0070, K0107, K0110,  K0114, K0118, K0123, K0125, K0128, K0144, K0155, K0156, K0168, K0209,  K0231, K0244, K0251, K0351, K0624  S0047, S0068, S0072, S0086  A0174, A0175   Knowledge   Skills  Abilities   Work Role Name  Law Enforcement/Counterintelligence Forensics Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description   IN-FOR-001  Digital Forensics (FOR)  Investigate (IN)  Conducts deep-dive investigations on computer-based crimes establishing  documentary or physical evidence, to include digital media and logs associated  with cyber intrusion incidents.
T0059, T0096, T0220, T0308, T0398, T0419, T0401, T0403, T0411, T0425  K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0017, K0021, K0042, K0060,  K0070, K0077, K0078, K0107, K0109, K0117, K0118, K0119, K0122, K0123,  K0125, K0128, K0131, K0132, K0133, K0134, K0145, K0155, K0156, K0167,  K0168, K0179, K0182, K0183, K0184, K0185, K0186, K0187, K0188, K0189,  K0305, K0624  S0032, S0046, S0047, S0062, S0065, S0067, S0068, S0069, S0071, S0073, S0074,  S0075, S0087, S0088, S0089, S0090, S0091, S0092, S0093  A0005, A0175   Tasks  Knowledge   Skills   Abilities      121   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Work Role Name  Cyber Defense Forensics Analyst  Work Role ID  Specialty Area  Category  Work Role  Description  Tasks   IN-FOR-002  Digital Forensics (FOR)  Investigate (IN)  Analyzes digital evidence and investigates computer security incidents to derive  useful information in support of system/network vulnerability mitigation.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix C – Workforce Development Tools    C.1   DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit   The DHS Cybersecurity Workforce Development Toolkit (CWDT) [8] helps any organization  understand its cybersecurity workforce and staffing needs to protect its information, customers,  and networks.
This toolkit includes cybersecurity career path templates and recruitment  resources to recruit and retain top cybersecurity talent.
The CWDT provides tools to help  understand an organization’s cybersecurity workforce risks and take inventory of an  organization’s workforce.
CWDT notes that the first step in preparing to build a cybersecurity  workforce is a shared vision for organizing one’s cybersecurity workforce.
Having a shared  vision supports leaders as they respond to changing environments and provides data to better  adjust resources, see patterns of work, and highlight areas of potential risk.
This understanding is  especially important in the ever-changing environment of cybersecurity.
The CWDT includes a  Cybersecurity Workforce Planning Capability Maturity Model (CMM), a self-assessment tool to  help an organization to evaluate the maturity of its cybersecurity workforce planning capability.
The (CWDT) offers profiles as a guide to focus on retaining staff at every level whether entry- level, mid-career, or seasoned cybersecurity professionals.
C.1.1   Proficiency Levels and Career Paths   Developing and sharing career paths with employees will help them identify their proficiency  levels and advance in cybersecurity career paths.
The CWDT includes a three-step process to develop cybersecurity career paths for one’s  organization.
•  Step 2 – Use a CWDT template to create custom cybersecurity-specific career paths for  your organization filling in “Suggested Experience & Credentials,” “Competencies and  Sample Skills / KSAs,” and “Suggested Training & Development Activities.”   •  Step 3 – Share career paths with cybersecurity managers and staff.
C.2   Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool   Once an organization has determined its cybersecurity requirements (such as through a  cybersecurity audit or an internal self-assessment), it can reference the NICE Framework to  identify the work roles and tasks that will help fulfill those requirements.
While general terms,  such as “cyber professionals,” have historically been used to measure needs, the specificity  provided by the NICE Framework provides a better approach to describe the dozens of discrete  job functions needed.
By identifying the required and available competencies, and by identifying  gaps between required and available skills, the organization can identify critical needs.
The  NICE Framework helps an organization to answer the following questions, drawn from the  Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder Tool [9], regarding maintenance of an effective and  supportive workforce environment to achieve its cybersecurity goals:   123   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  How do you assess your workforce capability and capacity needs related to   •  How do you organize and manage your cybersecurity workforce to establish roles and   cybersecurity?
•  How do you prepare your workforce for changing cybersecurity capability and capacity   needs?
As more organizations assess their cybersecurity workforce, the common lexicon in the NICE  Framework enables capacity and capability assessment across multiple organizations, industry  sectors, and regions.
C.3   Position Description Drafting Tool   The DHS Cyberskills Management Support Initiative PushbuttonPD Tool [10] allows managers,  supervisors, and HR specialists to rapidly draft a federal employee position description (PD)  without the need for extensive training or prior knowledge of position classification.
It is  designed to present language from multiple, mission-critical authoritative sources and standards  for duties, tasks, and KSAs, rapidly capture the hiring official’s requirements, and present them  in a robust hiring package that can be easily integrated into existing agency HR processes.
Any  organization can experiment with the PushbuttonPD Tool to see how it pulls NICE Framework  material into a job description.
124   NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix D – Cross Reference to Guidance and Guideline Documents   NICE Strategic Goal #3 Guide Career Development and Workforce Planning aims to support  employers to address market demands and enhance recruitment, hiring, development, and  retention of cybersecurity talent.
Adoption in this case means that the  NICE Framework is used as a reference resource for actions related to cybersecurity workforce,  training, and education.
One way to encourage adoption of the NICE Framework is to push authors of cybersecurity  guidance or guideline documents to cross reference some of the content of those documents to  components in the NICE Framework.
Appendix D includes examples of publication cross  referencing that could encourage adoption of the NICE Framework.
D.1   Cybersecurity Framework    In 2014, NIST released the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [11],  commonly referred to as the Cybersecurity Framework.
Developed in response to Executive  Order (EO) 13636 [12], the Cybersecurity Framework provides a performance-based and cost- effective approach to help organizations to identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risk.
It was  built through a series of public workshops that were convened by NIST to better understand what  standards and methodologies are helpful for achieving effective risk management, and how  voluntary existing good practices might be implemented to improve cybersecurity.
A companion document to the Cybersecurity Framework, the NIST Roadmap for Improving  Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [13] points to the need for a skilled cybersecurity  workforce to meet the unique cybersecurity needs of critical infrastructure.
It recognizes that, as  the cybersecurity threat and technology environments evolve, the workforce must continue to  adapt to design, develop, implement, maintain, and continuously improve the necessary  cybersecurity practices.
The Cybersecurity Framework consists of three parts: Framework Core, Framework  Implementation Tiers, and Framework Profiles.
Each Cybersecurity Framework component  reinforces the connection between business drivers and cybersecurity activities.
The Framework  Core elements work together as follows:   •  Functions organize basic cybersecurity activities at their highest level.
•  Categories are the subdivisions of a Function into groups of cybersecurity outcomes   closely tied to programmatic needs and activities.
•  Subcategories further divide a Category into specific outcomes of technical and/or   management activities.
•  Informative References are specific sections of standards, guidelines, and practices  common among critical infrastructure sectors that illustrate a method to achieve the   125      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
The Informative References presented in the  Framework Core are illustrative and not exhaustive.
They represent the cross-sector  guidance most frequently referenced during the Framework development process.
The Core Functions each contribute to a high-level understanding of the cybersecurity needs of  the organization:   •  Identify (ID) – Develop the organizational understanding to manage cybersecurity risk to   systems, assets, data, and capabilities.
•  Protect (PR) – Develop and implement the appropriate safeguards to ensure delivery of   critical infrastructure services.
•  Detect (DE) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to identify the   occurrence of a cybersecurity event.
•  Respond (RS) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to take action   regarding a detected cybersecurity event.
•  Recover (RC) – Develop and implement the appropriate activities to maintain plans for   resilience and to restore any capabilities or services that were impaired due to a  cybersecurity event.
Table 8 describes  the relationships among the Cybersecurity Framework Functions and NICE Framework  Categories.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 8 - Crosswalk of NICE Framework Workforce Categories to Cybersecurity Framework   Functions   NICE Framework   Category   Securely Provision  (SP)   Operate and  Maintain (OM)   Oversee and Govern  (OV)   Protect and Defend  (PR)   Analyze (AN)   Collect and Operate  (CO)   Investigate (IN)      Category Description   Conceptualizes, designs, and/or builds  secure information technology (IT) systems,  with responsibility for aspects of system  and/or network development.
Provides the support, administration, and  maintenance necessary to ensure effective  and efficient information technology (IT)  system performance and security.
Provides leadership, management, direction,  or development and advocacy so that the  organization may effectively conduct  cybersecurity work.
Identifies, analyzes, and mitigates threats to  internal information technology (IT) systems  and/or networks.
Performs highly-specialized review and  evaluation of incoming cybersecurity  information to determine its usefulness for  intelligence.
Provides specialized denial and deception  operations and collection of cybersecurity  information that may be used to develop  intelligence.
Investigates cybersecurity events or crimes  related to information technology (IT)  systems, networks, and digital evidence.
Related Cybersecurity  Framework Function(s)   Identify (ID), Protect (PR)   Protect (PR), Detect (DE)   Identify (ID), Protect (PR),  Detect (DE), Recover (RC)   Protect (PR), Detect (DE),  Respond (RS)   Identify (ID), Detect (DE),  Respond (RS)   Detect (DE), Protect (PR),  Respond (RS)   Detect (DE), Respond (RS),  Recover (RC)   D.1.2   Example Integration of Cybersecurity Framework with NICE Framework   While the Cybersecurity Framework and the NICE Framework were developed separately, each  complements the other by describing a hierarchical approach to achieving cybersecurity goals.
Consider the following example:   Cybersecurity Framework’s Respond Function includes a Mitigation (RS.MI) Category.
The  Category includes a Subcategory, RS.MI-2, pointing to an outcome of, “Incidents are  mitigated.” While Cybersecurity Framework describes this outcome, and provides several  informative references regarding the security controls to achieve it, Cybersecurity Framework  does not provide any informative guidance regarding who should be responsible for attaining the  outcome, or what KSAs would apply.
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   Reviewing the NICE Framework, we identify the Cybersecurity Defense Incident Responder  (PR-IR-001) role in the Protect and Defend (PR) category, Incident Response (IR) specialty  area.
We can review the description of this role to ensure that it aligns with the Cybersecurity  Framework RS.MI-2 outcome:   Responds  to  disruptions  within  the  pertinent  domain  to  mitigate  immediate  and  potential threats.
Uses mitigation, preparedness, and response and recovery approaches  to  maximize  survival  of  life,  preservation  of  property,  and  information  security.
Investigates and analyzes relevant response activities and evaluates the effectiveness  of and improvements to existing practices.
Investigates,  analyzes,  and  responds  to  cybersecurity  incidents  within  the  network  environment or enclave.
We learn from Appendix A of this document that the person whose position includes this work  role might be expected to perform many of the following Tasks, which align with the desired  Cybersecurity Framework outcome:   •  T0041 - Coordinate and provide expert technical support to enterprise-wide cybersecurity   defense technicians to resolve cybersecurity defense incidents.
•  T0161 - Perform analysis of log files from a variety of sources (e.g., individual host logs,  network traffic logs, firewall logs, and intrusion detection system [IDS] logs) to identify  possible threats to network security.
•  T0163 - Perform cybersecurity defense incident triage, to include determining scope,   urgency, and potential impact; identify the specific vulnerability; and make  recommendations that enable expeditious remediation.
•  T0175 - Perform real-time cybersecurity defense incident handling (e.g., forensic  collections, intrusion correlation and tracking, threat analysis, and direct system  remediation) tasks to support deployable Incident Response Teams (IRTs).
•  T0214 - Receive and analyze network alerts from various sources within the enterprise   and determine possible causes of such alerts.
•  T0233 - Track and document cybersecurity defense incidents from initial detection   through final resolution.
•  T0246 - Write and publish cybersecurity defense techniques, guidance, and reports on   incident findings to appropriate constituencies.
•  T0262 - Employ approved defense-in-depth principles and practices (e.g., defense-in-  multiple places, layered defenses, security robustness).
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   •  T0278 - Collect intrusion artifacts (e.g., source code, malware, Trojans) and use   discovered data to enable mitigation of potential cybersecurity defense incidents within  the enterprise.
•  T0279 - Serve as technical expert and liaison to law enforcement personnel and explain   incident details as required.
•  T0164 - Perform cybersecurity defense trend analysis and reporting.
•  T0503 - Monitor external data sources (e.g., cybersecurity defense vendor sites,   Computer Emergency Response Teams, Security Focus) to maintain the currency of  cybersecurity defense threat condition and determine which security issues may have an  impact on the enterprise.
Furthermore, from Appendix B, we can learn the broad range of KSAs that might be needed by a  person whose cybersecurity position includes this work role.
Armed with this information, an organization seeking to achieve the outcome described by  Cybersecurity Framework   RS.MI-2 may determine whether one or more existing staff have the necessary skills to complete  the tasks described.
If one or more KSAs are lacking, the employee desiring to fill that work role  will know specifically what areas need improvement and can seek academic classes or industry  training to gain the necessary knowledge.
If no such staff are found, the employer has specific  Task descriptions and KSA requirements that may be advertised in a job posting, or that may be  used for contractor staff to augment existing personnel.
D.2   Systems Security Engineering   NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-160, Systems Security Engineering - Considerations for a  Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems [14], addresses  the engineering-driven actions necessary to develop more defensible and survivable systems— including the components that compose those systems and the services that depend on them.
It  starts with and builds upon a set of well-established International Standards for systems and  software engineering, and infuses systems security engineering techniques, methods, and  practices into those systems and software engineering activities.
The ultimate objective is to  address security issues from a stakeholder requirements and protection needs perspective, and to  use established engineering processes to ensure that such requirements and needs are addressed  with the appropriate fidelity and rigor across the entire life cycle of the system.
Increasing the  trustworthiness of systems is a significant undertaking that requires a substantial investment in  the requirements, architecture, design, and development of systems, components, applications,  and networks—and a fundamental cultural change to the current “business as usual” approach.
Introducing a disciplined, structured, and standards-based set of systems security engineering  activities and tasks provides an important starting point and forcing function to initiate needed   129      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
The ultimate objective is to obtain trustworthy secure systems that are fully capable of  supporting critical missions and business operations while protecting stakeholder assets, and to  do so with a level of assurance that is consistent with the risk tolerance of those stakeholders.
Practitioners of the system security engineering  specialty discipline will likely become subject matter experts who can justify additional KSAs  and tasks to be added to the NICE Framework.
D.3   U.S. Office of Personnel Management Federal Cybersecurity Codes   On January 4, 2017, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued a memorandum  [15] titled “Guidance for federal agencies assigning new cybersecurity codes to positions with  information technology, cybersecurity, and cyber-related functions”.
The memorandum notes  that the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 [16] requires OPM to  establish procedures to implement the NICE coding structure and to identify all Federal civilian  positions that require the performance of information technology, cybersecurity, or other cyber- related functions.
Table 9 shows the mapping of NICE Framework Work Role IDs which  represent the interdisciplinary nature of cybersecurity work to OPM cybersecurity codes which  are compatible with the OPM Enterprise Human Resources Integration system.
130   NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Table 9 – Crosswalk of Work Role IDs to OPM Cybersecurity Codes   Work Role ID  OPM   Code  Work Role ID  OPM   Code  Work Role ID  OPM  Code   SP-RSK-001   611  OV-LGA-001   731  AN-TWA-001   141   T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      Appendix E – Acronyms    Selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this paper are defined below:   NICE FRAMEWORK   Application programming interface   Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation   Cross-Domain Solutions   Chief Information Officer   Crypto Key Management System  Capability Maturity Model Integration   Content Management System  Committee on National Security Systems Instruction    API  CDM  CDS  CIO  CKMS  CMMI  CMS  CNSSI  COMSEC  Communications Security   COTR  DNS  EISA  FISMA  FOIA  HR  IDS  IP  IPS  IR  IRT  ISD  ITL  KSA  LAN  NICE  OLA  OMB  OPM  OS  OSI  P.L.
PCI  PHI  PIA  PII  PKI  R&D  RFID  RMF  SA&A  SDLC  SLA  SOP   Contracting Officer's Technical Representative   Domain Name System   Enterprise Information Security Architecture   Federal Information Security Modernization Act   Freedom of Information Act   Human Resource   Intrusion detection system   Internet Protocol   Intrusion Prevention System   Incident Response   Incident Response Teams   Instructional System Design   Information Technology Laboratory   Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities   Local area network   National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education   Operating-Level Agreement  Office of Management and Budget   Office of Personnel Management   Operating system   Open System Interconnection   Public Law   Payment Card Industry   Personal Health Information   Privacy Impact Assessments   Personally Identifiable Information   Public key infrastructure   Research and Design  Radio Frequency Identification   Risk Management Framework   Security Assessment and Authorization   System development life cycle   Service-Level Agreements   Standard operating procedures    132   NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST SP 800-181      SQL  TCP  TTP  URL  VPN  WAN        Structured query language   Transmission Control Protocol   Tactics, techniques, and procedures   Uniform Resource Locator   Virtual Private Network   Wide Area Network         T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m     :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181   NICE FRAMEWORK   Appendix F– References   [1]  [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9]  [10]  [11]  [12]  [13]  NICE Framework Revision webpage, National Institute of Standards and Technology  [Website], https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/nice-cybersecurity- workforce-framework-revisions National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, National Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework, ver.
1.0, https://www.nist.gov/file/359276 National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, National Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework, ver.
2.0, https://www.nist.gov/file/359261 Reference Spreadsheet for NIST Special Publication 800-181 https://www.nist.gov/file/372581 NICE Framework, National Institute of Standards and Technology [Website], https:// www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/resources/nice-cybersecurity-workforce- framework U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (ETA) [Website].
https://www.doleta.gov Competency Model Clearinghouse, Cybersecurity Competency Model, https://www.careeronestop.org/competencymodel/competency- models/cybersecurity.aspx U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Cybersecurity Workforce Development  Toolkit (CWDT), https://niccs.us-cert.gov/workforce-development/cybersecurity- workforce-development-toolkit Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Program, National Institute of Standards and  Technology [Website], https://www.nist.gov/baldrige/products-services/baldrige- cybersecurity-initiative U.S. Department of Homeland Security, CMSI PushButtonPDTM Tool Website,  https://niccs.us-cert.gov/workforce-development/dhs-cmsi-pushbuttonpd-tool Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.0, National  Institute of Standards and Technology February 12, 2014, https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/cybersecurity- framework-021214.pdf Executive Order no.
13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,  DCPD-201300091, February 12, 2013. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-02- 19/pdf/2013-03915.pdf NIST Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, National Institute  of Standards and Technology, February 12, 2014, https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/ roadmap-021214.pdf   134      T h s    i  p u b  l i  c a  t i  o n    i s    a v a  i l  a b e  l    f r e e o     f   c h a r g e    f r o m  :    h  t t  p s : / /  d o  i .
NIST SP 800-181      NICE FRAMEWORK   NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-160, Systems Security Engineering - Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy  Secure Systems, National Institute of Standards and Technology, November 2016,  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-160   Memorandum on Guidance for Assigning New Cybersecurity Codes to Positions  with Information Technology, Cybersecurity, and Cyber-Related Functions, January  2017, https://www.chcoc.gov/content/guidance-assigning-new-cybersecurity-codes- positions-information-technology-cybersecurity   H.R.2029 - Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 which contains Division N-  Cybersecurity Act of 2015, https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ113/PLAW- 114publ113.pdf   Strategic Recruitment    for Cybersecurity   Data-driven.
Analyze   Investigate   Oversight and  Development   Collect and   Operate   Operate and  Maintain   Protect and  Defend   Securely  Provision   March 2017    1   Strategic Recruitment    The Office of Management and Budget’s, Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy  Memorandum M-16-15, issued on July 12, 2016 reads:  •  Goal 3: Recruit and Hire Highly-Skilled Talent.
Engaging in Government-wide and agency- specific efforts to expand the cybersecurity workforce through recruitment of highly- skilled talent, and streamlining the hiring and security clearance process while still meeting  applicable law and standards.
– Purpose:   Engage in Government-wide and agency-specific efforts to conduct  outreach and recruitment for cybersecurity talent and improve and expand on  existing hiring and retention efforts.
– Outcome:  Increase the pipeline of cybersecurity talent entering the Federal   workforce, including candidates who have not traditionally considered Federal  employment, and provide reliable and effective human resources services that enable  agencies to immediately fill vacancies.
March 2017    2   Strategic Recruitment   Consistent with the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, OPM is:   1.
Ensuring the Federal cybersecurity   4.
agencies better target and measure the  success of their recruitment efforts.
Partnering with agencies and key   cybersecurity leaders to continue to  improve the way the Federal Government  attracts and recruits new talent.
3   Components   Agencies with a proactive recruitment model focused on building talent pipelines, cultivating  and maintaining partnerships, monitoring recruitment activities and sharing accountability  will be more successful in securing top cybersecurity talent.
Resources    Employer Branding    – Staff  – Budget  – Technology   Collaboration    – Leadership  – Hiring Managers  – Human Resources  – Recruiters   Data-driven Approach   – Workforce Planning  – Labor Market  – Recruitment Analytics   – Job Postings  – Recruitment Messaging  – Communication with   Candidates   Integrated  Social Media   – Branding and Messaging  – Communication with   Candidates   Onboarding and Retention   – Mentoring  – Orientation      March 2017    Sourcing   – Students, Recent   Graduates and Alumni   – Presidential   Management Fellows  – Transitioning Service   Members  – Veterans  – Military Spouses  – Federal Employees  – Experienced  Candidates   – Senior Executives      4   Resources   In order for a recruiting strategy to be successful agencies must determine what resource  needs  will be required for implementation.
Having the right staff and technology with the  capabilities to implement the strategy is a critical step in the strategic process.
Budget—The strategic recruitment plan will need to be examined against current and  future budgeting requirements.
A proactive recruitment strategy will require more  funding than a traditional passive recruitment strategy.
Staff—The collaboration of HR and Hiring Managers can only accomplish a part of  the strategic recruitment process due to the transactional nature of the relationship.
Agencies may need to seek out qualified talent acquisition professionals (i.e.,  recruiters, sources, or vendors) to gain access to groups of qualified individuals.
Technology—Access and the ability to utilize recruitment technology and tools will  be critical in reaching qualified job seekers and maintaining agency competitiveness  with the private sector.
March 2017    5   Resources—Budget   Recruiting Expenses   Operations   Technology   Advertising   Agency Misc.
• Infrastructure  • Staff expenses  • Security    • Website(s)  • Social media  • Databases   • Print  • Online  • Third-party   • Travel  • Staff training  • Memberships   • Travel  • Relocation  • Assessments    Alleviating Constraints   • Advance headcount targets  • Supportive staffing model   • Zero-based budgeting     March 2017    6   Resources—Budget   Costs associated with the recruitment and sourcing of candidates are often carried by the  agency, but the individual costs (e.g., candidate travel, relocation, background checks) may  be borne by the office or component.
Some budgeting recommendations include:     – Develop hiring goals (e.g., headcount targets) prior to developing a budget.
– Obtain budget approval as far in advance of the recruitment cycle as possible for   items such as Relocation, Recruitment, and Retention (3Rs), advertising, technology,  travel, etc.
March 2017    7   Resources—Staff   Successful recruitment requires experienced recruitment teams with expertise  in developing  networks, identifying groups of qualified individuals, managing the recruitment lifecycle,  and  building relationships with sources of talent.
Your agency will need to define the following:     Team Purpose  – Aligned with Strategic Recruitment Plan      Organizational Structure  – Fit and Function within the Organization   • Talent Pipeline  • Requisition-Specific  • Occupation-Specific  • Volume  Seasonal  •  Team Role  – Talent Capability    • Messaging  Sourcing  • • Outreach  • • Candidate Experience   Full Lifecycle   • Organizational Home  • Working Relationships  •  Integrated Processes   – Governance and Compliance  – Workflows (Effectiveness and Efficiency)  – Service Level Agreements   Sourcing Methodology   – How Sourcing will be Done   Sourcing (Finding Talent)    • Research (Market Intelligence)   • • Messaging (Engaging Talent)   • Conversion (Generating Qualified Applicants)    March 2017    8   Resources—Technology   Your agency will need the technical capability (e.g., equipment, infrastructure) to set-up and  carry out recruitment activities through online resources (i.e., USAJOBS, job boards, sourcing  tools, and social media).
You will need to ensure staff have the capability and technological  resources to conduct online recruiting as well as clear policy guidance on social media usage.
Other technology considerations include:    – Organizational coordination of online resources.
• Social media account management.
– Focus on resolving business problems should lead system development.
• How to manage the candidate lifecycle in real-time?
• How to establish and manage a social media branding and recruitment strategy?
• How to acquire the right technology and access to social media to accomplish the   above?
March 2017    9   Collaboration   Hiring managers should be involved in the recruitment process to ensure quality of candidates.
Work closely with human resources (HR) before the job opportunity announcement (JOA) is   posted to:   – Ensure the position description (PD) is accurate and up-to-date;  – Complete a job analysis to identify the critical competencies needed in the job;  – Participate in identifying/developing the assessment tool that will be used to evaluate   candidates;   – Develop a recruiting strategy; and  – Ensure the JOA accurately describes the duties of the job and competencies and   experience required in an easy-to-understand and appealing manner.
After the applicants  are assessed and the referral list is issued, the hiring manager should actively engage in  interviewing top candidates and making the selection.
Hiring managers and HR Specialists should collaborate to recruit and hire a diverse, high-   performing workforce that reflects the diversity of the American society.
Hiring Managers  –  Prepare for the conversation (i.e., be  able to describe your team/office, have  past PDs, provide historical feedback  from interviewers and/or applicants on  the process, etc.).
– –  Recruiters and HR  Specialists  – Educate your managers on recruiting   strategies, hiring authorities, and agency  policies.
– Use OPM resources and training to inform   managers on the recruitment and hiring  process.
– Encourage hiring managers  to engage in   outreach and recruitment activities.
– Solicit hiring manager’s feedback on the   ROI of recruiting events.
– Collaborate with internal diversity councils   to access diversity data and incorporate  that data into  your planning.
March 2017    11   Collaboration    Hiring Managers  –  –  –  –  –  Allocate sufficient time to devote to  recruitment.
Internal  agency policies determine who has access  to data, but they also encourage the use  of such data.
Provide realistic job requirements so HR  and recruiters can prepare a realistic job  preview to attract quality applicants  throughout the hiring process.
Recruiters and HR  Specialists  – Research the job series related to   cybersecurity and similar internal or external  job postings.
– Review relevant hiring data and industry   trends and share information with managers.
– Provide the manager with an overview of the   process and timeframes to manage  expectations.
– Set realistic expectations and help develop   recruiting options.
– Keep managers and applicants informed.
March 2017    12   Data-Driven—Workforce Planning   1. Review your organization’s workforce plan,   especially for cybersecurity positions.
– Define hiring projections:  number of   cybersecurity vacancies.
Ensure proper cybersecurity coding to   capture work roles and align those roles with  cybersecurity vacancies.
– Refer to the NIST Guidance, Federal Cybersecurity Coding Structure issued     November 15, 2016  https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/05/15/opm_cyber securitycodingstructure.pdf                March 2017       13   Data-Driven    3.
Recruiters/HR Specialists must research workforce trends and talent needs and inform   cybersecurity managers and HR specialists.
– Information on current recruitment trends will be available on HRU.gov (Recruitment Policy   Studio).
4. Review  your organization’s applicant flow data and workforce diversity to give you a clear   guide on where  gaps exists.
OPM reports include:    – https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/reports/  – https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/federal-workforce-at-  a-glance/       @   OPM Contact     DiversityandInclusion@opm.gov        March 2017    14   Data-Driven—Applicant Flow Data   Applicant Flow Data is used to determine if applicant  pools are reflective of the civilian labor force.
Application   Applicant Flow Data is available to agencies using USA  Staffing through a secure FTP site and Cognos.
Agencies   using other Talent Acquisition Systems will need to  contact their service provider for access to AFD.
AFD allows agencies to identify barriers and best  practices at each stage in the hiring process:  application,  qualification, referral and selection.
USA Staffing and OPM’s Office of Diversity and Inclusion  host an interagency Applicant Flow Data Work Group to  share information and best practices.
To find out more about USA Staffing capabilities,  please contact:   Alesia Booth, USA Staffing Program Manager  Alesia.Booth@opm.gov      16   March  2017    Data-Driven    5.
Some metrics include:   – Time-to-hire—How long it takes to hire.
– Satisfaction Surveys—Measure hiring manager, applicant, and new hire satisfaction.
– Use available hiring flexibilities  and hiring authorities to drive sourcing efforts, including   those specific to attracting cybersecurity talent.
March 2017    17   Employer Branding   The Employment Brand is critical in  communicating core organizational and  occupational attributes to cybersecurity talent.
Your brand includes your EVP, the values  exhibited by your leaders and employees, and  reflects what others say about your agency.
Create or validate your Employee Value Proposition based on what is important to the   cybersecurity talent that you seek.
Develop an Employment Brand and branding strategies before considering use of social   media.
Provide enough information through branding so applicants can determine if the position is a   good fit.
Write clear and understandable job postings that describe the duties of the job, competencies,   and required experience in plain language and in an appealing manner.
A  theme  that  best  describes  the  cybersecurity  mission  of  the  agency  can  be  determined  by  examining  the  attributes  of  your  current  cybersecurity  workforce.
– Engage executive leadership, communications and media offices, hiring managers,   subject matter experts, and recruiters in creating the organizational social media  recruiting strategy for cybersecurity positions.
– Have your recruiters involved by posting cybersecurity news and other relevant   information that may attract applicants to your job openings (e.g., hiring initiatives,  Federal Viewpoint Survey scores).
March 2017       20   Sourcing—Practices   Active and targeted sourcing of talent is necessary to meet the high volume of cybersecurity  hiring required to expand and maintain the Federal workforce.
Partner with colleges and universities, including minority serving institutions, Centers of   Academic Excellence in cybersecurity to increase recruiting efforts.
– Use Student Ambassadors from your agency  to talk to cybersecurity students about   your agency and careers.
– Have cybersecurity experts provide virtual or in-person information sessions to   students.
Work with industry and professional organizations to learn effective strategies to attract    qualified candidates.
Increase outreach activities to include women and minorities in cybersecurity fields.
Have current employees, subject matter experts, managers, and supervisors participate in   career fairs, virtual events, testimonial videos, etc.
Use your cybersecurity employees and new hires to refer applicants for hard-to-fill positions.
Use online resources (e.g., social media, résumé databases, discussion forums) to identify   qualified individuals and inform them about open positions.
March 2017    22   Sourcing—Types of Talent   Students and    Recent Graduates   • Use the Pathways Programs, and other internship   programs to hire candidates who possess up-to-date  knowledge in cybersecurity specialties.
Federal Employees   • Identify agency employees on cybersecurity career   paths, rotational assignments, etc.
or Federal  employees who desire to enter cybersecurity fields.
Passive Candidates   • Source applicants who are at different stages of their   careers in private industry, academia, and Government  yet are not actively looking for jobs.
Presidential   Management Fellows       • Access candidates with advanced degrees in all  academic backgrounds, including cybersecurity.
Recruit candidates who are pursuing Bachelors, Masters, or Ph.D. degrees in Information   Assurance and Cybersecurity- related degree programs.
To recruit CyberCorps® Scholarship  for Service (SFS) participants, Hiring Managers and HR specialists can visit www.sfs.opm.gov  and register as an agency official or contact the program office at sfs@opm.gov.
You can  receive information on CyberCorps® SFS participants available and their degree information  so you can contact them directly, work directly with a participating institution, or work directly  with OPM staff to determine other methods that may work better for you.
– Identify Centers for Academic Excellence colleges and universities that have a diverse student   population, including women and minorities.
Share your organization mission and job openings.
Once they  complete their educational and program requirements, they can be noncompetitively converted to  career conditional status.
Contact your agency Pathways Program Officer or OPM at  pathways@opm.gov for additional information.
The  WRP is managed by the Department of Labor.
Sponsor or participate in cyber challenges and competitions to raise awareness to students   early in their education.
March 2017    26   Sourcing–Veterans    Many wounded warriors, transitioning service members, and veterans have the ideal background  and training from the military to meet your cybersecurity workforce staffing needs.
Many  veterans are pursuing training and/or education through various Department of Veterans Affairs  programs, to include the GI Bill, that make veterans an exceptional applicant pool.
Use the Feds Hire Vets platform and social media sites to recruit Veterans for your   cybersecurity staffing needs.
Contact the CHCO Agency Veteran Employment Program Office (VEPO) to:     – Develop Vets to Feds (V2F) Career Development Program for critical occupations    • Develop a program for cybersecurity occupations to target veteran candidates for   training and development    – Participate in the Department of Veterans Affairs Vocational Rehabilitation Program   • Non-paid Work Experience  • On-the-job Training Program   – Partner with Veterans Service Organizations to create talent pipelines   • Veterans of Modern Warfare, Student Veterans of America, American Legion, etc.
– Participate in Department of Defense Programs   • Hiring Heroes Program/Hiring Heroes Career Fairs/Pre-scheduled interviews  • Operation Warfighter Intern Program    – Find VEPO POCS at www.fedshirevets.gov/AgencyDirectory/index.aspx   •  If you do not have a VEPO, contact OPM’s Veterans Services at:  fedshirevets@opm.gov or (202) 606-3017      March 2017    28   Sourcing–Federal Employees   Identify potential cybersecurity professionals inside the Federal workforce.
Develop and promote cybersecurity career paths, rotational assignments, and mentoring   and coaching programs to provide employees with opportunities to become subject  matter experts in their field or move into entry- or higher-level cybersecurity positions.
Encourage agency employees with requisite skill sets to gain training and/or experience   in anticipation of applying and competing for entry-level cybersecurity positions.
Keep internal and external Federal employees informed (through social media, website,  or other forums) about cybersecurity initiatives and challenges to encourage individuals  who may be interested to apply for cybersecurity positions.
Leverage educational discount programs for Federal employees by encouraging  continuing education in cybersecurity.
Expand efforts to cybersecurity professional organizations and alumni organizations to   identify highly-qualified candidates.
Seek referrals from current cybersecurity employees and contractors to identify possible   candidates with the skill sets needed for open positions.
Use the Resume Mining tool on USAJOBS to search for cybersecurity talent and invite them   to apply for specific job openings that are a possible match to their skill set.
Use social networking such as LinkedIn to connect with potential candidates, especially at   the mid-and senior-level.
Recruit Presidential Management Fellows with advanced degrees in cybersecurity.
– Include information about the PMF program in outreach to students and recent   graduates with advanced degrees.
Hiring Option:    –  Pathways Programs – Presidential Management Fellows Program.
Develop a plan and strategies to implement onboarding in phases over an 18-month period   starting before the employee comes on board to the end of the first year.
Participate in the Government-wide cybersecurity orientation program for new   cybersecurity professionals.
Use higher-level and senior cybersecurity staff to mentor new employees and bring them                 up-to-speed on mission critical work, organizational culture, and new technologies.
Establish career paths for cybersecurity employees and track the development of critical   skills sets.
Offer mentoring programs and networking opportunities within the cybersecurity   community.
Potential Onboarding Delivery Methods   In-person   Virtual   Self-guided  Combination   March 2017    32   Strategies–Checklist   Talent Acquisition          Strategy Status   • Create consistent policies across the organization.
Plans by Talent Type   • Develop  sourcing  plans for each Mission Critical Occupation (MCO).
Executive Engagement   • Implement defined leadership roles and accountability.
Implementation Approach   • Align talent strategy with strategic human capital plan.
March 2017    33   Strategies–Talent Acquisition Strategy   Development Map   March 2017    34   Strategies–Social Media Strategy Map   March 2017    35   OPM Resources   •  Compensation:  – Guide on compensation flexibilities for cybersecurity professionals:   https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/reference- materials/handbooks/compensation-flexibilities-to-recruit-and-retain-cybersecurity- professionals.pdf   – Fact sheet on compensation for prospective employees:    https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/pay-administration/fact- sheets/federal-employee- compensation-package/     Recruitment and Hiring:   •  – Cybersecurity Hiring, Pay, and Leave Flexibilities   https://www.chcoc.gov/content/cybersecurity-hiring-pay-and-leave-flexibilities   CyberCareers.gov  https://www.cybercareers.gov/      –     March 2017    36   OPM Resources   https://hru.gov/    https://hru.gov/Studio_Recruitment/Studio_Recruitment.aspx       Recruiting Boot Camp:         Professional Development Series    outreach@opm.gov         Pathways Programs       Professional Development   Series    pathways@opm.gov      March 2017    37   WHITE PAPER  Credentialing Cybersecurity  Workforce  CompTIA INSIGHTS INTO   THE CERTIFICATION PROCESS  Table of Contents  Foreword The Cybersecurity Training Imperative Industry-Driven, Vendor-Neutral Certifications:   The CompTIA Story IT Certification in the Cybersecurity Environment    What is a Certification?
Producing Trusted Cybersecurity Certifications  The Certification Development Process   How is an IT Certification Made?
3  4  5    6    7      9  10  What to Measure in a Credential Examination:     11      13  CompTIA and the Cybersecurity Credentials  Industry 13  Glossary 17  Appendices  Knowledge, Performance or Both?
The CompTIA Public-Private-Academic Partnership:   Optimum Responsiveness to Rapid Developments   in the Cybersecurity Threat Environment                Industry Recognized Credentials  Foreword  CompTIA, the leading global provider of vendor-neutral IT certifications, develops security  certifications that are foundational and promote the workforce skills needed to combat  cyber threats and weaknesses.
This white paper provides a transparent explanation of  CompTIA’s expertise in developing, disseminating, and updating IT security certifications.
Although other peer organizations may offer procedural variations, it is our hope that  this description of the CompTIA methodology will provide a broader understanding of the  importance and effectiveness of the private sector credentialing community.
In this paper  we set forth:  •  The importance of developing varied career paths to meet today’s workforce and    cybersecurity challenges.
•  CompTIA’s network of learning and testing partners and the origin and importance    of vendor-neutral certifications.
•  The meaning of a certification: A credential achieved through examination that validates   the knowledge and skills of an individual or organization.
•  How effective certification is constructed and kept up to date by assembling subject   matter experts to develop a Job Task Analysis (JTA), an examination blueprint, and  extensive examination questions that map to the blueprint.
•  The breadth of CompTIA relationships with government and academic communities, all   of which enhance the effectiveness of the credential and the rapidity by which real-world  developments can drive updates, improvements, and training.
•  A framework that demonstrates order and coherence to the cybersecurity credentialing   ecosystem.
With a rapidly developing cybersecurity threat matrix, both government and private-sector  professionals must be nimble and collaborative.
Todd Thibodeaux, President and CEO CompTIA  03  CompTIA.org  The Cybersecurity Training Imperative  Technology innovation has given us an interconnected global  marketplace.
We now have hundreds of millions of online users  with constantly evolving mobile computing platforms offering  ubiquitous access to information, communication, and commerce  wherever we live.
The correspondingly complex and mobile nature of  digital threats to the world’s computer networks is growing at the  same exponential pace.
Training the cybersecurity workforce for  tomorrow’s threat environment requires  forward-looking approaches; merely  informing end users and IT security  professionals about existing cyber threats  is not enough.
Those responsible for hiring  the best human cybersecurity talent must  have confidence—before a breach or  breakdown occurs—that employees are  trained and equipped in a manner that  can be confidently identified, measured,  and validated.
Further, it is essential to develop and  provide ongoing training so that the  professional workforce is prepared to  address new and emerging threats to our  increasingly digital way of life.
Cybersecurity professionals rely on a  variety of tools to prepare for defending  against and responding to cyber threats.
Other sources include vendor-  neutral credentials that address a broader  subject or practice area, on-the-job training  programs, internships or other practical,  experience-based programs.
In the cybersecurity world, career paths  vary from technical information assurance  and auditing to IT management—with levels  within each scaling from apprentice to  master.
Each pathway serves a distinct and  important role in addressing today’s cyber  threats and requires unique training and  skill sets.1  (See Appendix 1 for details.)
CompTIA certifications also cover a wide  array of IT fields including cloud, mobility,  storage, healthcare, green IT, and more.
However, the focus of this paper is the suite  of IT certifications that are the basis for  cybersecurity training and the specific role  of certifications in addressing the critical need to train, credential, and deploy  thousands of professionals to protect our  national IT infrastructure.
Another resource is the Essential Body of Knowledge matrix developed by the Department  of Homeland Security (http://www.us-cert.gov/ITSecurityEBK/EBK%20Matrix-Sept08.pdf).
Industry Recognized Credentials  “No foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our  networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American  families, especially our kids.
We are making sure our government  integrates intelligence to combat cyber threats, just as we have done to  combat terrorism.
And tonight, I urge this Congress to finally pass the  legislation we need to better meet the evolving threat of cyber-attacks,  combat identity theft, and protect our children’s information.
If we do, we  can continue to protect the technologies that have unleashed untold  opportunities for people around the globe.”  –  President Barack Obama, State of the Union Address, January 2015  Industry-Driven, Vendor-Neutral  Certifications: The CompTIA Story  The success of the personal computer led  the computer service and repair industries  to commission CompTIA to create its globally  recognized, vendor-neutral CompTIA A+  certification program in 1992, which has been  continually updated in the over two decades  since.
Following on the  success of the CompTIA A+ certification,  CompTIA developed and introduced CompTIA  Network+, and CompTIA Security+.
Each  CompTIA certification is industry- driven,  validating technical skills for both individuals  working in IT and for the people who hire and  train them.
By securing and validating core skills and  knowledge, both job-seekers and established professionals can progress to  more complex and specialized cybersecurity   credentials, such as vendor-specific  hardware and software training.
As a   career in cybersecurity matures, it may well  necessitate higher-level, specialty training  and skills in subjects such as security  auditing, forensics, and cybersecurity  management.
Workers might also feel  compelled to acquire additional credentials  to validate those skills to current or  prospective management.
A diverse array of  career paths needs to be available in order to  maintain a skilled cybersecurity workforce.
Along with a global network of third-   party academic and training providers,  CompTIA plays an important role in the  skills-development efforts for today’s  cybersecurity workforce.
As a result of our focus on creating independent certification  credentials developed in isolation from the  training community, CompTIA is recognized  worldwide as a trusted provider of vendor-  neutral certification exams.
05  CompTIA.org  IT Certification In The Cybersecurity  Environment    In addition to validating core competencies,  certifications can be developed and deployed  quickly to address ever-evolving threats  to our IT infrastructure.
Certifications can  demonstrate that a workforce remains  current and informed on technology  advancements that defend against ever- present cyber threats.
CompTIA has put an increasing focus on  cybersecurity, enabling professionals   and solution providers with foundational  principles for securing a network and  managing risk.
The responsiveness of  CompTIA’s credentialed certifications in  addressing technological advancements  has led to private sector and government  mandates for continuing education  requirements for cybersecurity professionals—a development that   CompTIA fully supports.
Put simply, a certification is achieved  through an examination that validates the  knowledge and/or skills of an individual or  an organization.
The American  National Standards Institute (ANSI) provides  a useful definition:  Certification and certificate are distinct  terms, yet they are often used synonymously.
Certification is more comprehensive and  includes an assessment of an individual’s  knowledge, skills, and abilities based on a  body of knowledge pertaining to a profession  or occupation.
Certificates  are generally issued for life.2  Beyond this important distinction, the  industry often refers to credentials and  accreditations.
Credentials attest to  someone’s knowledge or authority such  as a FBI agent badge, a Ph.D. in physics, or  an IT security certification.
For example, by submitting to a voluntary,  self-regulatory process through American  National Standards Institute (ANSI), CompTIA  has sought accreditation of foundational  certifications CompTIA A+, Network+ and  Security+, as well as the CompTIA Advanced  Security Practitioner certification.
The wide variety of methods used to train  and validate knowledge for cybersecurity  professionals demonstrates there is no “one-  size-fits-all” solution.
While most academic  and professional programs promote broad,  introductory knowledge for cybersecurity  professionals, the generalized scope of such  programs is impractical for many full-time IT professionals.
Specialty certifications  can be more effective in providing “just- in- time” training and validation for a  specific technology tool or skill.
But in  some situations, more in-depth training  and certification,  which generally requires  more experience in a profession and  more core knowledge, is appropriate.
Ideally, IT professionals, along with their  career guidance personnel, can construct  learning and career paths using a variety of  credentialing options as tools to develop the  skill sets required.
2. https://www.ansica.org/wwwversion2/outside/PERfaq.asp?menuID=2  Industry Recognized Credentials  Producing Trusted Cybersecurity  Certifications  IT certification has evolved into a validation  instrument that is a trusted resource in  both the IT and the human resources (HR)  communities.
How is an internationally  validated and trusted certification  instrument  constructed?
THE CERTIFICATION DEVELOPMENT  PROCESS  To be an effective and defensible IT  certification, a credential must meet the  following criteria:  •  Technical Precision and Accuracy with   respect to the current and particular body  of knowledge.
•  Comprehensive in Scope to validate the   breadth of skills required by the IT and  cybersecurity professional.
•   Integrity in the Exam Creation Process so   students trust that an exam fairly validates  the requisite skills for a particular job or  skills area and is worth requisite study and  experience; and that IT management and  HR professionals trust both the credential  and the holder as a person who possesses  genuine and comprehensive knowledge.
•   Rigorous and Effective Security in Delivery  to ensure that cheating does not take place.
To meet these important benchmarks,  CompTIA employs an exacting process to  develop and disseminate credentials.
Development of an IT certification begins by  identifying and bringing together Subject  Matter Experts (SMEs) to draft a blueprint for  the examination known as a Job Task Analysis  (JTA).
Each  SME is required to sign a legally binding non-  disclosure agreement3 precluding any profit  motive in the credentials-training industry.
To assure both a  balanced and comprehensive product,  SMEs are selected from a wide variety of  disciplines and vertical markets — including  government, private sector, and, where  individuals are not in any way involved  in course preparation or delivery for IT  certifications, academic professions.
Recent  SMEs for CompTIA IT security certifications  have included government professionals  from the U.S. Department of Homeland  Security, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Navy.
Private-sector experts from companies  including Booz Allen Hamilton and Lockheed  Martin have also participated.
CompTIA  allows no more than two individuals  from the same organization or agency to  participate in the process, ensuring that the  exam is not skewed or biased toward any  one agency or vendor technology.
For details about the requirements SMEs must meet before participating in CompTIA’s certification  development process, see http://certification.comptia.org/get-involved/examdevelopment.aspx   CompTIA.org  After a group of qualified SMEs is selected,   it is sequestered at CompTIA’s headquarters  (much like a deliberating jury in a legal  setting) with precautions taken against  tampering or outside influences upon the  group’s deliberations.
The JTA is then used to develop a blueprint  to test against.
The JTA, along with other  test development procedures, helps ensure  the defensibility of the resulting content.
The collaborative nature of the process is  underscored in the requirement that both  the draft JTA and the draft examination  blueprint cannot be received in final form  until a significant volume of feedback  is received from qualified professionals  worldwide.4 The partnership between  public, private, and academic sectors of  the cybersecurity learning, research, and  practice domains is clearly evident in the  final product.
Curriculum developers, book  publishers, authors and designers, and other  professionals begin developing teaching  and learning materials for training and the  eventual certification exam.
Certification candidates have access to  resources like these as well as resources like  CompTIA CertMaster.
CompTIA CertMaster  is an online study companion using four  components to ensure professionals not  only learn but retain  the information they  are studying.
These four components include  brain science, adaptive learning, superlative  study tools, and mobile learning.
When it comes to certification exam  integrity, CompTIA has maintained a policy  of precluding all instructors, professors,  authors, training executives, and even  unauthorized members from their own  organization (e.g., marketing and sales  personnel) from the vital activities required  in the creation of an examination.
While  there may be other avenues to a similar  outcome, this process protects against  proprietary knowledge obtained  in the  creation of a test from being used to “teach  to the test.” CompTIA’s practice is to maintain  a clear wall of separation to protect the  integrity and validity of the examination  process.
Writing the Questions Once the JTA and examination blueprint  are completed another group of SMEs is  convened for the question writing phase of  the process.
Once the required number of questions  mapped to every area on the examination  blueprint is created, the examination—still  in beta format—is published.
This is one of the  most crucial steps in exam development.
At the workshop, another group of SMEs  estimates the number of minimally qualified  candidates who would answer each question  correctly.
Industry Recognized Credentials  “With this increased reliance on cyber-dependent systems, come   increased threats and vulnerabilities.
Protecting the cybersecurity of our  critical infrastructure is a top priority for the nation, and in February  2013 the President signed Executive Order (EO) 13636: Improving Critical  Infrastructure Cybersecurity and released Presidential Policy Directive   (PPD)-21: Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, which aims to  increase the overall resilience of U.S. critical infrastructure.”  – About the Critical Infrastructure Cyber Community C3 Voluntary Program,   Dept.
of Homeland Security; 2013  Keeping the Credential Current,   Valid, and Relevant Given the type of threats and the  corresponding levels of complexity of  hardware and software to meet the  exigencies of IT security, a valid certification  examination must stay up to date.
CompTIA relies upon a Certification Advisory  Committee, yet another group of impartial  industry experts, academics, and analysts  who review the certification blueprint.
This  group reports significant developments in a subject area to CompTIA credential  managers.
If the committee recommends  that additional technologies be addressed  before a scheduled exam update, the  development cycle is altered in order to cover  all knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary  to perform the job functions associated with  cybersecurity—and yet another question-  writing development cycle is added to the  certification for that year.
As the technology has  evolved and the threats and exploits have   grown, so too has the response in providing   timely and accurate training materials   and best practices.
They also face  legal prosecution if they divulge answers  or other prohibited intellectual property  relating to an examination.6  To deter cheating, a variety of proprietary  technologies are employed.
These include  delivery and transmission of exams in  encrypted formats, random scrambling of examination questions and answers, pools  of thousands of potential questions to stem  the brute-force memorization of answers,  and digital forensics such as biometrics and  time-per-question analysis.
The objective  is to ensure that a CompTIA security  certification is ethically created and honestly  earned.
Further, CompTIA participates in  forums with other credential providers to  maintain the integrity and security of IT  certification credentials.
Incidentally, they are also the  preferred testing providers for the DOD 8570 information assurance program.
CompTIA.org  What to Measure in A Credential Examination:  Knowledge, Performance or Both?
There is an internal debate among  cybersecurity practitioners as to what is  more important to validate: 1) An individual’s  conceptual knowledge, or 2) Performance  associated with a particular job or  responsibility.
Both domain knowledge  expertise and practical skills are absolutely  vital and should be a part of any serious  competency training and validation process.
When a certification is developed or updated,  CompTIA works closely with its learning  partners to ensure training materials are  available in the industry and are available in multiple mediums.
Moreover, a significant  portion of testing for CompTIA certifications includes scenario-based questioning that asks  the test taker to react to real-life situations.
A meaningful benefit in certifications that  are predominately knowledge-based is that  they help establish criteria or measure an  individual’s readiness and ability to move to  higher-level and more complex certifications.
This core base of knowledge provides  confidence in situations not previously  encountered and leads to the development of  best practices, resulting from lessons learned  in other settings.
Psychometric validation  that can accurately measure conceptual  knowledge has existed for decades and is  evident in the trustworthiness of high-stakes  assessments such as the SAT, GRE, MDCAT,  and LSAT.
We need to know how to drive the car, but  we also need to know things about speed  limits, right of way, and other conceptual  knowledge before we can secure a driver’s  license.
It’s really not one or the other; it’s a  matter of authentically integrating both the  practical and the foundational knowledge  and then making sure that testing processes  validate both types of knowledge.
To ensure  this, CompTIA has added performance- based  questions to many of its certification exams  and will continue to include them on all new  and updated products.
In 2011,  CompTIA introduced its first mastery-level  certification exam in the cybersecurity  domain, the CompTIA Advanced Security  Practitioner (CASP) certification exam.
This exam validates a higher level of skills  required for both systems and network  security.
It is highly recommended that  individuals taking this exam have a minimum  of five years of technical security experience  at the enterprise level.
As cybersecurity specializations develop,  expertise will lean toward performance-  based criteria but will also continue to   be supported by a foundation of core  conceptual knowledge—much like a surgical  internship practically validates a medical  student who has already passed his or  her graduation requirements.
The key is  to make sure that such a process does not  unnecessarily bottleneck the cybersecurity  education and training ecosystem.
We need  cybersecurity professionals who are trained  and credentialed in a timely manner.
Industry Recognized Credentials  The CompTIA Public-Private-Academic  Partnership: Optimum Responsiveness  to Rapid Developments in the  Cybersecurity Threat Environment  The cybersecurity challenges of today —  and tomorrow — are being confronted by  dedicated professionals in the government,  the private sector and academia working in  a collaborative setting and utilizing the best  available technical tools.
As   an association, we have been engaged with  various government agencies, academic   partners and initiatives to ensure that industry-  recognized certifications are a prominent  piece of the overall national cybersecurity  posture.
Support for industry-recognized  certifications is a fundamental tenant of   the National Initiative for Cybersecurity   Education (NICE).
As technology becomes more broadly used,  cybersecurity awareness is important for the  general workforce along with specialized se-  curity professionals.
CompTIA research found  that human error accounted for 55 percent of  security breaches in 2013, and that number is  growing every year.
The components are:  •  National Cybersecurity Awareness.
•  Formal Cybersecurity Education.
•  Cybersecurity Workforce.
•  Cybersecurity Workforce Training and   Professional Development.
As an early contributor to the NICE initiative,  particularly as it relates to the professional- ization and training of the nation’s workforce,   CompTIA provided input to NIST and the   Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to help  articulate standards for how the association  defines cybersecurity roles and responsibilities.
The goal of this component of the NICE process  is that it will result in a common lexicon in  terms of how various cybersecurity roles   are defined and what knowledge, skills and  abilities (KSAs) align to those roles across   government.
The resulting input from a  broad cross-section of government, private  sector and academic contributors (including  CompTIA) was the establishment of 31 cyber- security specialty areas that are now housed  on a portal.
The portal was designed to be  an online resource for individuals looking to  enter the cybersecurity workforce, advance  their careers or simply want to be more  cyber-savvy.7    CompTIA also engaged in a detailed mapping  process to align its certifications to many of  the cybersecurity specialty areas and jobs  identified by DHS.
CompTIA has also   encouraged peer-credentialing bodies  through our role as a founding member of   the Cybersecurity Credentials Collaborative8   to do the same.
Additionally, NICE is working  with the Office of Personnel Management  (OPM) to ensure that this work has relevance  and application to the federal workforce  across all the agencies.
A baseline definition  of cybersecurity jobs will finally allow OPM to  properly benchmark and identify gaps in the  federal workforce.
Another piece to the puzzle is Executive Order  13636, entitled the “Framework for Improving  Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.” The  Executive Order, which was issued in February  2013, established “it is the Policy of the United  States to enhance the security and resilience  of the nation’s critical infrastructure and to  maintain a cyber-environment that encour- ages efficiency, innovation and economic  prosperity while promoting safety, security,  business confidentiality, privacy and civil  liberties.”  The Executive Order charged NIST with  developing a framework that is voluntary,  risk-based and intended only for owners  and operators of critical infrastructure.
The  framework is a set of industry standards and  best practices designed to help organizations  manage cyber risks.
According to CompTIA  research, only 41 percent of firms currently  perform formal risk analysis as part of their  security planning.
For the purposes of the   framework, critical infrastructure is defined  as “systems and assets, whether physical or  virtual, so vital to the United States that the  incapacity or destruction of such systems and  assets would have a debilitating impact on  security, national economic security, national  public health or safety, or any combination of  those matters.”  NIST worked closely with industry and govern- ment partners in the development of this  framework organizing five workshops – three  of which CompTIA participated in – and a  call for public comment – to which CompTIA  submitted recommendations.9  Through the Certified Academic Partnership  Program (CAPP), CompTIA works with commu- nity colleges and other academic institutions.
Many of these institutions are academic  centers of excellence and serve as gateways  for government recruiting in cybersecurity.
The partnership between government,  academia and industry is a robust and strong  one.
By working with government partners,  CompTIA is able to share resources and tools  that have been created by the private sector  for the development of a strong federal and  private cyber workforce.
These alliances  with government and academia go far in  ensuring a seamless workforce – one that can  easily move from the public to the private  sector, effectively share new knowledge and  approaches, and always ensure that there is  an adequate skilled labor force to ward off  cybersecurity attacks and advance critical  infrastructure needs.
“For the last 10 years, what we’ve seen on our networks has been essentially  exploitation, [such as] theft of intellectual property and crime.
Over the last  few weeks, we’ve seen distributed denial-of-service attacks, so we’re seeing  the threat grow from exploitation to ... disruption, and my concern is it’s  going to go from exploitation and disruption to destruction.”  – Army Gen. Keith B. Alexander, Director of the National Security Agency      Oct. 2, 2012  9.
Refer to the NISTFramework pdf  (http://techvoice.org/Libraries/Documents/CompTIA_Comments_NISTFramework_12-13-13.sflb.ashx)  Industry Recognized Credentials  CompTIA and the Cybersecurity  Credentials Industry  As domain areas in cybersecurity continue  to evolve, there is a corresponding increase  in credentials that validate new skill sets.
A simple but important way to distinguish  valid credentials from “fly-by-night” entrants  is to consult the ANSI.10 ANSI maintains  a personnel certification accreditation  program, and governmental agencies  in key sectors such as national security,  public safety, and healthcare rely on ANSI  accreditation for third-party verification  of the competence of certification bodies.
ANSI is the only personnel certification  accreditation body in the U.S. to fulfill the  globally recognized requirements of ISO/IEC  17011:2004, which represents the highest  internationally accepted practices for  accreditation bodies.
CompTIA also works closely and  collaboratively through meetings and  engagements with peer certification  organizations and stakeholders in  government, academia, and the private  sector.
The shared objective is to align  credentials to identified career pathways,  inform senior IT leadership and the  educational community about the role of cybersecurity credentials, and provide  continuous improvement and management  of the credentialing ecosystem.
It is  incumbent upon those in the IT security   credentials world to align various organizations and vendor companies to  publicize more coherent and interrelated  career paths—from entry-level to mastery  levels of IT expertise.
IT professionals will  continue to inspire trust and support from IT  and HR personnel in the cybersecurity world.
GLOSSARY  ANSI American National Standards Institute,  a 501(c)(3) non-profit association and the  voice of the U.S. standards and conformity  assessment system.
While helping to assure  the safety and health of consumers and  the protection of the environment, ANSI  oversees the creation, promulgation, and  use of thousands of norms and guidelines  that directly impact businesses in nearly  every sector—from acoustical devices to  construction equipment, from dairy and  livestock production to energy distribution,  and many more.
ANSI is also actively  engaged  in accrediting programs that  assess conformance to standards, including  globally recognized cross-sector programs  such as the ISO 9000 (quality) and ISO 14000  (environmental) management systems.
Bloom’s Taxonomy A classification scheme  of intellectual behavior developed by  Benjamin Bloom who identified six levels of  cognitive learning—from the simple recall  of facts (Knowledge), as the lowest level,  through the increasingly complex levels of Understanding, Application, Analysis,  Synthesis, and Evaluation.
CompTIA A+ Certification The CompTIA A+  certification is the industry standard for   13  10.
The international, vendor-neutral certification proves competence in areas such as  installation, preventative maintenance,  networking, security, and troubleshooting.
CompTIA A+ certified technicians also  have excellent customer service and  communication skills to work with clients.
CompTIA Advanced Security Practitioner  (CASP)  CASP is CompTIA’s first mastery level  certification exam and was voted on to the DoD 8570 exam list in early 2013.
CASP  is approved for IAT Level III, IAM Level II,  IASAE Level I, and IASAE Level II in U.S. DoD  Information Assurance directive 8570.01-M.
It is designed for information assurance  professionals in technical leadership roles  in an IT enterprise environment (especially  military environments).
CASP proves  competence in enterprise security;  risk management and incident response; research and analysis; integration of  computing; communications and business  disciplines; and technical integration of  enterprise components.
CompTIA Network+ Certification The  CompTIA Network+ certification is the sign  of a competent networking professional.
It is  an international, vendor-neutral certification  that proves a technician’s competency in  managing, maintaining, troubleshooting,  installing and configuring basic network  infrastructure.
CompTIA Security+ Certification CompTIA  Security+ is an international, vendor-neutral  certification that proves competency in  system security, network infrastructure,  access control, and organizational security.
Critical IT Infrastructure The backbone  of our nation’s economy, security and   health.
Critical  infrastructure are the assets, systems,  and networks, whether physical or virtual,  so vital to the United States that their  incapacitation or destruction would have  a debilitating effect on security, national  economic security, national public health or  safety, or any combination thereof.
(http:// www.dhs.gov/what-critical-infrastructure)  Cyberspace Cyberspace is a global domain  within the information environment  consisting of the interdependent network  of IT infrastructures, including the Internet,  telecommunications networks, computer  systems, and embedded processors and  controllers.
Cybersecurity A synonym of Information  Security as cited in ISO 27001.
Clearly defined objectives form  the foundation for selecting appropriate  content, learning activities, and assessment  measures.
(From Patricia Archer, 1979,   Writing Higher-Level Learning Objectives:   The Cognitive Domain, New York: Media  Systems Corporation)   Industry Recognized Credentials  Global Information Grid The globally  interconnected, end-to-end set of  information capabilities, associated  processes, and personnel for collecting,  processing, storing, disseminating, and  managing information on demand to  war fighters, policy makers, and support  personnel.
The global information grid  includes owned and leased communications  and computing systems and services,  software (including applications), data,  security services, other associated   services, and national security systems.
Global Information Infrastructure  The worldwide interconnection of  communications networks, computers,  databases, and consumer electronics  that make information available to users.
The global information infrastructure  encompasses a wide range of equipment,  including cameras, scanners, keyboards,  facsimile machines, computers, switches, compact disks, video and audio tape, cable,  wire, satellites, fiber optic transmission  lines, networks of all types, televisions,  monitors, printers, and much more.
The  friendly and adversary personnel who make  decisions and handle the transmitted information constitute a critical component  of the global information infrastructure.
Information Assurance Measures that  protect and defend information and  information systems by ensuring their  availability,  integrity,  authentication,  confidentiality, and  non-repudiation.
This includes providing for restoration  of information systems by incorporating  protection, detection, and reaction  capabilities.
(DOD 8500.01E, October 24, 2002,  recertified April 23, 2007)  Information Security is defined as the  preservation of the confidentiality, integrity,  and availability of information.
Also see NIST 800-30, “Information system security is a system  characteristic and a set of mechanisms  that span the system both logically and  physically.
The five security goals are  integrity, availability, confidentiality,  accountability, and assurance.”  ISO The Independent, non-governmental  membership organization and the world’s  largest developer of voluntary International  Standards.
(http://www.iso.org/iso/home/ about.htm)  Job Task Analysis (JTA) The formal process  of defining the requirements of a position  and identifying the knowledge, skills, and  abilities necessary to effectively perform the  duties of the position.
Psychometrics Psychometrics is the field  of study concerned with the theory and  technique of educational and psychological  measurement, which includes the  measurement of knowledge, abilities,  attitudes, and personality traits.
The field is  primarily concerned with the construction  and validation of measurement  instruments, such as questionnaires, tests,  and personality assessments.
It involves  two major research tasks, namely: (i) the construction of instruments and  procedures for measurement; and (ii) the  development and refinement of theoretical  approaches to measurement.
Those who   15  CompTIA.org  practice psychometrics are known as  psychometricians and although they may  also be clinical psychologists, they are  not obliged to be so and could instead be,  for example, human resources or learning  and development professionals.
Either  way specific, separate qualifications in  psychometrics are required.
When spoken,  sometimes the acronym «SME» is spelled out  («S-M-E») and   Industry Recognized Credentials  Appendix 1 CAREER ROADMAP  CompTIA Fundamental  Knowledge: Preparing for  Training and Certification  CompTIA Core Certifications  Fundamental IT credential  for multiple careers  Fundamental IT credential  for multiple careers  CompTIA Certifications  Hardware and End User Support  Further Vendor  Specific   Certifications  Career paths:    • A+ certification    • General job prep  Average Salary: $54,620* Possible job roles:    • Help Desk or Field       Technician    • IT Support Technician  A+ and twelve months  networking experience  Average Salary: $62,950* Possible job roles:    • Network Administrator    • Network Engineer  Two years network  administration with  security focus  Average Salary: $84,243* Possible job roles:    • Information Security        Specialist    • Network Adminstrator  Network/Data Management  Business Process Management  17  * Source: Computerworld Salary Survey 2013 - U.S. salaries only  CompTIA.org  Appendix 2 CERTIFICATION EXAM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  Job Task Analysis &  Blueprint Development  Preliminary JTA and  Exam Objectives:   Blueprint Validation  Preliminary Exam   Development   & Validation  • Need Arises for    the Development   of a Certification  Examination • Selection of    Subject Matter   Experts (SMEs)  • Job Task Analysis  (JTA) Workshop,  CompTIA HQ  • Output: Preliminary  JTA and Preliminary  Examination   Objectives Blueprint  (EOB)  • Statistical survey to  validate Preliminary  Blueprint (Statistically  significant number of  respondents needed;   global feedback   opportunity)  • Output: Working    Examination   Objectives Blueprint  released globally   (translated)  • Curriculum & training   development  initiated with   3rd-party providers  • Exam Item-writing   workshop (12-15 SME  participants, CompTIA  HQ  • Output: Beta    Examination to be   published globally   by CompTIA test   providers  • Beta Examination   taken and validated by  statistically significant  beta test population &  feedback  • Output: Final    Certification Examination   Exam Publication   and Release  • Examination localization   & translation(s)   development  • Examination release   (timed to coincide  with availability of  3rd-party curricular  materials)   • Annual updates to   create additional items  for the examination  question pool  • Regular refresh of    all content to assure   accuracy and currency  of domain knowledge  validated  Appendix 3 CYBERSPACE INFRASTRUCTURE RELATIONSHIPS11  Critical Infrastructure/ Key Resources (CIKR)  Physical Infrastructure  Cyber Infrastructure  Emergency   Services  Energy  Agriculture  & Food  Corporations/   Institutions  Farms/Food Processing   Plants  Delivery Sites  Information  Services  Software  Defense    Industrial Base  Banking &  Finance  Transportation  Dams/  Reservoirs    Treatment Plants  Cable/Fiber  Railroad/Highway/   Bridges/  Piplines/Ports  Control Systems  Internet  Government  Public Health  Public  Facilities  Nuclear   Power Plants  Energy  Hospitals  Hardware  Chemical  Water  Nuclear  11.
Adapted from “Securing the Nation’s Critical Cyber Infrastructure,” US Department of Homeland Security  Industry Recognized Credentials  About CompTIA  CompTIA is the voice of the world’s information  technology (IT) industry.
Its members are the  companies at the forefront of innovation and the  professionals responsible for maximizing the   benefits organizations receive from their investments  in technology.
CompTIA is dedicated to advancing  industry growth through its educational programs,  market research, networking events, professional  certifications, and public policy advocacy.
For more information, please visit CompTIA.org.
CompTIA is a registered trademark  of CompTIA Properties, LLC in the U.S. and internationally.