CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING    AT A TURNING POINT         Analysing a new generation of    national cybersecurity strategies for   the Internet economy   Also includes contributions from non-governmental stakeholders              Cybersecurity Policy Making at a Turning Point:   Analysing a New Generation of National  Cybersecurity Strategies for the Internet   Economy   and         Non-governmental Perspectives on a New   Generation of National Cybersecurity Strategies:   Contributions from   BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC                                        ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND   DEVELOPMENT   The  OECD  is  a  unique  forum  where  governments  work  together  to  address  the  economic, social and environmental challenges of globalisation.
The OECD is also  at the forefront of efforts to understand and to help governments respond to new  developments  and  concerns,  such  as  corporate  governance,  the  information  economy and the challenges of an ageing population.
The Organisation provides  a  setting  where  governments  can  compare  policy  experiences,  seek  answers  to  common problems, identify good practice and work to co-ordinate domestic and  international policies.
The  European Union takes part in the work of the OECD.
Cover image : © germanskydive110 - Fotolia.com                           © OECD 2012   Applications to reproduce or translate all or part of this work should be made to  rights@oecd.org.
3   Foreword   A comparative analysis by the OECD of a new generation of national  cybersecurity  strategies  reveals  that  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  at  a  turning  point.
They  approach  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner,  encompassing  economic,  social,  educational,  law-enforcement,  technical, diplomatic, military and intelligence-related aspects.
legal,   This  booklet  includes  the  OECD  report  as  well  as  the  full  text  of  the  contributions  to  this  work  by  non-governmental  stakeholders  from  the  Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC), Civil Society Internet  Society  Advisory  Council  (CSISAC)  and  the  Internet  Technical  Advisory  Committee (ITAC).
The OECD focuses on security in cyberspace as a driver for economic  prosperity and social development.
The findings of this work will inform the  review of the 2002 Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and  Networks  which  provide  a  set  of  high  level  principles  for  addressing  security in an open and interconnected digital environment through a risk- based approach.
For more information: http://oe.cd/security.
© OECD 2012         5   Table of contents       CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT: ANALYSING  A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES FOR  THE INTERNET ECONOMY .......................................................................................... 7  Main points .................................................................................................................... 9  Synthesis ...................................................................................................................... 11  Cybersecurity has become a national policy priority ............................................... 11  Some concepts are shared by all strategies............................................................... 13  Other concepts may reveal emerging trends ............................................................ 14  Actions plans are reinforced and broadened ............................................................ 16  Considerations expressed by non-governmental stakeholders ................................. 17  The review of the Security Guidelines ..................................................................... 19  Conclusion ................................................................................................................ 21  Detailed comparative analysis ...................................................................................... 24  Rationale and scope .................................................................................................. 24  Key concepts ............................................................................................................ 31  Management structures and action plans .................................................................. 36  Considerations highlighted by non-governmental stakeholders ............................... 47  Other considerations ................................................................................................. 51  Annex I. Intergovernmental organisations and initiatives ............................................ 53  Annex II.
Cybersecurity policy in the European Union ............................................... 59  Annex III.
Key objectives and concepts in cybersecurity strategies ............................ 68  Annex V. Questionnaire circulated to volunteer countries .......................................... 71  Annex VI.
Questionnaire circulated to non-governmental stakeholders ...................... 73  Notes ............................................................................................................................ 74  References .................................................................................................................... 79        © OECD 2012      6       NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF  NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM  BIAC, CSISAC AND ITAC ............................................................................................ 85  About the OECD ICCP non-governmental stakeholder representation ....................... 86  1) What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for the economy  and the society?
............................................................................................................ 88  2) What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to public policy  for cybersecurity?
..................................................................................................................... 96  3) How should governments implement cybersecurity policy at national and at  international levels and how does this compare with current new strategies?
........... 100  4) What is the role and responsibility of business and industry/civil society/  Internet technical community with respect to cybersecurity public policy?
............................................................... 103  5) What is - or what will be - the impact of recent cybersecurity strategies on business  and industry/civil society/the Internet technical community?
.................................... 107  6) How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be evaluated?
What  metrics should be applied to measure their efficiency?
............................................. 111  Notes .......................................................................................................................... 114      CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 7   CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT    A TURNING POINT   Analysing a New Generation of National Cybersecurity   Strategies for the Internet Economy                            © OECD 2012   8 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT             Foreword   This  report  analyses  the  latest  generation  of  “national  cybersecurity  strategies”  in  ten  volunteer  countries  and  identifies  commonalities  and  differences.
Representatives  of  business, civil society and the Internet technical community participated actively  in the work, in particular by responding to a questionnaire.
The report was discussed by the Working Party on Information Security and  Privacy (WPISP) and declassified by the Committee for Information, Computer  and Communications Policy (ICCP) at its 64th session on 24 October 2012.
The  findings  of  the  work  will  inform  the  upcoming  review  of  the  OECD  2002  Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a  Culture of Security.
The report was prepared under the direction of a group of delegates led by  Geoff Smith (United  Kingdom) and Manuel Pedrosa de Barros (Portugal) by  Laurent  Bernat  (OECD  Secretariat)  with  Peter  Ford  and  Nick  Mansfield,  consultants to the OECD.
OECD work on cybersecurity can be found at http://oe.cd/security.
CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 9   Main points   The comparative analysis of a new generation of national cybersecurity  strategies in ten OECD countries reveals that cybersecurity policy making is at  a turning point.
A single definition of cybersecurity cannot  be derived from these strategies.
They  approach  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner, encompassing economic, social, educational, legal, law-enforcement,  technical, diplomatic, military and intelligence-related aspects.
The  new  generation  of  national  cybersecurity  strategies  aims  to  drive  economic and social prosperity and protect cyberspace-reliant societies against  cyber-threats.
This has been a traditional area of interest for the OECD, going  back  to  the  1992  Guidelines  for  the  security  of  information  systems.
A  key  challenge of cybersecurity policy making today is to pursue these two objectives  while preserving the openness of the Internet as a platform for innovation and  new sources of growth.
Cybersecurity  strategies  recognise  that  the  economy,  society  and  governments now rely on the Internet for  many essential functions and that  cyber threats have been increasing and evolving at a fast pace.
They  emphasise  the  need  to  respect  fundamental  values  such  as  privacy, freedom of speech, and the free flow of information.
They also call  for  improved  international  co-operation.
Some  strategies  also  support  more  flexible and agile policy approaches, and emphasise the economic dimension  of  cybersecurity  policy.
Some  create  the  conditions  for  a  multistakeholder  dialogue in the cybersecurity policy making and implementation process.
They  include  more  emphasis  on  cybersecurity  research  and  development  (R&D) and real time monitoring of government infrastructures.
They aim to  develop a more robust cybersecurity industry sector and to take advantage of  economic  drivers  and  incentives  for  cybersecurity.
They  create  partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  and  encourage  cybersecurity  exercises.
They   © OECD 2012   10 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       develop digital identity frameworks and specific policies for the protection of  children on line.
In  addition  to  describing  this  evolution  of  cybersecurity  policy  making,  the  report  highlights  suggestions  by  business,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical community, for example with respect to security-related barriers to  trade  that  could  inhibit  innovation  and  global  deployment  of  cost-effective  security  solutions.
The  report  calls  for  further  analysis  of  the  intersections  between  economic,  social  and  sovereignty  cybersecurity  policies  and  points  out the opportunity for countries to extend their national co-ordination agency  as an international contact point to facilitate co-operation on cybersecurity at  policy and operational levels.
It also makes suggestions in the context of the  review of the 2002 OECD Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems  and Networks: Towards a Culture of Security (“Security Guidelines”).
This new age of cybersecurity policy making is still in its infancy and will  take  time  to  further  develop.
In  the  meantime,  a  key  challenge  for  governments  is  to  be  prepared  to  face  a  possible  serious  cyber  incident,  as  envisaged in nearly all the strategies, in a way that does not undermine the  openness of the Internet which is key to the vitality of the Internet economy.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 11   Synthesis   This report analyses the emergence of a new generation of government  policies,  sometimes  called  “cybersecurity  strategies”,  in  a  total  of  ten  volunteer OECD countries: eight which had adopted such a strategy between  2009  and  the  end  of  2011  (Australia,  Canada,  France,  Germany,  Japan,  Netherlands,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States),  and  two  which  were in the process of developing one (Finland and Spain).
Finally,  the  report  draws  some  conclusions  on  the  role  of  the  OECD  and  the  review  of  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
Several  annexes provide more details, for example with respect to intergovernmental  organisations involved in cybersecurity (Annex I), and developments in the  European Union (Annex II).
Cybersecurity has become a national policy priority   The  analysis  of  this  new  generation  of  national  cybersecurity  strategies  reveals  a  fundamental  evolution  in  government  policy  making  whereby  cybersecurity  is  elevated  among  government  priorities.
The  Internet  and  ICTs  are  essential  for  economic  and  social  development and form a vital infrastructure.
In a general context of  economic downturn, the open Internet and ICTs are a new source of  growth and a driver for innovation, social well-being and individual  expression.
As the Internet economy grows, the whole economy and  society,  including  governments,  become  increasingly  reliant  on  this  digital infrastructure to perform their essential functions.
© OECD 2012   12 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Cyber  threats  are  evolving  and  increasing  at  a  fast  pace.
They  are  still initiated by criminal actors but also come from new sources, such  as foreign states and political groups, and may have other motivations  than money making, such as some types of “hacktivism” (Anonymous),  destabilisation  (Estonia  in  2007),  cyberespionage,  sabotage  (e.g.
As a consequence, the scope of almost all new cybersecurity strategies has  evolved from solely protecting individuals and organisations as distinct actors,  to also protecting society as a whole.
This change results from the evolution of  the  role  of  the  Internet  in  society.
When  the  Internet  was  merely  a  useful  platform  for  individuals  and  organisations,  the  consequences  of  failures  were  manageable at  the  level of each individual and organisation, and government  policy was about helping them to prevent and manage such incidents.
As the  Internet  has  become  essential  for  the  economy  and  the  society,  the  consequences  of  failures  can  directly  impact  society  as  a  whole.
Therefore,  cybersecurity  strategies  aim  at  achieving  interrelated  objectives:  strengthening cybersecurity for the Internet economy to further drive economic  and social prosperity, and protecting cyberspace-reliant societies against cyber- threats.
Managing the complexity of pursuing these two objectives in parallel,  while  preserving  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  fundamental  values,  is  probably the main challenge of cybersecurity policy making today.
two   The  criticality  of  the  Internet  for  the  modern  economy  has  several  consequences on cybersecurity policy making, the main one being the adoption  of strategies that approach cybersecurity in an integrated and comprehensive  manner.
Governments  recognise  the  need  to  address  all  the  facets  of  cybersecurity holistically rather than in a fragmented manner as in the past.
New  cybersecurity  strategies  are  government-wide  and  encompass  the  economic,  social, educational, legal, law-enforcement, technical, diplomatic, military and  intelligence-related  aspects  of  cybersecurity.
This  integrated  approach  is  generally supported by strong leadership, sometimes at head of state or head of  government level, illustrating the significant elevation of cybersecurity amongst  government priorities.
Not  all  strategies  use  the  terms  of  “cyberspace”  and  “cybersecurity”.
Most countries include the concept of critical information  infrastructures  in  the  scope  of  their  strategy,  as  defined  in  the  OECD  Recommendation on the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures.3   © OECD 2012       Some concepts are shared by all strategies      CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 13   Most strategies share the following concepts:  ?
As  cybersecurity  becomes  an  issue  of  national  priority,  responsibility for cybersecurity policy making and implementation is  being  clearly  assigned  within  the  government.
However,  no  single  existing  vertical  agency  can  claim  a  comprehensive  understanding  and a sufficiently wide authority to manage all facets of cybersecurity.
Again, this  evolution  from  a  multi-agency  to  an  inter-agency  approach  requires  strong leadership to enable co-ordination and co-operation across pre- existing government silos.
They acknowledge that policies must  be based on inclusive public-private partnerships, which may include  business, civil society, the Internet technical community, and academia.
Improved  international  co-operation.
International  co-operation  and  the need for better alliances and partnerships with like-minded countries  or  allies,  including  facilitating  capacity  building  of  less  developed  countries  are  shared  as  key  objectives  by  most  strategies.
Most  countries,  however,  provide  little  detail  on  how  to  achieve  enhanced  international co-operation.
Exceptions include the United States which  has developed a specific international strategy for cyberspace, and the  United Kingdom which initiated an international dialogue at the 2011  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace  and  promoted  the  concept  of  international norms of behaviour in cyberspace which can also be found  in the Australian and German strategies.
International and regional organisations such as the Council of Europe,  the  European  Union,  the  G8,  the  Internet  Governance  Forum,  the  OECD,  the  Organisation  for  Security  and  Co-operation  in  Europe   © OECD 2012   14 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       (OSCE)  and  the  United  Nations,  including  the  International  Tele- communications Union (ITU), are mentioned but without much detail  as regards their role, except for the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation  (NATO), mentioned by several countries with respect to cybersecurity  in the military context.4    ?
Respect for fundamental values: all strategies place a strong emphasis  on  the  need  for  cybersecurity  policy  to  respect  fundamental  values,  which generally include privacy, freedom of speech, and the free flow  of  information.
Several  strategies  explicitly  mention  the  need  to  maintain  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  no  strategy  suggests  modifying it in favour of strengthened cybersecurity.
On the contrary,  the openness of the Internet is generally described as a requirement for  the further development of the Internet economy.
Sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  policy  making,  i.e.
national and international security, intelligence, defense and military  aspects   This  evolution  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  consideration  that  cybersecurity addresses the protection of the society as a whole and  requires  a  whole  of  government  integrated  approach.
Sovereignty  considerations emerge at different levels of domestic policy: i) at the  strategic  level,  for  example  with  the  recognition  of  cyber  threats  targeting  the  military,  or  the  risk  of  cyberespionage  from  foreign  states, ii) at the organisational level, as departments and ministries in  charge of diplomacy, intelligence and the military are included in the  intergovernmental co-ordination for policy making, sometimes with a  “national  security”  inter-agency  body  being  assigned  overarching  responsibility  for  cybersecurity  co-ordination,  iii) at  the  operational  level, with, for example, intelligence bodies playing a key role as a  source  of  for  situational  awareness.
Sovereignty  considerations also appear at the international policy level: i) strategies  mention the need for an international dialogue in relation to “rules of  engagement”  in  cyberspace  or  “confidence  building  measures”,  ii)  they highlight the role of some organisations like NATO and OSCE  to address these issues, and iii) they mention operational co-operation  with respect to intelligence-related information sharing between allies.
information   © OECD 2012        ?
Flexible policy approach     CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 15   The Internet economy is a dynamic environment where technologies,  usages and markets constantly evolve in an unpredictable manner for  the benefit of economic growth and innovation, and where threats are  also in permanent evolution.
Several strategies promote flexible and  agile cybersecurity policies which preserve the openness of the Internet  and the free flow of information as well as other factors that enable the  Internet to generate economic and social benefits and accommodate a  fundamentally  dynamic  environment.
Several  strategies  support  policies  that  enable  fast  and  informed  decision-making  processes,  embed  rapid  feedback  mechanisms  and  include  efficient  learning  cycles  and  improvement  to  quickly  and  efficiently  implement  new  measures.
The importance of the economic aspects of cybersecurity    While all strategies aim to address cybersecurity in order to maintain  and  further  develop  economic  and  social  prosperity  through  the  continued development of a vibrant Internet economy, the economic  aspects  of  cybersecurity  are  gaining  increased  visibility  in  several  strategies.
Some countries highlight that a higher level of cybersecurity  will  provide  their  economy  with  a  competitive  advantage.
They  recognise  that  economic  factors  play  a  key  role  in  improving  cybersecurity.
Several strategies encourage flexible policies leveraging  incentives for markets to better take security into account.
Some require  better  understanding  of  the  incentive  structure  of  market  players  in  relation  to  cybersecurity  and  promote  lightweight  measures  such  as  encouraging the use of security labels applied to products and services  to  better  inform  the  market.
Several  countries  set  as  a  key  policy  objective the development of a stronger cybersecurity industry sector,  including  the  development  of  a  larger  cybersecurity  workforce.
They  also  mention  the  possible  development  of  a  cybersecurity  insurance  sector.
Some  strategies  identify  a  higher  degree  of  technological  independence in relation to IT security as an important policy objective.
The benefits of a multistakeholder dialogue    Many  strategies  share  the  view  that  dialogue  with  non-governmental  stakeholders  is  key  to  good  cybersecurity  policy  making  and  imple- mentation.
Some   © OECD 2012   16 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       strategies  establish  a  dedicated  body  including  these  stakeholders  to  provide  information  and  advice  to  the  government.
In  general,  input  from  business  is  widely  recognised  as  essential,  including  for  the  implementation  of  the  strategies,  but  less  information  is  available  as  regards the consultation with the civil society, beyond academia.
Actions plans are reinforced and broadened   Cybersecurity strategies generally include or are followed by the adoption  of action plans aimed to strengthen key priority areas which were identified in  the survey carried out in 2004:5    ?
Government security: action plans include a multiplicity of initiatives,  from  the  development  of  a  situational  awareness  capacity  to  the  rationalisation  of  government  network  infrastructures,  and  the  generalisation of audits in the public sector.
Protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures:  action  plans  generally  include  measures  related  to  the  protection  of  critical  information infrastructures.
Fight  against  cybercrime:  action  plans  include  many  initiatives  to  develop law enforcement capacities, improve the legal framework and  foster  international  co-operation  on  the  basis  of  the  Budapest  Cybercrime Convention.
Awareness  raising:  action  plans  include  many  initiatives  targeting  specific populations such as children, SMEs and decision makers in  government and critical infrastructures.
Education: action plans recognise in particular the need for a stronger  cybersecurity workforce.
The development of cybersecurity skills is  identified as a key priority by several countries.
Response:  strategies  recognise  the  role  played  by  Cyber  Security  Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs), and create a national CSIRT or  strengthen it where it already exists.
Research  and  Development  (R&D),  which  benefited  from  a  relatively  low level of attention in an OECD survey carried out in 2004 is elevated to a  much  higher  level  of  priority  in  new  cybersecurity  strategies,  generally  focusing on better organisation and co-ordination of existing cybersecurity  R&D efforts in partnership with the private sector.
One country, the United  States, adopted a strategic plan for its cybersecurity R&D programme.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 17   Some cybersecurity strategies also introduce new themes in their action   plans such as:   ?
The development of a situational awareness and real time monitoring   capacity, mainly for government infrastructures.
The  development  of  policies  to  support  the  development  of  a  more   robust cybersecurity industry sector.
The  consideration  of  specific  business  players  or  sectors  which,  without  strictly  being  defined  as  critical  information  infrastructures,  could  cause  significant  damage  to  the  economy  if  successfully  targeted.
Partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs)  to  address  the   botnet threat, with the participation of their customers.
Cyber security exercises, including across borders.
The development of digital identity frameworks.
Considerations expressed by non-governmental stakeholders   This section reflects some of the observations and suggestions expressed  by business, civil society and the Internet technical community6, in response  to a questionnaire circulated in January 2012 about the current evolution of  cybersecurity policy making (cf.
Generally, non-governmental stakeholders agree that i) multistakeholder  collaboration  and  co-operation  are  the  best  means  to  develop  effective  cybersecurity policies that respect the fundamentally global, open and inter- operable nature of the Internet; ii) policy options must be flexible enough to  accommodate the dynamic nature of the Internet; iii) more robust evidence- based cybersecurity policy making is needed, an area which is generally not  covered by cybersecurity strategies.
Non-governmental  stakeholders  consider   the  divide  between  sovereignty and economic/social cybersecurity policy making is increasingly  blurred and that this trend could lead to challenging consequences.
For example,  business points out that it could face additional burdens while civil society is  concerned that its consultative role could be reduced, that transparency could  decrease  and  that  warfare  semantics  could  increasingly  shape  the  cyber-  that   © OECD 2012   18 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       security policy debate, with the risk of minimising the economic and social  benefits of the openness of the Internet.
In  addition  to  greater  consultation  with  non-governmental  stakeholders,  civil  society  suggests  several  measures  to  ensure  that  cybersecurity  policy  making  remains  transparent,  proportionate  and  balanced.
For  example,  cybersecurity  strategies  could  include  a  sunset  clause  to  prevent  measures  which were legitimate at the time of their adoption from threatening funda- mental  rights  as  technology  evolves.
Policy  initiatives  could  systematically  include a clear  risk assessment detailing  the specific harm  that  they plan to  address as well as an assessment of their impact on fundamental rights such as  free flow of information, privacy and freedom of speech.
A number of other proposals are put forward by stakeholders to increase   the effectiveness of cybersecurity strategies.
The consistency of cybersecurity measures with other cybersecurity  initiatives  could  be  systematically  assessed  (civil  society).
For  example,  legislation  which  criminalises  hacking  could  take  into  account  that  legitimate  research  contributing  to  enhance  cyber- security may employ the same techniques.
Governments  as  owners  and  operators  of  information  systems  and  networks  could  lead  by  example  by  adopting  best  practices,  technologies  and  even  legislative  requirements.
Appropriate  trust  compliance  programmes  and  procurement  practices  by  government  can provide a clear direction to other economic actors.
Technologies  developed  for  the  government  can  also  benefit  the  market  (civil  society, Internet technical community).
Policy  makers  could  seek  advice  from  the  Internet  technical  community as early as possible in the policy making process to avoid  pursuing  technical  community).
flawed  decisions   technologically   (Internet   ?
Policies could encourage the development of open standards enabling  innovation  for  security  solutions,  relying  on  respected  and  well- established  open  Internet  standardisation  groups  and  avoiding  unilateral  modification  of  Internet  standards  (Internet  technical  community).
The  collection  of  empirical  evidence  could  be  encouraged  to  better  assess the relevance of strategies and policies, as well as to support  the risk-based approach called for in the Security Guidelines.
Various  means  for  increasing  evidence-based  policy  making  have  been  highlighted to counterbalance existing disincentives that many players  face in providing more information regarding cyber incidents.
They   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 19   include  harmonised  breach  notification  mechanisms  and  the  disclosure of metrics related to risks faced by government systems  (civil society, Internet technical community).
Finally,  the  international  dimension  of  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  highlighted by business and the Internet technical community.
They stress that  requirements imposed by some countries on ICT equipment create complex  challenges  for  the  industry.
They  underline  that  security-related  technical  barriers  to  trade,  for  example  in  the  form  of  local  standards  requirements,  redundant security certification schemes or interferences  in the global  value  chain increase cost, limit functionality, constrain innovation, and skew a level  playing field.
They call for government policies to allow for the deployment  of  global  cost-effective  industry  solutions  and  encourage  the  exploration  of  solutions,  for  example  through  international  standards,  cross-compliance  recognition frameworks and awareness raising of less developed countries on  this issue.
The review of the Security Guidelines   The 2002 Recommendation of the OECD Council concerning Guidelines  for the Security of Information Systems and Networks – Towards a Culture of  Security (the 2002 Security Guidelines) established the first international set  of fundamental principles focused on the development of security policies in  an open environment.
They can be used by governments to develop national  policies  as  well  as  by  public  and  private  organisations  to  design  their  own  security policies.
The comparison of national cybersecurity strategies provides  a useful source of information and inspiration in the context of the review of  the Guidelines initiated in 2012.
All  the  strategies  studied  are  consistent  with  the  Guidelines’  principles  and several directly reflect some key concepts such as the need for a culture of  (cyber)security, the shared responsibility of all participants and the need for a  risk-based approach.
Nevertheless, none of these strategies explicitly mentions  the  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
© OECD 2012   20 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Resilience is used in many national strategies, without a clear definition  but generally as the capacity of an information system or network to continue  to  operate  despite  incidents,  or  to  carry  on  normal  operations  smoothly  notwithstanding technical problems.
It is therefore consistent with a security approach based on risk assessment  and  management  as  promoted  by  the  Security  Guidelines  and  relates  to  several principles such as Response (3), Risk Assessment (6), Security Design  and Implementation (7), and Security Management (8).
Real-time capacity appears in most strategies, even if not explicitly, as an  extension of the concept of “timeliness” included in the Guidelines’ Response  principle.
Although  governments  have  established  or  strengthened  national  Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Teams  (CSIRTs),  they  generally  recognise the need for more real-time “situational awareness” at operational  level.
Governments achieve this notably through the establishment of Cyber  Security Operation Centers (CSOCs) for the security of their own networks.
The  need  for  real  time  cybersecurity  management  is  also  reflected  in  the  private  sector  with  increased  demand  for  such  CSOC  solutions.
The  emergence  of  real-time  capacity  in  cybersecurity  is  consistent  with  the  recognition that, in an open and interconnected environment, security controls  will  not  be  robust  enough  to  fully  control  a  perimeter  that  can  potentially  extend to the whole Internet.
This implies that risk management measures take  into account the possibility that unauthorised entities gain access to the system  with malicious intentions, and that measures to detect and control them within  the  perimeter  are  as  essential  as  measures  to  secure  the  perimeter.
In  this  context, cybersecurity no longer just requires timely response to incidents, but  also  real-time  monitoring  of  networks.
And  beyond  technical  security  controls,  the  need  for  real-time  cybersecurity  management  also  raises  challenges with respect to security processes and human decisions.
There  may  therefore  be  scope  to  better  reflect  the  need  for  real-time  cybersecurity  management  in  the  review  of  the  Security  Guidelines.
In so  doing, it would be necessary however to keep in mind challenges raised by  real-time  monitoring  of  networks  for  enhanced  response,  such  as  with  respect to privacy and other fundamental values expressed in the Ethics and  Democracy principles.
Unlike their predecessor adopted in 1992, the 2002 Security Guidelines  do not include a section on how to implement the Guidelines’ principles in  public policy, or in public or private organisations.
The common elements of  current cybersecurity strategies provide several concepts that could inspire  the  development  of  such  guidance  with  respect  to  national  policy  making   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 21   such  as  i)  the  adoption  of  a  strategic  approach,  ii) supported  by  strong  leadership,  iii)  addressing  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner,  including  efficient co-ordination mechanisms adapted to the country’s culture and style  of  government,  iv)  involving  non-governmental  stakeholders,  v) fostering  flexible  policy  solutions,  vi)  encouraging  self-regulation  and  public-private  partnerships,  vii)  respecting  fundamental  values  with  appropriate  safeguards  and checks and balances, viii) and fostering international co-operation such as  through the adoption of common norms of behaviour in cyberspace.
And, last  but  not  least,  adopting  policy  measures  that  encourage  the  production  of  robust and internationally comparable data could be considered.
This would  enable better informed policy making and improve risk assessment at a macro  level.
At a more operational level, the guidance could encourage the adoption of  a toolkit of  measures for governments, to be further refined and developed,  including i) leading by example through the implementation of best practices  for  the  security  of  their  own  systems  and  networks,  ii) developing  or,  if  it  already exists, strengthening a national CSIRT capacity, iii) strengthening the  fight  against  cybercrime,  iv) implementing  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures, v) raising awareness of  all  participants,  vi)  leveraging  the  appropriate  incentives  to  stimulate  the  development of a cybersecurity industry sector and encouraging the develop- ment  of  a  cybersecurity  workforce,  vii) encouraging  cybersecurity  research  and development, viii) establishing a single point of contact for international  co-operation,  ix) encouraging  the  organisation  of  cybersecurity  exercises,  including across borders.
Conclusion   The emergence of sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity strategies is  an evolution that is likely to influence policy making in the longer term.
At  this stage, sovereignty considerations are kept separate from the economic and  social  aspects  of  cybersecurity  but  intersections  are  becoming  visible.
For  example,  in  some  cases,  policy  and/or  operational  co-ordination  is  led  by  agencies whose missions focus on sovereignty considerations; some strategies  call for facilitating technology spillovers from the intelligence community to  the  cybersecurity  industry  sector;  new  industry  suppliers  and  products  benefitting from R&D investments driven by sovereignty considerations are  entering  the  cybersecurity  marketplace;  and  finally,  in  some  countries,  the  military  and  intelligence  communities  are  becoming  important  potential  suppliers of cybersecurity jobs.
Understanding the implications of this cross- fertilisation in the short, medium and longer term might become increasingly  relevant to inform the cybersecurity policy making process.
© OECD 2012   22 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  establishment  by  national  strategies  of  points  of  co-ordination  within  governments  creates  an  opportunity  to  enhance  international  co- operation  at  policy  and  operational  levels.
Each  country  might  consider  extending this co-ordination effort by nominating an international point of  contact  in  its  government,  which  would  be  available,  for  example,  to  facilitate the distribution to the relevant domestic agencies of cybersecurity  related  requests  from  foreign  countries,  whether  at  policy  or  operational  levels, whether for emergency, informational or other purposes.
Although  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  is  generally included in the scope of the strategies, the issue of cross-border  interdependencies  is  rarely  addressed  at  strategic  level.
Further  co- operation on this matter, which is addressed in the OECD Recommendation  on the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures (2008), would be of  mutual interest.
More generally, cybersecurity policy making seems to be reaching a new  level of maturity as compared to previous policies rooted in the early 2000s,  with  stronger  leadership,  enhanced  visibility  within  governments,  better  co- ordination, and broader involvement of stakeholders.
A  further  challenge  is  the  need  to  preserve  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  fundamental values, consistent with the 2011 Recommendation of the Council  on Principles for Internet Policy Making.
Finally, the lack of details as regards  the  various  measures  adopted,  the  lack  of  metrics  and  methodologies  for  assessing  their  efficiency,  the  rapid  pace  adopted  by  some  countries  in  the  revision of their new framework, among other factors, suggest that this new  age of cybersecurity policy making is still in its early days.
Refining and implementing these new policy packages will take time.
In  the meantime, a key challenge for governments is to be prepared to face a  possibly serious cyber incident, as envisaged in nearly all the strategies, in a  way that does not undermine the openness of the Internet.
As cybersecurity  policy develops, a key question will be whether and how governments make  the  protection  of  the  openness  of  the  Internet  an  integral  part  of  cyber- security.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 23   What should be the role of the OECD?
As noted above, cybersecurity strategies recognise international organi- sations  as  essential  for  the  improvement  of  international  co-operation  in  general.
They do not however provide much detail on the specific role that  each of these international organisations should play.
More generally, it is  unclear  at  this  stage  how  international  co-operation  on  cybersecurity  will  evolve in the mid to long term.
This includes, for example, the translation at  the international level of the domestic evolution towards holistic approaches  that bring together economic, social and sovereignty aspects.
The OECD started to analyse the impact of ICTs on the economy and  the society and to develop ICT-related policy instruments in the mid-1970s.
In  1980,  the OECD  adopted  the Privacy  Guidelines,  the  first  international  policy  instrument  to  address  ICT  policy  in  relation  to  trust  and  confidence.
Since the early 1990s, the OECD has accumulated a vast amount of expertise  in  security  of  information  systems  and  networks  and  other  related  areas  including electronic authentication, cryptography policy and the protection of  critical information infrastructures.
So far, the OECD’s approach to security in  the digital world has aimed to develop security policy frameworks that enable  ICTs and  the  Internet economy  to capture new sources  of growth, to  foster  innovation  and  to  enhance  social  well-being.
The  OECD’s  main  assets  as  reflected  in  the  2002  Security  Guidelines  (see  below)  are  its  capacity  to  develop  recommendations  based  on  high-level  flexible  policy  principles,  through a consensus-based process involving all stakeholders.
The first one is related to policies fostering the  development of a cybersecurity industry sector which would drive growth and  employment directly, in addition to, indirectly, sustaining trust in the Internet  economy (towards an “industrial cybersecurity policy”).
The second one is the  development  of  more  robust  and  internationally  comparable  cybersecurity  indicators, to better inform the cybersecurity policy making process as well as  the  market place, and would support  the development of cybersecurity as a  more robust economic sector.
© OECD 2012   24 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Detailed comparative analysis   In  2003  and  2004,  the  OECD  carried  out  a  survey  to  examine  how  governments undertook the implementation of the 2002 OECD Guidelines  for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a Culture  of  Security  (“Security  Guidelines”).
The  results  of  this  survey  highlighted  that almost all governments had finalised their national strategy for fostering  a culture of security (OECD, 2005).
Between 2009 and 2011, several countries  adopted  or  initiated  the  development  of  a  new  generation  of  strategies,  sometimes called “cybersecurity strategies”.
This detailed comparative analysis  explores the contextual elements that are driving the policy changes (rationale  and scope) and analyses key concepts of national cybersecurity strategies.
It  is followed by an analysis of the management structures and key aspects of  concrete plans of action for achieving strategic objectives.
The third section  reflects  some  of  the  considerations  highlighted  by  non-governmental  stake- holders  in  response  to  a  questionnaire  on  national  cybersecurity  strategies.
Rationale and scope   The development and adoption of new national cybersecurity strategies  is an emerging trend characterised by its dynamism.
Eight  of  the  ten  countries  which  volunteered  to  participate  in  this  comparative  exercise  have  adopted  a  new  cybersecurity  strategy.
Two  other  countries have initiated a process for adopting one in the short term (Finland,  Spain7) and a European Internet Security Strategy is planned for autumn 2012.8  Most participating countries which adopted a strategy between 2009 and  2010 are already in the process of reviewing it.
The United Kingdom which  adopted a cybersecurity strategy in 2009 released a new strategy in November  2011.
At the time of writing, the Australian 2009 Cyber Security Strategy was  in  the  course  of  being  updated  by  the  release  of  the  government’s  Cyber  White  Paper,  following  up  on  a  public  consultation  carried  out  in  autumn  2011.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 25   All  strategies  result  from  the  recognition  of  increased  cyber  risks,  i.e.
increased  cyber  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  potential  impact  on  the  economy and the society.
Sources, motivations, nature, organisation and sophistication of threats   are evolving...   States are emerging as new sources of threats in addition to individuals  and  groups  which  can  be  related  to  organised  criminality,  potentially  to  terrorism,  but  also  to  economic  and  commercial  interests.
Some  strategies  highlight  that criminals, terrorists, intelligence services and militaries benefit from the  borderless  nature  of  the  Internet  which  impedes  the  easy  attribution  of  malicious digital activities to specific individuals.
The nature of threats continues to include criminal activities such as theft  (of identity, personal data, secrets of all kind and financial assets), infringe- ment of intellectual property rights, denial of service, defacement and other  sources  of  disruption,  covering  breaches  of  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability.
However,  the  main  emerging  types  of  threats  are  large-scale  denial  of  service  attacks,  leakages  of  private  information,  cyberespionage  against  governments  and  critical  parts  of  business  and  industry,  and  the  disruption  of  critical  infrastructures.
Cyber- espionage, military operations, sabotage and deception operations are included  as  potential  threats  in  many  strategies.
Examples include  the 2007 massive attack on Estonian networks, the 2009 large scale denial of  service attacks against Korea and the United States, numerous sophisticated  cyberespionage  activities  targeting  numerous  governments,  regional  and  international  institutions  and  firms  operating  in  the  security  sector,  data  leakages affecting 77 and 35 million customers of respectively Sony and SK  Comms.
The  alleged  physical  disruption  of  the  Iranian  nuclear  enrichment  programme using the Stuxnet worm is sometimes highlighted as an important   © OECD 2012   26 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       turning  point  in  relation  to  the  protection  of  critical  infrastructures.
Finally,  the  UK  2011  cybersecurity  strategy  mentions  as  potential  threats  the  possibility  for  States  to  spread  disinformation  and  for  terrorists  to  spread  propaganda,  radicalise  potential  supporters,  raise  funds,  communicate and plan (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a).
The level of organisation of the major threat sources, whether individuals,  groups  or  States  has  significantly  increased.
Criminal  groups,  motivated  by  financial gain, export to the virtual world their real world organisational skills  in order to maximise the benefits from digital criminal activities.
Even isolated  individuals  have  developed  “loose  coalitions”  or  “decentralised  online  (e.g.
For  example  organised  criminal  groups  and  State  actors  have  become  capable  of  developing extremely innovative malicious software9 (malware) capable of  evading  advanced  detection  software.
They also recognise the constantly evolving nature  of  the  threat,  sometimes  making  a  parallel  with  bacteria  developing  drug  resistance to antibiotics11.
...  Countries’  vulnerability  and  reliance  on  ICTs  and  cyberspace  have increased to the point where cybersecurity becomes a national  priority.
Over the last ten years, the Internet evolved from a useful communication  tool for individuals and organisations to an essential digital infrastructure for  the economy and society as a whole.
This is illustrated by the dependence of  critical  infrastructures on information systems and networks,12 including for   © OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 27   example  distribution  of  food,  water,  energy,  telecommunications,  transport,  health  service,  the  financial  system  and  the  functioning  of  all  areas  of  government  including  emergency  services  and  the  military.
Strategies  recognise the estimated and potential losses for individuals and organisations  resulting from cyber threats, for example in terms of financial damages (e.g.
According to the United Kingdom, the reliance of the country’s interests  on  cyberspace  is  “far-reaching,  affecting  the  individual  citizen,  almost  all  aspects  of  government,  industry,  our  national  infrastructure,  transportation  and the way our economy operates” (UK Prime Minister, 2009).
For Spain,  much of the country’s stability and economic prosperity will depend on the  security of its cyberspace.
According to France, the current level of attacks  on information systems reveals a high potential for destabilisation of daily  life,  disruption  of  networks  that  are  critical  to  the  life  of  the  nation  and  denial of functioning of military capacity (French Government, 2008).
For  the  Canadian  Minister  of  Public  Safety,  Canada’s  increasing  reliance  on  cyber  technologies  makes  the  country  vulnerable  to  those  who  attack  its  digital infrastructure to undermine its national security, economic prosperity  and way of life (Government of Canada, 2010).
The United States stresses  that cyberspace provides a “platform for innovation and prosperity and the  means  to  improve  general  welfare  around  the  globe”  that  “touches  practically everything and everyone”.
Australia recognises that its national security, economic prosperity  and social wellbeing are critically dependent upon the availability, integrity  and confidentiality of a range of information and communications techno- logies (Australian Government, 2009).
The Netherlands notes  that  the  continuity  and  security  of  supply  are  essential  for  the  private  sector’s survival and for the society as a whole and that a breakdown could  lead to social disruption (Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, 2011).
© OECD 2012   28 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Cybersecurity  strategies  aim  at  two  interrelated  objectives:  protecting  the society against cyber threats as it becomes more reliant on cyber- space and  fostering  cybersecurity  as  essential for  the  further  develop- ment of the Internet economy.
While new strategies often result from a “national security” review...
In contrast with the previous generation of strategies in the early 2000s,  one of the key drivers for the development of new cybersecurity strategies is  related to “national security”.
For  example,  the  French  2010  strategy  on  “Defense  and  security  of  information systems” results from the adoption of a 2008 “White Book on  Defense and National Security” which aimed at developing a new holistic  national  security  strategy  taking  into  account  changes  in  the  global  environment since 1994.
The United Kingdom developed its 2009 strategy  as a result of a change in its approach to national security initiated in 2008.
The main driver for the development of the cybersecurity strategy was the  identification of the increasing importance of cyberspace in the life of the  United Kingdom and as one of the highest priorities for action in relation to  national  security.
After  the  adoption  of  the  strategy  and  the  change  of  government, both the National Security Strategy and the Strategic Defence  and  Security  Review  (SDSR)  addressed  cyber  security  risks  (2010).
The  2009  Australian  cybersecurity  strategy  was  preceded  by  an  “E-Security  National Agenda” announced in 2001 and reviewed in 2006.
As a result, the  strategy  starts  with  the  Australian  Prime  Minister’s  statement  that  cyber  security is now one of the country’s top tier national security priorities.
The  planned Spanish and Finnish cybersecurity strategies will result respectively  from the 2011 Spanish Security Strategy which includes a section on cyber- threats, and the 2010 Finnish National Security Strategy for Society.
In the early 2000s, cybersecurity policy making aimed to foster trust on  line  in  order  to  create  the  conditions  for  the  Internet  to  drive  prosperity,  growth and well being.
A decade later, governments are facing a different  situation: the Internet economy became a significant source of growth in its  own right and a platform for innovation that cuts across all other economic  sectors.
Large segments of the core fabric of the economy and society rely  on  the  Internet  and  related  ICTs.13  However,  the  Internet  did  not  succeed  because the infrastructure became more secure but rather despite its inherent  insecurity.
The  nature  of  technical  vulnerabilities  of  information  systems  interconnected  through  the  Internet  have  not  fundamentally  changed.
The  Internet continues to be “driven more by considerations of interoperability  and efficiency than security” (US White House, 2009).
What has changed is  that the society and the economy now rely on this fundamentally insecure   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 29   environment.
Thus addressing cybersecurity has become a national priority  for governments and requires a strategic approach focusing on the protection  of  the  society  as  a  whole  rather  than  only  on  the  individual  interests  of  specific participants considered separately.
This is the meaning of “national  security”  across  all  these  new  cybersecurity  strategies  and  it  represents  a  major  policy  evolution  from  the  mind-set  that  drove  the  adoption  of  the  2002 Security Guidelines and subsequent implementation frameworks.
... they also address cybersecurity as essential for the development   of the Internet economy.
It  would,  however,  be  misleading  to  conclude  that  these  countries  have  abandoned the economic and social objective of cybersecurity policy making.
Rather,  what  emerges  from  these  recent  strategies  is  the  dual  objective  of  fostering  cybersecurity  for  creating  the  conditions  for  a  prosperous  Internet  economy while protecting the society as a whole from cyber risks stemming  from increased reliance on cyberspace.
Managing the complexity of pursuing  this double objective can be seen as one of the main, if not the main, current  cybersecurity policy making challenges.
For  example,  the  German  strategy  aims  to  maintain  and  promote  economic  and  social  prosperity  and  stresses  that  ensuring  cybersecurity  has  turned into a central challenge for the state, business and society and a vital  question for the 21st century.
The Dutch strategy focuses on strengthening the  security  of  the  digital  society  in  order  to  give  individuals,  businesses  and  public bodies more confidence in the use of ICT while recognising that the  society’s growing dependence on ICT makes it vulnerable to the misuse and  disruption of ICT systems.
According to the Australian 2009 strategy the aim  of  the  government  is  to  maintain  a  secure,  resilient  and  trusted  electronic  operating  environment  that  supports  Australia’s  national  security  and  maxi- mises  the  benefits  of  the  digital  economy.
Confronting  and  managing  risks  “must be balanced against [...] the need to promote efficiency and innovation  to  ensure  that  Australia  realises  the  full  potential  of  the  digital  economy”.
The  2011  UK  Cybersecurity  Strategy  recognises that as the Internet drives economic growth and supports open and  strong  societies,  the  cost  of  cyber  incidents  for  businesses,  the  potential  reduction  in  trust  towards  online  communications  “can  now  cause  serious  economic and social harm to the UK” (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a).
The 2009  US Cyber Policy Review stresses that the country “faces the dual challenge of  maintaining  an  environment  that  promotes  efficiency,  innovation,  economic  prosperity and free trade while also promoting safety, security, civil liberties  and privacy rights.
It is the fundamental responsibility of our government to   © OECD 2012   30 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       address  strategic  vulnerabilities  in  cyberspace  and  ensure  that  the  US  and  the world realise the full potential of the information technology revolution”  (US White House, 2009).
Japan recognises the need to develop a safe and  secure use of  ICT to enable the use of  ICT to solve  the key challenges it  faces  such  as  economic  growth,  ageing  society  and  environmental  issues.
The aim of the strategy is to “guarantee the nation’s safety and security by  improving its ability to respond to all types of ICT threats, including cyber  attacks, to the world’s highest level, [...] as well as to build an environment  where  the  nation  can  actively  utilize  ICT  without  concerns  regarding  information security reliability”.
As a result of this context, the overall issue of cybersecurity is elevated  amongst  government  priorities  and  benefits  from  more  governmental  co- ordination.
The  first  objective  of  most  strategies  is  to  improve  the  organisation  of  the  government  to  address  cybersecurity  by  assigning clear responsibilities to various government bodies.
In some instances, the government carried out a consultation process with  the  private  sector,  for  example  interviews  and  workshops  (Netherlands) or via the Internet (Australia’s Cyber White Paper).
through   The concepts of “cybersecurity” and “cyberspace” are not used by all  countries.
However,  the  scope  of  most  strategies  generally  covers  all  information  systems  and  networks,  including  critical  information  infrastructures that are not connected to the Internet.
While some countries use concepts like “cybersecurity” and “cyberspace”,  others  continue  to  use  “security  of  information  systems”  (France)  and  “information security” (Japan) or a mix of cybersecurity and “safe and reliable  ICT” (Netherlands).
Some countries provide definitions  of cyberspace and  cybersecurity.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 31   The scope of the strategies generally includes all information systems,  both connected to the Internet or not, and in particular information systems  and  networks  that  support  critical  infrastructures.14  As  an  exception,  the  German strategy considers that IT systems in an isolated virtual space are  not part of cyberspace.
Key concepts    While cybersecurity strategies share common concepts...   Strategies generally lay out a narrative which varies across countries and  leads  to  the  introduction  of  various  key  objectives  and  concepts  (see  Annex IV).
Holistic / integrated / comprehensive approach supported by strong   leadership   There is a general agreement on the need for a more holistic approach to  cybersecurity  policy  making.
Comprehensiveness,  in  this  context,  means  in  general  the  inclusion  of  all  facets  of  the  problem,  such  as  for  example  economic, social, educational, legal, law enforcement, technical, diplomatic,  military, and intelligence-related aspects,  as well as all participants inside the  government  (see  below  government  co-ordination)  and  outside,  throughout  the  society  (including  businesses  and  individuals)  and  beyond,  with  foreign  partners.
For  example,  Australia  aims  to  develop  a  “government-led  coherent,  integrated approach” (Australian Government, 2009) and Germany stresses  that  “cybersecurity  must  be  based  on  a  comprehensive  approach”  and  requires a “high level of government commitment” (Federal Ministry of the  Interior, 2011).
The United  Kingdom  supports  a  “coherent  approach  to  cybersecurity  in  which  the  Government,  organisations  across  all  sectors,  the  public  and  international  partners all have a part to play” (United Kingdom).
While themes such as  the  protection  of  the  critical  information  infrastructure,  the  fight  against  cybercrime, the protection of information systems and networks, and others  are  still  relevant  and  can  be  identified  in  the  actions  outlined  in  the  strategies, they are now blended together in a holistic fashion under a single  umbrella  which  is  sometimes  tagged  with  a  specific  term  such  as  “cyber- security”  (Australia,  UK)  or  “cyberdefense”15  (France).
© OECD 2012   32 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Government co-ordination  The need for a holistic approach raises the challenge of government co- ordination  to  enable  many  government  agencies  to  work  together  in  a  coherent  manner,  avoid  duplication,  foster  synergies  and  pool  initiatives.
The  scope  of  government  co-ordination  is  very  broad,  from  the  economic  and  social  sectors  to  the  law  enforcement,  national  security,  intelligence,  military and diplomatic sectors.
To address this challenge, strategies assign  clear  cybersecurity  co-ordination  responsibilities  to  existing  or  new  management  structures  (see  below,  management  structures)  at  policy  and  operational levels.
Public-Private Partnerships  Most strategies recognise that cyberspace is largely owned and operated  by  the  private  sector  and  that  policies  should  be  based  on  public-private  partnerships,  which  may  include  business,  civil  society  and  the  academia.
The  UK  2009  Strategy  recognises that the success of the National Cyber Security Programme (EUR  777 million over 4 years17) depends on the critical role that the private sector  has to play and should be based on “a genuine partnership where policy is  co-designed  so  that  a  credible  national  response  can  be  delivered”  (UK  Prime Minister, 2010a).
Japan highlights that “the role of public and private  sectors  must  be  clearly  identified  in  the  course  of  building  an  alliance  between  the  two  sectors”  (Japanese  Information  Security  Policy  Council,  2010).
The Dutch strategy notes that public-private partnerships should be  based  on  mutual  trust,  considering  both  sides  as  equal  partners,  enabling  gains  for  every  party  and  following  co-operation  models  with  clearly  defined  tasks,  responsibilities,  powers  and  guarantees  (Dutch  Ministry  of  Security and Justice, 2011).
International co-operation    ?
Most strategies also stress the importance of the international dimension  of cybersecurity and the need for better alliances and partnerships with like- minded  countries  or  allies,  including  capacity  building  of  less  developed  countries.
Most  countries  however  provide  little  detail  on  how  to  achieve  international  objectives,  except  for  the  United  States  which  developed  a   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 33   specific international strategy for cyberspace and the United Kingdom which  initiated an international dialogue at the London Conference on Cyberspace in  November 2011.
Australia  promotes  an  “active  international  engagement”  based  on  an  “active,  multilayered  approach  to  international  engagement  on  cyber  security”  (Australian  Government,  2009).
Canada  stresses  international  collaboration  as  essential  to  secure  cyberspace  and  the benefit  from  being  seen  internationally  and  domestically  as  a  trusted  partner  in  making  cyberspace safer.
It supports international efforts to develop and implement  a global cyber governance regime that will enhance security.
The Canadian  government plans  to develop a cybersecurity foreign policy.
The develop- ment  of  international  co-operation  is  one  of  the  main  objectives  of  the  French national strategy.
Japan stresses that international alliances must be  reinforced  as  “unprecedented  borderless  incidents  are  now  more  likely  to  occur”  (Japanese  Information  Security  Policy  Council,  2010).
The  US  International Strategy for Cyberspace in 2011 aims to “unify [its] engage- ment  with  international  partners  on  the  full  range  of  cyber  issues”  and  provides  “the  context  for  [its]  partners  at  home  and  abroad  to  understand  [its] priorities and how [they] can come together to preserve the character of  cyberspace  and  reduce  the  threats  [they]  face”  (US  White  House,  2011a).
The United  Kingdom  took  the  lead  in  a  multilateral  dialogue  with  the  2011  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace  and  promotes  the  adoption  of  international  norms of behaviour in cyberspace (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a; UK Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  2011).
Most strategies also mention the role of international organisations but  they provide little detail as to the role that each organisation plays or should  play and how to ensure consistency across them.
In general, they mention  the Council of Europe, the G8, the Internet Governance Forum, the OECD,  the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and the  United  Nations.
The  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation  (NATO)  is  also  mentioned by several countries with respect to cybersecurity in the military  context (Canada, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Spain, United Kingdom).
Spain  and  Germany indicate a possible extension of the role of the European Network  and Information Security Agency (ENISA).
© OECD 2012   34 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Fundamental values  Finally,  consistent  with  the  Security  Guidelines  (Democracy  principle),  most strategies recognise the respect of fundamental values such as freedom  of expression, privacy protection and the free flow of information as essential.
The Dutch strategy calls for proportionate measures based on risk assessment  taking  into  account  the  balance  between  the  desire  for  security  and  the  protection of fundamental rights.
The UK 2011 strategy stresses that actions to  strengthen  national  security  must  be  consistent  with  obligations  such  as  freedom of expression, the right to seek, receive and impart ideas, the right to  privacy and the commitment to uphold civil liberties.
The international norms  of  behaviour  in  cyberspace  proposed  by  the  UK  Foreign  Secretary  include  fundamental  values.
The planned Australian Cyber White Paper also includes  the  idea  that  issues  in  the  online  world  should  be  dealt  with  in  a  manner  consistent with similar issues off line.
that  behaviour  which   ... some concepts are specific to some countries, such as the economic  aspects  of  cybersecurity,  the  need  for  dynamic  policies  and  the  emergence of “sovereignty” considerations.
Countries place a variable emphasis on economic aspects of cybersecurity  in  their  strategies:  some  countries  make  a  reference  to  information  security  (and  privacy)  in  their  economic  growth  strategy  (Japanese  Cabinet  Office,  2010),18  some  develop  a  specific  strategic  document  dedicated  to  economic  aspects (US Department of Commerce, 2011) and others consider economic  measures as part of the main actions to be taken by the government (Australia,  France, United Kingdom).
Interestingly, the UK 2011 strategy aims to enable  the promotion of the country as a good place to do business in cyberspace,  thus developing a competitive advantage for the country in cyberspace (UK  Cabinet Office, 2011a, UK National Security Review, 2010).
A similar idea  can  be  found  in  the  Spanish  Security  Strategy  according  to  which  the  development  of  a  safe  cyberspace  can  give  Spain  a  competitive  edge  (Gobierno de España, 2011).
In some cases, strategies underline the need to  maintain  or  develop  technological  independence  or  sovereignty  in  core  strategic IT competences (Germany, Spain).
Some  countries  recognise  the  need  for  policies  tailored  to  a  dynamic  environment,  for  more  rapid,  flexible,  and  agile  government  cybersecurity  policy  making  and  implementation  mechanisms.
The  United  Kingdom  promotes a “flexible cyber security response” (UK SDSR).
Japan supports  policies adapted to technical innovation, active rather than passive security   © OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 35   measures, encouraging methodologies such as the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle  approach and other methods that enable to actively implement new measures  (Japanese Information Policy Council, 2010).
The  2002  Security  Guidelines  responded  to  the  challenge  of  generalised  interconnectedness  creating  an  ever  changing  and  instable  IT  environment  by  recognising  the  need  for  dynamic  security  concepts  (risk  assessment, reassessment, shared responsibility, awareness, response, etc.).
However,  they  did  not  address  how  to  develop  and  implement  dynamic  policies to support these concepts.
Further, countries are now faced with the  need to dynamically manage cybersecurity as a problem of national scale.
national  security,  intelligence, defence and the military) in the sphere of information systems  and networks policy  making is probably the  most striking consequence of  countries considering the interests of society as a whole in addition to each  participant  separately.
While  sovereignty  considerations  and  sovereignty  government bodies have never been completely absent from the IT sphere,20  they did not appear specifically in cybersecurity policy making in the past.
For  example, the US DoD strategy is included in the holistic approach adopted  by the US Government to address cybersecurity21 and the US International  Strategy  for  Cyberspace  includes  a  “Defense  objective”  and  a  military  policy priority (US White House, 2011, p. 12 and 20).
The UK 2009 strategy briefly discusses this aspect and “recognises  the need to develop military and civil capabilities, both nationally and with  allies,  to  ensure  we  can  defend  against  attack,  and  take  steps  against  adversaries  where  necessary”.
The  German  strategy  also  includes  the  military  dimension  of  cybersecurity  but  makes  a  clear  distinction  with  civilian  cybersecurity.22  The  emergence  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  related  government  agencies  play  a  role  both  in  the  cybersecurity  policy  making  process as well as at the operational level (see below).
© OECD 2012   36 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  strategies  are  consistent  with  the  principles  of  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines  but  they  do  not  mention  them.
Nevertheless,  they  introduce the concept of business continuity (or resilience) and real time  management which are not as such in the Guidelines ...
The 2002 Security Guidelines provided nine principles to create a general  frame of reference for participants to understand security issues and respect  ethical values in the development and implementation of coherent policies for  the security of information systems and networks.
Although national strategies  never mention the OECD Security Guidelines, they all reflect their principles.
In addition, many strategies highlight “resilience” of information systems  and  networks  as  a  key  strategic  concept  which  is  absent  from  the  Security  Guidelines.
As  such,  it  is  consistent  with  the  Guidelines  which  introduced  risk  management  as  a  fundamental  approach  for  the  security  of  information systems and networks.
Resilience is related to several principles  of  the  Security  Guidelines,  such  as  Response  (3),  Risk  Assessment  (6),  Security  Design  and  Implementation  (7)  and  Security  Management  (8).
Similarly,  while  the  Security  Guidelines  focus  on  timeliness  of  Response,  action  plans  introduced  with  several  strategies  emphasise  the  need  for  real  time operational management based on situational awareness (see below).
Management structures and actions plans   Most  strategies  include  plans  that  identify  organisational  decisions  and  priority actions, generally described at a high level of generality.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 37   All strategies establish stronger government co-ordination mechanisms  and  most  highlight  leadership  as  a  key  factor.
Most strategies aim to improve the public administration’s organisation  and  co-ordination  to  address  cybersecurity.
“Cybersecurity Czar” reporting to the White House), to a specific agency for  cybersecurity attached to a co-ordination body (e.g.
Some countries also created a specific body for public-private co- ordination  and  to  provide  advice  to  the  government  regarding  how  to  balance  cybersecurity,  economic  objectives  and  fundamental  values  (e.g.
Dutch and German National Cyber Security Councils).
In  Australia,  policy  development  is  led  by  the  Cyber  Policy  Coordinator/National  Chief  Information  Officer  within  the  Department of the Prime Minister and Cabine,t24 under the National  Security Advisor.
A guiding principle is that the scale and complexity  of  the  cybersecurity  challenge  requires  strong  national  leadership  from  a  number  of  agencies  including  the  Attorney-General’s  Department,  which  chairs  the  Cyber  Security  Policy  Committee25  on which operational agencies are represented.
At operational level,  the 2009 Cybersecurity strategy established a new government CERT  (CERT Australia) and the Australian Defence White Paper created the  Cyber Security Operation Center (CSOC) to provide the government  with all-source cyber situational awareness and an enhanced ability to  facilitate operational responses to events of national importance.
Public  Safety  Canada  is  responsible  for  the  co-ordination  of  the  implementation  of  the  Canadian  strategy  and  for  designing  an  approach to reporting on this implementation.
It is also in charge of  public  cybersecurity  awareness.
Within  Public  Safety  Canada,  the   © OECD 2012   38 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre monitors the cyber threat  environment,  provides  mitigation  advice  on  cyber  threats  and  co- ordinates the national response to cyber security incidents, focusing on  critical  infrastructures.
Several  other  agencies  are  involved,  including  Industry  Canada  as  regards  the  digital  economy  strategy  to  create  a  safer  and  trusted  online  marketplace,  Treasury  Board  Secretariat  for  government cybersecurity, intelligence and cryptography agencies, the  Department of Justice with respect to cybersecurity legislation, Foreign  Affairs and International Trade Canada in relation to the international  dimension of cybersecurity.
The Department of National Defense and  the Canadian Forces are involved as regards the security of their own  networks, information sharing with other departments and relationships  with foreign military allies.
In Finland, while the government has not yet adopted a comprehensive  cybersecurity strategy, it has nevertheless assigned responsibility to the  Ministry of Finance’s Government Information Security Management  Board (VAHTI) for co-ordination with respect to cybersecurity within  the government.
France  created  a  national  authority  for  the  security  of  information  systems,  the  National  Agency  for  the  Security  of  Information  Systems  (ANSSI),  attached  to  the  Secretary  General  of  Defense  and  National  Security  (SGDSN)  who  reports  to  the  Prime  Minister.26  ANSSI  is  an  interagency  coordinator  of  governmental  action  and  its  missions  include  providing  secure  interagency  means  of  communi- cations, inspecting government systems, acting as a government CERT,  providing certification for systems protecting state secrets, acting as an  international point of contact and providing training.27    ?
The  development  of  the  German  strategy  was  led  by  the  Federal  Ministry of  the  Interior  in co-operation  with other  ministries and in  particular the  Foreign Office and Ministries of Defence, Economics  and Justice.
According to the strategy, the government has established  a  National  Cyber  Response  Centre  to  optimise  operational  co- operation within the government and co-ordination of protection and  response measures to IT incidents.
The Federal Office for Information  Security (BSI) is responsible for the Centre.
Other authorities  like   the  Federal  Office  for  the  Protection  of  the  Constitution  (BfV)  and  Federal Office of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (BKK), the  Federal  Criminal  Police  Office  (BKA),  the  Federal  Police  (BPOL),  the  Customs  Criminological  Office  (ZKA),  the  Federal  Intelligence  Service (BND), the military (Bundeswehr) and authorities supervising  critical  infrastructure  operators  are    co-operating  directly  with  each   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 39   other in this centre within the framework of their statutory tasks and  power.
The  Centre  will  inform  directly  the  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior  in  case  of  a  crisis.
In  addition,  a  National  Cyber  Security  Council  has  been  established  to  strengthen  cooperation  within  the  government and with the private sector and provide recommendations  at high political levels on strategic issues.
The Council is under the  responsibility of the Federal Government Commissioner for Informa- tion  Technology  (BfIT)  and  comprises  representatives  from  the  Federal  Chancellery  and  State  Secretaries  from  the  Foreign  Office,  Ministries  of  the  Interior,  Defence,  Economics  and  Technology,  Justice,  Finance,  Education  and  Research,  and  representatives  from  the  federal  Länder  (regions).
It  also  includes  representatives  from  business as associated members and the academia, as appropriate.
The  National Cyber Response Centre will submit recommendations to the  National Cyber Security Council.
Japan places some focus on the need to “establish an organisational  systems to implement a comprehensive policy under strong leader- ship  through  an  alliance  of  the  concerned  government  agencies  centred around the Cabinet Secretariat”.
The  Dutch  government  assigned  co-ordination  and  coherence  responsibility to the Ministry of Security and Justice and promotes a  network-centred form of collaboration.
It created a National Cyber  Security Center with a strategic and implementation responsibility,  incorporating the current GOVCERT.NL, to provide expertise and  advice,  support  and  execute  response  during  incidents,  enhance  crisis  management.
It  also  includes  the  ICT  Response  Board,  a  public-private  partnership  that  gives  advice  on  how  to  counteract  major  ICT  disruptions  to  decision-making  organisations.
It  also  created  a  National Cyber Security Council with representatives from public  and  private  sectors  as  well  as  the  academia  to  help  improve  the  understanding  of  cyber  security  developments  and  help  parties  deal  with incidents and make decisions in crisis.
The UK established an Office of Cyber Security (OCS) subsequently  renamed  Office  of  Cyber  Security  and  Information  Assurance  (OCSIA)  in  the  Cabinet  Office28  to  provide  strategic  leadership  for  and  coherence  across  the  government.
OCSIA  delivered  the  cyber- security  strategy.
Its  missions  include  providing  strategic  direction,  supporting  education,  awareness  and  training,  working  with  the   © OECD 2012   40 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       private  sector,  working  with  the  Office  of  the  Government  Chief  Information  Office  (OGCIO)  to  ensure  resilience  and  security  of  government infrastructures, engaging with international partners.
The  2009  Cyber  Security  Strategy  also  created  a  Cyber  Security  Operations  Centre  (CSOC)  to  actively  monitor  the  health  of  cyberspace,  provide  collective  situational  awareness,  enable  better  understanding of attacks against UK networks and users, co-ordinate  incident response and provide better advice and information about the  risks to business and the public.
It is a multi-agency body hosted by  Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in Cheltenham,  alongside  GCHQ’s  Information  Assurance  arm,  Communications  Electronics Security Group (CESG).
The US Cyber Policy Review focused on the lack of organisation of  its  administration  and  on  improving  the  distribution  of  responsi- bilities  for  cybersecurity  and  decision  authority  to  direct  action  across the government.
Cybersecurity was designated as one of the  President’s  key  management  priorities.
A  cybersecurity  co- ordinator  was  appointed  and  the  Cybersecurity  Office  was  created  within  the  National  Security  Staff  at  the  White  House,  working  closely with the Federal Chief Information Officer and the National  Economic  Council.
The  Cyber  Policy  review  included  several  organisational actions, such as the designation of a privacy and civil  liberties  official  to  the  National  Security  Council  Cybersecurity  Directorate and the establishment of a formal interagency process.
“Sovereignty  agencies”  play  an  operational  role  for  cybersecurity  in  most countries.
Among  the  various  agencies  involved  in  their  implementation,  most  strategies assign an operational role to agencies with sovereignty responsi- bility  such  as  ministries  of  defence  and  agencies  in  charge  of  intelligence  and other “national security” missions.
These include agencies in charge of  cryptography  expertise  (e.g.
Communications  Security  Establishment  Canada),  civilian  and/or  military  intelligence  services  (e.g.
Canadian  Security  Intelligence  Service,  Dutch  General  Intelligence  and  Security  Service (AIVD) and Military Intelligence and Security Service (MIVD), the  UK  GCHQ.
In the 2011 UK strategy, the overall budget for the four-year National Cyber  Security Programme includes shares for the Signal Intelligence Account and  Ministry of Defence which are recognised, in the strategy, as having a strong  role in improving the understanding of and reducing the vulnerabilities and  threats the country faces in cyberspace.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 41   Cybersecurity strategies strengthen priorities identified in 2003-2004 ...   All  strategies  reinforce  areas  of  priority  that  were  defined  in  the  first  generation of strategies for the security of information systems and networks  (see OECD, 2005).
Enhancing government security and protecting Critical Information   Infrastructures (CII)    These  two  areas  highlighted  in  2004  as  key  drivers  supporting  the  development  of  a  culture  of  security  are  generally  reinforced  in  2012.
All countries  include a large range of new measures for better securing  government  systems,  ranging  from  fostering  the  use  of  cryptography  and  ensuring  autonomy  in  this  area,  to  rationalising  government  networks,  improving  the  resilience  of  government  systems,    developing  labelling  schemes, promoting strong authentication for civil servants, developing attack  detection/prevention  capacity,  multiplying  Chief  Information  Security  Officers,  promoting  standards  and  the  use  of  audit,  requiring  business  continuity plans, establishing procurement requirements, raising awareness of  civil  servants  and  developing  viable  career  paths  for  security  experts,  etc.
The UK stresses the importance of cybersecurity in  the context of its Government Cloud Strategy (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a and  2011b).
In  many  cases,  countries  consider  the  protection  of  government  systems and networks as part of the protection of critical infrastructures.
The  protection  of  CII  is  generally  part  of  the  cybersecurity  strategies  although countries generally have specific policy documents to address this  challenge.
Some  strategies  stress  the  need  to  better  integrate  CII  manage- ment  structures  with  other  cybersecurity  structures  as  an  objective  (Netherlands).
Measures  for  the  protection  of  CII  vary  depending  on  the  level of advancement of each country in that area and are generally based on  public-private  co-operation.
They  include  preparatory  measures  such  as  cybersecurity  incident  response  plans  and  improved  crisis  management  plans,  the  development  of  business  continuity  arrangements,  the  organi- sation  of  exercises,  the  creation  of  a  rapid  response  capacity  with  inter- national  reach,  the  improved  co-ordination  of  and  information  sharing  amongst the various players (e.g.
),  the  development  of  legal  frameworks,  international  alliances, the promotion of standards and the organisation of audits.
© OECD 2012   42 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Enhancing the fight against cybercrime  As  regards  cybercrime,  most  countries  focus  their  efforts  on  the  development of their law enforcement capacity.
Some countries highlight the  need  to  improve  their  legal  framework  (Canada,  France,  Japan,  United  Kingdom),  to  reinforce  international  co-operation  (France,  Germany,  Japan)  and  regionally  harmonise  criminal  law  (Spain).
The  United  Kingdom  developed  a  dedicated  cybercrime  strategy  in  2010  which  describes  the  current cybercrime situation, provides a vision, and details how the govern- ment  will  achieve  its  objectives  (UK  Home  Office,  2010).29  Cybersecurity  strategies include various  measures such as strengthening existing high-tech  crime  units,  training  law  enforcement  staff,  involving  non-law  enforcement  experts in police cyber investigations (e.g.
Canada will establish a centralised   Cyber  Crime  Fusion  Centre  to  respond  to  requests  from  the  Cyber  Incident  Response  Centre  regarding  cyber  attacks  against  Government  or  Canada’s  critical  infrastructure  (Government  of  Canada,  2010).
Germany  will  create  a  joint  institution  with  industry  and  law  enforcement  agencies  to  exchange  know- how  (Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  2011).
Most  countries  support  the  Budapest Convention on Cybercrime and some indicate possible examination  of  the  need  for  further  international  legislation  in  his  area  (Germany,  Netherlands).
Awareness raising  initiatives generally focus on the general population, including specific targets  such as children (Australia, Spain, United Kingdom), and on businesses and  government  bodies,  including  specific  targets  such  as  decision  makers,  and  critical  infrastructures.
Education  efforts  towards  the  general  population  include,  for  example,  cyber  hygiene  education  in  schools  at  all  levels  (Netherlands),  using  social  media  (United  Kingdom),  through  partnerships  with  ISPs  (see  below),  via  the  possible  establishment  of  an  “information  security  support  service”  (Japan).
The  United  Kingdom  supports  the  development  of  market  differentiators,  including  certified  safety  labels  for  products  and  services,  and  industry-led  standards  and  guidance.
The  Netherlands  established  a  cyber  security  education  and  training  centre.
Australia  supports  the  concept  of  responsible  digital  citizenship  based  on  digital literacy and awareness to exploit online opportunities and effectively  mitigate cyber risks.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 43   In contrast with 2004, the lack of a cybersecurity workforce is identified  as a key policy challenge by governments.
The  UK  strategy  recognises  the  need  to  better  understand  the  demand  for  cyber  security  skills  across  the  private  sector.
Several countries promote the development of viable career paths.
The United  Kingdom  aims  to  encourage  the  development  of  a  community  of  “ethical  hackers”.
Measures  include,  for  example,  establishing  programmes  of  certified  specialist  training  (Netherlands,  United  Kingdom),  supporting  a  Cyber  Security  Challenge30,  strengthening  postgraduate  education  and  developing a coherent cross-sector research agenda to strengthen the academic  base (United Kingdom).
Research and Development  Research  and  Development  which  was  identified  as  an  area  of  lower  attention  in  2004  is  featured  prominently  in  current  strategies.
The most significant effort is  the publication by the US White House in December 2011 of its Strategic  Plan  for  Federal  Cybersecurity  Research  and  Development  Program.
The  strategy  aims  to  induce  change  by  understanding  the  root  causes  of  cybersecurity  deficiencies  rather  than  just  addressing  symptoms,  develop  scientific foundations for security by stimulating research in areas such as  biology,  economics  and  other  social  sciences,  maximise  research  impact  through co-ordination and collaboration of agencies across the government  and accelerate transition to practice.
Develop a “situational awareness” capacity: all strategies aim to  enhance  their  ability  to  collect  real-time  information  about  online  threats.
This  aspect  of  the  strategies  is  sometimes  related  to  the  development of a cyber intelligence capability.
Develop  an  industrial  policy  for  cybersecurity  (France,  United  Kingdom,  United  States).
For  example,  France  aims  to  support  innovative SMEs in the security sector.
The US DoD “will promote  opportunities  for  SMEs  and  work  with  entrepreneurs  in  Silicon  Valley  and  other  US  technology  innovation  hubs  [...]”.
Several  strategies  include  leveraging  public  procurement  to  help  cyber  security  SMEs.
The  UK  2011  strategy  calls  for  exploring  how  GCHQ’s expertise can more directly benefit economic growth and   © OECD 2012   44 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       support  the  development  of  the  UK  cyber  security  sector  without  compromising  its  mission.
Initiatives  could  include  commercial  exploitation  of  GCHQ  expertise,  partnerships  with  various  players  to foster cybersecurity innovation, and government-sponsored venture  capital  model  to  unlock  cybersecurity  innovation  in  SMEs.
Spain  highlights  the  need  to  support  the  development  of  private  national  companies  in  this  strategic  sector  “where  reliance  on  foreign  firms  could be dangerous”.
Specifically  address  key  business  players or  sectors:  the  United  Kingdom and the United States call for specific measures to better  protect  businesses  that  are  not  part  of  the  national  critical  infrastructure but which nevertheless represent important economic  assets for the country.
The  United  States  developed  the  concept  of  an  “Internet  and  Information Innovation Sector (I3S)” which includes functions and  services that create or utilise the Internet or networking services and  have large potential for growth, entrepreneurship and vitalization of  the  economy  but  would  fall  outside  of  CI  as  defined  by  the  government  (US  Department  of  Commerce,  2011).
A  nationally  recognised approach would be developed to minimise vulnerabilities  in  this  sector,  including  through  the  development  of  codes  of  conduct,  promotion  of  standards,  of  automation  in  security  and  through improved security assurance.
Incentives would be leveraged  to help I3S combat cyber threats, call for education and research and  international co-operation.
The  United  Kingdom  established  a  “cybersecurity  hub”  gathering  largest companies from all sectors where the threat to revenues and  intellectual  property  is  capable  of  causing  significant  economic  damage  to  the  United  Kingdom.
This  public/private  hub  aims  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  actionable  information  on  threats  and  strengthen  response  to  incidents,  analyse  new  trends,  and  work  to  strengthen collective cybersecurity capabilities (UK Cabinet Office,  2011a, 4.20).
In another initiative, the British government addresses  specifically the retail sector through the creation of a Retail Cyber  Security  Forum  to  establish  effective  reporting  and  information  sharing.31    ?
Germany created a task force to address specifically IT security in  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the Interior, 2011).
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 45   ?
Foster  partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs):  where,  for  example,  ISPs  inform  their  customers  when  their  equipment is identified as taking part in a botnet and take action to  assist them in solving the problem.
Germany,  which  also  adopted  a  similar  initiative,  stresses  the  possibility  for  providers  to  assume  greater  responsibility  including making available to users a basic collection of appropriate  security  products  and  services  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 2011).
Initiatives include the development of market differentiators such as  certified  cyber  security  labels  (see  above)  and  the  possibility  to  develop  a  cyber  insurance  market  (US  Department  of  Commerce,  2011).
The  UK  Department  for  Business,  Innovation  and  Skills  (BIS)  will  hold  a  strategic  summit  with  professional  business  services  providers  including  insurers,  lawyers  and  auditors  to  discuss how they can develop the services they offer to business to  help them manage and reduce risks.32 Several countries support the  mandatory  notification  of  breach  of  personal  data  and  reporting  mechanisms for data leakages in critical sectors (e.g.
Develop  digital   identity  frameworks:  Spain   is  rolling  out  electronic  identification  documents  to  its  population  through  an  ambitious  digital  identity  plan.
The  development  of  a  strategy  to  foster  stronger  digital  identity  is  part  of  the  US  strategic  package  (US  White  House,  2011b.
The  German  strategy  stresses  the  provision  of  basic  security  functions  by  the  state,  such  as  electronic  proof  of  identity  or  certified  e-mail34  (German Federal Ministry of the Interior, 2011).
The UK National  Cyber Security Programme includes funding for the development of  a trusted and resilient approach to identity assurance (UK Cabinet  Office, 2011a, 4.18).
© OECD 2012   46 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Carry  out  cyber  security  exercises  to  enhance  incident  response  co-ordination, including across borders (Japan, Netherlands, Spain,  and United States)   ?
Address concerns related to the security of supply chains (Canada,   Unites States).
Develop  a  cyberdefense  military  capacity:  the  protection  of  military  networks  and  the  development  of  an  offensive  cyber  capacity is mentioned by some cybersecurity strategies but without  much detail (France, United Kingdom, United States).
The German  strategy  makes  a  clear  distinction  between  civilian  and  military  cybersecurity which focus respectively on IT systems in use in the  civilian and military German cyberspace.
All  countries  support  the  establishment  of  stronger  international  mechanisms.
International  co-operation  was  considered  as  important  in  2004  but  limited  to  the  sharing  of  best  practices  and  guidance.
All  countries’  strategies  now  emphasise  the  need  to  reinforce  international  co-operation.
International co-operation results from the inherently transnational nature of  the Internet and some strategies recognise that they rely on partnerships with  third  countries  for  some  aspects  and  express  willingness  to  assist  foreign  partners where possible.
The need for stronger international efforts is highlighted regarding  various aspects:    ?
Participating in discussions carried out in international and regional   organisations (see Annex I).
Developing  internationally  recognised  norms  of  behaviour  for  cyberspace (Australia, United Kingdom) or a code for state conduct  in cyberspace (Germany), including confidence building measures.
Organising/participating in international cybersecurity exercises.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 47   ?
Developing  a  capacity  to  assist  other  countries  in  case  of  crisis  (France) and help them to build the components of a cybersecurity  framework (Japan, United Kingdom, United States).
In several instances, the international dimension of strategies addresses  problems  which  extend  beyond  the  economic  and  social  impact  of  cyberspace such as the prevention of armed conflict, through, for example,  confidence-building measures.
Considerations highlighted by non-governmental stakeholders   This  section  introduces  some  of  the  considerations  and  suggestions  expressed by the business, civil society, and the Internet technical community  in their response to a questionnaire circulated in January 2011 (cf.
While  non-governmental  stakeholders’  responses  reflect  variations  as  regards priority areas of concern, they exhibit the following strong points of  convergence: i) multistakeholder collaboration and co-operation are the best  means  the  fundamentally global, open and interoperable nature of the Internet; ii) policy  options must be flexible enough to accommodate the dynamic nature of the  Internet;  iii)  more  robust  evidence-based  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  needed, an area which is generally not covered by cybersecurity strategies.
to  develop  effective  cybersecurity  policy   that   respects   Non-governmental stakeholders share some concerns with respect to the  emergence  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  and  stress  the  importance  of  enhanced  multistakeholder  dialogue  to  overcome  these  challenges.
Business  recognises  that  the  divide  between  national  security  and  economic  security  is  increasingly  blurred,  in  particular  as  more  critical  infrastructures are owned by the private sector.
It stresses that in exercising  their  sovereignty  competencies,  governments  may  adopt  cybersecurity  policies which impact economic security and private sector systems as well as  create burdens on business.
Greater emphasis on enhanced consultation and  co-operation  with  business  could  help  governments  find  the  appropriate  balance between sovereignty and economic and social cybersecurity.
Civil  society  also  recognises  this  increasingly  blurred  divide  and  is  concerned that the emergence of sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity  reduces its participation in the policy making process.
This could for example  result  from  the  involvement  and  lobbying  of  the  security  industry  and  law  enforcement,  opaque  policy  processes,  strong  military  and  intelligence  interests,  public-private  partnerships  modelled  on  traditional  intelligence   © OECD 2012   48 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       communities rather than Internet governance ones, and finally state-to-state  interactions taking place in closed settings.
Another concern is that the lack of  specificity  of  the  term  “cybersecurity”  in  conjunction  with  the  emergence  of  sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity policy making may lead to re-couch  all  cybersecurity  issues  into  the  language  of  “national  security”  and  warfare,  preventing  balanced  policy  making  and  fostering  the  adoption  of  drastic  solutions such as network monitoring instead of other practical solutions more  respectful  of  citizens’  rights.
Discussions  related  to  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  might  influence  broader  cybersecurity  debates  towards  national  security  thereby  justifying  sweeping  unaccountable  powers.
Finally,  the  extension  of  state  rivalries  in  cyberspace  is  pointed  out  by  civil  society  as  creating  one  of  the  chief  security  threats  on  line,  for  example  by  increasing the market demand for exploits and threats which can proliferate into  the civilian economy.
To  limit  possible  challenges  raised  by  the  blurred  divide  between  sovereignty and economic and social considerations, the civil society suggests  that  policy  initiatives  target  specific  and  narrowly  defined  tangible  and  demonstrable harms in order to prevent an overarching security blanket which  would  suffocate  the  very  society  it  seeks  to  protect.
This  suggestion  could  enable better informed decision making and balancing of the expected security  benefits with the possible impact on fundamental rights.
It could be viewed as a  proposed “Transparency” principle for cybersecurity policy making, building on  the risk approach called for in the Security Guidelines (see OECD, 2012b).
The  civil  society  also  proposes  that  the  impact  on  fundamental  rights  of  each  cybersecurity initiative be assessed so as to enable more informed discussions.
It  also suggests the adoption of a sunset clause for cybersecurity strategies to avoid  policies proportionate to the risks when initially adopted ultimately threatening  fundamental rights as technology evolves.
Such a measure would also ensure  that strategies are reviewed regularly.
Recognising that the protection of children on line is a very important  shared objective, the Internet technical community stresses that it should not  be misused as a justification for cybersecurity measures that are contrary to  an open Internet.
The civil society highlights that legal provisions to enhance cybersecurity  can in some countries interfere with legitimate cybersecurity research and deter  further R&D and investments in this area.
It proposes that an assessment of the  consistency  of  cybersecurity  measures  would  help  prevent  such  counter- productive  situations.
The  civil  society  also  encourages  fact-based  decision  making as a central element of the cybersecurity discussion, while recognising  that transparency of risk-related data raises real challenges for the private sector,  which faces many disincentives to reveal this type of information, as well as for  national security agencies which do not generally operate in full transparency   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 49   mode.
To cope with  these challenges,  it suggests  that governments disclose  metrics regarding risks faced by their own systems and networks rather than  relying  on  external  sources  of  information  sometimes  linked  to  the  cyber- security  industry.
Breach  notification  requirements  put  forward  by  several  strategies  are  mentioned  as  another  source  of  data.
The  Internet  technical  community  highlights  the  need  to  develop  a  standard,  unified  and  privacy- respecting  method to collect, analyse and report data breaches at the global  level in order to provide industry and governments with a better understanding  of cybersecurity threats.
Data could also result from other measures such as  the guidance adopted by the US Securities and Exchange Commission in 2011  regarding  disclosure  obligations  relating  to  cybersecurity  risks  and  cyber  incidents.
The  need  to  address  the  international  dimension  of  cybersecurity  in  relation to trade and innovation is a key concern for the Internet technical  community and for business.
The Internet technical community expressed the  view  that  approaches  that  increase  technical  barriers  to  trade  in  ICT  infra- structure  equipment  and  end  user  devices  risk  balkanising  the  Internet  into  different markets with different technical regulation.
For businesses, which  often  operate  globally  and  face  a  variety  of  specific  approaches  to  both  economic and sovereignty cybersecurity, coherence of cybersecurity policies  at  international  level  is  essential.
Although  differences  between  national  cybersecurity approaches are inevitable, they should allow for the deployment  of global cost-effective industry solutions.
Thus unilateral requirements to use  local  standards or  technologies, unnecessary  or  redundant documentation or  certifications requirements, as well as interferences in the global value chain  create complex challenges.
The adoption by third countries of specific require- ments may intentionally or inadvertently compromise overall cybersecurity; it  can also severely increase cost, limit functionality and constrain innovation, as  well as impair trade or skew a level playing field by hindering the ability of  companies  and  organisations  to  roll  out  globally  consistent  processes  and  infrastructures.
It  also  encourages  the  exploration  of  cross  compliance  recognition  mechanisms  whereby  a  system  which  has  been  found  compliant  for  one  set  of  requirements  under  one  regulation should be recognised as compliant with similar requirements under  another  regulation.
Finally,  it  calls  for  governments  to  promote  the  use  of  internationally recognised standards to address this challenge and underlines  the role of the OECD to raise the awareness of less developed countries on  this issue as well as to lead by example.
© OECD 2012   50 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  role  of  international  standards  is  emphasised  by  the  Internet  technical  community  which  highlights  that  governments  should  foster  the  development of open standards and permission-less innovation for security  solutions.
This  community  emphasises  the  need  to  respect  the  well- established  channels  for  Internet  standards  development  (e.g.
IETF  and  W3C) and to avoid unilateral modifications to global Internet standards as  well as overly prescriptive approaches which risk freezing security solutions  and  stifling  innovation  in  technology  and  Internet  use.
The  translation  of  cybersecurity policy priorities into the technological sphere should support  and  promote  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Internet.
This  community  also  highlights  that  the  overall  objective  of  a  more  secure  Internet  is  supported  by  the  development  of  a  variety  of  technical  building  blocks  through an open, collaborative and consensus-based standards development  model.35  Voluntary  security  initiatives  can  also  play  a  role,  such  as  the  Software  Assurance  Forum  for  Excellence  in  Code  (SAFECode)  which  focuses  on  effective  software  assurance  methods,  and  the  Open  Group  Trusted Technology Forum (OTTF)36 which focuses on open standards for a  more trusted global supply chain.
The  Internet  technical  community  underlines  its  role  as  a  source  of  independent advice regarding the potential intended and unintended conse- quences of planned policy decisions on the Internet and the way it functions,  and stresses that policy makers should seek such advice as early as possible  in the policy development process in order to avoid pursuing technologically  flawed decisions.
Finally,  the  Internet  technical  community  stresses  the  critical  role  of  the  government  to  provide  leadership  and  co-ordination  of  cybersecurity  efforts  through  appropriate  legal  reforms  and  public-private  partnerships  to  facilitate  information  sharing  and  voluntary  adoption  of  best  practices  by  the  industry.
Multi-stakeholder co-operation and government leadership should aim to ensure  functionality of infrastructure and services before, during and after attacks, the  development of more robust systems and networks and more secure solutions  that  preserve  the  principles  of  the  open  Internet.
The  Internet  technical  com- munity notes, with the civil society, that governments can play a lead role in the  implementation  of  best  practices,  including  policies,  technologies  and  even  legislative requirements to secure their own information systems and networks.
The  development  of  well-designed,  balanced  and  judiciously  applied  trust  compliance  programmes  and  procurement  practices  by  governments  would  provide a clear direction to other economic and social actors.
Moreover, govern- ment cybersecurity information and experience could in turn benefit the rest of  society if it is shared.
© OECD 2012       Other considerations    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 51   The  introduction  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  is  a  turning point that is likely to influence cybersecurity policy making in the  longer term and will deserve continued attention and further analysis in the  future.
As reflected in current strategies, however, most of these sovereignty  considerations are generally separated from economic and social aspects of  cybersecurity, and are mentioned mainly as a result of the holistic nature of  these strategies.
In many  cases, the relationship between the economic and social aspects addressed in  the strategies and such sovereignty considerations are only mentioned to make  a  link  between  government  cybersecurity  and  sharing  of  information  with  intelligence agencies.
Nevertheless,  some  intersections  between  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social aspects of cybersecurity appear in some strategies and in current public  cybersecurity policy debates.
For example, in some countries, the co-ordination  of  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  taking  place  in  a  “national  security”  co- ordination  agency  or  body  such  as  a  National  Security  Council,  or  National  Security  Advisor.
Other  potential  intersections  may  result  from  increased  sovereignty cybersecurity spending spilling over into the civilian cybersecurity  market.
For example, the British strategy calls for exploring how the expertise  of one of its intelligence agencies can more directly benefit the development of  a  British  cybersecurity  industry  sector  without  compromising  its  mission.
Cybersecurity  investments  driven  by  defence  contracts  could  change  the  dynamic of the civilian market, new key players from the defence and security  industry37 could gain more weight in a growing civilian cybersecurity market,  introducing  innovative  products  and  services  as  well  as  a  different  ethos;  cybersecurity  personnel  hired  and  trained  in  the  defense  forces  could  several  years  later  enter  the  civilian  cybersecurity  jobs  market.
These  possible  evolutions could partially address the objectives of several strategies to develop  a  stronger  cybersecurity  industry  based  on  enhanced  skills  and  a  larger  workforce.
These  examples  suggest  that  the  breadth  of  the  grey  area  where  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social  cybersecurity  considerations  overlap  varies  across  countries,  raising  new  opportunities  and  challenges.
As  cyber- security  policy  develops,  the  intersections  between  the  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social  facets  of  cybersecurity  would  need  to  be  carefully  analysed, for example to assess their impact on the openness of the Internet, on  the supply and demand of cybersecurity products, services, skills and jobs, on  fundamental  values  such  as  privacy  and  freedom  of  speech  (Democracy  Principle  of  the  Security  Guidelines)  as  well  as  on  the  complexity  of  inter- national co-operation in cybersecurity.
© OECD 2012   52 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The development of evidence-based policy making through appropriate  indicators,  whether  statistical  or  anecdotal,  quantitative  or  qualitative,  is  generally  absent  from  the  cybersecurity  strategies  compared  in  this  report.
However, it may be considered essential to a risk-based approach at all levels,  for better cybersecurity policies and implementation, and for the development  of a stronger cybersecurity market.
Although the protection of critical information infrastructures is generally  included  in  the  scope  of  cybersecurity  strategies,  the  issue  of  cross-border  interdependencies is rarely addressed at strategic level.
Further co-operation  on this matter which is addressed in the OECD Recommendation on Protec- tion of Critical Information Infrastructures (2008) would be of mutual interest.
Most strategies mention the need to improve international co-operation  at policy and operational levels.
Nevertheless,  the  trend  towards  the  establishment  of  co- ordination mechanisms within governments in order to support more holistic  strategies provides an interesting opportunity for each country to establish an  official  single  point  of  contact  for  international  cybersecurity  co-ordination/  co-operation.
This would follow-up on the OECD 2008 Recommendation on the Protection  of Critical Information Infrastructures which called for governments to “make  available  information  regarding  the  national  agencies  involved  in  the  protection of CII, their roles and responsibilities, to facilitate identification of  counterparts and improve the timeliness of cross border action”.
Finally,  several  strategies  underline  the  importance  of  cyber  security  exercises  but  few  take  into  account  the  need  to  develop  contingency  and  response  plans  in  advance  as  well  as  the  importance  of  regional  and  inter- national exercises.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 53   Intergovernmental organisations and initiatives   Annex I   This annex provides a brief overview of intergovernmental bodies and   initiatives currently addressing cybersecurity at the policy level38.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)   APEC39  is  a  regional  economic  forum  which  groups  21  economies  to  promote free and open trade and investment, regional economic integration,  economic and technical co-operation, human security, and a favourable and  sustainable business environment to support sustainable economic growth and  prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
Its  Telecommunications  and  Information  Working  Group  (APEC  TEL) aims to improve telecommunications and information infrastructure in  the Asia-Pacific region by developing and implementing appropriate telecom- munications  and  information  policies.
APEC  TEL  Security  and  Prosperity  Steering  Group  (SPSG)  carries  out  many  activities  related  to  security,  trust  and  confidence  in  network/infrastructure/services/technologies/applications/  e-commerce.
Since  2005,  OECD  co-operates  closely  with  SPSG  in  various  areas  such  as  security  of  information  systems  and  networks,  awareness  raising,  malware, the protection of children on line and  botnets.
APEC TEL meets twice a year and organises  regularly  APEC  Telecommunications  and  Information  Industry  Ministers’  Meetings (TELMIN).
The  Budapest  Convention  on  Cybercrime  was  adopted  on  8 November  2001  as  the  first  international  treaty  addressing  crimes  committed  using  or  against  network  and  information  systems  (computers).
As of April 2012, 28 OECD   © OECD 2012   54 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       members  had  signed  the  Convention  and  17  had  ratified  it.
The OECD is an observer in the T-CY and the Council of Europe is an  observer in the OECD Working Party on Information Security and Privacy.
The Council of Europe also helps countries to ratify, accede and implement  these treaties through technical co-operation projects.
G8  The involvement of the G8 in the field of cybercrime dates back to the  late  90s,  when  the  G8  created  a  mechanism  to  expedite  contacts  between  countries, the so-called “G8 24/7 network of contact points”.
In May 2003,  the  G8  adopted  the  G8  Principles  for  Protecting  Critical  Information  Infrastructures on the fight against crimes and terrorist acts committed using  or  against  network  and  information  systems  (“cyber-crime”  and  “cyber- terrorism”).
In  May  2004  the  G8  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  Ministers  adopted  the  Best  Practices  for  Network  Security,  Incident  Response  and  Reporting  to  Law  Enforcement  and  in  May  2009  a  significant  part  of  the  Final Declaration was devoted to cybercrime and cybersecurity, focusing on  collaboration  between  service  providers  and  law  enforcement  and  on  the  strengthening  of  international  co-operation.
Internet  was  among  the  key  priorities of the G8 2011 Deauville Summit which was preceded by an “e- G8”  event  held  in  Paris  prior  to  the  Summit.
G8  Leaders  agreed  on  a  “number  of  key  principles,  including  freedom,  respect  for  privacy  and  intellectual  property,  multi-stakeholder  governance,  cyber-security,  and  protection from crime, that underpin a strong and flourishing Internet”.42    Internet Governance Forum (IGF)   ?
The  IGF  was  established  by  the  World  Summit  on  the  Information  Society in 2006 to bring people together from various stakeholder groups in  discussions on public policy issues relating to the Internet.
While there is no  negotiated outcome, the IGF informs and inspires those with policy making  power in both the public and private sectors.
The IGF facilitates a common   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 55   understanding of how to maximise Internet opportunities and address risks  and challenges.
Its mandate includes the discussion of public policy  issues related to key elements of Internet governance in order to foster the  sustainability, robustness, security, stability and development of the Internet.
Themes related to cybersecurity are  regularly discussed in the annual IGF  meeting and in regional IGF type settings.43   ?
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)  NATO has recently acknowledged the need to focus on cyber defence.
In the 2010 Strategic Concept adopted in Lisbon, NATO Allies recognised  the need for NATO to develop further the ability to prevent, detect, defend  against  and  recover  from  cyber-attacks,  including  by  using  the  NATO  planning  process  to  enhance  and  co-ordinate  national  cyber-defence  capabilities, bringing all NATO bodies under centralised cyber protection, and  better integrating NATO cyber awareness, warning and response with member  nations.
The Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD-COE)44  was  created  in  2006  in  Tallinn,  Estonia.
It  is  an  international  military  organisation  whose  mission  is  to  enhance  the  capability,  co-operation  and  information  sharing  among  NATO,  NATO  nations  and  Partners  in  cyber  defence by virtue of education, research and development, lessons learned  and consultation.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)   Within  the  broader  objective  of  the  OECD  to  develop “better  policies  for  better  lives”,  the  OECD  Committee  for  Information,  Computer  and  Communications  Policy  (ICCP)  promotes  Internet  policies  that  unleash  innovation and capture new sources of growth for more inclusive economic  development  and  increased  social  well-being.
Its  Working  Party  on  Information Security and Privacy (WPISP) develops flexible policy recom- mendations and guidance to sustain trust  in the  Internet Economy and the  global networked society.
Its work is based on in-depth policy analysis in  areas such as National Cybersecurity Policies,  Indicators for cybersecurity  and  privacy,  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  (CIIP),  digital  identity  management,  malware,  Radio-Frequency  Identification  (RFID),  privacy protection and the protection of children online.
WPISP Participants  are  delegates  from  34  OECD  member  countries,  observers,  other  inter- national  organisations  as  well  as  representatives  of  business,  civil  society  and the Internet Technical Community.
© OECD 2012   56 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)   The OSCE addresses a wide range of security-related concerns, including  arms  control,  confidence-  and  security-building  measures,  human  rights,  national minorities, democratisation, policing strategies, counter-terrorism and  economic and environmental activities.
Enhancing cyber security has become  a cross-dimensional topic and endeavour in the OSCE.
Organisation of American States (OAS)  The OAS groups 35 independent states of the Americas which adopted in  2004  a  Comprehensive  American  Strategy  to  Combat  Threats  to  Cyber- security.46  The  strategy  involves  three  OAS  groups  which  address  cyber- security from a different perspective: the Inter-American Committee against  Terrorism  (CICTE)  which  supports  member  states  in  their  efforts  to  create  CSIRTs, promotes the creation of a Secure Hemispheric Network of National  CSIRTs  and  fosters  a  culture  of  cybersecurity,  the  Meetings  of  Justice  or  Other  Ministers  or  Attorneys  of  the  Americas  (REMJA)  Cyber  Crime  Working  Group  which  focuses  on  legal  requirements  and  investigation  capabilities,  and  the  Inter-American  Telecommunications  Commission  (CITEL) which addresses technical aspects.
United Nations (UN)  The United Nations has been the host of a number of activities related to  cybersecurity and cybercrime in the past few years.47 In 2003, through the  resolution 58/32, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to  consider threats to information security and possible cooperative measures.
To  this  end  a  Group  of  Governmental  Experts  (GGE)  was  established  in  2004 but consensus was not reached on a final report.
The same theme was  discussed  by  a  “Group  of  Governmental  Experts”,  appointed  in  2009  in  pursuance of UN General Assembly resolution 60/45 of 8 December 2005.
The Group produced a report on 16 July 2010 which recommends, among  other things, “further dialogue among States to discuss norms pertaining to  State use of ICTs, to reduce collective risk and protect critical national and  international  infrastructures”.
In  preparation  of  the  12th  United  Nations  Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice48 (Salvador, Brazil, 12-19  April 2010) the Secretariat of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)  prepared a working paper in which it recommended that “the development of a  global convention against cybercrime should be given careful and favourable  consideration”.
While  some  countries  were  supporting  such  development,  others strongly opposed highlighting the existence of the Budapest Conven- tion and the need to focus on capacity-building rather than on law-making.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 57   Lastly a proposal for a UN General Assembly resolution on an International  code  of  conduct  for  information  security  was  put  forward  by  China,  the  Russian  Federation,  Tajikistan  and  Uzbekistan  in  September  2011.
“The  text,  similar  to  the  one  tabled  in  past  years,  called  on  Member  States  to  promote  further  at  multilateral  levels  the  consideration  of  existing  and  potential  threats  in  the  field  of  information  security,  as  well  as  possible  strategies to address the threats emerging in this field, consistent with the  need to preserve the free flow of information.
New to the draft this year, [...]  was a provision seeking continuation of study by a group of governmental  experts  to  be  established  in  2012  of  existing  and  potential  threats  in  the  sphere  of  international  security  and  possible  cooperation  measures  to  address them, including norms, rules or principles of responsible behaviour  of States and confidence-building measures in information science.”49 The  UN General Assembly has also adopted several resolutions related to cyber- security such as Resolution 57/239 on the “Creation of a global culture of  cybersecurity” which builds on the OECD 2002 Security Guidelines50    The  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU)  is  the  specialised  agency  of  the  United  Nations  which  is  responsible  for  Information  and  Communication Technologies.
Cybersecurity is considered in the “C5” World  Summit  on  Information  Society  (WSIS)  Action  Line  of  the  Geneva  Action  Plan on building confidence and security in the use of ICT.
ITU was proposed  as  moderator/facilitator  in  implementing  concrete  projects  and  initiatives  along this line.
ITU deals also with adopting international standards to ensure  seamless  global  communications  and  interoperability  for  next  generation  networks; building confidence and security in the use of ICTs; emergency  communications to develop early warning systems and to provide access to  communications during and after disasters, etc.
Conferences on Cyberspace  The  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace51  (1-2  November  2011)  was  meant to build on the debate on developing norms of behaviour in cyber- space, as a follow-up to the speech given by UK Foreign Minister Hague at  the Munich Security Conference in February 2011 which set out a number  of  “principles”  that  should  underpin  acceptable  behaviour  on  cyberspace.
© OECD 2012   58 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Meridian Process   The Meridian process aims to provide Governments worldwide with a  means by which they can discuss how to work together at the policy level on  Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP).
An  annual  conference  and  interim  activities  are  held  each  year  to  help  build  trust  and  establish  international  relations  within  the  membership  to  facilitate  sharing  of  experiences and good practices on CIIP from around the world.52        © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 59   Cybersecurity policy in the European Union    Annex II   This  annex  provides  an  overview  of  i)  recent  developments  at  the  European  Union  (EU)  level,  ii)  the  main  EU  institutions  and  departments  involved in cybersecurity and iii) the main EU cybersecurity-related policy  documents.
Recent developments on a cybersecurity strategy at the EU level   The European Commission and the High Representative for Foreign and  Security Policy will jointly present a European Strategy for Cyber-Security  by the second semester of 2012.
This work will be jointly prepared by the  Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology  (DG CONNECT, ex DG INFSO), the Directorate General Home Affairs and  the  European  External  Action  Service.
The  strategy  will  put  forward  both  policy  and  regulatory  measures  to  ensure  a  safe  and  resilient  digital  environment for all EU citizens, businesses and public administrations and  to  effectively  prevent  cybercrime,  in  respect  of  fundamental  rights  and  European values.
Overview of EU institutions and departments    At  the  European  Union  level,  topics  relevant  to  cybersecurity  and  cybercrime  are  dealt  with  by  various  institutions  and  departments.
They  include:   ?
The various aspects of cybersecurity  are discussed in different Council configurations, such as Transport,  Telecommunications  and  Energy  (TTE)  Council,  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  (JHA)  Council,  Council  Working  Party  on  Civil  Protection  (PROCIV),  COTER,54  EU  Military  Committee  (EUMC),  and  the  Political  and  Security  Committee  (PSC)  /  Council  Standing  Committee on Operational Co-operation on Internal Security (COSI),   © OECD 2012   60 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Council Working Party on Transatlantic Relations (COTRA), etc.
Its Directorate  General  Security,  Safety  and  Communication  and  Information  Systems  is  in  charge  of  the  security  of  SGC  communications  and  information systems.
The European Parliament55 debates and passes EU laws with the EU  Council,  scrutinises  other  EU  institutions  to  make  sure  they  are  working democratically, debates and adopts the EU’s budget, with the  EU  Council.
Various  committees  of  the  European  Parliament56  have  an  interest  in  certain  aspects  of  cybersecurity  including  committees on Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE), Civil Liberties,  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  (LIBE),  Internal  Market  and  Consumer  Protection (IMCO), International Trade, Foreign Affairs (AFET), and  Security and Defence (SEDE).
It manages the day-to- day business of implementing EU policies and spending EU funds.
The  main  Directorates  General  involved  in  activities  related  to  cybersecurity include:  ?
Directorate  General  for  Communications  Networks,  Content  and  Technology  (DG  CONNECT,  former  DG  INFSO)  is  in  charge  of  policy activities on Network and Information Security (NIS) and on  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  (CIIP),  electronic  signature directive, eGovernment, the Safer Internet programme, the  ICT trust and security thematic of the 7th Framework for Research  and  Technological  Development  (FP7)  and  the  EU  Regulatory  Framework for Electronic Communications.
Directorate General Enterprise and Industry (ENTR) is in charge of  EU  industrial  policy,  satellite  navigation,  standardisation  and  the  security thematic of FP7.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 61   ?
Directorate  General  Internal  Market  (MARKT)  is  responsible  for  the Electronic Commerce Directive and for European legal frame- works in the areas of regulated professions, services, company law  and  corporate  governance,  public  procurement,  intellectual,  indus- trial property and financial services.
Working in close cooperation with  policy  Directorates-General,  the  JRC  addresses  key  societal  challenges  while  stimulating  innovation  through  developing  new  methods,  tools  and  standards,  and  sharing  its  know-how  with  the  Member States, the scientific community and international partners.
Several  other  Commission  bodies  are  involved  in  cybersecurity  activities focusing on the functioning of the Commission itself:   ?
Secretariat General (SG) leads activities on crisis management.
Directorate  General  Human  Resources  and  Security  (HR)  lays  down  the  European  Commission  policy  on  security  and  hosting  a  Cyber Attack Response Team (CART).
The  European  External  Action  Service58  (EEAS)  assists  the  High  Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy  who chairs the Foreign Affairs Council and conducts the common  foreign  and  security  policy,  also  ensuring  the  consistency  and  co- ordination  of  the  EU’s  external  action.
EEAS  is  involved  in  international aspects related to cyber security and cybercrime.
The European Network and Information Security Agency59 (ENISA)  was  established  in  2004  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  network  and  information security in the EU by giving expert advice on network  and information security to national authorities and EU institutions,  acting  as  a  forum  for  sharing  best  practice,  facilitating  contacts  between  EU  institutions,  national  authorities  and  businesses.
Together with EU institutions and national authorities, ENISA seeks  to develop a culture of network and information security across the  EU.
To assist the EU Member States in the task of developing and  maintaining a successful national cybersecurity strategy, ENISA is  developing a Good Practice Guide.60    © OECD 2012   62 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Its  mission  is  to  improve  the  effectiveness  and  cooperation  between  EU  law  enforcement  authorities in preventing and combating serious international crime  and terrorism, with the aim of achieving a safer Europe for all EU  citizens.
The European Defence Agency (EDA)63 was established in 2004 to  improve  the  EU’s  defence  capabilities  especially  in  the  field  of  crisis  management;  promote  EU  armaments  co-operation;  strengthen  the  EU  defence  industrial  and  technological  base  and  create a competitive European defence equipment market; promote  research,  with  a  view  to  strengthening  Europe’s  industrial  and  technological potential in the defence field.
The EU  Institute  for  Security  Studies  (EUISS)64  is  an  autonomous  agency that is an integral part of the support structures for the EU’s  Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
It provides analyses,  forecasts and recommendations on security issues of relevance for  the  EU.
Main EU policy documents related to cybersecurity   General documents   ?
EC (2001), Communication on “Network and Information Security:   Proposal for A European Policy Approach”, COM(2001)298.
Available at http://eur- lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/com/2001/com2001_0298en01.pdf   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 63   ?
EC (2006), Communication on a “Strategy for a Secure Information  Society - Dialogue, partnership and empowerment”, COM(2006)251.
EC (2009), Directive 2009/140/EC of the European Parliament and   of the Council amending Directive 2002/21/EC on a common  regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and  services (Framework Directive).
This Directive sets new provisions on  security and integrity of networks and services.
See the Trust  and Security chapter which launched several actions addressing  security and resilience.
EC (2010), “Delivering an area of freedom, security and justice for   Europe’s citizens.
Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm  Programme”, COM(2010) 171 final.
EC (2010), “The EU Internal Security Strategy in Action: Five steps  towards a more secure Europe”, COM(2010) 673 final.
The Stockholm Programme/Action Plan and the EU  Internal Security Strategy in action underline the Commission’s  commitment to building a digital environment where every  European can fully express his or her economic and social potential.
EC (2010), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and  of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing  Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517.
© OECD 2012   64 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ENISA   ?
EC (2004), “Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 of the European   Parliament and of the Council of 10 March 2004 establishing the  European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA)”.
EC  (2010),  “Proposal  for  a  regulation  concerning  the  European  Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA)”.
EC (2009), “Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure  protection (CIIP).
Protecting Europe from large scale cyber-attacks  and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience”,  COM(2009) 149 final.
EC (2011), “Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure   Protection.
Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber- security”, COM(2011) 163 final.
This second communication on CIIP takes stock of the  results achieved since the adoption of the CIIP action plan in 2009  and describes the next priorities planned under each action at both  European and international level.
© OECD 2012        Protection of children    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 65   ?
European Parliament and Council (2008), Decision No   1351/2008/EC of 16 December 2008 establishing a multi-annual  Community programme on protecting children using the Internet  and other communication technologies.
© OECD 2012   66 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Annex III   Key policy documents per country67   ?
Cyber Security Strategy.
Canada’s  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  For  a  Stronger  and  More  Prosperous   Canada.
National  Security  Strategy  for  Society.
Government  Resolution  on  Enhancing  Information  Security  in  Central   Government, VAHTI 7/2009.
Defence and Security of Information Systems.
Prime   Minister’s Secretary General for Defence and National Security, 2011.   ?
Main  measures  adopted  by  the  government.
Cyber  Security  Strategy  for  Germany.
Information  Security  Strategy  for  Protecting  the  Nation.
Japanese   Information Security Policy Council, 2010.70   ?
Annual Plan Information Security.
Japanese Information Security Policy   Council, 2010.   ?
Second  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical   Infrastructures.
Information Security Policy Council, 2009.    ?
Policy  for  Enhancement  of  Information  Security  Measures  for  the  Central  Government  Computer  System.
Japanese  Information  Security  Policy Council, 2005.    ?
Standards for Information Security Measures for the Central Government  Computer System.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council, 2010.   ?
The  National  Cyber  Security  Strategy.
Dutch  Ministry  of  Security  and   Justice, 2011.
© OECD 2012   Australia   Canada   Finland69   France   Germany   Japan   Netherlands    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 67   ?
Spanish  Security  Strategy:  Everyone’s  responsibility.
Royal Decree 3/2010 of 8 January 2010, regulating the National Security  Framework  within  the  scope  of  e-government;  Law  8/2011  of  28  April  2011, establishing measures for the protection of critical infrastructures;  Royal Decree 704/2011 of 20 May 2011, approving secondary legislation  on the protection of critical infrastructure; Law 59/2003 of 19 December  2003, on electronic signature; Royal Decree 1553/2005 of 23 December  2005  regulating  the  issuance  of  the  national  identity  card  and  its  electronic signature certificate.
The UK Cyber Security Strategy.
Cyber  Security  Strategy  of  the  United  Kingdom.
Safety,  Security  and   Resilience in Cyber Space.
Strategic  Defence  and  Security  Review  (SDSR).
A  Strong  Britain  in  an  Age  of  Uncertainty:  The  National  Security   Strategy.
Cyber Crime Strategy.
Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information   and Communications Infrastructure.
International Strategy for Cyberspace.
Prosperity, Security and Openness   in a Networked World.
Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal.
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative.
Cybersecurity,  Innovation  and  the  Internet  Economy.
Enhancing Online   Choice, Efficiency, Security and Privacy.
Trustworthy  Cyberspace:  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Federal  cybersecurity  Research and  Development Program.
Executive  Office of  the President,  National Science and Technology Council, 2011.
Spain71   United  Kingdom   United  States      © OECD 2012   68 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Key objectives and concepts in cybersecurity strategies   Annex IV   Australia   Canada   Finland72   France   ?
Maintain  a  secure,  resilient  and   trusted  electronic  operating  environment that supports Australia’s national security and maximises  the benefits of the digital economy.
All Australians are aware of cyber risks, secure their computers and   take steps to protect their identities, privacy and finance online   ?
Australian businesses operate secure and resilient ICTs to protect the  integrity of their own operations and the identity and privacy of their  customers   ?
The Australian Government ensures its ICTs are secure and resilient  ?
Securing Government systems  ?
Partnering   to  secure  vital  cyber  systems  outside   the  federal   Government   ?
Helping Canadians to be secure on line.
By  2016,  Finland  is  global  forerunner  in  cyber  threat  preparedness  and in securing vital functions of the society under all circumstances.
international  co-operation  for   is  an  active  player   ?
Finland   in   cybersecurity strategy.
Security and reliable cyberspace is more an enabler than a threat.
Focus  on  vital  functions  for  the  Finnish  society:  government  security,  functions,  functioning  of  the  economy  and  infrastructure,  population’s  income  security and capacity to functions, psychological resilience to crisis.
international  activities,  defense,   internal   ?
“diplomatic,  military,  scientific,  sovereignty  technical and economic information which enables freedom of action  and conditions prosperity of nations”).
information   ?
Reinforce cybersecurity of national critical infrastructures  ?
Ensure security in cyberspace.
© OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 69   ?
Ensure  cybersecurity  at  a  level  commensurate  with  the  importance  and  protection  required  by  interlinked  information  infrastructures,  without hampering opportunities and the utilisation of cyberspace   ?
Reinforce  policies  taking  account  of  possible  outbreaks  of  cyber  attacks  (reinforce  the  general  mode  of  readiness)  and  establish  counteractive organisation.
Active international co-operation  ?
Measures must be proportionate  ?
Culture of cybersecurity.
Improved national and international co-ordination.
Development  of  a  risk  map  and  catalogue  of experts,  resources  and   ?
Implementation of the National Security Framework.
Recognition  of  a  safe  cyberspace  as  a  competitive  edge  for  the   best practices.
Derive  huge  economic  and  social  value  from  a  vibrant,  resilient  and  secure  cyberspace  where  our  actions,  guided  by  our  core  values  of  liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity,  national security and a strong society.
Tackle cyber crime and be one of the most secure places in the world   ?
Be  more  resilient  to  cyber  attacks  and  better  able  to  protect  our   to do business in cyberspace   interests in cyberspace   ?
Have  the  cross-cutting  knowledge,  skills  and  capability  it  needs  to   underpin all our cyber objectives.
Germany   Japan   Netherlands   Spain   United  Kingdom   © OECD 2012   70 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT      United States  ?
Establish a national dialogue on cybersecurity, engage in a global race  depending on mathematics and skills (like after the launch of Sputnik  in 1957).
Address  the  cross-border  challenge  by  shaping  the  international   environment, and bringing like-minded nations together.
Develop  a  comprehensive  framework  to  ensure  a  coordinated  response  by  the  Federal,  State,  local  and  tribal  governments,  the  private sector and international allies to significant incidents.
Define  performance  and  security  objectives  for  the  next  generation   infrastructure, with the private sector.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 71   Questionnaire circulated to volunteer countries   Annex V   1.
What is your cybersecurity strategy?
This question aims to gather information on the strategy itself and the  rationale  behind  it.
Please  provide  details,  as  appropriate,  including  for  example on:    ?
The objectives of the strategy, its scope, main components, the main  drivers  and  contextual  changes  that  led  to  its  development,  and  the  meaning or understanding of “cybersecurity” in this particular context.
The international dimension of your strategy, including in relation to   international organisations.
What are you doing to implement the strategy?
This  question  aims  to  help us  understand what  policies  have  been  (or  are expected to be) developed or significantly modified as a consequence of  the adoption of your strategy.
Provide information on the international aspects of the implementa-  tion of your strategy.
© OECD 2012   72 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT      3.
This question aims to gather information on how cybersecurity strategies  and  policies  both  protect  the  economy  and  the  society,  and  actively  foster  economic and social development.
The structures and processes that ensure coherence and consistency  of cybersecurity strategies and policies with strategies and policies  in other areas, i.e.
innovation, growth, competition),  protecting  national  interests  (or  “national  security”),  education,  research  and  development,  e-government,  and  fundamental  values  (e.g.
good governance, privacy, free flow of information, etc.).
What  processes  are  (were  or  plan  to  be)  used  to  develop,  implement  and  review the strategy and policies?
Please describe the processes for the i) development, ii) implementation,  iii) review of your strategy and policies, iv) measurement of their effective- ness and v) involvement of stakeholders in the development, implementation  and review of your strategy and policies.
Where  appropriate,  the  role  of  international  co-operation  (e.g.
regional  or  international  exercises)  and  international  organisations,  as well as your participation in international co-operation.
The main challenges and enablers that your government has faced or  is facing in the process of development, implementation and review  of its strategy and policy, as well as in the process for international  co-operation.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 73   Questionnaire circulated to non-governmental stakeholders   Annex VI   The  questionnaire  below  aimed  to  collect  input  from  business  and  industry,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical  community  to  understand  their perspective on national cybersecurity strategies analysed in the report.
This consultation was channelled through the official representation of these  stakeholder communities to the OECD: the Business and Industry Advisory  Committee  to  the  OECD  (BIAC), Civil  Society  Internet  Society  Advisory  Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC).
What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for the   economy and the society?
What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to public  policy  for  cybersecurity?
How  should  governments  implement  cybersecurity  policy  at  national  and at international levels and how does this compare with current new  strategies?
What  is  the  role  and  responsibility  of  [business  and  industry]  [civil  society] [the Internet technical community] with respect to cybersecurity  public policy?
What is -or what will be- the impact of recent cybersecurity strategies on  technical   [civil  society]   industry]   [business  and  community]?
[the   Internet   6.
How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be evaluated?
What metrics should be applied to measure their efficiency?
© OECD 2012   74 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT            Notes      1.
10.   issues  related   to   the  protection  of  critical   The  material  for  this  analysis  was  collected  between  March  2011  and  March 2012.  Business  and  Industry  Advisory  Committee  (BIAC),  the  Civil  Society  Internet Society Advisory Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical  Advisory Committee (ITAC) to the OECD.
Specific  information  infrastructures  are  not  addressed  in  this  report  although  they  appear  in  some  strategies.
See  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  the  Protection  of  Critical Information Infrastructures (2008).
Annex  III  provides  an  overview  of  intergovernmental  organisations  addressing cybersecurity.
References  to  the  views  of  “business”,  “civil  society”  and  the  “Internet  technical  community”  reflect  input  from,  respectively,  BIAC,  CSISAC  and  ITAC.
The analysis below includes  Finland and Spain taking into account that  they  have  not  yet  adopted  a  cybersecurity  strategy.
Most  of  the  information  related  to  these  two  countries’  approach  is  related  to  their  national security strategy and/or other key policy documents provided by  delegations.
These elements provide an indication of the direction of their  future cybersecurity strategy.
In this paper, the term attack refers to any type of intentional exploitation  of  a  vulnerability  by  a  source  of  threat,  including  for  breach  of  confidentiality.
This  dependence  characterises  the  concept  of  “critical  information  infrastructure”  as  defined  in  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  Critical  Information Infrastructure Protection.
© OECD 2012           CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 75   13.
For Japan, the increasing dependency on ICT in socioeconomic activities  implies  that  “information  security  can  be  seen  as  a  part  of  the  social  infrastructure”.
The Spanish Security Strategy, which addresses all national security risks,  considers  cyberspace  as  a  specific  domain  comparable  to  land,  sea,  air,  space and information, and which includes the Internet as well as cellular  phones, terrestrial television and satellite communications.
The  French  approach  to  “cyberdefense”  includes  all  aspects  of  cyber- security, regardless of their military or civilian nature.
ANSSI, which sits  under  a  Prime  Minister’s  co-ordination  body  for  matters  of  national  security and defense, is the national authority for cybersecurity.
“While securing peace of mind for the nation’s citizens by implementing  measures to protect personal information and improve security, Japan will  make every effort to encourage utilization of information and communi- cations technology, such as through improved training to provide people  with  a  command  of  this  technology.
This  will  make  daily  life  more  convenient  for  the  public,  triple  productivity  in  fields  concerned  with  information and communications technology, enhance international com- petitiveness by lowering production costs, and foster the development of  new industries” (Japanese Cabinet Office, 2010).
For example in relation to export controls or simply because of the use of  IT by the military and the intelligence community, as demonstrated by the  development  of  Internet  technologies  by  the  US  Defense  Advanced  Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
For  example,  its  Strategic  Initiative  3  states  that  “DoD  will  partner  with  other  US  government  departments  and  agencies  and  the  private  sector  to  enable a whole-of-government cybersecurity strategy” (US DoD, 2011, p.  8).
“Civilian  cybersecurity  focuses  on  all  IT  systems  for  civilian  use  in  German cyberspace.
Military cybersecurity focuses on all IT systems for  military  use  in  German  cyberspace.”  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 2011).
© OECD 2012   76 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT         24.
Décret  n°  2009-834  du  7  juillet  2009  portant  création  d’un  service  à  compétence  nationale  dénommé  « Agence  nationale  de  la  sécurité  des  systèmes d’information ».
See  also  Council  of  Europe,  2011  for  a  discussion  on  the  concepts  of   cybercrime and cybersecurity strategies.
The Cyber Security Challenge is a non-profit public-private initiative that  “runs national online competitions and raises awareness of cyber learning  opportunities and careers.
It is designed to excite, inspire and help  talented people, of any age, to follow a career in cyber security”.
ibid, 4.47.    initiative  which   is  not  part  of  a  government  national  cybersecurity  strategic  plan  but  may  act  as  a  market  incentive  is  the  issuance  by  the  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  of  Guidance regarding disclosure obligations relating to cybersecurity risks  and cyber incidents (US Securities and Exchange Commission, 2011).
This is consistent with the findings of  the OECD comparative analysis of national strategies for digital identity  management.
Examples  provided  by  the  Internet  technical  community  include,  from  IETF, DNSSEC, TLS, IPSec, RPKI, SAML; from W3C, Content Security  Policy, XML Signature, XML encryption; from OASIS, Digital Signature  Services  (DSS),  Security  Assertion  Markup  Language  (SAML);  from  ISO,  security  management  standards  such  as  IS27001  and  IS27002  as  well as the Entity Authentication Assurance Framework, DIS29115.
See www.safecode.org and   http://www3.opengroup.org/getinvolved/forums/trusted   © OECD 2012           CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 77   37.
Some  of  the  largest  defense  and  security  firms  (e.g.
Boeing,  EADS,  Finmeccanica, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Thales, ...) have a  portfolio  of  cybersecurity  products  and  services  which  extends  beyond  government military markets to civilian customers.
A  list  of  organisations  addressing  cybersecurity  standardisation  can  be  found in the ICT Security Standards Roadmap developed by ENISA, ITU  and the Network and Information Security Steering Group (NISSG) of the  ICT Standards Board.
See  an  exhaustive  review  of  the  activities  of  the  UN  regarding  cyber- security  at:  www.un.org/en/ecosoc/cybersecurity/maurer-cyber-norm-dp- 2011-11.pdf    48.  www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime-congress/12th-crime-congress.html.
© OECD 2012   78 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT         55.
Cybersecurity  strategy  is  being  developed.
The  strategy  has  been  updated  in  2011  by  the  “Information  Security  2011”,  available  at  www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/is2011_eng.pdf.
The  “Management  Standards  for  Information  Security Measures for the Central Government Computer Systems” (April  2011),  available  at  www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/K304-101e.pdf,  updates  the  “Standards  the  Central  Government Computer system” of 2010 and the “Policy for Enhancement  of Information Security Measures for the Central Government” of 2005.
Cybersecurity  strategy  is  being  developed.
These  documents  form  the   Information  Security  Measures   current basis on which the strategy will be built.
The  Finnish  cybersecurity  strategy  is  under  development  at  the  time  of   writing.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 79   References   ANSSI (2011), “Défense et sécurité des systèmes d’information.
Australian Government (2009), “Cyber Security Strategy”.
Cyber White Paper.
Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice (2011), The National Cyber Security   Strategy (NCSS).
ENISA (2011a), “Measurement Frameworks and Metrics for Resilient   Networks and Services: Technical report”, p. 12.
Available at   www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/stakeholder-relations/files/country- reports/   ENISA (2011c), “Cyber security: future challenges and opportunities”.
© OECD 2012   80 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ENISA (2012), “National Cyber Security Strategies.
Setting the course for   national efforts to strengthen security in cyberspace”.
A European Strategy for Internet   Security.
High Level Public-Private Security Roundtable.
Finnish Ministy of Defense (2010), “Security Strategy for Society.
Finnish Ministry of Finance (2009), “Government Resolution on Enhancing  Information Security in Central Government”.
German Federal Ministry of the Interior (2011), “Cyber Security Strategy   for Germany”.
Gobierno de España (2011), “Spanish Security Strategy.
Government of Canada (2010), Canada’s Cyber Security Strategy.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 81   Government of Canada (2009), National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council (2010), “Information Security   Strategy for Protecting the Nation”.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council (2010), Annual Plan   Information Security 2010.
Luiijf, H., Besseling, K., Spoelstra, M., Graaf, P. de (2011), Ten National   Cyber Security Strategies: a comparison.
CRITIS 2011 – 6th  International Conference on Critical information infrastructures Security,  September 2011.
OECD (2002), Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and   Networks: Towards a Culture of Security, Paris.
OECD (2005), The Promotion of a Culture of Security for Information   Systems and Networks in OECD Countries, Paris.
OECD (2008), Recommendation of the Council on the Protection of Critical   Information Infrastructures, Paris.
OECD (2009), Computer Viruses and Other Malicious Software: A Threat   to the Internet Economy, OECD Publishing.
OECD (2011), National Strategies and Policies for Digital Identity   Management in OECD Countries, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No.
OECD (2012a), “Proactive Policy Measures by Internet Service Providers   against Botnets”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No.
© OECD 2012   82 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       OECD (2012b), “Non-Governmental Perspectives on a New Generation of  National Cybersecurity Strategies”.
UK Cabinet Office (2009), “Cyber Security Strategy of the United   Kingdom.
Safety, Security and Resilience in Cyber Space”.
UK Cabinet Office (2011a), “The UK Cyber Security Strategy.
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (2011), “Security and freedom in   the cyber age - seeking the rules of the road”.
UK Home Office (2010), “Cyber Crime Strategy”.
UK Prime Minister (2010a), “Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty:   The Strategic Defence and Security Review”.
UK Prime Minister (2010b), “A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty:   The National Security Strategy”.
US Department of Commerce (2011), “Cybersecurity, Innovation and the   Internet Economy”.
US Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology   Council (2011), “Trustworthy Cyberspace: Strategic Plan for the Federal  cybersecurity Research and Development Program”.
Available at   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 83   www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/fed_cybersecurity _rd_strategic_plan_2011.pdf.
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence  (2011), “Rogers & Ruppersberger Introduce Cybersecurity Bill to Protect  American Businesses from “Economic Predators”.
US Securities and Exchange Commission (2011), CF Disclosure Guidance:   Topic No.
Cybersecurity.
Assuring a Trusted and   Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure.
US White House (2010), The “Comprehensive National Cybersecurity   Initiative”.
US White House (2011a), “International Strategy for Cyberspace.
Prosperity, Security and Openness in a Networked World”.
Enhancing Online Choice, Efficiency, Security and  Privacy”.
US White House (2011c), Fact Sheet: “Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal”.
© OECD 2012                   NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW   GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY   STRATEGIES:    CONTRIBUTIONS FROM BIAC, CSISAC AND ITAC            86 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES            Note by the Secretariat   This document brings together views from business, civil society and the  Internet  technical  on  the  emergence  of  a  new  generation  of  national  cyber- security strategies.
These stakeholder views were solicited in January 2012 by  the  OECD  Secretariat  through  a  questionnaire  to  the  Business  and  Industry  Advisory  Committee  (BIAC),  the  Civil  Society  Internet  Society  Advisory  Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC) to  the OECD.
This input was used in developing the report on “Cybersecurity  Policy Making at a Turning Point: Analysing a New Generation of National  Cybersecurity Strategies for the Internet Economy” which was declassified in  November  2012  by  the  OECD  Committee  on  Information,  Computer  and  Communications Policy (ICCP).
These views will also inform the review of  the  2002  OECD  Guidelines  for  the  Security  of  Information  Systems  and  Networks: Towards a Culture of Security undertaken by the Working Party on  Information Security and Privacy (WPISP) in 2012-2013.
About the OECD ICCP non-governmental stakeholder representation   Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) - www.biac.org   Founded in 1962, the Business and Industry Advisory Committee to the  OECD  (BIAC)  is  officially  recognised  by  the  OECD  as  the  representative  body  of  the  OECD  business  community.
As  an  independent  international  business association, BIAC brings a cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary view  to OECD work most relevant to business.
Civil Society Internet Society Advisory Council (CSISAC) – csisac.org  The  Civil  Society  Information  Society  Advisory  Council  (CSISAC)  contributes constructively to the policy work of the OECD ICCP Committee  and promotes the exchange of information between the OECD and the civil  society  participants  most  active  in  the  field  of  information  technology.
Information  from  the  OECD  will  provide  civil  society  participants  with  a  stronger  empirical  basis  to  make  policy  assessments;  inputs  into  research  and policy development from civil society will provide the OECD with the   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 87   essential  perspective  of  stakeholders  “at  the  receiving  end”  of  policy.
Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC) – www.internetac.org   The Internet Technical Advisory Committee to the OECD (ITAC) brings  together  the  counsel  and  technical  expertise  of  technically  focused  organi- sations, in a decentralised networked approach to policy formulation for the  Internet  economy.
The  main  purpose  of  the  ITAC  is  to  contribute  con- structively  to  the  OECD’s  development  of  Internet-related  policies.
ITAC  primarily contributes  to the work of the OECD Committee for Information,  Computer and Communications Policy (ICCP) and its specific working parties  such  as  the  Working  Party  on  Communications  and  Infrastructure  Services  Policy (CISP), the Working Party on Information Economy (WPIE) and the  Working Party on Information Security and Privacy (WPISP).
The ITAC is  open  to  any  Internet  technical  and  research  organisation  that  meets  the  membership criteria listed in the Committee’s Charter.
© OECD 2012   88 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Non-Governmental Perspectives on a New Generation of   National Cybersecurity Strategies: Contributions from BIAC,   CSISAC and ITAC   From your perspective:   1) What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for  the economy and the society?
This  increasing  complexity  and  interaction  is  essential  to  support  and  incent  many  of  the  economic  and  societal  benefits  that  exist  in  our  digital  economy  and  information  society.
This complexity and interaction is also more difficult to secure.
We  have  also  seen  the  global  nature  of  exploits  increasing with computer and mobile exploits morphing across the globe like  natural  viruses  do  in  epidemics,  except  at  Internet  speed.
Going  forward  we clearly  understand  the  need  to  continue  to  increase  efforts to reduce cybercrime, increase security in products and services, and  advance risk management practices address these issues to assure continued  trust in the infrastructure, the creation of new and innovative products and  services and continued growth in and adoption of new technologies, services  and business models predicated on the open Internet.
Major challenges include:  ?
A  globally  distributed,  sometimes  coordinated,  and  increasingly  professional group of bad actors that use increasingly sophisticated  means to deny service or steal, alter or destroy information.
We  note  that  the  geographic  distribution  of  the  perpetrators  of  cyber-attacks  makes  it  very  difficult  to  pinpoint  one  geographical   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 89   location as the origin of these attacks; the ubiquitous connectivity of  Cyberspace poses a challenge regarding the effectiveness of counter- measures which tend to be short lived since it is sufficient to simply  regroup the malicious resources and start again.
Diminished lead and reaction time to threats including potential zero   day exploits.
Complex systems and interactions among systems that may increase   the challenge and complexity of security.
The increasing national mandates for using local standards or tech-  nologies will hurt security and limit innovation.
The world economy and the security of sovereign states benefits from   international risk-based standards.
The  increased  challenges  of  effectively  and  globally  sharing  information  related  to  threats  or  exploits,  while  assuring  that  such  sharing does not enhance the potential success of threats or exploits.
Assuring that data is properly secured in systems in a holistic and   defense in depth manner across all relevant control parameters.
Fostering  better  security  by  design  across  government  and  industry  and addressing the explosion of new individual application developers  who  may  have  little  formal  training  in  writing  code  or  securing  software.
Training at all levels of the organisation on security appropriate to   their role; focusing on both technical and human factors.
Training of individual users appropriate to their role: updated anti- virus and malware definitions, common sense surfing tips, minimal  steps to protect identity and sensitive information; alerts on phishing  and social engineering.
Information  sharing  related  to  terrorist  or  criminal  acts    between  government  and  industry  that  both  meets  national  security/law  enforcement  requirements  while  respects  the  relevant  privacy  and  civil liberties limitation on information sharing.
The  lack  of  “inter-operability”  between  the  legal  frameworks  adopted by different countries increases the difficulty in defining a  global  solution  to  combat  cybercrime  and  prevent  the  misuse  of  information;  this  results  in  a  “nomadic  cybercrime”  since  cyber- criminals cannot be bound to any territorial jurisdiction.
© OECD 2012   90 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       The above challenges can only successfully be addressed if innovation  in  technology  and  security  are  allowed  to  advance.
Furthermore,  these  challenges should not be addressed through top down proscriptive measure  that  result  in  technology  mandates  or  unnecessarily  interfere  with  the  development  and  deployment  of  systems.
Importantly,  in  tackling  security  challenges  one  of  the  priorities  is  to  promote  the  use  of  appropriate  risk  assessment frameworks to evaluate the potential negative impacts to critical  information  infrastructures  caused  by  security  threats  and  vulnerabilities.
The  most  important  actions  should  be  focused  to  ensure  the  availability,  reliability and security of networks and information systems.
Cybersecurity must have the objective to achieve a distributed and co- ordinated  approach  to  provide  the  level  of  security  and  resilience  that  is  needed in cyberspace.
Efforts to improve cybersecurity should be based on  globally  accepted  standards,  best  practices,  and  international  assurance  programs.
This approach will improve security, because proven and effective  security  measures  must  be  deployed  across  the  entire  global  infrastructure.
Another  goal  of  this  approach  is  to  improve  interoperability  of  the  digital  infrastructure,  to  incentivise  more  private-sector  resources  to  be  used  for  investment and innovation to address future security challenges.
Lastly, organisations must often work globally and across sectors.
This  must be done using globally coherent systems and common practices based  on  international  standards.
Efforts  to  create  national  or  local  implementa- tions  of  security,  not  based  on  internationally  accepted  practices,  could  severely increase cost, limit functionality and constrain innovation.
Response from CSISAC   Our greatest cybersecurity challenge is the overall lack of clear priorities  aimed at addressing specific tangible and demonstrable harms in a targeted  manner.
Reliance  on  general  and  non-contextual  statements  of  increased  cyber insecurity is leading to proposals for broad, open-ended powers that  threaten citizens’ fundamental rights in disproportionate ways.
As noted in  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines,  cybersecurity  initiatives  should  be  implemented in a manner that is consistent with the rights that are essential  to free and democratic societies.
Many current cybersecurity initiatives fall  short  of  this  objective.
Clarifying  governments’  priorities  and  goals,  and  ensuring a fact-based, threat-specific approach is critical to remedying this  tendency and to the development of cybersecurity strategies that are beneficial  to  the  economy  and  society.
This  will  avoid  a  monolithic approach to cybersecurity that conflates many distinct issues and  contexts.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 91   An effective and proportional solution will be narrowly tailored to address  well-defined risks premised on risk assessments.
One great hindrance to effective policy-making in this area is the lack of  publicly available, concrete information from independent sources.
Part of  the  problem  is  that  implementation  of  cybersecurity  measures  will  often  occur  on  private  networks  with  scant  incentive  to  disclose  problems,  and  often  with  many  incentives  not  to  do  so.
Attempts  to  treat  all  potential  cybersecurity  issues  as  “threats  to  national  security”  import  a  culture  of  secrecy  that  further  prevents  public  disclosure  of  adequate  information.
While  there  may  be  legitimate  reasons  for  withholding  some  of  this  information, there must be a serious attempt at overcoming these challenges  to  enable  fact-based  decision-making  as  a  more  central  component  to  the  cybersecurity discussion.
Many  recent  cybersecurity  proposals  envision  open-ended  powers  to  monitor  and  react  to  online  activity.
Such  powers  are  inconsistent  with  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms,  the  rule  of  law,  and  legitimate  interests  that  are  core  to  democratic  societies,  and  therefore  lie  in  conflict  with  Principles 4 and 5 of the OECD’s own security guidelines of 2002.
This, in turn, threatens  the  transparency  and  openness  recognised  in  the  Security  Guidelines  as  essential to cybersecurity strategies in democratic societies.
Beyond  the  threat  to  transparency  and  openness  of  process,  proposals  that  lack  such  specificity  of  purpose  threaten  the  economic  and  societal  value  of  the  Internet.
This  is  already  evident  in  the  implementation  of  previous cybersecurity strategies.
In the United States, for example, cyber- security  provisions  have  been  misused  in  a  myriad  of  ways:  to  hinder  competition and innovation, to prevent users from accessing their own data  by the  mechanism of their  choice, to prevent users from accessing legally  purchased products such as gaming systems, to shut down criticism, to deter  academic  research  and  even,  somewhat  counter-productively,  to  deter  security researchers.1 Instead of engaging in a nuanced assessment of what  activities  are  positive  and  which  warrant  deterrence,  policies  grant  broad  powers to “prevent unauthorised access”.
The  same  flaws  are  already  evident  in  cybersecurity  legislative  proposals  that  aim  to  empower  private  companies  with  ill-defined  “monitoring”  and  “countermeasure”  powers.2    © OECD 2012   92 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       With  respect  to  the  adoption  of  specific  initiatives,  a  “risk  assessment  first”  approach  is  in  accordance  with  the  current  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines,  especially  the  principles  on  security  management,  risk  assess- ments, awareness, and reassessment.
Cybersecurity strategies cannot be set  or  assessed  in  the  abstract.
Acceptable  levels  of  risk  can  only  be  determined  after  factual  assessments  have  been  completed, and with the nature and importance of the information sought to  be protected firmly in mind.
Risk assessments should be an ongoing process  because  appropriate  modifications  to  security  policies  need  to  be  made  to  deal with new and ever-changing threats and vulnerabilities.
Once govern- ments  conduct  these  assessments,  they  must  then  clearly  articulate  the  tangible  cybersecurity  risk  they  are  addressing  in  each  discrete  initiative.
This is why cybersecurity strategies should include, as a prerequisite to the  adoption of any specific cybersecurity initiative, a risk assessment leading to  a  clear  statement  of  the  assets  to  be  protected  and  the  risk  models  that  demonstrate this need for protection.
Yet another way in which cybersecurity policies exhibit a troubling lack  of specificity is in the very definition of them.
“Cybersecurity” has come to  mean a huge spectrum of things.3 Not only does this lead to powers that are  overly  broad  in  scope  and  application,4  but  it  also  risks  generating  a  consensus that is illusory.
For example, the potential of cybersecurity threats  to  impact  critical  infrastructure  does  not  transform  the  cybersecurity  dis- cussion  into  one  focused  primarily  on  threats  to  national  security.
Such  threats, even if demonstrably tangible, will always remain one small part of  the overall cybersecurity issue and should not be used to justify sweeping  unaccountable powers.
Further, without a clear understanding of what cyber- security seeks to protect, it is impossible to develop tangible risk models and,  by  extension,  to  determine  whether  any  resulting  gains  in  security  are  proportional to any resulting impact on the rights of citizens.
Powers that may  be proportional when tailored to address national security concerns might not  be as proportionate when employed in defense of private rights.
Absent specifics on risk assessments, the factual scope of the problem,  and the “cybersecurity” rubric itself, it is difficult to speak of specific goals  and objectives.
There is an unfortunate tendency to re-couch  cybersecurity  issues  in  terms  of  “warfare”  and  “national  security”.
While  some aspects of cybersecurity  might implicate these  more serious concerns,  conflating  all  cybersecurity  issues  in  this  way  is  not  conducive  to  balanced  policy-making.
It  can  lead  to  the  adoption  of  drastic  solutions  such  as   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 93   network monitoring, despite the ready availability of more practical options  that are respectful of citizens” rights.
Defensive  “target  hardening”  is,  generally  speaking,  a  more  effective  solution to these cybersecurity problems.
Target hardening requires addressing  a host of problems, including insufficient access control, lack of encryption,  poor network management, and failure to install security patches, inadequate  audit  procedures,  and  information  security  programs.
Ensuring  proper  incentives  are  in  place  for  vendors,  service  providers, and governments to adopt this type of target hardening may be the  best mechanism for member states to achieve higher levels of security on the  Internet.
Does  it  make  sense  to  expand  ISP–level  monitoring  and  promote  dramatic  countermeasures  as  a  solution  to  botnets  if  the  problem  is  more  directly  related  to security  errors in  software such as Windows,  Safari, or Android?
Better computer-based security solutions installed by default may do far more  to address botnets then ISP policing.
In  conclusion,  the  primary  challenge  to  balanced  cybersecurity  policy- making  and  governance  on  the  basis  of  informed  multi-stakeholder  dis- cussions is the lack of clear priorities premised on a solid evidentiary basis an  aimed  at  addressing  specific  and  tangible  harms.
Current  cybersecurity  strategies lack specificity and grounding in demonstrable risk.
It is critical for  Members to enrich the public record by providing more details on the scope,  nature,  and  dimensions  of  existing  cybersecurity  risks.
Generally  speaking,  defensive  target  hardening  is  preferable  to  dramatic  expansions  of  powers  aimed at implementing monolithic “offensive” strategies.
The latter often fail  to  address  real  security  problems  and  can  actually  make  matters  worse  by  weakening  existing  privacy  safeguards,  disrupting  the  reliable  operation  of  networks  that  are  the  subject  of  protection.
Simpler  practical  measures  that  create real security by encouraging better computer hygiene are not only less  intrusive, but in many instances they will be far more effective.
© OECD 2012   94 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Response from ITAC   Preliminary comments   There is no consensus on what the term “cybersecurity” means.
A lack  of a common shared understanding of this term is the primary obstacle to the  development of internationally compatible solutions.
There also appear to be  different views as to what falls within the scope of “national” vs. “private”  cybersecurity.
National cybersecurity strategies appear to be heavily influenced by one  of  two  starting  point  assumptions,  i.e.
whether  governments  regard  the  Internet  as  a  fundamentally  “trusted  space”  or  an  inherently  “distrusted  space”.
Any discussion on “cybersecurity” needs to clarify and clearly articulate  what is within scope.
Is the objective to secure any or all of the following:  devices  connected  to  the  Internet;  the  Internet  infrastructure;  applications;  communications;  data;  identity;  and/or  “essential  services”  (e.g.
electricity  distribution) dependent on the Internet?
For example, the  development of robust inter-domain policies related to “cybersecurity” will  need to address issues of control and compliance.
Compliance programs have the potential to move  the  discussion  to  a  slightly  broader  base,  which  encompasses  technology,  policy, and operations.
Response to question 1    A  key  priority  for  the  Internet  technical  community  is  developing  technical  security  solutions  that  remain  consistent  with  the  fundamental  properties of the Internet – global, open and interoperable, and communicating  those  solutions  in  ways  that  are  understandable  to  policy  and  commercial  decision-makers.
A key priority for society and the economy is to have confidence in the  network.
To  be  trusted,  the  Internet  must  provide  channels  for  secure,  reliable,  private,  communication  between  entities,  which  can  be  clearly  authenticated  in  a  mutually  understood  manner.
The  mechanisms  that  provide this level of assurance must support both the end-to-end nature of   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 95   Internet architecture and reasonable means for entities to manage and protect  their own identity details.
Priorities (and challenges) include:  ?
Preserving the openness and global nature of the Internet, as well as   its innovative potential, and fundamental human rights   ?
reach- ability) such as security, privacy, reliability, resilience and usability  ?
Finding  the  right  balance  between  security  and  an  enabling   environment for communication, trade, innovation and growth   ?
Recognising that different security solutions are needed for different  types  of  interactions  on  the  Internet  and  that  the  highest  level  of  security  attainable  may  not  be  the  optimal  solution  in  all  circum- stances   ?
Developing  new  solutions,  critically  assessing  existing  approaches  and discarding old security paradigms that are not well suited to the  Internet    ?
Realising  that  the  implementation  of  security  solutions  is  a  long- term  investment  in  the  Internet  ecosystem  that  everyone  benefits  from,  and  that  stakeholders  have  a  shared  interest  in  the  manage- ment of these resources   Cyber  threats  change  rapidly  making  a  mandatory,  compliance-driven  regulatory model ineffective and counterproductive by limiting needed flexi- bility to adjust to new threats.
The global nature of the Internet, communications networks and the ICT  industry requires a global approach to address cybersecurity concerns.
Any approaches to cybersecurity that increase technical barriers to trade  in  ICT  infrastructure  equipment  and  end  user  devices  risk  balkanising  the  global  Internet  into  different  markets  with  different  technical  regulations.
© OECD 2012   96 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES      2) What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to  public policy for cybersecurity?
Response from BIAC   In  general,  governments  should  recognise  cyber-security  as  a  growing  challenge and should consider cyber threats as a matter of national security.
More  economic  funds  should  be  allocated  in  order  to  promote  the  collaboration of industries in realising national security infrastructure, aimed  to identify and mitigate security threats.
Governments should also create more awareness on security  topics by  introducing for example security requirements into their call announcements  for public sector services.
Governments of course have competence in making decisions of national  security.
Issues of civil liberties and how to implement policies appropriately  and with as  limited a burden as possible are  topics  that benefit from  multi- stakeholder  consultation.
That  being  said,  the  divide  between  national  security and economic security, where many more shared interests are at play,  is ever more blurred.
Furthermore, greater amounts of critical infrastructure  are under the control of the private sector.
Governments must thus find the  appropriate balance between exercising their competence in national security  and  addressing  issues  that  impact  economic  security  and  private  sector  systems.
Increased cooperation and collaboration is developing in these areas,  but more needs to be done.
The  cooperation  between  security  agencies  is  essential  because  the  jurisdictions  have  territorial  boundaries  that  cyberspace  has  not.
It  is  difficult  to  attribute  responsibility,  both  for  the  difficulty  to  trace  cyber  events  and  for  the  lack  of  reference  paradigms for a clear assignment of liability.
Cooperation  between  the  private  sector  (such  as  universities,  industries,  associations,  ISP,  etc.)
and  government  institutions  is  important  to  raise  awareness to the cyber security issue and to ensure the resilience of critical  infrastructure and the availability of the services.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 97   In this way it is possible to implement an effective IT governance policy  in terms of tools and resources necessary for the operation of networks and  their resilience, and in terms of coordination mechanisms in case of security  attacks on a large scale.
This co-operation can be more effective if it involves also international   partners.
The OECD played an important role in related issues of cryptography  years  back  where  it  was  finally  decided  that  security  would  be  enhanced  overall if companies were more broadly allowed to use cryptography which  had  been  previously  controlled  in  the  manner  of  a  munitions.
While OECD member countries can do more  in this area, the issue is especially relevant in many developing countries that  have not had the same experience curve.
With  global  interference  among  systems  and  value  chains  governments  can  no  longer  just  address  security  within  their  borders.
Third  countries  may  develop  one  off  require- ments  that  may  intentionally  or  inadvertently  compromise  overall  security.
Only  through  the  reinforcement  of  the  need  to  rely  on  internally  accepted  standards  can  such  outlier  action  be  addressed.
As was noted above, issues of security are global and multisectoral, thus  one improvement noted in the OECD paper which should be further enhanced  is  the  interdisciplinary  work  on  security  both  across  agencies  within  governments and across local as well as national governments.
In considering enhanced working relationships with the private sector,   two areas of consultation should be prioritised:   ?
Governments  can  promote  the  institution  of  CERTs  and  encourage  the  involvements  of  University  and  other  corporations  for  information  sharing  and  education strategies.
In many cases the level of specificity  or proscription may not benefit security and may create significant  and unintended burdens and consequences.
© OECD 2012   98 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Response from CSISAC   Governments  must  recognise   that  rivalries  among  nation-states  constitute one of the chief security threats on the Internet.
Taking advantage of zero-day exploits  and  the  use  of  malware  is  highly  questionable  on  practical  and  ethical  grounds, and such activities do not lose their ethical murkiness when wielded  by  Governments.5  Their  geopolitical  rivalries  and  development  of  offensive  cyberwar capabilities can threaten the cooperative basis of international digital  communications.
Also,  governments  need  to  formally  recognise  that  their  own  massive  data  collection  and  surveillance efforts can, when breached, pose a threat to civilians and even to  the very security concerns such surveillance seek to alleviate.
Domestic efforts  to  survey  citizens  can  like-wise  lead  to  weakened  security.6  Governments  should  avoid  imposing  design  obligations  that  undermine  security  in  the  name of their own surveillance efforts.
Governments  must  be  cautious  of  knee-jerk  reactions  to  perceived  cybersecurity threats.
not relying solely  upon  evidence  from  the  cybersecurity  industry)  and  should  develop  the  capacity  to  generate  their  own  measurements  and  to  conduct  their  own  assessments.
A  core  element  of  this  information-generating  imperative is the need to implement breach notification obligations.
Absent  such  obligations,  it  becomes  difficult  to  begin  to  assess  the  scope  of  the  problem,  as  many  cybersecurity  breaches  will  simply  go  unreported.
We  note further that breach notification obligations have also been recognised as  a strong mechanism for instilling target hardening incentives.7 An effective  breach  notification  obligation  will  be  two-tiered,  with  one  lower  standard  controlling disclosure to a government authority for recording and oversight  purposes,  and  a  second,  higher  standard  controlling  disclosure  to  directly  affected individuals.8    Governments have an obligation to ensure that any cybersecurity policies  or strategies adopted are demonstrably necessary, fact-based, consistent with  fundamental rights of citizens and proportionate to a legitimate aim.
Defensive  target  hardening  can  address  many  of  the  most  comprehensive  and  widespread  cybersecurity  issues.
Such security problems are shared by governments, the private   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 99   sector,  NGOs,  and  individuals,  and  thus  present  similar  problems  and  solutions.
We  all  use  the  same  computers,  networking  hardware,  Internet  protocols  and  software  packages,  which  have  the  same  vulnerabilities  and  problems.
Governments can take the lead by implementing rigorous policies,  technical tools and even legislative obligations to secure information systems  and  software  for  everyone  as  soon  as  vulnerabilities  are  discovered,  while  securing government operated infrastructure that relies on those systems.
Only  with  such  a  defensively  oriented  security  culture  will  governments  maximise  safety  for  everyone.
By taking the lead, Governments will not only take great steps towards  securing  information  of  citizens  and  Government  services,  but  will  also  generate  policies  and  tools  that  others  can  use  to  similarly  secure  their  systems.
Government initiatives to secure internal networks can also provide  a valuable source of information on what works and does not work, which  can  in  turn  form  the  basis  of  future  policy  discussions  as  well  as  government-led education campaigns.
Such initiatives can also result in the  identification and dissemination of information regarding threat metrics and  dimensions  –  another  area  where  Governments  should  be  taking  the  lead.
Governments are often the largest single domestic users of IT services, and  have access to immense stores of valuable information that can be used to  better assess cybersecurity issues.
Mechanisms should be explored to make  this information available on a regular basis.
Response from ITAC   A  very  significant  evolution  in  government  strategies  has  been  the   adoption of the multistakeholder model for policy development.
The role and responsibility of governments is to foster the open, trans- parent and collaborative development and deployment of security solutions,  and to develop policies in an actively engaged multistakeholder process.
It is important that governments do not adopt strategies that are reactive,  but rather, develop an approach to cybersecurity that embraces technology  and innovation, while protecting end-users and critical infrastructure.
Further,  in  forming  public  policies  for  cybersecurity,  governments  should be mindful that in some countries much of the critical infrastructure  for  telecommunications  and  the  Internet  is  operated  by  non-governmental   © OECD 2012   100 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       entities,  i.e.
private  entities,  which  bear  the  primary  responsibility  for  securing their own networks and facilities.
As a mandatory regulatory model is unlikely be effective in addressing  evolving cyber threats, government has a critical role to play in the leader- ship  and  coordination  of  cybersecurity  efforts  through  legal  reforms  and  public-private  partnerships  to  facilitate  information  sharing  and  voluntary  industry adoption of best practices.
Governments can also show leadership  through  their  own  well-designed,  balanced  and  judiciously  applied  trust  compliance programs and procurement practices.
Finally,  multi-stakeholder  cooperation  and  leadership  by  governments   should include:   ?
Cooperation and mutual assistance to build more robust systems and   networks;    ?
Governments encouraging the deployment of more secure solutions   that preserve the fundamental principles of the open Internet.
3) How should governments implement cybersecurity policy at  national and at international levels and how does this compare with  current new strategies?
Response from BIAC   Governments  should  implement  cybersecurity  policy  at  national  level  having in mind the evolving and sophisticated security threats scenario and  also taking into account the nature of the cybercrime which is not confined  inside a single nation.
At international level it’s necessary to share and coordinate with other  countries  on  the  development  of  global  policies,  addressing  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  and  sharing  technical  mechanisms  and  best  practices  to  improve  also  interoperability.
Strategies  should  promote  cooperation  at  international  level,  reinforcing  alliances  and  promoting  incident response coordination.
Companies that create and  deliver  technology and services, as well as  those that rely on technology and services to deliver critical infrastructure  functions address security at the system and process level.
Companies are   © OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 101   increasingly  global  and,  as  a  result,  they  embrace  international  standards.
We recognise that government may have national priorities  that differ and may emphasise different aspects of security as more or less  critical.
These variances in approach should still allow for the deployment  of global, coherent and cost-effective industry solutions.
As we consider the recent economic upheavals, we must be able to be as  efficient as possible in the use of resources and deployment of technology.
The system used by the Common Criteria where evaluations done  to  a  common  set  of  standards  by  certified  labs  are  globally  accepted  by  participating countries optimises the use of costly resources.
Further  exploration should also be undertaken to cross recognise compliance; systems  that are found to be compliant with one set of regulatory requirements should  be  recognised  as  being  found  compliant  with  similar  requirements  for  a  different  regulation.
Response from CSISAC   As a starting point, it should be recognised that positive cybersecurity  outcomes  might  not  require  dramatic  legal  changes.
Rather,  technical  and  governance  solutions  may  go  far  to  address  many  potential  cybersecurity  issues.
As noted above, there has been a tendency to enact overly aggressive  legislative  measures  where  practical,  technical  solutions  could  yield  much  more effective results.
As  also  noted  above,  Governments  must  be  more  accountable  and  transparent about current and planned cybersecurity strategies, especially in  approach to disclosing security vulnerabilities.
This is crucial to democratic  governance, trust, and good security.
The culture of secrecy that permeates  intelligence  agencies  fits  poorly  with  best  practices  for  private-sector  civilian security and more generally, principles of multi-stakeholder Internet  governance.
More  creative  solutions  to  information  sharing  must  be  explored  and,  as  a  starting  point,  a  strong  presumption  of  maximum  disclosure (rebuttable on a concrete basis) should be adopted as a guiding  principle.
Where a concrete basis for hiding information exists, it should not  be withheld longer than is necessary.
© OECD 2012   102 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Governments should ensure the implementation of cybersecurity policies  at  the  national  and  international  level  in  accordance  with  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
This  means  that  measures  taken  to  secure  information  systems  and  networks  should  be  respectful  of  fundamental  rights  and  democratic  values,  and  premised  on  risk  assessments.
Similarly, Governments need to ensure that their own infrastructure is  secure.
They  should  do  so  holding  particular  regard  to  the  protection  of  citizens’ personal data and in keeping with OECD Privacy guidelines.9    Governments should be wary of large, monolithic cybersecurity projects  that  fail  to  address  specific  problems  in  a  concrete  and  targeted  manner.
Governments  should  ensure  that  cybersecurity  strategies  are  not  implemented in a manner that is in fact detrimental to its stated objective.
A  key example is the deterrent effect many security-based provisions have had  on  security  researchers,  who  often  face  legal  threats  from  organisations  wielding cybersecurity powers in order to avoid the potential embarrassment  of a publicly disclosed breach in safeguards.10 Governments should ensure  such legal protections, if adopted, do not interfere with legitimate security  research and should audit existing protections to ensure legitimate research  of this type is unhindered.
Response from ITAC   At  the  national  level,  cybersecurity  policies  should  be  developed  and  implemented in close collaboration with all interested and potentially affected  parties in a truly open, transparent and inclusive multistakeholder approach.
Such  policies  should  be  based  on  reliable  evidence,  a  solid  technological  foundation  and  a  proper  understanding  as  to  how  the  Internet  works.
Such  policies should foster the development of open standards and permission-less  innovation for security solutions.
They should avoid unilateral modifications  to  the  global  Internet  standards  and  technologies  –  any  changes  should  be  done using the appropriate channels (e.g.
Technology  will  continue  to  evolve  –  this  is  consistent  with  a  vibrant  and  dynamic  global  Internet  economy.
Cybersecurity  policies  should  be  flexible enough to allow technology to evolve and to be responsive enough  to  address  new  threats  as  they  arise.
Solutions  need  to  be  workable,  implementable and scalable.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 103   Governments have a role to play in encouraging the development of new  business models as technology advances.
Efforts should be placed on cybersecurity strategies that target the source,  rather  than  the  user  or  the  intermediary.
Governments  should  be  careful  to  avoid  overly  prescriptive  approaches,  which  risk  freezing  security  solutions  and stifling innovations in technology and Internet use.
National  cybersecurity  strategies  will  need  to  be  mindful  of  national  cultures and values, yet compatible with international strategies and the global  nature of the Internet.
However,  it  is  also  important  that  that  objective  not  be  misused  as  a  justification for cybersecurity measures that are contrary to an open Internet.
Given the transborder nature of the Internet, international cooperation is  crucial for effective cybersecurity.
At the international level, policies should  stimulate the creation and use of common terminology/definitions, encourage  sharing  of  best  practices  and  facilitate  the  information  exchange  that  is  essential  to  combating  cybercrime.
It  is  also  important  for  cybersecurity  priorities  to  be  translated  into  technical  solutions  that  work  with  the  fundamental principles of the Internet and not against them.
As  in  policy  development,  the  Internet  technical  community  should  be  viewed as an essential partner in the implementation of cybersecurity policies.
4) What is the role and responsibility of business and industry/civil  society/Internet technical community with respect to cybersecurity  public policy?
Response from BIAC   Business, as innovator and developer of hardware, software and services,  the owner and operator of many critical infrastructure systems and developer  or  provider  of  many  government  owned  and  operated  systems  has  a  very  significant role to play.
Business plays this role directly  in their  technology  development  and  operational  policies,  cooperatively  in  collaborative  policy  development with governments and in appropriate multi-stakeholder settings  and in a directed fashion when implementing solutions for governments.
© OECD 2012   104 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       A number of strategies have consultation mechanisms, but again we raise  concerns on how to best differentiate across areas of economic and national  security.
The ability of governments to consult effectively with business in  the  context  of  national  and  economic  security  to  assure  that  there  is  appropriate cooperation in attaining mutual and important public policy goals  while assuring that undue burdens are not placed on business is an objective of  many of the strategies that needs greater emphasis.
Industry  can  actively  cooperate  and  collaborate  in  the  formulation  of  government policies related to cybercrime: monitoring, investment, counter- measures,  harmonisation  of  terminology,  laws  etc.
Defining security measures for emerging threats; in this contest the IT  industry should continually innovate and invest in the development of  its  products  and  services.
Being  an  innovative  and  dynamic  sector  with  rapidly  changing  and  evolving  technologies,  the  industry  can  give an important  value  to  the cybersecurity in addressing new and  evolving threats.
Continue to lead or collaborate as appropriate in developing globally  accepted  cybersecurity  standards,  best  practices,  and  international  assurance programs.
Developing and utilising comprehensive risk  management strategies  and  best  practices  to  achieve  and  maintain  trust  in  the  cyber  infra- structure.
In conclusion, the responsibility of industry is to lead and contribute to a  range of significant public-private partnerships and government initiatives,  including  information  sharing,  analysis,  training  and  emergency  response  with governments and industry peers.
Response from CSISAC   When it comes to cybersecurity, civil society is often excluded from the   process of policy making.
First,  the  involvement  and  lobbying  of  security  industries  and  law  enforcement  in  the  political  decision-making  process,  with  the  increasing  exclusion  of  the  citizenry,  is  concerning  and  leads  to  opaque  policy  processes and the marginalisation of the democratic process.
© OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 105   What also concerns civil society is the growing tendency towards public- private  partnerships  on  cybersecurity  strategies,  which  seem  modelled  on  traditional  intelligence  community  policy-making  approaches  and  not  on  Internet governance.
Although  international  cooperation  on  cybersecurity  may  be  necessary,  state-to-state interaction on these matters often exclude civil society with the  result that civil society concerns are ignored.
In regards to participation and openness, Governments should ensure the  proper participation of civil society in the cybersecurity policy development  process  so  that  civil  society  can  effectively  play  its  role  in  the  governance  process  —  namely,  to  ensure  values  such  as  openness,  concerns  of  individuals,  and  the  protection  of  privacy,  free  expression,  association,  and  access  to  information  are  taken  into  account  in  policy  outcomes.11  Civil  society  can  also  actively  engage  in  facilitating  cooperation  among  existing  security networks, while making the network’s actions more transparent and  accountable.
Response from ITAC   The  private  sector,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical  community  are important stakeholders and should be involved in the development and  implementation  of  cybersecurity  policies.
Only  a  truly  multistakeholder  approach will allow local, national and international communities to find the  right  balance  between  policy  requirements,  technical  soundness,  and  civil  rights of citizens, while ensuring the innovative potential of the Internet.
The  Internet  technical  community  is  in  the  best  position  to  provide  independent advice to policymakers on the potential intended and unintended  consequences  of  policy  decisions  to  the  Internet  and  the  way  that  it  works.
Policymakers  should  seek  this  advice  as  early  as  possible  in  their  policy  development process to avoid pursuing technologically flawed decisions.
The Internet technical community is also in a unique position to develop  building block security solutions (e.g.
SSL) that can be deployed by others  to  provide  Internet  users  with  various  options  and  varying  degrees  of  security in their Internet experience.
Such building blocks can also be used  to achieve national cybersecurity objectives (e.g.
using DNSSEC to secure  government email communications).
© OECD 2012   106 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       It should also be noted that the Internet technical community’s work to  improve  the  security  of  Internet  infrastructure  (occurring  independently  of  national  or  international  cybersecurity  policies)  is  quietly  supporting  the  overall policy objective of a more secure and trusted Internet.
Fundamental  to this is the Internet model of developing standards openly, collaboratively,  and by consensus.
Examples of technical standards developed by the Internet Engineering  Task Force (IETF) to improve the security of Internet infrastructure include:   ?
Secure BGP (Border Gateway Protocol)  ?
DNSSEC  (Domain  Name  System  Security  Extensions)  –  securing   integrity and authenticity of DNS responses   ?
RPKI  (Resource  Public  Key  Infrastructure)  –  an  infrastructure  to  support  certification  of  the  Internet  Number  Resources  and  the  foundation for the solutions of security of the global routing system  ?
Kerberos  Network  Authentication  System  –  provides  a  means  of  verifying the identities of entities on an open (unprotected) network   ?
TLS (Transport Layer security) – provides communications security   over the Internet  IPsec (Internet Protocol Security) – provides the end-to-end security  at the Internet layer   ?
Examples  of   technical  standards  work  under  development  and  consideration  at  the  World  Wide  Web  Consortium  (W3C)  to  improve  the  security of the Web and the Internet include:   ?
Content Security Policy  ?
cryptographic APIs for JavaScript   Examples of OASIS data security standards include:  ?
Digital  Signature  Services  (DSS)  –  digital  signature  services   standards for XML   ?
Key  Management  Interoperability  Protocol  (KMIP)  –  provides   extended functionality to asymmetric encrypted key technologies   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 107   ?
Security  Assertion  Markup  Language  (SAML)  –  XML-based  framework for creating and exchanging security information between  online partners   ?
eXtensible  Access  Control  Markup  Language   representing and evaluating access control policies   (XACML)  –   Example  of  requirements  and  frameworks  specifications  from  the   ISO/IEC include:   IS27001 – Information Security Management Systems – Requirements  IS27002 – Code of Practice for Information Security Management   ?
Identity Assurance Framework – Service Assessment Criteria (IAF- SAC)  –  provides  criteria  for  assessment  of  a  Credential  Service  Provider  (organisational,  credential  management  and  identity  proofing)   the  Communications  Sector  Coordinating  Council,   The ICT industry  is also working collaboratively  through public-private  partnerships to secure communications infrastructure.
The  industry is also developing voluntary security measures such as Safecode and  OTTF.
The telecommunications industry has incorporated security measures  into technology-specific standards, such as 3GPP and 3GPP2.
The  industry  should  work  together  with  all  stakeholders  to  further  develop standard, unified privacy-respecting methods to collect, analyse and  report  data  breaches  at  a  global  level  to  provide  industry  and  government  with a better understanding of, and ability to combat, cybersecurity threats.
5) What is -or what will be- the impact of recent cybersecurity  strategies on business and industry/civil society/the Internet technical  community?
Response from BIAC   Increased certainty and assurance will accrue to business and industry in  the form of greater trust in the infrastructure and services and government  adoption of new technologies helps demonstrate the capacity of and faith in  technology.
© OECD 2012   108 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       That  being  said,  technology  mandates,  prescriptive  rules  and  detailed  requirements are not usually appropriate vehicles for achieving government  objectives.
Government should work with non-government stakeholders to  build better risk-based strategies that are agile enough to respond to rapid  changes in the global threat environment.
Issues  related  to  corporate  and  organisational  policies  dealing  with  security  and  supply/value  chains  need  to  address  corporate  realities  and  business needs.
The desire to help assure security by government mandated  specific or detailed requirements related to operations and supply chain may  often  constrain  innovation,  create  burdens  and  increase  costs  without  improving  overall  security.
Similarly  in  some  non-OECD  countries,  procurement or domestic preferences in the guise of security requirements or  requirements related to security may either impair trade or otherwise skew a  level  playing  field  to  the  disadvantage  of  overall  security  by  precluding  or  significantly hindering the ability of companies and organisations to roll out  globally consistent processes and infrastructures.
Response from CSISAC   More mass surveillance policies, less accountability, and  transparency   As mentioned above, there is a morally hazardous problem with current  cybersecurity approaches that focus on “offensive” security measures (e.g.
These  open-ended  immunity  regimes  are  also  indicative  of  the  monolithic  approach to cybersecurity warned against above.
Furthermore,  it  rarely  seems  that  citizens  and  their  needs  are  at  the  center of cybersecurity policies.
Some context-specific problems include:   Identity Management Schemes    One  set  of  strategies  being  touted  as  a  solution  to  the  cyber  security  problem is to promote widespread identity management schemes, in which a  user  potentially  has  to  authenticate  to  some  system  before  a  network  (or  some aspects of a network) is accessible to her.
Even her low-level actions   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 109   such  as  the  sending  of  packets  may  be  attributable  to  her  authenticated  identity  under  some  proposals.
In  addition  to  being  a  disruptive  departure  from  the  way  the  Internet  works  now,  we  should  not  assume  that  such  authentication or identity management schemes would lead to good security.
For  one,  implementation  challenges  would  create  a  whole  host  of  new  vulnerabilities  and  security  issues.
Moreover,  even  setting  these  security  issues  aside,  it  is  not  certain  that  attribution  would  be  all  that  useful.
Chilling People’s Freedom of Expression Rights   Specific  tactics  such  as  the “Internet  kill  switch”  and  communications  shutdowns  are  particularly  powerful  in  restraining  speech  and  association.
This kind of measure does not only operate in authoritarian regimes; indeed  the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, in the midst of civil unrest last  year,  proposed  shutting  down  social  networking  sites  and  the  Blackberry  messaging service.
Similar proposals have been voiced in the United States,  only to be dismissed as impractical on a network level.
Sometimes  the  supposed  harm  that  results from an act of hacktivism — such as the temporary defacement of a  website13  —  has  a  de  minimis  quality  that  belies  its  characterisation  as  a  “cybersecurity  threat”.
In  other  instances,  acts  of  hacktivism  have  the  potential  to  cause  more  serious  harm  if  for  example  these  were  turned  to  denial  or  delay  of  access  to  essential  services.
Whistleblowing  and  releases  of  classified  information  that  expose  govern- mental abuses also blur the line between legal and illegal activity.
This kind  of  hacktivism,  therefore,  must  always  be  assessed  through  the  lens  of   © OECD 2012   110 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       traditional  civil  and  political  rights  and  not  conflated  with  “national  security” threats or “cyberwarfare”.
Specifically,  cybersecurity  strategies  should  not  unduly  and disproportionately interfere with important democratic activities such as  collaboration,  participation,  coalition  building,  advocacy,  fundraising,  and  the dissemination of information by individuals and groups.
Extra-Territorial Impact of Cybersecurity Policies   The  cybersecurity  strategies  of  one  government  can  affect  citizens  of  another country due to the cross-border nature of communications.
An example is the recent distribution of pro-government malware  in  Syria,  which  was  released  from  within  the  country  first  onto  satellite  networks and set up in the absence of access to national infrastructure.
The  malware—targeted  at  Syrian  opposition  activists—later  spread  to  users’  computers  outside  of  Syria,  capturing  webcam  activity,  disabling  notifica- tion settings for certain antivirus programs, recording key strokes, stealing  passwords, and sending this sensitive information to a Syrian IP address.15  Thus,  the  extra-territorial  effects  of  cybersecurity  policies  should  also  be  taken into account by governments when they are formulating these policies,  especially the impact on civil society activism work in other countries.
Response from ITAC   Cybersecurity  policies,  developed   through  open,  consensus-based  processes, could be a key element to the continued growth and robustness of  the Internet.
They could help facilitate online commerce, secure government  networks, and enhance the online user experience.
However, poorly crafted  cybersecurity  strategies  could  have  the  opposite  impact.
For  example,  cybersecurity approaches that emphasise hardening of networks or extensive  government controls could result in network fragmentation, higher costs for  providers  and  users  of  online  services  and  applications,  and  stifle  free  expression.
Cybersecurity  approaches  require  a  delicate  balance  of  many  interests,  roles  and  responsibilities  within  the  Internet  ecosystem  –  we  all  have  a  role  to  play.
Tilting  the  balance  in  one  direction  or  the  other  will  inevitably have broad impacts at the local, national and international level.
© OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 111       6) How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be  evaluated?
What metrics should be applied to measure their  efficiency?
Response from BIAC   To be efficient national cybersecurity strategies and policies should be  periodically  evaluated  and  updated  so  that  improvements  can  be  imple- mented to face new security threats.
Producing  periodic  country  reports  to  share  information  about   security incidents and the level of damages created.
Planning  recurrent  cybersecurity  risk  assessments  to  verify  the  efficacy of the security measures applied.
This output could be used to  review the cybersecurity strategies and policies.
While  it  would  be  nice  to  be  able  to  comparatively  evaluate  cyber- security strategies, the paper indicates that each national strategy has its own  definitions,  priorities  and  implementation  methods  suited  to  the  legal  and  cultural context of the nation.
It would thus be best to measure the effective- ness of such strategies within the national deployment and then separately  measure how well the strategies enabled cooperative work across jurisdic- tions.
While the topics and implementation methodologies vary, there could be  some uniformity in the measurement criteria that could further enable some  levels of comparison or at least create some referencable bench marks.
It  should  be  noted  that  cost-effectiveness,  useful  information  sharing,  com- plaints, positive or negatives impacts on the level of security as measured by  breach  or  other  malicious  behaviour,  costs  to  business  and  attributable  growth  in  the  usage  of  the  internet  and  the  economy  could  all  be  useful  metrics.
Response from CSISAC   National  cybersecurity  policies  must  be  evaluated  by  their  impact  on  fundamental  rights  and  legitimate  considerations  of  citizens  as  set  out  in  Principles  4  and  5  of  the  2002  Security  Guidelines.
A  successful  cyber- security strategy will ensure that, prior to its adoption, each specific cyber- security initiative it envisions is designed in a manner consistent with core   © OECD 2012   112 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       values recognised by democratic societies, such as freedom of expression,  privacy,  due  process,  and  transparency.
The  effectiveness  of  each  cyber- security proposal should be measured by these metrics and consistent with  fundamental human rights.
A human rights compliance checklist or Impact  Assessment  should  be  a  mandatory  element  of  the  assessment  process  for  each  cybersecurity  initiative.
Further,  any  impact  on  fundamental  rights  must be narrowly tailored to address a specific, well-defined cybersecurity  threat that presents a demonstrable risk of tangible harm.
In recognition of  the  ever-shifting  technological  landscape  that  characterises  the  Internet,  there  is  a  risk  that  cybersecurity  initiatives,  even  if  proportionate  when  initially adopted, may grow to impact significantly on fundamental rights as  technology evolves.
Cybersecurity strategies should therefore build in 5 year  sunset  clauses  or  mandatory  rights  impact  assessment  reviews  to  ensure  adopted policies do not grow over time in a manner that is inconsistent with  fundamental rights.
This is an area where opacity is produced not only by withholding information  from  the  public  (on  grounds  that  it  would  compromise  company  secrets  or  alert  criminals  to  vulnerabilities)  but  also  through  the  prevalence  of  discus- sions and legislative proposals so broad and vague it becomes impossible to  know what powers are actually being granted and the purposes for which they  will  be  used.16  Monolithic  solutions  of  this  nature  are  not  only  problematic  because they tend to be broader than the issues they are designed to address,  but also in that they effectively immunise the use of such powers from proper  assessment of their effectiveness, proportionality, and impact on fundamental  rights.
It  is  difficult  to  gauge  the  scope,  intended  use  and  effectiveness  of  cybersecurity  powers  premised  on  a  vague  need  to  produce  “a  general  increase in cyber insecurity” or, alternatively, of powers aimed at enhancing  national  security,  but  which  are  open-ended  in  the  conditions  under  which  they might be used.
Response from ITAC   No cybersecurity policy will be able to address 100% of all online risks.
Is  the  policy  developed  with  an  open,  inclusive  and  transparent  process?
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 113   ?
Does the cybersecurity strategy protect basic human rights such as  freedom of expression and provide adequate privacy protection for  end-users?
Does the policy create an environment of information sharing?
Does  the  policy  support  appropriate  voluntary  adoption  of  globally  developed  standards  and  best  practices  to  address  cybersecurity  threats?
One metric for the effectiveness of policies would be to measure the level  of  international  participation  pre-  and  post-  policy  implementation.
A  successful set of policies should increase Internet users willingness to access  Internet services and systems, and would increase their overall willingness to  participate in the ecosystem.
Internet users may never understand many of the  issues  surrounding  cybersecurity  policies,  however  many  users  have  the  ability to “vote with their feet” regarding the use of services and participation  in Internet communities at the local, national and international levels.
© OECD 2012   114 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Notes      1.
See  “Dangerously  Vague  Cybersecurity  Legislation  Threatens  Civil  Liberties”,  Dan  Auerbach  and  Lee  Tien,  EFF,  2012.
Various  proposed  U.S.   legislative   initiatives,  for  example,  adopt  extremely  vague  or  broad  definitions  of  cybersecurity  threats  that  can  include,  in  some  instances,  ‘theft  or  misappropriation  of  private  or  government  information,  intellectual  property,  or  personally  identifiable  information’.
This provision will allow ISPs to monitor communications  of  subscribers  for  potential  intellectual  property  infringements;  block  accounts believed to be used in infringing; block access to websites such  as The Pirate Bay believed to be carrying infringing content; or take other  measures  provided  ISPs  claim  it  was  motivated  by  cybersecurity  concerns.
Also, of concern is the language of “theft or misappropriation  of private or government information” in some bills, which might be used  to block sites such as WikiLeaks and the New  York Times  which have  published information deemed classified.
See  “Dangerously  Vague  Cybersecurity  Legislation  Threatens  Civil  Liberties”,  Dan  Auerbach  and  Lee  Tien,  EFF,  2012.
www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/03/rogers-’cybersecurity’-bill-broad-     4.
© OECD 2012           NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 115   5.
Paragraph 4 of the Guidelines requires that Exceptions to the Principles  contained  therein,  “including  those  relating  to  national  sovereignty,  national security and public policy (“public order”)” should be as few as  possible.
There  are  many  examples  in  the  US  of  instances  where  security  researches have faced legal threats under anti-hacking provisions found in  the  CFAA  as  well  as  under  analogous  anti-circumvention  protection  measures found in the US DMCA.
“Towards a cyber security strategy for global civil society?”, Ron Deibert,   Global Information Society Watch.
Bruce Schneier compares the “harm” caused by some DDoS attacks to the  service  delays  caused  by  a  crowd  of  protestors  standing  in  front  of  a  service  outlet:  Schneier  compared  the  pro-WikiLeaks  attacks  on  MasterCard  and  Visa  to  a  bunch  of  protesters  standing  in  front  of  an        © OECD 2012   116 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES         office building, refusing to let workers in.
“Is Wikileaks Engaged in  ‘Cyber  war”,  J.D.
See  for  example  this  case  study  in  zero  day  voter  suppression  and  electronic  miss-information  campaigns  in  “E-Deceptive  Campaign  Practices  Report  2010:  Internet  Technology  &  Democracy  2.0”,  EPIC,  2010.
Examples can be found in recent U.S. cybersecurity legislative initiatives.
See  “House  Committee  Rushing  to  Approve  Dangerous  “Information  Sharing”  Bill”.
© OECD 2012   Standardisation for security  European Approach to Standardization for a  Digital Market, Athens, 18-19/05/2016 Demosthenes.Ikonomou@enisa.europa.eu  1  “The nice thing about standards is  there's so many to choose from”, A.S.  Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 2nd  ed., p. 254  4  A plethora of standardisation initiatives  International  •  •  •  •  •  ISO: International Organization for Standardization  IEC: International Electrotechnical Commission  ITU: International Telecommunications Union  IETF: Internet Engineering Task Force  IEEE: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers  European  •  •  •  •  CEN: Comité Européen de Normalisation  ETSI: European Telecommunications Standards Institute – Cyber Security  Coordination Group  ICTSB: ICT Standards Board – NISSG (‘04-’08)  National  •  •  ANSI: American National Standards Institute  NIST: National Institute of Standards and Technology  Industrial initiatives  • W3C, OASIS, Liberty Alliance, FIDO, Wi-Fi Alliance, BioAPI, WS-Security, TCG  •  •  GP, PC/SC, Open Card Framework, Multos  PKCS, SECG  5  Security standards: a taxonomy  Base standards  •  Cryptographic algorithms  • Modes of use • Application Program Interfaces (APIs)  Functional standards  •  •  procurement, product certification, services TLS, IPsec, X.509, EMV specifications  Evaluation Criteria  •  •  Common Criteria ISO/IEC 15408 (Evaluation Criteria for IT Security) FIPS 140-2 (Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules)  Interpretative documents and best practices:  •  ISO/IEC 27002 (Code of Practice for Information Security Management)  6  ENISA and SDOs  Established collaboration agreements with: • •  • • •  •  Exchange of information of mutual interest Organisation of joint meetings and workshops  ENISA to channel standardisation activities to ETSI, if appropriate Exchange of working documents, within well defined frames ENISA to nominate observers for ETSI Technical Bodies  ISO SC27 (Liaison) ETSI (MoU) - - - - - CEN CENELEC (MoU) ITU (MoU started) ENISA aligns key activities with the work of SDOs - - - ENISA is an active member of CSCG  ETSI TISPAN on CIIP, ESI on eID, CLOUD on cloud certification CEN CENELEC on smart grids; ISO SC 27 in the area of privacy  Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  7  The challenge of ‘complexity’  Committee designs  Backwards compatibility  Optimizations for various cases  High complexity  • barrier for evaluation • barrier for market entry • makes secure implementation very difficult  8  The challenge of ‘maintenance’  Context changes;  New technical vulnerabilities;  Is fixing it better than doing nothing?
Lack of consistent strategy towards standards (cPPP, MSP?
);  Need establishing a small number of key initiatives at EU level  (‘Airbus’-like projects) • Multi-disciplinary projects with industrial participation; • Necessary contributions by DPAs, apps developers; • H2020, cPPP, MSP; Improve coordination between EU funded R&D and ISO;  Possible ‘vehicles’ for such a coordination  ETSI CEN CENELEC CSCG (???
); • • H2020 (industrial platforms);, •  cPPP and/or MSP;  10  10  Open questions...  Are current initiatives adequate to address the issues?
Industrial involvement??
11  11  Example Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 – eIDAS  • Articles 30 and 39: Obligation regarding the certification   of the conformity of QSCDs that: - Must be assessed with regard to the requirements set in Annex   II  - Must be carried out by appropriate public or private bodies   designated by Member States (art.30.1) that must be notified  to the Commission (art.30.2)  - Must be carried out according to standards to be listed in the   implementing act pursuant to article 30.
3; or  - An alternative process using comparable security levels may be   used only in the absence of standards or when a security  evaluation is on-going.
30.4) Implementing acts in order to list standards for the  security assessment of IT security products (art.30.3)  Certification   bodies  Security  Market  Dynamism  Organisational   Framework  Technical  Aspects  European Union Agency for Network and Information Security  13  SOGIS-MRA Technical framework for IT security certification  • SOGIS – Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) (v.3) – 2010  - -  Signed by AT, FI, FR, DE, IT, NL, UK, ES, SE + NO Participants to this Agreement are government organisations or  government agencies   - Recognition from all signatories of CC and ITSEC certificates up to EAL 4 - Recognition of highest assurance levels defined for specific IT technical   -  domains (including smart card technologies).
Peer review and information sharing amongst participants ->  recognition of certificates issued  • The MRA is not part of the “EU acquis” • The MRA does not apply to the 28 Member States  European Union Agency for Network and Information Security  14  Concluding Remarks  Not addressed all related issues   Market position of EU ICT industries;  horizontal vs. vertical solutions on standardization.
Standards are a tool, not the objective;  Maintaining security standards is perhaps more complex than general  standards;  Plethora of fora and initiatives  •  not enough coordination  Open evaluation procedures essential;  Stimulate European market through procurement might be an approach?
17  European Union Agency for Network and Information Security  Science and Technology Park of Crete   P.O.
Box 1309, 71001 Heraklion  Greece   Follow ENISA  http://www.enisa.europa.eu  18  ENISA and standards  Regulation 526/2013, Art.3.1d   Support research and development and standardisation, by:   (i) facilitating the establishment and take-up of European and international  standards for risk management and for the security of electronic products,  networks and services;  (ii) advising the Union and the Member States on research needs in the  area of network and information security with a view to enabling effective  responses to current and emerging network and information security risks  and threats, including with respect to new and emerging information and  communications technologies, and to using risk-prevention technologies  effectively;   Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  19  ENISA approach to standards  • Aim: promotion of best practices through SDOs • ENISA role: interface between private sector, public sector,   SDOs  • Short- and mid-term goals  Formal cooperation with SDOs and specific WGs  - - Working collaboration with SDOs  • Long-term goals  - Review of and participation in NIS standardisation activities -  Proposal of standards, via means of proposals for standardisation requests  Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  20  ENISA and standards  Regulation (EC) 460/2004 Art.
3 – In order to ensure that the scope and objectives set out in  Articles 1 and 2 are complied with and met, the Agency shall perform  the following tasks:  (g): to track the development of standards for products and services on  network and information security  However  (12) The exercise of the Agency's tasks should not interfere with the  competencies and should not pre-empt, impede or overlap with the relevant  powers and tasks conferred on: the European standardisation bodies, the national standardisation bodies and  the Standing Committee as set out in Directive 98/34/EC of the European  Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the  provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and  of rules on Information Society Services  Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  21  REGULATION (EU) No 1025/2012  Definition of standard  REGULATION (EU) No 1025/2012 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 25 October  2012 on European standardisation, amending Council Directives 89/686/EEC and 93/15/EEC and  Directives 94/9/EC, 94/25/EC, 95/16/EC, 97/23/EC, 98/34/EC, 2004/22/EC, 2007/23/EC, 2009/23/EC and  2009/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Decision 87/95/EEC  and Decision No 1673/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council  (1) ‘standard’ means a technical specification, adopted by a recognised standardisation body, repeated or continuous application, with which compliance is not compulsory, and which is one of the following:  for  ‘international standard’ means a standard adopted by an international  (a) standardisation body; (b) ‘European standard’ means a standard adopted by a European standardisation organisation; (c) ‘harmonised standard’ means a European standard adopted on the basis of a request made by the Commission for the application of Union harmonisation legislation; (d) ‘national standard’ means a standard adopted by a national standardisation body;  European Union Agency for Network and Information Security  22  REGULATION (EU) No 1025/2012 – Standardisation bodies  (8) ‘European standardisation organisation’ – an organisation listed in Annex I: Annex I - EUROPEAN STANDARDISATION ORGANISATIONS  1.
ETSI — European Telecommunications Standards  Institute   (9) ‘international standardisation body’ means the International  Organisation for Standardisation (ISO), the International  Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the International  Telecommunication Union (ITU)  Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  23  ETSI CEN-CENELEC Cyber Security  Coordination Group (CSCG)  • Give strategic advice to the technical committees of CEN, CENELEC   and ETSI  • Develop a gap analysis of European and International Standards on   cyber security  • Define of joint European requirements for European and   International Standards on cyber security  • Establish a European roadmap on standardization of cyber security  • Act as contact point for all questions of EU institutions relating to   standardization of cyber security  • Suggest a joint US and European strategy for the establishment of a   framework of International standards on cyber security  Cybersecurity standards - European approach |  Udo Helmbrecht  24  International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives,  Anna-Maria Osula and Henry Rõigas (Eds.
), NATO CCD COE Publications, Tallinn 2016  Permission to make digital or hard copies of this publication for internal  use within NATO and for personal or educational use when for non-profit  or non-commercial purposes is granted providing that copies bear this  notice and a full citation on the first page.
Any other reproduction or  transmission requires prior written permission by NATO CCD COE.
C H A P T E R   1 1  Key Concepts in Cyber Security:   Towards a Common Policy   and Technology Context   for Cyber Security Norms  Claire Vishik, Mihoko Matsubara, Audrey Plonk  1.
Introduction  1.1 Definition of Cyber Security Cyber security is a complex subject and has a number of definitions, such as this  from the National Initiative for Cyber Security Careers and Studies (NICCS):  ‘The activity or process, ability or capability, or state whereby information  and communications systems and the information contained therein are pro- tected from and/or defended against damage, unauthorized use or modifica- tion, or exploitation.’1  The same source also offers an extended definition:  ‘Strategy, policy, and standards regarding the security of and operations in  cyberspace, and encompassing the full range of threat reduction, vulnera- bility reduction, deterrence, international engagement, incident response,  resiliency, and recovery policies and activities, including computer network  operations, information assurance, law enforcement, diplomacy, military,   1  NICCS, ‘Explore Terms: A Glossary of Common Cybersecurity Terminology,’ https://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  221  and intelligence missions as they relate to the security and stability of the  global information and communications infrastructure.’2  1.2 Multidisciplinary Context for Cyber Security Norms In this chapter, we do not attempt to offer a comprehensive analysis of various cyber  security contexts, but rather to compare common elements in a set of representative  documents and explore the connection between shared principles and domain-specific   norms in a context that encompasses policy, technology, and societal issues.
The white paper adopted by several industry associations in Europe, Asia, and  the US, entitled Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry and Govern- ment Approaches to the Continued Growth and Security of Cyberspace, observes:  ‘Technology and services change and evolve rapidly, and policymaking related to  cyberspace must also be innovative to support growth, security, trust and confi- dence, and stability’.
All stakeholders (government, industry, academia, and civil  society) must work together to ensure that the benefits of cyberspace are accessi- ble to citizens, and that major challenges are addressed.3 While a government is  responsible for developing policies, strategies, and regulatory conditions for the  development of cyber security, industry is the source of cutting-edge technolo- gies, technical expertise, deployment and operational experience, and, in many  countries, owns major components of critical infrastructure.
Multi-stakeholder  cooperation requires a common context to enable the participants to collaborate  constructively.
Industry owns and operates a significant part of the Internet infra- structure and develops and deploys technologies responsible for the operations  and evolution of cyberspace.
For both industry and government, the shared con- text is important because it permits regulators to design policies consistent with  the technology space and flows of information and allows industry to introduce  products and solutions that are aligned with high-level principles and based on  specific norms and best practices.
A richer context proposed in this paper could  explain, for example, why an implementation of a network service is compliant  with generally accepted privacy requirements, and what best practices and tech- nology  norms,  such  as  the  use  of  privacy-preserving  cryptographic  protocols,  have been employed to achieve these goals.
In another example, rich context can  provide practical guidance on solutions available to increase the reach of cyber- space to areas with limited infrastructure based on the standards and technologies  available today.
The need for the shared context in cyber security and challenges  associated with its creation are also highlighted in research.4  2  3   4   Ibid.
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry and Government Approaches for the Continued Growth and Security of  Cyberspace’ (BSA | The Software Alliance, et al, Seoul Conference on Cyberspace 2013, October 2013), 1-2, http://www.itic.
Adopted  by  five  industry  associations  in  conjunction  with  the Cyber Space Conference in Seoul in 2013.
Jeffrey Hunker, ‘Policy Challenges in Building Dependability in Global Infrastructures,’ Computers & Security 21 (2002): 705- 711; Bruce L. Benson, ‘The Spontaneous Evolution of Cyber Law: Norms, Property Rights, Contracting, Dispute Resolution  and Enforcement without the State,’ Journal of Law, Economics and Policy 269 (2005).
222   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  There are a number of multi-disciplinary principles or guidelines that should be  approached as a whole, to ensure that societal, policy, and technology aspects are  integrated; this is illustrated in Table 1, which is based on the example offered by  OECD Guidelines for cyber security.
Nine Principles from the OECD Guidelines.5  Type of Elements Policy,   organisational   Technology  Principles Awareness  Responsibility  Response  Description  Needs and requirements for security of information systems and  benefits of their implementation should be recognised Responsibility for the security of information systems and net- works should be shared by all Timely and co-operative way to prevent, detect and respond to  security incidents is necessary Regular structured risk assessments should be conducted Security should be incorporated as an essential element of infor- mation systems and networks  Risk assessment Security design and  implementation Security management A comprehensive approach to security management should be   Reassessment  Societal  Ethics  Democracy  adopted Appropriate modifications to security policies, practices,  measures and procedures should be made as the environment  changes Legitimate interests of others should be respected; work should  be conducted in an ethical manner The security of information systems and networks should be  compatible with essential values of a democratic society  While the development of high level concepts and guidelines has been relatively  successful, it has proved a challenge to define a multi-disciplinary integrated model  that could allow technologists and policy-makers to easily collaborate on develop- ing viable cyber security policies and approaches to cyber norms that are compati- ble with a quickly evolving technology environment.
The global nature of the Inter- net and the ubiquitous use of cyberspace worldwide require the amalgamation of  various disciplines and the collaboration of academia, government, industry, and  civil society organisations.
However, the research and practitioners community has  not developed a mechanism to link more concrete and frequently domain-specific  norms to the high-level principles in a scientific and predictable fashion.
The lack of a rich common context, comprising both principles and norms, has  delayed the emergence of harmonised mechanisms which would enable the multi-  stakeholder community to build on the shared values associated with the societal,  policy, and technological aspects of cyber security.
It has also led to weaknesses in  the technology space, where policy requirements are not always adequately incor- porated,  and  in  policy  design,  where  technology  constraints  are  not  always  well  understood.
5   ‘OECD Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a Culture of Security’ (Organization for  Economic Co-operation and Development, 25 July 2002), 10-12, http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/15582260.pdf.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  223  1.3 Principles and Norms As the article focuses on establishing a common context, it is necessary to use broad,  all-encompassing  definitions.
A  norm  is  simply  defined  as  a  standard,  model  or  pattern, in reference to technology norms and best practices discussed in this chap- ter.
Multi-stakeholder groups frequently focus on the development of principles  because the high level of generalisation permits diverse participants to form con- vergent views.
Although efforts are made  to design technical norms and best practices based on accepted policy principles,  the link between the norms and the principles and between the technology and the  policy space is highly abstract.
This level of abstraction simplifies consensus, but  also complicates discussions on design and implementations of cyber security poli- cies that take into consideration both norms and principles.
The typical (and constructive) approach in multi-stakeholder efforts in cyber  security is to propose common high-level policy principles and to ensure that the  technical norms are developed in accordance with them.
This top-down view leads  to positive results for agreeing on industry norms.
An example of such consensus  achieved on high-level principles in a complicated area is the encryption principles  developed by the World Semiconductor Council.7 However, this approach is not  always sufficient for the incorporation of the requirements defined by the technol- ogy space and technology constraints into the policy design process.
The limitations  are due in part to the complexity and dynamism of the technology environment and  relative slowness of the policy response.
It is not realistic to expect expert knowledge  of technology from the policy-makers and an expert knowledge of policy from the  technologists.
The  absence  of  mechanisms  to  transition  more  objectively  from  principles  to  norms  hinders  the  development  of  common  ground  in  complex  and  multi-  disciplinary fields, like cyber security.
As an example, support for privacy is a shared  principle in most cyber security strategies, but the nature of technical standards,  norms, and best practices that are necessary in different technology contexts and  the constraints imposed by technologies are not clear to the policy-makers, lead- ing to imperfect regulations that are difficult to harmonise internationally.
In other  words, recognition of the essential character of privacy in connection with cyber  security  is  not  actionable  without  a  predictable  linkage  to  best  practices  (norms   6  Definition from Merriam-Webster, ‘Principle,’ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/principle.
224   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  and standards), such as data anonymisation techniques or obfuscation of unique  identifiers.
In a different example, understanding of technology constraints, such  as the impossibility of complete anonymity in today’s computing environment, is  necessary in order to create regulations and policies that are effective, such as guide- lines for data protection.
The introduction of a scientific reasoning process based  on ontology that links policy principles and technical best practices would improve  regulatory design and extend opportunities for self-regulation.
Predictability would  also increase trust in industry norms and best practices through the recognition of  their connection to generally accepted principles in situations ranging from policy  implementation to support for self-regulation.
The level of complexity of multi-disciplinary issues in cyber security also requires  decision and dialogue support tools, and an ontology linking principles and norms  can provide a foundation for such a mechanism.
Ontologies are commonly used in a variety of settings in cyber secu- rity, such as creating threat and vulnerability models for innovative fields.
The complexity of the field of cyber  security and the need to formulate relatively simple technical norms and best prac- tices that are connected to general policy principles point to ontology as the tool of  choice to capture relationships between concepts, principles, and their attributes  and to enable robust modelling of constraints and complex situations.
Ontologies for cyberspace have also been created by,  for example, Kopsell.10 The introduction of a well-designed ontology could help the  participants to create a framework for reasoning about cyber security norms in con- nection to shared principles, and to understand the mutual connections of the best  practices, thus improving the efficiency of outcomes.
The benefits will be significant  for policy-makers and policy theorists, allowing them to improve their understanding  of the complex technology space, and for industry, to support design and positioning  of norms and best practices in a correct policy context.
See, for example, Wikipedia, ‘Ontology (Information Science),’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology_(information_science).
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  225  Although we do not propose a concrete design for a ‘multi-stakeholder dialogue  support’ ontology in this paper, we can identify foundations, upon which it can be  built:  •  High level policy principles (top layer) can be derived from commonly   accepted key concepts identified by earlier efforts.
•  Technology characteristics can be established based on the accepted   attributes of the technology environment and input from various  experimental frameworks developed to analyse it.
•  Norms, standards and best practices can be developed by the  communities of experts and incorporated into the ontology.
As an example, the  Public Initiative on Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) convened by NIST11 proposed  a risk-based framework for CPS that links risk domains of privacy, security, safety,  resilience, and reliability in one integrated model.
The insights resulting from this  work can inform regulation and standardisation for the Internet of Things (IoT).
The reference framework produced by the same public  working group extracts concrete elements that can make future IoT systems trust- worthy.
An ontology can link the high-level risk principles and concrete technical  norms in this and similar initiatives, in order to permit technologists and regulators  to jointly reason about optimal technology environments and the policy approaches  that govern them.
Incorporation of these elements  of shared vision could speed up the creation of the body of knowledge to support  consensus-building on major issues in cyber security.
We start the discussion with the  analysis of the most pertinent characteristics of the technology environment since  they provide additional linkage between high level principles and norms.
11  Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group, http://www.cpspwg.org/.
226   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  2.
Technology Environment  Today’s dynamic technology environment supports seamless functioning of all soci- eties around the globe.
This section attempts to extract key characteristics of the  technology environment that are also pertinent to policy-making in cyber security.
Broad categorisation of these attributes is illustrated in Table 2  below, and they form a foundation for technology principles to be used in the ontol- ogy we are describing.
Key characteristics of the technology space by broad category.
Category Technology  Societal  Attribute Universal Connectivity Complexity and dynamic nature Influence on the physical environment Shared nature of infrastructure  Global and universal use of cyberspace Broad economic impact of cyberspace  2.1 Ubiquitous Connectivity and Interoperability The modern computing environment is characterised by ubiquitous connectivity  and  interoperability  between  heterogeneous  networks  and  diverse  systems  and  devices.
The numbers of connected devices cannot be estimated with great preci- sion, but is extremely large.
EMC Corporation estimates over 7 billion people will  use 30 billion Internet-connected devices by 2020,12 whereas Cisco and DHL pre- dict a higher number – 50 billion connected devices by the same date.13 Disparate  computing and network domains of fifteen years ago have merged into an inter- connected space that supports multiple models of use, connectivity, and access via  shared infrastructure.
The diversity of connected devices is enormous, including  everything from data centres and full PC platforms to tablets, industrial control  systems, disposable sensors and RFID tags, and it is matched by the diversity of  the networks.
Ubiquitous connectivity and broad interoperability support movements of data   12  EMC2,  New  EMC  Innovations  Redefine  IT  Performance  and  Efficiency,  4  May  2015,  http://www.emc.com/about/news/ 13  Cisco, ‘Internet of Things (IoT),’ http://www.cisco.com/web/solutions/trends/iot/portfolio.html.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  227  over  diverse  networks  and  are  important  for  numerous  areas  of  policy-making,  including  standards  policies,  network  and  information  security  regulations,  and  data protection.
Policy developments that hinder the open nature of the Internet,  such as data localisation or reliance on indigenous standards, can become obstacles  to global interoperability and inhibit the role of cyberspace as a powerful engine of  economic growth.
2.2 Intrinsic Complexity and Dynamism of the Technology Environment Interoperable frameworks that form the foundation of the modern technology envi- ronment are likely to contain unknown vulnerabilities due to the effects of compo- sition of diverse security models.
We  have  not  yet  developed  mechanisms  to  analyse  the  composite  picture  of  infrastructure  that  is  today’s  reality.
Although the process is designed to reach one operational  goal, their security capabilities are different at different stages of the process.
Defin- ing ‘trust evidence’ for this environment has proved very challenging.14  With  no  objective  approaches  to  estimating  the  security  of  complex  systems  under operational conditions and no standards to apply to diverse environments  where they operate, it is difficult to comprehend the consequences of system level  or environmental changes.
Complexity of the computing environment is the result of the aggregation of  various frameworks and underlying security and privacy models that were designed  in isolation.
The impact of complexity needs to be well understood in order to cor- rectly inform the development of effective cyber policies.
Policy-makers frequently  examine cyber security concerns at a simplified level, making generalisations that  become  disconnected  from  the  evolving  capabilities  of  the  complex  technology  space.
These  policies  need  to  be  technology-neutral,15  but  also  aware  of  the  key  characteristics of the technology space in order to incorporate the crucial relation- ships between norms and best practices in cyber security.
2.3 Intermingling of Cyber and Physical Components Another important characteristic of cyberspace is the connection between cyber  and physical environments, as exemplified in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), sys- tems of systems that have computing components, communication capabilities, and   14  Claire Vishik, Anand Rajan, Chris Ramming, David Grawrock, and Jesse Walker, ‘Defining trust evidence: research directions,‘  Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Research (CSIIRW ‘11), Frederick  T. Sheldon, Robert Abercrombie, and Axel Krings, eds.
15  Technological  Neutrality  is  ‘the  freedom  of  individuals  and  organizations  to  choose  the  most  appropriate  and  suitable  technology to their needs and requirements for development, acquisition, use or commercialisation, without dependencies  on  knowledge  involved  as  information  or  data’:  Wikia,  ‘Technology  Neutrality,’  http://itlaw.wikia.com/wiki/Technology_ neutrality.
228   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  physical subsystems.16 CPS, now ubiquitous, requires more complex and integrated  security and risk models.
For CPS, the traditionally separated domains of safety,  resilience, reliability, security, and privacy, are intertwined.17 Separate assessment of  these domains is insufficient to address the risks, because requirements optimised  for one domain can be detrimental to the composite risk picture of a system or  an area of infrastructure.
Characteristics of CPS such as the presence of a physical  subsystem and real-time controls may demand a departure from traditional views  on security or privacy requirements and instead put an emphasis on safety and reli- ability, such as when developing risk models for nuclear power station management,  where privacy concerns are minimal while safety and reliability requirements are  crucial.
Stuxnet  is  an  example  of  an  attack  carried  through  cyber-physical  environ- ments18  that  illustrates  the  need  to  analyse  the  requirements  for  all  relevant  risk  domains using an integrated process.
Only collaboration between multidisciplinary  policy and technology teams can help address these risks.
Tools supporting aggre- gation  of  different  fields,  such  as  the  proposed  ontology,  can  help  in  developing  complex norms that span several risk domains, like privacy, cyber security, safety,  and reliability.
2.4 Shared Global Infrastructure Based on Open Standards The benefits of the shared global infrastructure and open standards are clear to all.
We  can use the same devices, applications, networks, and processes in France and Japan,  China and Egypt; for the most part, technology now speaks a common language.
The consensus on the importance of the global shared infrastructure and open stand- ards predates the commercial Internet, but concerns about its dependability emerged  early in the Internet history and crystallised into a separate area of research in the mid- 1990s.19 Strong focus on the protection of critical infrastructure has led some researchers  such as Dunn Cavelty to assert that ‘militarisation of cyber security’ was under way.20  The infrastructure is shared among the different users of cyberspace from edu- cation to transportation and energy, and by different geographic regions underlying  the functionality of generic systems and processes.
Uneven availability of expertise  and resources has resulted in varying levels of cyber security and privacy protec- tions in the infrastructure, stressing the need for policy-makers and technologists  to continue to focus on capacity-building in cyber security.
16  See for example definitions at the Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group.
17  See deliverables of the NIST from Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group.
18   [Stuxnet] ‘was a 500-kilobyte computer worm that infected the software of at least 14 industrial sites in Iran, including a  uranium-enrichment plant.
The key compromise was that Stuxnet placed itself in a critical path where it could not only  disrupt the plant process, but also disrupt/manipulate the information flow to the system operator.
Jeffrey Hunker, ‘Policy Challenges in Building Dependability in Global Infrastructures.’  19  20  Myriam Dunn Cavelty, ‘The Militarisation of Cyber Security as a Source of Global Tension,’ in Strategic Trends 2012, ed.
Daniel   Möckli (Zurich: Center for Security Studies, 2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2007043.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  229  2.5 Global Use of Cyberspace and Its Significant Impact on the Economy Around 40% of the world’s population used the Internet in 2014.21 Twenty years  ago, in 1995, the level of connectivity stood at 1% of the population.
The number of  Internet users grew at 7.9% in 2014, more than seven times faster than the popula- tion growth of 1.14%.
Some 78% of the populations of developed countries and 31%  of those of the developing world were connected in 2014.22 With such a large pop- ulation of users, cyberspace-dependent processes permeate the fabric of everyday  life.
The global nature and scope of cyberspace require strong understanding of the  complex underlying technologies and patterns of use as well as policy frameworks  enabling cyberspace use.
Norms and best practices created in this context need to  be actionable and broadly applicable.
Although the development of the technology is rapid, the process of building  a unified economic theory for cyber security and providing recommendation on  optimal economic models to achieve improved security coverage has been slow.24  The digital economy magnifies the efficiencies achieved by monetary economies  and creates economies of scale and scope via intermediation and aggregation of  resources.
Novel use models emerge and quickly become mainstream, providing a  constant source of innovation and alleviating information asymmetry, as illustrated  by Akelof’s model.25 Despite the rapid pace of change, there is limited theoretical  work to address key economic issues, such as design of viable economic incentives  for the development of secure infrastructure.26 Slow development of the economic  theory for cyber security is an inhibitor for the design, implementation, and harmo- nisation of broadly applicable policies, metrics and the model necessary for building  and evaluating cyber security norms.
23  24   21  Statistics from Internet Live Stats, ‘Internet Users,’ http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users/.
22   International Telecommunications Union (ITU) estimate: Wikipedia, ‘Global Internet Usage,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Global_Internet_usage.
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry.’  Johannes M. Bauer and Michel J. G. Van Eeten, ‘Cybersecurity: Stakeholder Incentives, Externalities, and Policy Options,’  Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009): 706-719; and Eric Luiijf, et al, ‘Ten National Cyber Security Strategies: A Comparison,’  in Critical Information Infrastructure Security: 6th International Workshop, CRITIS 2011, Lucerne, Switzerland, September 8-9,  2011, Revised Selected Papers, ed.
26  Claire  Vishik,  Frederick  Sheldon  and  David  Ott,  ‘Economic  Incentives  for  Cybersecurity:  Using  Economics  to  Design  Technologies  Ready  for  Deployment,’  in  ISSE  2013  Securing  Electronic  Business  Processes,  eds.
230   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  3.
Extracting High Level Concepts for the Ontology  Section 2 explored fundamental technology characteristics of cyberspace.
The goal  of section 3 is to extract high-level common elements from diverse sources that  address  both  policy  and  technology  aspects  of  cyberspace  and  that  can  be  used  to populate top levels of the proposed ontology.
With no accepted framework in  place for the co-development and analysis of technology and policy approaches for  cyber security, we find useful input in related research, policy analysis, and indus- try papers.
These common elements reflect shared interests and concerns among  industry and government, and thus should form a foundation for an ontology sup- porting multi-disciplinary work on cyber security policy approaches and norms, by  allowing industry to design best practices (technical and process norms) consistent  with the accepted high level principles, and by enabling the policy community to  understand the connection between the principles and best practices guiding their  concrete implementation.
It is not a comprehensive list of sources and key concepts,  but it is representative, and the sources that we evaluated produced overlapping sets  of high-level concepts, suggesting shared views on many aspects in cyber security.
3.1 Theoretical Research Frameworks A number of technology and policy frameworks have been proposed to enable or  facilitate the examination of multidisciplinary subjects in security and privacy.
A good  example is Technology Dialectics,27 a model developed by Professor Sweeney to mit- igate conflicts between requirements of technology and context of use in society.
The  goal is to detect potential social and adoption issues early in the technology cycle and  resolve them by creating tools to determine whether a technology is demonstrably  appropriate for a certain society or context.
Although the framework focuses on pri- vacy, it can be used for broader analysis and easily applied to cyber security.
Similar single-domain technology and policy frameworks have been proposed  by various researchers, including Golubchikov and Deda for the study of low-en- ergy housing,28 and Ananda, Pandy, and Punia for the analysis of the power sector  in India.29 The shared elements found in this work are summarised in Table 3 below.
27  Latanya Sweeney, ‘Technology Dialectics: Constructing Provably Appropriate Technology,’ Data Privacy Lab (2006), http://  dataprivacylab.org/dataprivacy/projects/dialectics/index.html.
29  V. Ananda Kumar, Krishan K. Pandey and Devendra Kumar Punia, ‘Cyber Security Threats in the Power Sector: Need for a   Domain Specific Regulatory Framework in India,’ Energy Policy 65 (2014): 126-133.
28  Oleg  Golubchikov  and  Paola  Deda,  ‘Governance,  Technology,  and  Equity:  An  Integrated  Policy  Framework  for  Energy   Efficient Housing,’ Energy Policy 41 (2012): 733-741.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  231  Table 3.
Category Technology  Societal  Approach  Key concepts Broad applicability Rapid innovation Shared infrastructure and context requirements Diverse operational models Evolving use models and context Complex requirements for adoption Economic considerations Connection to fundamental rights (e.g., privacy) Actionable (rather than observational) Capable of evolution Provably effective  The  characteristics  found  in  the  technology  and  policy  frameworks  that  we  examined are consistent with those we discussed in section 2.
These concepts are  useful to inform ontology development, and they point to ontologies as support  tools  linking  technology  and  societal  issues.
Similar  frameworks  are  frequently  employed to support technology development processes in industry.
3.2 Cyber Security Strategies Another source of shared high-level concepts is found in cyber security strategies  formulated by different countries.
The OECD’s report, Cyber Security Policy-Making  at a Turning Point: Analysing a New Generation of National Cyber Security Strategies  for the Internet Economy and Non-governmental Perspectives on a New Generation  of National Cyber Security Strategies: Contributions from BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC,  reveals that cyber security strategies developed by different nations share a num- ber of common elements.
Shared approaches include the stated need for enhanced  internal operational coordination; reliance on private-public partnerships, interest  in  improved  international  coordination,  the  need  to  protect  fundamental  values  in cyberspace,30 as well as reliance on flexible policies for cyber security, support- ing the economic development associated with the ICT sector, and engagement in  multi-stakeholder dialogue.
Other researchers such as Kshetri and Murugesan, who  compared the US and EU cyber security strategies,31 and Luiijf, who examined ten  cyber security strategies, highlight similar elements of shared cyber security vision.
Common elements of cyber security strategies are summarised in Table 4.32  Private  ownership  and  operation  of  critical  infrastructure  mean  that  all  the  stakeholders (government, academia, industry, and non-profits) need to collaborate   30   ‘Cybersecurity  Policy-Making  at  a  Turning  Point:  Analysing  a  New  Generation  of  National  Cybersecurity  Strategies  for  the  Internet  Economy  and  Non-Governmental  Perspectives  on  a  New  Generation  of  National  Cybersecurity  Strategies:  Contributions from BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC’ (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 16 November  2012), 9, http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/cybersecurity%20policy%20making.pdf.
31  Nir  Kshetri  and  San  Murugesan,  ‘EU  and  US  Cybersecurity  Strategies  and  Their  Impact  on  Businesses  and  Consumers,’   Computer 46 (2013): 84-88.
32  Luiijf, et al, ‘Ten National Cyber Security Strategies: A Comparison,’ 1-17.
232   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  on cyber security issues in order to mitigate cyber threats and enhance resiliency  and security while maintaining the interoperability and open Internet.33 But diverse  stakeholders cannot acquire expertise in all the relevant topics.
Arming multi-stake- holder initiatives with tools such as a comprehensive ontology, in addition to the  typical high level deliverables of multi-stakeholder dialogue, e.g., position papers,  can bring more efficiency to the process, allowing industry to elucidate the viability  of norms and best practices in a broader context that is easier to understand.
Common elements shared by cyber security strategies based on OECD34 report   and other analyses.
Type of Elements Societal/economic  Common Elements Economic impact   Organisational/policy  Enhanced government cooperation  Public-private cooperation  International cooperation   Division of responsibility among  various government organisations  and sovereignty Support for fundamental values  Technology-related  Innovation  Comprehensive coverage  Description Quantification of economic benefits of cyber  security into the strategy Better policy level and operational coordina- tion among multiple agencies Engagement of all stakeholders (government,  industry, non-profits) in policy and solutions  development Collaboration with other countries on a range  of cyber security issues Operational role of agencies responsible for  national security  Recognition of fundamental values, such as  freedom of expression, privacy protection and  the free flow of information as essential Preservation of open Internet as a platform for  innovation and economic growth Strategies address the full range of ICT com- ponents  3.3 Industry-Led Initiatives Another source of high-level concepts is furnished by documents created by indus- try and industry associations.
The white paper prepared by five industry associations  for  Cyber  Seoul  2013  provides  useful  categorisation  of  areas  of  focus:  economic  considerations,  social  and  cultural  benefits,  cyber  security  proper,  international  security, cyber crime, and capacity-building as summarised in Table 5.35 The paper,  which is based on a number of earlier sources, indicates high-level areas which are  important for industry and to which more specific norms need to be anchored.
‘Cybersecurity Policy-Making at a Turning Point,’ 10-15.
33  34  Eric Luiijf, Kim Besseling and Patrick de Graaf, ‘Nineteen National Cyber Security Strategies,’ International Journal of Critical  Infrastructure Protection 9 (2013): 7-26; ‘An Evaluation Framework for National Cyber Security Strategies’ (European Union  Agency for Network and Information Security, 11 November 2014), 30-31, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience- and-CIIP/national-cyber-security-strategies-ncsss/an-evaluation-framework-for-cyber-security-strategies-1/an-evaluation- framework-for-cyber-security-strategies; ‘Cybersecurity Policy-Making at a Turning Point,’ 9, 24-52.
‘Moving Forward Together: Recommended Industry.’  35   Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  233  Table 5.
High-level categories from Seoul industry paper (2013).
Type of Elements Economic  Key Area Economic growth and development  Policy   (legal, organisational)  Development of legal frameworks  International cooperation  Capacity-building  Response to cyber threats  Response to cyber crimes  Societal  Societal and cultural benefits  Description Economic growth is the key contribution of the  ICT sector Criminal statutes to clarify and enhance law  enforcement’s ability to prosecute bad actors, to  combat cyber crime and enhance international  cooperation are available Cooperation to advance social, economic, and  cultural goals, given cyberspace offers a unique  global commons Cooperation to develop additional capabilities in  legal, policy, and technology areas Cooperation to prevent, detect, and respond to  cyber security threats.
Work to deter cyber threats, implement tools to  identify criminal activities, and carry out coor- dinated action Increased access to education, influence on the  political process, and support for human rights  The paper illustrates a significant level of convergence on high-level principles  between the industry and governments that participated in the Seoul Conference on  Cyberspace 2013, based, for example, on the similarities between these approaches  and the approaches reflected in cyber security strategies produced by various gov- ernments, as described above.
An ontology linking these key concepts and more  concrete best practices could enable diverse communities to collaborate in greater  depth and develop more actionable norms and policies.
3.4 Global Digital Infrastructure Work Industry, academia and government have developed a number of position papers  that provide insights into novel policy approaches that support key trends in tech- nology evolution.
Among these documents, Intel’s Sponsoring Trust in Tomorrow’s  Technology:  Towards  a  Global  Digital  Infrastructure  Policy36  explains  the  founda- tional nature and importance of Global Digital Infrastructure (GDI) and the need  to develop policies that support GDI-based innovation and preserve the users’ trust  in the digital economy.
These policies should support the environment that ensured  the success of GDI; openness, interoperability, and economic growth potential and  should  be  technology  neutral,  based  on  open  standards,  fostering  international  cooperation and strong accountability.
The underlying concept is ‘the triangle of  trust’ – a collaboration of industry, government, and NGOs on broadly applicable  policy principles, including self-regulation and consumer awareness and education.
Other recent research efforts have studied other aspects of GDI, describing GDI  evolution and associated metrics.37 Max Craglia (2015), editor of the joint project of  John Miller and David Hoffman, ‘Sponsoring Trust in Tomorrow’s Technology: Towards a Global Digital Infrastructure Policy,’  36  Intel Corporation (2010), http://blogs.intel.com/wp-content/mt-content/com/policy/Global%20Digital%20Infrastructure%20 Policy%20Merged.FINAL.PDF.
234   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the European Commission on Digital Earth  2020, stressed the importance of incorporating policy constraints when developing  specific technologies, in order to avoid complications and speed up adoption, echo- ing the main thrust of the Technology Dialectics framework.
Type  Technology  Broadly applicable principle Interoperability  Openness  Foundation in open standards  Description Seamless interoperation among the components of  infrastructure and ecosystem Free flow of data across borders and global access to and  sharing of innovation Support for innovation, collaboration, and openness  without relying on particular technologies  Dynamic nature and rapid evolution Quick pace of innovation affecting technology and use   Societal  Economic growth potential  Policy  Self-regulation  Multi-stakeholder international   cooperation Accountability  models Strong economic growth with cross-sectoral collabora- tion Self-imposed rules based on based practices and optimal  technology outcomes Cooperation across borders and sectors to promote  continued innovations, economic growth and trust Obligation/willingness to take responsibility for perfor- mance based on agreed-upon expectations  The high-level common elements and principles discussed in this section form  an overlapping representative list drawing from diverse sources produced by indus- try, government, academia, and non-profits.
These concepts and the relationships  between them can be used to populate the top level of the ontology we are propos- ing to support multi-stakeholder work in cyber security.
Major Gaps That We Need to Address  In order to create a viable common context for the diverse stakeholders in cyber  security, additional research, analysis, and industry assessment efforts are needed.
4.1 Scientific Foundations for Cyber Security The last decade saw several efforts to move cyber security from a practical dis- cipline to a more theoretical level; to develop a ‘science of cyber security’ that  could provide a common foundation for the increasingly diverse range of cyber  security topics.
The Federation of American Scientists (FAS) described the issue   as follows:  Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  235  ‘The challenge in defining a science of cyber-security derives from the pecu- liar aspects of the field.
...  Cyber-security  requires  understanding  of  computer  science  concepts,  but  also shares aspects of sciences such as epidemiology, economics, and clinical  medicine; all these analogies are helpful in providing research directions.’38  The report concludes:  ‘There is a science of cyber-security.
For the future, as far  as can be discerned, there will be new attacks on old technologies, and new  technologies that need to be defended.’39  Cyber security is a science with mature subfields, but lacking accepted definitions of  fundamental concepts such as security composition, assurance, accountability, or trust.
Strong and generally accepted scientific foundations for cyber security will be instru- mental in developing approaches to policy design and norm development based on  shared principles already defined by earlier efforts.
We hope that an ontology that we are  describing here can be instrumental in unifying definitions and methodologies in differ- ent areas of cyber security, in addition to linking technical norms with policy principles.
4.2 Standardisation Strategy, Process, and Policy Open standards enable the foundation of today’s digital infrastructure and are cru- cial for the seamless operation of cyberspace.
Active work on the development of  international standards is conducted in a variety of settings, from international (for  example, ISO, IEC, and ITU)40 and national standards bodies (ANSI, BSI, or DIN)41  to industry standards consortia (IEEE or TCG)42.
It is recognised that most gener- al-purpose technology and governance standards and specifications have to address  security and, in many cases, privacy in order to be viable.
The inventory of poten- tially relevant standards existing today is enormous.
There are solid internationally  recognised policy mechanisms set up to support the use of open standards, includ- ing agreement within the World Trade Organization.
Standards are necessary to  enable the foundations of the dynamic and open cyberspace.
However, in the area of cyber security, there is a lingering perception that, in  order to strengthen national security, open international standards should not be   38   39  40   Jason, The MITRE Corporation, Science of Cyber-Security, JSR-10-102 (19 November 2010), 1, http://fas.org/irp/agency/dod/ jason/cyber.pdf.
IEC (International Electro-technical Commission), ISO (International Organization for Standardisation), ITU (International  Telecommunication Union).
41  American  National  Standards  Institute  (ANSI),  British  Standards  Institution  (BSI),  Deutsches  Institut  für  Normung  e.V.
42  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Trusted Computing Group (TCG).
236   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  used, even in general-purpose technology environments, and that local or regional  standards provide greater security because knowledge about them is more limited.
These misconceptions have been disproved by extensive research, and continued  development  of  indigenous  standards  represents  a  potential  threat  to  the  global  nature of the Internet and may exclude some constituencies from using the latest  most robust security technologies.
Among the areas in standardisation that require  further development, the following gaps stand out:  •  The dearth of global cyber security standards strategy that can address   current priorities, e.g., in the infrastructure area;  •  The absence of faster and more efficient processes and greater directional  flexibility in standardisation, to match the dynamic nature of today’s tech- nology environments;  •  A lack of methodologies to address harmonisation of standards policy in   different countries and regions; and  •  No mechanisms to incorporate regional requirements without jeopardis-  ing the global nature of the cyber security standards.
The gaps in the standardisation approaches stem from structural issues, which  have  led  to  fragmentation  of  efforts  to  develop  standards.
Many  organisations,  regionally and internationally, have engaged in developing standards for the same  or similar spaces.
Examples include international (ISO/IEC) and Chinese stand- ards for a Trusted Platform Module; differing regional approaches to Internet gov- ernance and numerous overlapping efforts focusing on IoT standardisation in such  organisations as IEEE, ISO/IEC, or ETSI.
An ontology that is proposed here can  have a unifying influence on both technical and governance standards, allowing the  stakeholders to address cross-cutting issues in standardisation for cyber security  instead of treating these issues in isolation for each context.
4.3 Absence of a Common Vocabulary and Reasoning Framework The dynamic evolution of cyberspace and its global nature require multidisciplinary  study in a process that can support ideation, harmonisation, deployment, adoption, and  maintenance of cyber security technologies and policies in a multi-stakeholder setting.
Policy  and  technology  communities,  government,  and  industry  use  different  paradigms to address shared concerns.
National security commu- nities,  energy  and  finance  sectors,  high-tech  industry,  and  other  key  players  use  different frameworks to address similar security issues.
While policy researchers  and policy-makers look at the cyber security landscape from a strategic perspective  based on general philosophy of the subject, engineers tend to focus on technology  considerations and are frequently unaware of the impact national or international  regulations and geopolitical concerns could have on their work.
Technologists have   Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  237  different work cycles and objectives, and use different language to policy researchers  and policy-makers to describe similar issues.
In  order  to  overcome  cultural  and  knowledge  gaps  between  policy  research- ers, regulators and the technical community, a common framework and common  vocabulary need to be developed.
The lack of this shared context is a major stum- bling block leading to the fragmentation of the work of different communities of  research and practice.
Towards a Shared Context:   Connecting Principles and Norms  Analysis of literature on different aspects of cyber security furnished us with a list of  multi-disciplinary fundamental concepts and principles for the integrated analysis  of cyber security issues.
These elements could serve as a foundation for an ontology  to support more efficient multi-stakeholder dialogues in policy, technology, stan- dardisation, and other areas, and for studying cyber security as a multi-disciplinary  scientific subject, incorporating societal, technology, and policy contexts.
The  lack  of  a  provable  ontology-based  connection  between  high  level  princi- ples and recommendations, technical feasibility of proposals, pace of innovation,  efficiency, and enforceability plays a role in complicating negotiations on complex  issues, such as the new Data Protection and Network and Information Security reg- ulations in the European Union.
The complexity of the issues requires unrealistic  knowledge of the broader context from all the participants.
Availability of a broadly  applicable ‘dialogue ontology’ would allow industry to demonstrate how technical  norms and best practices support high-level principles and recommendations.
Such  tools would also help illustrate technology constraints in proposed approaches and  find remedies to eliminate contradictions.
An ontology would help reduce ambigu- ity by establishing definitions and relationships between concepts and permitting  the stakeholders to reason about consequences of the proposed regulations or the  requirements of the current technology solutions and processes, such as interna- tional data flows.
Most importantly, an ontology linking high-level principles and  concrete technical or process norms and best practices would be instrumental in  outlining a clearer direction towards the implementation of accepted policy pro- posals.
238   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  The use of key concepts as the highest level of the ontology can speed up its  development and shorten the discussions associated with the structure of the ontol- ogy.
An  ontology  will  help  avoid  over-simplification  of  cyber  security  principles  and provide a framework to incorporate norms and best practices, linked with the  principles in a predictable fashion.
In order to create the common context for in-depth reasoning in support mul- ti-stakeholder  discussions,  we  need  to  link  abstract  ideas  and  concrete  actiona- ble concepts, account for dynamisms and rapid evolution of cyberspace, address  governments’ concerns and users’ requirements, and understand the implications  created  by  the  technology  space.
From the technology point of view, cyberspace is rooted in shared global dig- ital  infrastructure  (GDI)  and  includes  a  variety  of  technology  domains  that  can  form a large number of dynamic contexts.
Among these contexts, we can identify  smart grid, connected transportation and energy, online education, social networks,  organisational  and  government  environment,  as  well  as  broader  foundations  of  these  contexts,  such  as  ‘cloud’  or  the  ‘Internet  of  things’.
The  environment  com- prises multiple interconnected technology components such as networks, devices,  and data, and also possesses user interfaces and, in some case, physical subsystems.
The technology space has a number of important characteristics that have strong  impact on the development of policies and technical norms.
They include intrinsic  complexity, interoperability, ubiquitous connectivity, and intermingling of diverse  contexts, such as cyber and physical.
These characteristics need to be taken into  consideration in every policy and technology strategy initiative.
The technology space brings significant societal benefits, but its continued suc- cess depends on the acceptance of innovation by the society.
It has been an economic  driver and engine of innovation since its emergence, and has acquired an enormous  user base, with 40% of the global population connected, providing access to edu- cation, information, and entertainment, supporting consumer and work environ- ments, and underlying every element of critical infrastructure.
The  technology  environment  is  based  on  fundamental  characteristics  linking  the technology environment with the policy space and providing a foundation for  the development of industry norms and best practices for cyberspace.
Because of  the  complexity  of  the  environment,  cyber  security  risks  are  multi-faceted,  com- prising the adjacent domains of security, privacy, safety, reliability, and resilience.
These risk domains can be addressed through private-public collaboration, inter- national cooperation, national coordination, and multi-stakeholder efforts, the key   Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  239  Policy Principles and Activities: • Enhanced internal government cooperation • International cooperation • Public-private & multi-stakeholder cooperation • Flexibility • Multi-domain risk models • Ability to address national security and citizens’    concerns  • Basis in fundamental democracy values • Accountability • Development and harmonisation of appropriate    legal frameworks, e.g., for fighting cyber crime  • Self-regulation  Technology Characteristics: • Intrinsic complexity • Universal connectivity • Shared infrastructure • Global interoperability • Openness • Reliance on open standards • Rapid evolution and adaptability • Rapid innovation  Societal Benefits: • Strong and broad economic impact • Increase in productivity • Universal and globally diverse user base • Rapid evolution of usage models • Broad benefits for access to education,   training, general information  • Broad adoption of new communication   models and paradigms  Figure 1.
240   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  approaches shared by cyber security strategies of multiple countries such as Infor- mation Sharing and Analysis Centre (ISAC) efforts.
Policies necessary to support the rapid development of the technology space  and the societal benefits it fosters have to be based on the integrated character- istics of the cyber environments, and the attributes and principles upon which  these  characteristics  are  built.
They  need  to  include  a  well-defined  connection  between technology norms and best practices, and high-level policy principles.
Such a connection is necessary in order to define policies and regulations in a way  that makes them compatible with the technology environment.
The meaning of  key principles such as support for privacy or transparency needs to be reinforced  by the link with technical and process best practices that is necessary to opera- tionalise these concepts.
A rich ontology linking principles with norms and best  practices can help in maintaining a unified, but actionable model of cyberspace  and in forming objective links between the layer of principles and the layer of  norms and best practices.
Conclusions  The international harmonisation of cyber security strategies and visions has not yet  been achieved, but the analysis of diverse literature on cyber security and cyber- space shows a degree of coherence for high-level concepts and displays evidence  of commonality in concepts, principles, and attributes describing various aspects  of policy, technology space, and societal impacts of cyberspace.
This commonality  provides a reservoir of fundamental concepts and principles that can help industry,  government, academia, and others to develop an in-depth view of cyberspace.
These common concepts and principles covering technology, policy, and societal  issues can serve as a foundation of a shared approach to cyber security devised as  an ontology.
The ontology could connect high-level principles developed by policy  efforts and best practices designed by industry experts.
It could be instrumental in  creating a common context to support multi-stakeholder interactions, could help to  model and predict the rapid pace of chance in cyberspace and could enable a mul- ti-disciplinary scientific view of cyber security.
Although we did not build a prototype ontology to support the ontology pro- posal in this paper, such an ontology could be quickly developed based on the top- level concepts we proposed and with the use of common ontology tools such as  Protégé43 and based on the methodology described here.
The development of such  an ontology is a worthy topic for a multi-disciplinary community effort.
Key Concepts in Cyber Security: Towards a Common Policy and Technology Context for Cyber Security Norms  241  Industry has developed a set of best practices and norms in cyber security, such  as technology and governance standards, best practices for privacy and data pro- tection,  and  secure  technology  development.
We believe that an ontology permitting  diverse stakeholders to reason about the complex environment can provide tools  leading to greater mutual understanding and, as a result, to greater progress in cyber  security initiatives.
242   International Cyber Norms: Legal, Policy & Industry Perspectives  NERC Cyber Security Standards  NERC Cyber Security Standards   SANS January, 2008  Stan Johnson Manager of Situation Awareness   and Infrastructure Security  Stan.johnson@NERC.net 609-452-8060  Agenda Agenda  (cid:131) History and Status of NERC Cyber Security Standards (cid:131) Applicable Entities (cid:131) Definitions (cid:131) High Level Overview of Standards Requirements (cid:131) Implementation Plans (cid:131) Implementation Schedule  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  2  Brief History of NERC Cyber Security Standards Brief History of NERC Cyber Security Standards  (cid:131) NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Advisory Group (CIPAG)   response to FERC request (5/9/02 to 7/31/02) •  “Appendix G” of the FERC SMD NOPR  (cid:131) NERC Urgent Action (UA) 1200 Standard  •  Temporary standard currently in place (approved 8/13/04) •  Focus on Control Center •  Authorized until August 2006  (cid:131) NERC CIP Standards (formerly NERC 1300)   •  Recently Approved by Industry & NERC Board of Trustees •  Permanent replacement •  NERC 1200 & Substation & Power Plant  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  3  Drafting Process Drafting Process  (cid:131) Standards Authorization Request:  •  Started on August 21, 2003 •  2 drafts with industry comments  (cid:131) 95 pages of comments and responses   (cid:131) Standard:  •  Started on June 8, 2004 •  3 drafts with industry comments  (cid:131) 2580 pages of comments and responses  •  Ballot Version  (cid:131) 104 pages of comments and responses  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  4  Current Status Current Status  (cid:131) Approved by industry:   •  Second Ballot complete March 24, 2006 •  88.82% Approval by industry  (cid:131) Approved by NERC Board of Trustees on May 2, 2006  •  “Effective Implementation” June 1, 2006  (cid:131) Implementation Schedule starts  (cid:131) Submitted to FERC on August 28, 2006  •  Waiting for FERC action (Docket RM06-22)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  5  Current Status Current Status  (cid:131) Staff Assessment of CIP-002 through CIP-009  •  Issued December 12, 2006 •  Responses filed February 12, 2007  (cid:131) FERC Final Rule  •  NOPR issued on July 20, 2007 •  Industry Comment filed by October 5, 2007 •  Final Rule Issued sometime “early” 2008  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  6  Future Status Future Status  (cid:131) Final Rule will (likely) contain directed changes to   standards •  Clarify Requirements / Remove ambiguity •  Include “implied” requirements •  Some controversial issues   (cid:131) Final Rule cannot change the standards language  •  Changes must go through Standards Development   Process  •  Changes will therefore have their own implementation   plan and schedule  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  7  Definitions Definitions  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  8  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Critical Assets:  •  Facilities, systems, and equipment which, if destroyed,   degraded, or otherwise rendered unavailable, would  affect the reliability or operability of the Bulk Electric  System.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  9  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Cyber Assets:  •  Programmable electronic devices and communication   networks including hardware, software, and data.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  10  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Critical Cyber Assets:  •  Cyber Assets essential to the reliable operation of   Critical Assets.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  11  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Bulk Electric System:  •  As defined by the Regional Reliability Organization, the   electrical generation resources, transmission lines,  interconnections with neighboring systems, and  associated equipment, generally operated at voltages  of 100 kV or higher.
Radial transmission facilities  serving only load with one transmission source are  generally not included in this definition.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  12  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Adverse Reliability Impact:  •  The impact of an event that results in frequency-related  instability; unplanned tripping of load or generation; or  uncontrolled separation or cascading outages that  affects a widespread area of the Interconnection.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  13  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Technical Feasibility:  •  refers only to engineering possibility and is expected to be a  “can/cannot” determination in every circumstance.
The  Responsible Entity is not required to replace any equipment  in order to achieve compliance with the Cyber Security  Standards.
When existing equipment is replaced, however,  the Responsible Entity is expected to use reasonable  business judgment to evaluate the need to upgrade the  equipment so that the new equipment can perform a  particular specified technical function in order to meet the  requirements of these standards.
(from the FAQ)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  14  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Reasonable Business Judgment:  •  The phrase is in NERC Standards CIP-002 through   CIP-009 to reflect — and to inform — any  regulatory body or ultimate judicial arbiter of  disputes regarding interpretation of these  Standards — that Responsible Entities have a  significant degree of flexibility in implementing  these Standards.
(from the FAQ)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  15  Definitions Definitions  (cid:131) Significant Adverse Impact:  •  With due regard for the maximum operating capability of the affected   system, one or more of the following conditions arising from faults  or disturbances, shall be deemed as having significant adverse  impact:  (cid:131) System instability; (cid:131) Unacceptable system dynamic response or equipment tripping’ (cid:131) Voltage limits in violation of applicable emergency limits;  (cid:131) Loadings on transmission facilities in violation of applicable emergency   limits;  (cid:131) Unacceptable loss of load.
(IEEE C37.100-1981)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  16  Applicable Entities Applicable Entities  (cid:131) Reliability Coordinator (cid:131) Balancing Authority (cid:131) Interchange Authority (cid:131) Transmission Service   Provider  (cid:131) Transmission Owner (cid:131) Transmission Operator  (cid:131) Generator Owner (cid:131) Generator Operator (cid:131) Load Serving Entity (cid:131) NERC Office * (cid:131) Regional Reliability   Organization *  *  Not part of NERC Functional   Model  See http://www.nerc.com/~filez/functionalmodel.html  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  17  Not Applicable Not Applicable  (cid:131) “Facilities regulated by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory   Commission or the Canadian Nuclear Safety  Commission”  (cid:131) Communications networks between discrete   Electronic Security Perimeters  (cid:131) Entities with no “Critical Cyber Assets” determined   after complying with NERC Standard CIP-002 •  Must only annually comply with Standard CIP-002  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  18  General Concept General Concept  (cid:131) Applying IT “thought concepts” to control network environment  •  Policy & Procedure •  Access control •  Security perimeters •  Auditing •  Change management  (cid:131) Focus on Bulk Electric System “Critical Assets” (cid:131) Focus on “Critical Cyber Assets” (cid:131) Focus on “routable protocol” communications (cid:131) Process and documentation centric  •  Including annual reviews  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  19  NERC CIP Standards NERC CIP Standards  (cid:131) CIP-002 – Critical Cyber Assets (cid:131) CIP-003 – Security Management Controls (cid:131) CIP-004 – Personnel and Training (cid:131) CIP-005 – Electronic Security (cid:131) CIP-006 – Physical Security (cid:131) CIP-007 – Systems Security Management (cid:131) CIP-008 – Incident Reporting & Response Management (cid:131) CIP-009 – Recovery Plans  (cid:131) Implementation Plan  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  20  CIPCIP--002   002 –– Critical Cyber Assets Critical Cyber Assets  (cid:131) Derive list of Critical Assets  •  Risk-based approach •  Electrically critical for reliable BES operations  (cid:131) Derive list of Critical Cyber Assets  •  “Essential to the reliable operations” of Critical Assets •  Considerations for communications characteristics  (cid:131) Senior Management approval  •  Annual review •  May determine null set of Critical Cyber Assets  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  21  RiskRisk--Based Methodology Based Methodology  (cid:131)  Risk to Bulk Electric System – therefore an Impact Analysis •  Must “consider”:  (cid:131) Control centers and backup control centers performing the   functions of the entities listed in the Applicability section of this  standard.
(cid:131) Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including blackstart generators and substations in the electrical path of  transmission lines used for initial system restoration.
(cid:131) Systems and facilities critical to automatic load shedding under a   common control system capable of shedding 300 MW or more.
(cid:131) Any additional assets that support the reliable operation of the  Bulk Electric System that the Responsible Entity deems  appropriate to include in its assessment.
NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  22  Critical Cyber Assets Critical Cyber Assets  Bulk  Electric  System  Assets  Critical  Assets  Critical  Cyber Assets  Electric  System  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  23  CIPCIP--003   003 –– Security Management Controls Security Management Controls  (cid:131) Documented Cyber Security Policy  •  “control system specific”  (cid:131) Senior Management responsibility (cid:131) Exception process defined (cid:131) Information classification & protection program (cid:131) Access control program (cid:131) Change control & configuration management program  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  24  CIPCIP--004   004 –– Personnel and Training Personnel and Training  (cid:131) Awareness  •  Continual, informal, ongoing  (cid:131) Training  •  Annual, formal, attendance records  (cid:131) Personal Risk Assessment  •  a.k.a Background Checks •  Management observation   (cid:131) Access management  •  Approvals, records retention, termination •  Escorted access  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  25  CIPCIP--005   005 –– Electronic Security Electronic Security  (cid:131) Electronic Security Perimeter identification  •  Contains “all” Critical Cyber Assets •  May have multiple Electronic Security Perimeters •  May contain non-critical cyber assets •  Access point identification & protection  (cid:131) Electronic access controls •  Access point protection  (cid:131) Electronic access monitoring  •  Review access logs  (cid:131) Cyber vulnerability assessment (of perimeter)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  26  Electronic Security Perimeter Electronic Security Perimeter  Network of  Critical Cyber  Assets  Network of Critical Cyber  Assets may contain Non-  Critical Assets  Network of Non-  Critical Cyber  Assets  Serial RTU  Communication  RTU  Another Network  of Critical Cyber  Assets  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  27  CIPCIP--006   006 –– Physical Security Physical Security  (cid:131) Physical Security Plan with identified Physical Security   Boundary •  Must contain all Critical Cyber Assets •  May have multiple Physical Security Perimeters  (cid:131) Physical access controls •  e.g., electronic card key  (cid:131) Physical access monitoring  •  e.g., CCTV  (cid:131) Physical access logging  •  e.g., card access log  (cid:131) Access log retention and review  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  28  CIPCIP--007   007 –– Systems Security Management Systems Security Management  (cid:131) Test Procedures for new systems and significant changes (cid:131) Disable unused & unneeded ports and services (cid:131) Security patch management (cid:131) Malicious software prevention (cid:131) Account management (cid:131) Security event & status monitoring (cid:131) Disposal or redeployment of Cyber Assets (cid:131) Cyber vulnerability assessment (of Cyber Assets)  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  29  CIPCIP--008   008 –– Incident Reporting &  Incident Reporting &   Response Management Response Management  (cid:131) Documented Cyber Security Incident Response Plan •  Refer to NERC / ES-ISAC “Indications Analysis &   Warning” (IAW) procedures  •  Currently under review by CIPC •  Annual exercise of plan  (cid:131) Incident documentation  •  Keep documentation relating to incidents, including  logs, surveillance, investigations, recovery, reports,  etc.
•  Special care if law enforcement and prosecution will be   involved  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  30  CIPCIP--009   009 –– Recovery Plans Recovery Plans  (cid:131) Recovery plan documentation  •  For varying duration and severity •  Defined roles and responsibilities  (cid:131) Annual exercise of plans (cid:131) Update plans to reflect environment changes (cid:131) Backup, restore and secure storage of information (cid:131) Testing backup media  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  31  Implementation Plan Implementation Plan  (cid:131) Phased Plan (cid:131) 4 (really 31⁄2) “levels” of compliance:  •  “BW” – Begin Work  (cid:131) Entity has a plan to address requirements  •  “SC” – Substantially Compliant  (cid:131) Entity is implementing its plan  •  “C” – Compliant   (cid:131) Entity has completed technical work, but does not   have a full year of required logs  •  “AC” – Auditably Compliant  (cid:131) Entity meets full requirements of standard – with all   logs and records  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  32  Implementation Plan Implementation Plan  (cid:131)  Four separate compliance schedule tables: 1)  Balancing Authorities and Transmission Operators that  were required to self-certify compliance to UA1200, and  Reliability Coordinators  2)  Transmission Operators and Balancing Authorities that  were not required to self-certify compliance to UA1200,  along with Transmission Providers, and the Offices of  NERC and the Regional Reliability Organizations  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  33  Implementation Plan Implementation Plan  3)  All entities required to register to the Functional  Model during calendar year 2006 (pursuant to the  NERC / ERO filing activities).
(cid:131) Entities that currently do not “exist”  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  34  Implementation Plan Implementation Plan  (cid:131) Implementation Plan tables specified by CIP Standard and   individual requirement  (cid:131) 4 years for all currently (2006) registered entities to reach   “Auditable Compliant” (2007 to 2010) •  Maximum of 3 years to complete work and achieve   “Compliant” (2009)  •  Some requirements in Table 1 reach “Compliant” in 2008  NERC Cyber Security Standards   Overview  35