Data protection  A practical guide to  IT security Ideal for the small business  Under the Data Protection Act, you have  responsibilities to protect the personal information  that you and your staff collect and use.
This includes  a requirement to have appropriate security to prevent  it being accidentally or deliberately compromised.
The reputation of your business could  also be damaged if inadequate security contributes to  high profile incidents of data loss or theft.
This guide gives advice for small businesses on how  to keep IT systems safe and secure.
A practical guide to IT security  3  10 practical ways to keep your   IT systems safe and secure  Keeping your IT systems safe and secure can be a  complex task and does require time, resource and  specialist knowledge.
If you have personal data within  your IT system you need to recognise that it may be at  risk and take appropriate technical measures to secure  it.
The measures you put in place should fit the needs  of your particular business.
The following practical steps will help you decide how   to manage the security of the personal data you hold.
4  Assess the threats and risks to your business  1  Assess the threats and risks   to your business  Before you can establish what level of security is   right for your business you will need to review the  personal data you hold and assess the risks to that  data.
You should consider all processes involved   that require you to collect, store, use and dispose   of personal data.
Consider how valuable, sensitive or confidential the  information is and what damage or distress could be  caused to individuals if there was a security breach.
With a clear view of the risks you can begin to choose  the security measures that are appropriate for your  needs.
Get in line with Cyber Essentials  5  Get in line with Cyber Essentials  2  What is the problem?
There is no single product that will provide a   complete guarantee of security for your business.
The recommended approach is to use a set of security  controls that complement each other but will require  ongoing support in order to maintain an appropriate  level of security.
The UK Government’s Cyber Essentials Scheme  describes the following five key controls for keeping  information secure.
Obtaining a Cyber Essentials  certificate can provide certain security assurances   and help protect personal data in your IT systems.
Boundary firewalls and internet gateways This will be your first line of defence against an  intrusion from the internet.
A well configured firewall  can stop breaches happening before they penetrate  deep into your network.
An internet gateway can  prevent users within your organisation accessing  websites or other online services that present a   threat or that you do not trust.
6  Get in line with Cyber Essentials  2  Secure configuration Almost all hardware and software will require some  level of set-up and configuration in order to provide the  most effective protection.
You should remove unused  software and services from your devices to reduce  the number of potential vulnerabilities.
Older versions  of some widespread software have well documented  security vulnerabilities.
Access control Restrict access to your system to users and sources you  trust.
A brute force password attack is a common method of  attack, perhaps even by casual users trying to access  your Wi-Fi so you need to enforce strong passwords,  limit the number of failed login attempts and enforce  regular password changes.
Passwords or other access should be cancelled  immediately if a staff member leaves the organisation  or is absent for long periods.
Get in line with Cyber Essentials  7  2  Malware protection You should have anti-virus or anti-malware products  regularly scanning your network to prevent or detect  threats.
Patch management and software updates Computer equipment and software need regular  maintenance to keep it running smoothly and to fix   any security vulnerabilities.
Security software such as  anti-virus and anti-malware needs regular updates in  order to continue to provide adequate protection.
8  Secure your data on the move and in the office  3  Secure your data on the move and   in the office  What is the problem?
The physical security of equipment is important to  consider as devices containing personal data could be  stolen in a break-in or lost whilst away from the office.
You can also prevent or limit the severity of data  breaches by separating or limiting access between your  network components.
For example, if you can confine  the processing of personal data to a specific section of  your network you may be able to reduce the scope of  the required security measures.
You also need to ensure that the same level of security  is applied to personal data on devices being used away  from the office.
Many data breaches arise from the  theft or loss of a device (eg laptop, mobile phone or  USB drive) but you should also consider the security  surrounding any data you send by email or post.
Allowing untrusted devices to connect to your network  or using work devices on untrusted networks outside  your office can also put personal data at risk.
You can increase the physical security of your office  including storing your servers in a separate room with  added protection.
Back-up devices, CDs and USBs  should not be left unattended and should be locked  away when not in use.
You can ensure that personal data is either not on the  device in the first place or that it has been appropriately  secured so that it cannot be accessed in the event   Secure your data on the move and in the office  9  of loss or theft.
Good access control systems and  encryption will help here.
Encryption is a means of ensuring that data can only  be accessed by authorised users.
Typically, a (strong)  password is required to ‘unlock’ the data.
You can find  more information on choosing the right encryption on  our website.
Some mobile devices support a remote disable or   wipe facility.
This allows you to send a signal to a   lost or stolen device to locate it and, if necessary,  securely delete all data.
Your devices will normally   need to be pre-registered to use a service like this.
If you permit employees or other users to connect   their own devices to your network you will be   increasing the range of security risks and these   should also be addressed.
You can find more  information about these risks in the ICO’s guidance   on Bring Your Own Device (BYOD).
10  Secure your data in the cloud  4  Secure your data in the cloud  What is the problem?
There are a wide range of online services,   many incorporated within today’s smartphones   and tablets that require users to transfer data to   remote computing facilities – commonly known as   the cloud.
Processing data in the cloud represents a risk because  the personal data for which you are responsible will  leave your network and be processed in those systems  managed by your cloud provider.
You therefore need   to assess the security measures that the cloud provider  has in place to ensure that they are appropriate.
Make sure you know what data is being stored in the  cloud as modern computing devices, especially those  targeted at consumers, can have cloud backup or   sync services switched on by default.
Consider the use of two factor authentication   especially for remote access to your data in the cloud.
You can find more information about the use of   cloud services in the ICO’s Guidance on the use   of cloud computing.
Malware can also disrupt the availability of access to  your data.
Back-ups should not be stored in a way that makes  them permanently visible to the rest of the network.
Your employees may have a limited knowledge of cyber  security but they could be your final line of defence  against an attack.
Train your staff to  recognise threats such as phishing emails and other  malware or alerting them to the risks involved in  posting information relating to your business activities  on social networks.
You should encourage general security awareness within  your organisation.
A security aware culture is likely to  identify security risks.
You should also keep your knowledge of threats up-to- date by reading security bulletins or newsletters from  organisations relevant to your business.
Cyber criminals or malware can attack your systems  and go unnoticed for a long time.
Check your security software messages, access control  logs and other reporting systems you have in place on a  regular basis.
Make sure you can check what software or services are  running on your network.
Some organisations do not have adequate levels of  protection because they are not correctly using the  security they already have, and are not always able to  spot when there is a problem.
Good incident management can reduce  the damage and distress caused to individuals.
Make sure you are compliant with any industry  guidance or other legal requirements.
Document the controls you have in place and identify  where you need to make improvements.
Once any improvements are in place, continue to  monitor the controls and make adjustments   where necessary.
Consider the risks for each type of personal data   you hold and how you would manage a data breach.
If you have data you need to keep for archive purposes  but don’t need to access regularly, move it to a more  secure location.
This will help prevent unauthorised  access.
You might need specialist software  or assistance to do this securely.
Many small businesses outsource some or all of their   IT requirements to a third party.
You should be satisfied  that they are treating your data with at least the same  level of security as you would.
Ask for a security audit of the systems containing your  data.
Review copies of the security assessments of your   IT provider.
They must be   in writing and must require your contractor to act only  on your instructions and comply with certain obligations  of the DPA Don’t overlook asset disposal – if you use a contractor  to erase data and dispose of or recycle your IT  equipment, make sure they do it adequately.
Further reading  17  Further reading  As illustrated by the range of topics covered in this  guide, keeping an IT network safe and secure can be  a complex task and does require time, resource and  specialist knowledge.
Get Safe Online (www.getsafeonline.org)   A joint initiative between the government,   law enforcement, leading businesses and the public  sector to provide computer users and small businesses  with free, independent, user-friendly advice that will  allow them to use the internet  Cyber Street (www.cyberstreetwise.com)  Cyber Street is a cross-government campaign,   funded by the National Cyber Security Programme,   and delivered in partnership with the private and  voluntary sectors.
The campaign is led by the Home  Office, working closely with the Department for  Business, Innovation and Skills and the Cabinet Office.
Cyber Essentials (www.gov.uk/government/ publications/cyber-essentials-scheme-overview)  The Cyber Essentials scheme provides businesses  small and large with clarity on good basic cyber  security practice.
By focusing on basic cyber hygiene,  your company will be better protected from the most  common cyber threats.
Cyber Essentials is mandatory  for central government contracts advertised after   1 October 2014 that involve handling personal  information and providing certain ICT products  and services.
It has been developed as part of the  UK’s National Cyber Security Programme in close  consultation with industry.
18  Further reading  10 Steps to Cyber Security (https://www.gov.uk/ government/publications/cyber-risk-management-a- board-level-responsibility)   The 10 Steps define and communicate an Information  Risk Management Regime which can provide protection  against cyber attacks.
Action Fraud (www.actionfraud.police.uk)   Action Fraud is the UK’s national reporting centre for  victims of fraud or financially motivated internet crime.
If you would like to contact us please call 0303 123 1113  www.ico.org.uk  Information Commissioner’s Office,  Wycliffe House, Water Lane,  Wilmslow, Cheshire, SK9 5AF   6 January 2016  DOT HS 812 075        October 2014   A Summary of Cybersecurity  Best Practices  DISCLAIMER  This publication is distributed by the U.S. Department of Transportation, National  Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in the interest of information exchange.
A summary of   cybersecurity best practices.
Government Accession No.
Title and Subtitle  A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices            7.
Performing Organization Name and Address    Volpe National Transportation Systems Center  Security and Emergency Management Division  55 Broad Street  Cambridge, MA    3.
Performing Organization    8.
Performing Organization    10.
Work Unit No.
Sponsoring Agency Name and Address  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  Office of Program Development and Delivery    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE.
Abstract      This report contains the results and analysis of a review of best practices and observations in the  field of cybersecurity involving electronic control systems across a variety of industry segments  where the safety-of-life is concerned.
This publication is part of a series of reports that describe our initial work under the goal of  facilitating cybersecurity best practices in the automotive industry (Goals 1 and 2).
The  information presented herein increase the collective knowledge base in automotive cybersecurity;  help identify potential knowledge gaps; help describe the risk and threat environments; and help  support follow-on tasks that could be used to establish security guidelines.
Key Words  Cybersecurity, NIST, NHTSA, Guidelines, Risk  Management, Baseline, Use cases, Best  Practices   18.
Distribution Statement  Document is available to the public from the  National Technical Information Service  www.ntis.gov   19.
Security Classif.
Security Classif.
of Pages  40   Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72)   Reproduction of completed page authorized   22         i         Foreword      utomotive Cybersecurity Re ystems engineering approach,   search Program  the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration   NHTSA’s A Based on a s established five research goals to address cybersecurity issues associated with the secure  operation of motor vehicles equipped with advanced electronic control systems.
Build a knowledge base to establish comprehensive research plans for automotive   cybersecurity and develop enabling tools for applied research in this area;   2.
Facilitate the implementation of effective, industry-based best practices and voluntary   standards for cybersecurity and cybersecurity information-sharing forums;   3.
Foster the development of new system solutions for automotive cybersecurity;  4.
Research the feasibility of developing minimum performance requirements for   automotive cybersecurity; and   5.
Gather foundational research data and facts to inform potential future Federal policy and   regulatory decision activities.
This report  This report contains the results and analysis of a review of best practices and observations in the  field of cybersecurity involving electronic control systems across a variety of industry segments.
This research provides relevant benchmarks that are informative to making strategic decisions  for NHTSA’s research program.
This publication is part of a series of reports that describe our initial work under the goal of  facilitating cybersecurity best practices in the automotive industry (Goals 1 and 2).
The  information presented herein increase the collective knowledge base in automotive  cybersecurity; help identify potential knowledge gaps; help describe the risk and threat  environments; and help support follow-on tasks that could be used to establish security  guidelines.
ii         Table of Contents   Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................. 1  1  Background ....................................................................................................................................... 1  1.1  Cybersecurity Research Methodology .............................................................................................. 1  1.2  Findings............................................................................................................................................. 2  1.3  Study Findings ...................................................................................................................................... 4  2  Background ....................................................................................................................................... 4  2.1  Cybersecurity Research Methodology .............................................................................................. 4  2.2  Industries Studied .......................................................................................................................... 4  2.2.1  Findings............................................................................................................................................. 6  2.3  Information Technology and Telecommunications ...................................................................... 6  2.3.1  Aviation......................................................................................................................................... 9  2.3.2  Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST ........................................................................... 12  2.3.3  2.3.4  Financial Payments ..................................................................................................................... 18  2.3.5  Medical Devices .......................................................................................................................... 22  Automotive ................................................................................................................................. 25  2.3.6  2.4  Request for Information .................................................................................................................. 27  Challenges and Issues ..................................................................................................................... 28  2.5  Observations ................................................................................................................................... 28  2.6  2.7  References ....................................................................................................................................... 34     iii            1  Executive Summary  1.1 Background  The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration performed a review of cybersecurity best practices  and lessons learned in the area of safety-critical electronic control systems.
This review was across a  variety of industries in which electronic control systems are used in applications where breaches in  cybersecurity could impinge on critical control functions and therefore could jeopardize safety of life.
1.2 Cybersecurity Research Methodology  This research targeted cybersecurity best practices used in non-transportation industries and in other  transportation modes.
It was important to summarize from the experience (both successes and failures) of  government and private sector professionals who have been developing cybersecurity strategies, policies,  and approaches.
By looking outside the automobile industry, and indeed outside the transportation  industry itself, the goal was to understand the potential key elements of a cybersecurity program.
The focus of the research was to examine industries with commonalities to the auto industry with respect  to cybersecurity, and to study the state of these industries’ efforts to understand their cybersecurity issues  and how they are improving their cybersecurity posture.
The specific objectives were to bring forward  key observations to help NHTSA craft a strategic roadmap for cybersecurity.
Government and industries studied were:   Information technology and telecommunications,  Industrial control systems and energy,   •  •  •  Medical devices,  •  Aviation,  •  Financial payments, and  •  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Literature study of relevant cybersecurity research, guidelines, best practices, and standards in   target industries;   2.
Issuance of a Request for Information (RFI) to obtain informed views on the perceived needs,   prevailing practices, and lessons learned concerning the cybersecurity and safety of safety-critical  electronic control systems used in various modes of transportation and other industry sectors; and   3.
1        1.3 Findings  The information technology (IT) industry is a good model for cybersecurity protection based on its  experience, exposure to, and addressing of issues.
The telecommunications industry helped accelerate the  advancement of hacking activities and exposing key systems (hardware and software) by advancing  networking and enabling the development of the Internet.
The IT security industry developed best practices over the years that include the basic tenet that  information security is a life-cycle process.
While all the elements of a Life-Cycle Risk Management Program are important, perhaps the most vital  element of any cybersecurity program is to perform risk assessments on all systems, sub-systems, and  devices to determine what vulnerabilities are present.
A very effective  methodology for risk assessment is the development of use case scenarios.
Proper cybersecurity threat  modeling can help create a better and more effective risk mitigation plan through:   •  Emphasis on asset management and risk reduction before acquisition of information and security   technologies;   •  Selection of correct countermeasures; and   •   Justification of investments in security, compliance and risk management.
Individual industries examine the best practices of this life-cycle approach and create industry-specific  security guidelines that address the need for robust risk management that includes the assessment, design,  implementation, and operation phases of critical systems.
The research of the various industries studied has yielded some example best practices, shown in the  following table.
Key Observation   Cybersecurity is a life-cycle process that includes elements of assessment,  design, implementation, and operations as well as an effective testing and  certification program  The aviation industry has many parallels to the automotive industry in the  area of cybersecurity  Strong leadership from the Federal Government could help the development  of industry-specific cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices  Ongoing shared learning with other Federal Government agencies is  beneficial  Use of the NIST cybersecurity standards as a baseline is a way to accelerate  development of industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines  International cybersecurity efforts are a key source of information  Consider developing a cybersecurity simulator.
It could facilitate  identification of vulnerabilities and risk mitigation strategies and can be  used for collaborative learning (government, academia, private sector,   2   Source   All   FAA   FAA   FAA, NRC, NIST   FAA, NIST, NRC,  Automotive  Automotive, Aviation  FAA     international)  Cybersecurity standards for the entire supply chain are important   Foster industry cybersecurity groups for exchange of cybersecurity  information  Use professional capacity building to address develop cybersecurity skillsets  system designers and engineers  Connected vehicle security should be end-to-end; vehicles, infrastructure,  and V2X communication should all be secure.
Automotive, Financial  Payments  IT, DHS, NIST   All    Aviation, Automotive  (EVITA)   Mapping these key observations to the process of a lifecycle information security program yields the  stages in which each falls.
3         2  Study Findings  2.1 Background  NHTSA performed a review of cybersecurity best practices and lessons learned in the area of safety- critical electronic control systems.
This review was across a variety of industries in which electronic  control systems are used in applications where breaches in cybersecurity could impinge on critical control  functions and therefore could jeopardize safety of life.
2.2 Cybersecurity Research Methodology  The research targeted cybersecurity best practices used in non-transportation industries and in other  transportation modes.
It was important to summarize from the experience (both successes and failures) of  government and private sector professionals who have been developing cybersecurity strategies, policies,  and approaches.
By looking outside the automobile industry, and outside the transportation industry itself,  the goal is to understand the potential key elements of a cybersecurity program.
The focus of the research was to examine industries with commonalities to the auto industry with respect  to cybersecurity, and to study the state of these industries’ efforts understanding their cybersecurity issues  and how they are improving their cybersecurity posture.
Industries for the study were determined by examining, at a high level, whether industries have similar  concerns, risks, and constraints to that of the automobile industry; either similarity of the industry’s use  case or common issues or problem areas with respect to cybersecurity.
The first step entailed a literature study of relevant  cybersecurity research, standards, guidelines, and best practices as well as forward-looking examinations  of the growing need for cybersecurity in the use of information technology and wireless communications  in cyber-physical (and especially safety-critical) systems.
Step two was the issuance of a Request For Information (RFI) to obtain informed views on the perceived  needs, prevailing practices, and lessons learned concerning the cybersecurity and safety of safety-critical  electronic control systems used in various modes of transportation and other industry sectors.i   This RFI yielded 13 responses from a cross section of private sector companies, industry consortia, and  standards development organizations.
The SMEs were chosen by  examining the findings of the literature study and RFI, as well as through interactions with members of  industry.
2.2.1 Industries Studied   Table 1 summarizes the industries studied and the rationale for their inclusion.
4   Table 1: Industries Studied and Why      Why Studied  The IT industry has developed some of the more current best practices for  addressing cybersecurity.
IT Systems (and now cyber-physical systems, including control systems on  automobiles) are connected through various wired and wireless communications  protocols.
The Internet, cloud computing, etc.
has led to:   Increased threat vectors of the hacking community, and   •  •  More sophisticated hacking (online shared tools and hacking social   networks, etc.).
FAA has been working on security issues for several years.
Operational systems have been migrated using IT and mesh communications1 but  security is only now being addressed.
Infrastructure (networks/devices) often located in public spaces   •  •  Department of Homeland Security (ICS) and Federal Energy Regulatory  Commission/Nuclear Regulatory Commission (energy sector) have been  addressing the security issue for some time   NIST is a Federal Government Standards Development Organization.
Federal Information Processing Publication 199 Standards for Security  Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems (FIPS 199) and  NIST Special Publication 800 Series provide the baseline for Federal  cybersecurity best practices, as well as a foundation for industry-specific security  guidelines.
in the financial  payments industry drives requirements to secure networks outside of the card  issuers’ purview.
This includes the safety of life devices and systems.
The industry requires a high  degree of protecting individual privacy.
Cybersecurity work is beginning in the U.S. marketplace.
That work is  leveraging international work.
SAE International created the Vehicle Electrical  System Security Committee.
This group is gaining insight into the state of the  industry with respect to cybersecurity.
Industry Studied  Information  Technology  Telecommunications   Aviation   Industrial Control  Systems and Energy     National Institute of  Standards and  Technology   Financial Payments     Medical Devices    Automobile   These industries were studied using the three-step method discussed above.
An initial literature research  gave a general sense of each industry’s cybersecurity issues and the methodologies used to address them.
No industry studied had a “solution” to cybersecurity.
Rather, issues were actively being worked and  methodologies being developed along the lines of what could generically be called the best practices of  cybersecurity.
These best practices are not, as might be assumed, technical fixes to observed  vulnerabilities.
Rather, the foundation of a cybersecurity program entails an iterative cybersecurity  process over the entire life cycle of systems, sub-systems, software applications, or devices/hardware.
1 Mesh Communications is a type of communications network topology where each node in the network must not only capture  and disseminate its own data, but also serve as a relay for other nodes, that is, it must collaborate to propagate the data in the  network.
5        2.3 Findings  2.3.1 Information Technology and Telecommunications  The IT industry is has the most experience with cybersecurity issues.
Rapid  development and evolution of telecommunications fed this exponential growth.
Telecommunications has based the entirety of its industry on the technologies, standards, services, and  infrastructure established by IT.
The telecommunications industry has been and continues to be coupled  with that IT foundation to expand and facilitate services enabling the exchange of digital information.
The  business and technical issues of telecommunication are a very close parallel to the IT industry as a whole.
The key differentiation is that telecommunications is the enabling set of services that enlist IT technology  to provide services to all the industries that we are investigating.
This is an important factor to consider since wireless services are used for services relevant to the  automotive industry such as toll collection systems, automated crash notification (ACN), vehicle-to- vehicle exchanges, and infotainment systems.
This industry is what has enabled all the backroom  operation services to be possible, and has delivered the conveyer of data asset exchange services in use  today - the Internet.
Telecommunications and the Internet have allowed hackers to form online  communities to exchange ideas, tips, and hacking tools with targets being data.
Given these realities, the IT industry developed cybersecurity best practices over the years that include the  basic tenet that Information Security is a life cycle process.
Figure 1 shows the Information Security  Program as an iterative life cycle.
Figure 1: Information Security Life Cycle      6     While all the elements of the Life Cycle Risk Management Program are important, perhaps the most vital  element of any cybersecurity program is to perform risk assessments on all systems, sub-systems, and  devices to determine what vulnerabilities are present.
This process is important for organizations as it is  used to discover and categorize the security issues in their systems.
Risk Assessment  helps create a better and more effective risk mitigation plan because it:      •  Emphasizes the focus on asset management and risk reduction before acquisition of information   and security technologies.
Is instrumental in selecting the right countermeasures often prioritizing monitoring before active  data loss prevention (as an example)  Justifies investments in security, compliance, and risk management    •   •   Detailed breakdowns of the Information Security Lifecycle elements are shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2: Details of the Information Security Life Cycle Process   Assessment Phase  Establishing a Security  Policy   System Security  Evaluation   Iterative Risk  Assessment   Design Phase  System Prioritization   Security Architecture         A security policy includes administrative requirements and procedures in all  the areas detailed below.
Cybersecurity is beginning to be viewed as a need  throughout organizations, not just in the IT area.
Therefore there is a  realization that cybersecurity should be championed not by the chief  information officer, but rather the chief executive officer.
All functional  areas in an organization, from operations to human resources to IT, should  play an active role in developing a robust security policy.
Systems should be examined and evaluated for their security needs using  established standards and best practices throughout their life cycle to  uncover potential vulnerabilities.
A sample standard document is the FIPS  199 Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and  Information Systems.
Risks are measured through evaluation of the probability of the vulnerability  being exploited as well as the severity to the system, organization, public,  etc.
A best practice document in this area for  Federal IT Systems is the NIST SP 800.37 Guide for Applying the Risk  Management Framework to Federal Information Systems: A Security Life  Cycle Approach.
Once the risks have been identified and rated, they must be prioritized  based on the organization’s ability to apply appropriate resources (funding,  technical skill sets, etc.)
Examination of a system’s security architecture is the final piece to the  assessment of system security and the beginning of addressing  vulnerabilities identified in the assessment phase.
7           Table 2: Details of the Information Security Lifecycle Process (Continued)      Implementation Phase  Remediation and  Implementation   Security Test and  Evaluation   Operation Phase  Awareness and  Security Training   Intrusion Detection  and Response   Now that vulnerabilities have been identified, rated, and a security  architecture developed, the findings should be implemented with  appropriate security controls.
Included in the implementation is a process  for identifying the remediation of the fallout from potential exploitations of  vulnerabilities.
The Federal government guideline for developing the  implementation and remediation plan is the NIST SP 800.53B Recommended  Security Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations.
A robust conformance testing and certification plan is vital to ensuring that  appropriate security controls are compliant with security performance  specifications.
Once security controls have been applied and implemented in  field systems, it is vital to continuously monitor the systems to ensure that  any new vulnerabilities are identified and circumvented.
An example of a  best practice identified for this phase is FAA, which uses the Airborne  Network Simulator System (ANSS) to attempt to exploit vulnerabilities in a  controlled environment and evaluate potential consequences; so-called  “white hat” hacking is intended to improve security measures.
Once fielded systems are in operation comes the need for ongoing training  both to raise the awareness of the entire workforce of information security,  but also to train specific users of systems in their appropriate, secure use.
Often shortcuts are taken in the day-to-day operations of systems to save  time and avoid procedures that users may deem “tedious” but are a vital  means to keeping a strong system security posture.
8            2.3.2 Aviation  Developing “eEnabled” Aircraft  About a decade ago, the potential for cybersecurity issues in new commercial aircraft and in the systems  that communicate wirelessly between aircraft, airport ground equipment, and flight control systems began  to emerge.
Aircraft OEMs were developing “eEnabled technologies” that they were increasingly  deploying into aircraft.
The definition of eEnabled is any “device, system or combination of  devices/components and systems that communicate with technologies other than point-to-point including  interfaces between aircraft components and interfaces between aircraft and off-aircraft entities.”  Examples of eEnabled technologies include electronic flight bags (EFBs), WANs, cellular, Wi-Fi –  802.11b/g, and ethernet.
Legacy aircraft (e.g., B737, A320) have limited connections with external networks such as EFBs,  Gatelink, and wireless LANs.
However, eEnabled aircraft (e.g., B787, B747-8, A380, Bombardier C- Series) have many new and integrated external network connections (e.g., software data loading,  broadband 802.11 connections, etc.)
with airlines, airports, aircraft manufacturers, air navigation service  providers, and repair organizations.
The introduction of eEnabled technologies into new commercial  aircraft is leading to unprecedented global connectivity that creates a new environment for the aviation  sector.
Aircraft navigation and communication functions are transitioning from operating as isolated and  independent systems, to being integrated into a networked system that is dependent on exchanging digital  information between the eEnabled aircraft and external networks located on the ground and on other  eEnabled aircraft.
Due to the proliferation of these new connective technologies, it became necessary to re-examine security  and safety of the aircraft to protect it against unwanted cyber intrusion.
It would be essential to include  cybersecurity within the certification criteria and processes.
Additionally, the cybersecurity approach of the new eEnabled aircraft should be coordinated with the  move toward the Next Generation Air Traffic Control (NextGen) system.
NextGen will evolve from a  ground-based system of air traffic control to a satellite-based system of air traffic management which  includes enhanced use of GPS and weather systems, as well as enhanced data networking and the use of  digital communications.
Security architectures and information sharing will be a vital element of this  highly connected system, ensuring all system elements maintain appropriate levels of trust.
9           Standards-Setting Efforts  In 2007, FAA engaged the Volpe Center to research and evaluate the requirements for airborne network  security to ensure aircraft safety.
The study required robust involvement from other government agencies  (e.g., DHS and DoD), aircraft OEMs, suppliers, and academia.
Because the cybersecurity of aircraft  should be an international effort, the government of the United Kingdom was also involved.
Also in 2007, FAA helped lead the development of a standards development group in the Radio Technical  Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA).
This group (SC-216) developed the “Security Assurance and  Assessment Processes for Safety-related Aircraft Systems” (DO-326).
Published in December 2010, this  “process” document is intended to augment current guidance for aircraft certification to handle the  information security threat.
It addresses only aircraft type certification but is intended as the first of a  series of documents on aeronautical systems security that together will address information security for  the overall Aeronautical Information System Security (AISS) of airborne systems with related ground  systems and environment.
FAA has also staffed an internal national cybersecurity team to work on developing a standardized  approach to address the cybersecurity vulnerabilities of aircraft equipment being installed during type  certification, amended type certification, supplemental type certification, and field approval projects  throughout the Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service.
Future work activities by the RTCA SC-216 group include examination and update of the FAA  Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Order to address operational cybersecurity guidance for airline  and maintenance repair organizations for eEnabled aircraft.
Cybersecurity Simulation Laboratory  In order to gain hands-on understanding and experience regarding how the various eEnabled components  were integrated and what cybersecurity vulnerabilities may be present, FAA engaged the Volpe Center  and Wichita State University (WSU) to develop the Airborne Network Security Simulator (ANSS).
The  goals for ANSS are to:     •   Identify potential information security threats in a synthetic environment by simulating next  generation aircraft communications systems;   •  Share knowledge, tools, and methodologies with academia and other interested stakeholders to   extend research value;   •  Act as a coordinating authority for cybersecurity risk mitigation within the international   aerospace & aviation community;   •  Recommend appropriate technical & procedural standards for security risks to aid in the   •   development of regulatory guidelines and policies; and  Influence industry bodies on cybersecurity best practice with respect to specifications,  procedures, and recommendations used by the industry.
10     Through these various activities, FAA has identified the following key areas requiring security controls.
•  Electronic flight bags (EFBs)  •  Gatelink  •  Cellular   •  Field loadable software  •  User modifiable software  •  Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) equipment  •  •  •  Wireless servers/routers   •  Aviation sensors   Integrated modular avionics  Internal/external connectivity             Aircraft Certification Process and Issues  One of the key issues in the cybersecurity challenge for FAA is that, at this time, aircraft are not fully  integrated with all of the eEnabled technologies and systems.
This creates a difficult Type Certification  (TC) and Supplemental Type Certification (STC) problem with respect to cybersecurity.
A different set of challenges may emerge as many of the legacy aircraft may be retrofitted with newer  avionics as required to operate in a NextGen (U.S.) or Single European Sky ATM Research, SESAR  (Europe) operational environment.
Even older legacy aircraft will need to consider the importance of  cybersecurity.
Many scheduled for retrofit with the newer technology are subject to the same  cybersecurity threats.
This also increases complexity to the STC process by requiring a new security  baseline for each aircraft model and subtype configuration.
The challenge will be how to properly mitigate and manage the installation and use of newer IP-enabled  external networks, onto a legacy aircraft that was not originally designed to provide such capabilities.
While the existing backplane has fewer capabilities for an external access to any part of the aircraft,  previously isolated systems were never designed to protect or manage themselves while operating with  some of the newer external access methods (SATCOM, wireless networks, etc.).
eEnabled Aircraft Technology Survey  In 2010, FAA and Volpe Center conducted a survey of aircraft OEMs, supply chain vendors, type  certification inspection (DERs), and government/military organizations.
The goal of the study was to  gather information to be used to aid in future FAA planning related to regulations, directives, standards,  guidance, training, and research regarding aircraft network security.
The survey results showed that the vast majority of respondents had aggressive plans for developing and  adding eEnabled technologies into airframes: 63 percent of organizations planned to include eEnabled  technologies and within three to five years and that number would grow to 83 percent.
The inclusion of  these technologies is a logical business decision for the aircraft manufacturers and the airlines.
The  business rationale includes:   11         1.
Reduced labor cost: for example, aircraft that are IP addressable allow mechanics remote access   to the aircraft to perform maintenance; and   3.
Supplemental Type Certification involving the incorporation of eEnabled technologies on legacy aircraft  as well as the need to type certify new aircraft that are eEnabled will be a major workload for FAA in the  next few years.
FAA workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases;  2.
OEM workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases;  3.
Airline workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases;  4.
Supply chain issues- need to ensure cybersecurity requirements are communicated and met by   sub-tier vendors.
2.3.3 Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST  Connection between Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST research  The ICS and energy sectors have been combined in this study due to the many similarities in the  industries.
In fact, ICS is not so much an industry as a type of system that is present in many industries.
“Industrial Control Systems” is really a generic term that encompasses systems used to control industrial  production, including Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems.
However, the term is  becoming more general and can be applied to systems that control operational activities.
These control  systems form a base for many infrastructures in industries including the energy sector.
NIST was combined with ICS and the energy sector since NIST creates many of the standards, guidelines,  and best practices that are used for security standards for operational systems in each sector.
ICS can be used in the energy sector for controlling generation plant operations as well as to control the  function of the power distribution network.
ICS Research  Over the years, ICS has been increasingly enhanced with information technology hardware and  software as well as increasingly connected via the Internet through a mesh network of wired and  wireless communications.
12        A key standards document used in ICS is the NIST Special Publication 800.82 Guide to  Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security - Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)  systems, Distributed Control Systems (DCS), and other control system configurations such as  Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC).
The Department of Homeland Security’s Control Systems Security Program (CSSP) was created to  examine vulnerabilities of these systems within the Nation’s 18 Critical Infrastructure and Key Resource  (CIKR) Sectors.
The DHS CSSP website, www.us-cert.gov/control_systems/index.html, is a key resource for  background documents, tools, and best practices.
In addition to connecting users with various best  practices such as NIST standards and NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs), the CSSP  connects ICS professionals and organizations with the ICS Cyber Emergency Response Team (CERT).
A  CERT is a key element in any industry cybersecurity program.
The Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University developed the first CERT.
US-CERT  acts as a resource for cybersecurity professionals to highlight cybersecurity incidents and provide support  for incident response and forensic analysis as well as acts as a conduit for topical cybersecurity  information.
US-CERT has a robust warehouse of information products and alerts that are both technical  and non-technical in nature.
While US-CERT has widespread security information covering all IT  security, the ICS CERT tailors its activities to the ICS world.
In addition to informational products and tools, the ICS CSSP provides hands on training- ranging from  half-day awareness training to a one week technical course of study at the Idaho National Laboratory, as  well as on-site resources to work one-on-one with operators to perform assessments of their systems.
DHS CSSP is also active in the support and facilitation of an ICS industry Information Sharing and  Analysis Center (ISAC).
ISACs are extremely valuable, cross-industry organizations that act as  clearinghouses for information on cyber and physical threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions.
They help  members better understand their threats and vulnerabilities and are forums for anonymous submission  regarding specific vulnerabilities and security breaches.
Much more information on ISACs is available  through the National Council of ISACs at www.isaccouncil.org/.
Another key element of ICS support is the ICS Joint Working Group (ICSJWG), which is a cross-industry  group that includes the public and private sectors as well as academia, focused on reducing the risk to the  nation’s industrial control systems through information sharing throughout the 18 CIKRs.
The ICSJWG  facilitates cybersecurity knowledge sharing and provides tools, tips, and other informational products as  well as administers a semi-annual conference to bring security professionals together.
Examining the ICS world beyond the involvement of DHS, there is a building understanding that control  systems are no longer isolated, and therefore are no longer safe from the exploit of vulnerabilities.
The overarching key approaches in the ICS industry are:   13   •  Proactive involvement of the Federal Government through DHS CSSP;  •  Promotion of NIST standards, guidelines, and best practices;  •  The establishment and active use of a CERT (government-sponsored) and an ISAC (industry   •   consortium); and  Industry outreach and training through exhaustive archives of informational products online and  the management of the ICSJWG.
Energy (SmartGrid) Research  The electric power grid is evolving into a “smart grid” because of the demand for a more efficient and  complex system that will allow the participants more control.
These potential vulnerabilities to one of  the United States’ most vital national infrastructures led to the passing of the Energy and Independence  Security Act (EISA) of 2007.
EISA assigns roles and responsibilities for various members of the Federal Government and the electric  utilities industry and created two key organizations.
The first is the Smart Grid Advisory Committee  (SGAC), which is made up of private sector industry members.
The mission of the SGAC is to “provide  input to NIST on the Smart Grid standards, priorities and gaps, and on the overall direction, status and  health of the Smart Grid implementation by the Smart Grid industry including identification of issues and  needs and the Smart Grid Task Force” that consists of several Federal Government agencies.
The second group established by EISA is the Smart Grid Task Force, which is made up of 11 Federal  agencies.
The mission of the Task Force is to “ensure awareness, coordination and integration of the  diverse activities of the Federal Government related to smart grid technologies, practices, and services.”   See www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/smart-grid.asp.
Specific organizations called out by EISA are the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and  NIST.
EISA further tasks FERC “to adopt interoperability standards and protocols necessary  to ensure smart-grid functionality and interoperability in the interstate transmission of electric power and  in regional and wholesale electricity markets.” See www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus- act/smart-grid.asp.
NIST was charged with developing guidelines on how to securely implement the smart grid systems.
NIST states its goal in this work as “bringing together manufacturers, consumers, energy providers, and  regulators to develop ‘Interoperable standards’."
NIST staffed its Smart Grid cybersecurity discipline area in order to facilitate the development of  standards, guidelines, and best practices by members of the entire electric utilities industry.
It should be  noted however, that this level of activity on the part of NIST- the creation of a SmartGrid standards  working area led by a NIST Project Manager- is not the norm.
When specifically asked how NHTSA may engage NIST in the creation of a similar   14     work are for electronic resiliency of automobiles, the NIST subject matter experts stated that they would  do such a thing only if tasked by law.
Therefore, this level of facilitation and leadership by NIST is not  practical.
NIST Standards Developed  NIST has been a very active and successful steward of the development of standards for Smart Grid.
Perhaps most noteworthy is the publication in August 2010 of NISTIR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid  Cybersecurity.
Volume 1 covers the Smart Grid Cybersecurity Strategy, Architecture, and High-Level  Requirements.
This is a valuable guideline document for how to examine security in the Smart Grid, but  may be equally useful as a baseline to follow for the automotive industry.
1 covers the following stages of the security approach.
Selection of Use Cases with Cybersecurity Considerations  2.
Setting Boundaries: The Beginnings of a Security Architecture  4.
High Level Security Requirements  5.
Smart Grid Conformity Testing and Certification   These are the same basic steps in the life cycle approach to information security discussed previously.
This is not surprising since listed standards references include FIPS 199 and several of the NIST SP 800  series documents.
Other NIST accomplishments thus far include the identification of 75 initial standards—uniform ways of  doing business that should be considered to make an interoperable, secure Smart Grid a reality.
Additionally NIST has identified five "foundational standards" for consideration by federal and state  regulators.
The standards describe common data communications formats that would allow Smart Grid  devices and networks to work seamlessly and that specify cybersecurity protocols.
The basic finding in the examination of Smart Grid is that development of standards, guidelines and best  practices have been based on establishing the use of existing standards as baselines, then modifying them  for the specific needs of Smart Grid.
Armed with a basic set of guidelines individual vendors or operators  can then craft technical solutions to meet minimum security requirements developed collaboratively, but  led strongly by the Federal Government and industry regulators.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission  In the course of research efforts, the opportunity arose to learn about the inroads that the Nuclear  Regulatory Commission (NRC) has undertaken regarding cybersecurity.
The NRC regulates commercial nuclear power plants and other  uses of nuclear materials, such as in nuclear medicine, through licensing, inspection and enforcement of  its requirements.
NRC’s regulatory practice is highlighted in Figure 2.
Figure 2: NRC Regulatory Program         Cybersecurity Activities  Much investment in time and resources has been made by the NRC to ensure that developers, operators,  and maintainers of nuclear power facilities establish a cybersecurity program, and submit a plan to show  compliance.
The current key guideline they have put out to nuclear materials operators on cybersecurity is  NRC RG 5.71, which currently in its Draft Final Rule.
It spells out the requirements for a cybersecurity  plan to be submitted by the licensees for the NRC’s review and approval.
The licensee is required to  “provide high assurance that digital computer and communication systems and networks are adequately  protected against cyber-attacks, up to and including the design basis threat as described in Title 10 of the  Code of Federal regulations (10CFR) Part73, Section 73.1.”   The provisions in RG 5.71 require protection of all critical systems and networks and require  implementation of controls that will defend these systems against any cyber-attack that would adversely  affect the availability, integrity and confidentiality of the critical system’s assets and data.
The protection  of critical assets and data is to be achieved through the, “implementation of state-of-the-art defense-in- depth protective strategies” [RG 5.71 c (2)], whose aim “to ensure that the functions or tasks required to  be performed by the critical assets ... are maintained and carried out” [RG 5.71 c (4)] and “to prevent  adverse effects from cyber-attacks” [RG5.71 c (3)].
The controls referred to in NIST 800.53 and the   16     recommendations relevant to those controls found in NIST 800.82, are defined in terms of three distinct  classes: management, operational, and technical.
The NRC has disclosed that there are many items to address in ensuring better cybersecurity measures are  in place that are compliant with the NRC’s charter.
Current efforts that it is investigating include:       •   Involvement with several industry specific and international standards groups for setting  cybersecurity standards.
They believe the best way to develop standards is to work with outside  resources to maximize resources and progress.
•  Commitment to shared learning regarding cybersecurity through engaging other Federal agencies.
•  Use of ISO 26262 "Road vehicles -- Functional safety" and it’s reference standard, IEC 61508   Functional Safety standard for automotive Electric/Electronic Systems are important source  documents for NRC.
•  Continual reassessment of NRC RG 5.71 Cybersecurity Guide as the cybersecurity landscape   changes and to fully understand risks.
•  Standardization and improvement of architectures for nuclear management devices and   equipment to include elements such as Verification Tools and Diverse Redundancy “the power of  5” in testing for design flaws.
NIST  NIST Special Publication 800 series of documents and the Federal Information Processing Standards  Publication 199 Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems  (FIPS 199) are the baseline cybersecurity standards used by the Federal Government.
FIPS 199 is the mandatory standard to categorize all information and information systems collected or  maintained by, or on behalf of, each Federal agency.
FIPS 199 targets providing appropriate levels of  information security according to impact of risks.
This is the starting point for the use of the various NIST  publications used to perform lifecycle security assessment, controls, and monitoring (as shown in Figure  3 below).
This process is again reminiscent of the lifecycle approach to Information Security discussed in Section  3.1 above.
The added feature here is the various NIST standards publications that provide the guidance  for each element of the security lifecycle are highlighted.
17         Figure 3: Security Lifecycle and Corresponding NIST Publications         NIST standards documents are valuable assets for the development of industry-specific cybersecurity  guidance documents (e.g., NISTIR 7628 and others for Smart Grid).
2.3.4 Financial Payments  The financial payments industry has an interesting aspect that made it an appropriate industry to examine  in this study- that of distributed risk.
The financial payments industry has a complex ecosystem that  includes banks, card associations (Visa, MasterCard, etc.
Each of these  entities plays a part in handling payment transactions and the sensitive cardholder data associated with  them, leading to an interesting “supply chain” issue with respect to data security.
18               Figure 4: Financial Payment Ecosystemii   This complex network of participants all of whom store or transmit cardholder sensitive information  created a need to secure this distributed system.
Many potential vulnerabilities surface that must be  addressed and the financial payments industry, principally the card associations, or brands, led the  development of payment card industry (PCI) standards for security of transaction and cardholder data.
PCI standards mandate minimum-security requirements on all participating organizations in the  distributed payment-processing ecosystem.
These PCI standards ensure the end-to-end security of the payment process for the entire supply chain.
These fit with the security of the communications between the card and reader that entails securing the  magnetic card swipe or the contactless card tap through encryption, key management, etc.
This-card to- reader communications security was not germane to this research.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street  Reform and Consumer Protection Act takes some steps toward security regulation in the establishment of  a Consumer Protections Bureau with the Federal Reserve, but other attempts to create specific regulations  and fines to control data security have made it through committee, but not to the floor for a vote.
These bills generally require that an entity handling or storing data above a certain volume be required to  implement security protections, disclose breaches immediately, and provides a standard of fines.
Tort liability among banks and merchants has been the standard method of enforcement  and recently, Federal courts have set strong precedent for data breach tort liability in class-action suits as  well.
19        To take control of the costs of breaches, credit card brands now have a standard schedule of fines with  much lower or zero costs for merchants that have been participating in the PCI compliance programs and  disclose breaches immediately.
They also maintain zero-liability programs for cardholders and standard  agreements among banks in the network to expedite fraud defense and keep matters out of the courts.
Essentially, the payment brand networks have responded to the public demand and implemented security  policies that mirror Federal regulatory objectives.
It should be noted however, that cost figures to  implement PCI standards are not trivial.
This figure represented a five-fold increase from 2006 costs.iii      Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard  The vast majority of attention in the card payment systems security is focused on securing traditional  servers that store sensitive data.
The basic approach mirrors the security practices throughout the IT  industry, with feedback from fraud management practice.
The Payment Card Industry Security Standards  Council (PCI-SSC) codifies these practices, a body comprised of the major credit card networks (see  www.pcisecuritystandards.org/).
It should be emphasized that the financial payments industry took a  top-down approach in mandating the PCI-DSS.
The PCI-SSC consists only of credit card network  operators -- no merchants, acquirers, etc.
The standard mandates these practices and the enforcement model is distributed from the PCI-SSC to the  individual network’s security programs, to the acquirers, to the merchants, which are the targets of most  of the standard’s requirements.
Although not directly involved with certification, the PCI-DSS provides  certification requirements.
These include yearly self-assessment for small merchants, and full audits by  PCI-certified Qualified Security Assessors (QSAs) for large merchants, as well as quarterly network scans  for all merchants.
Payment applications have a similar program of standards and certification, the  Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS).
The actual standards are summarized in Table 3  below.
Table 3: PCI-DSS Objectives   Control Objectives   PCI DSS Requirements   Build and Maintain a  Secure Network   Protect Cardholder  Data   Maintain a  Vulnerability  Management  Program   1.
Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and  other security parameters  3.
Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public  networks  5.
Develop and maintain secure systems and applications   20         Implement Strong  Access Control  Measures   Regularly Monitor  and Test Networks   Maintain an  Information Security  Policy     7.
Restrict access to cardholder data by business need-to-know  8.
Assign a unique ID to each person with computer access  9.
Restrict physical access to cardholder data  10.
Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder  data  11.
Regularly test security systems and processes   12.
Maintain a policy that addresses information security   These 12 basic principles of IT security are again reminiscent of the stages covered by the Information  Security Lifecycle approach.
Even with full adherence to the standard, however, there is still significant potential  threat from specifically targeted zero-day and insider attacks because payment processing inherently  requires the use and transmission of sensitive information throughout the processing chain of several  parties.
Scanning and Assessment  PCI-DSS requires merchants to regularly scan their network environment and perform assessment to  ensure compliance.
Acquirers must collect this information from each merchant and report it to the  security compliance program of the card networks, with differing requirements based on the merchant’s  annual transaction level.
These transaction levels are not delineated by PCI, but are relatively standard  among payment brands.
Quarterly automated network scans with software from the PCI’s list of approved  scanning vendors.
Annual in-depth assessments are also required, in the form of a self-assessment  questionnaire (SAQ) or an on-site assessment by a PCI-SSC certified qualified security assessor, either  internal or external.
Certification  For small merchants, depending on the payment brand requirements, the PCI-SSC provides a standard  SAQ for PCI DSS compliance.
Larger merchants and processors, however, are required by the payment  brands to undergo regular scanning and assessment by council-certified vendors.
The PCI-SSC maintains  the programs for certification of approved scanning vendors, qualified security assessors for merchants,  internal security assessors for issuers and acquirers, and payment application qualified security assessors  for third-party processing applications.
21        The certification processes includes admission to the program, mandatory training, certification testing,  ongoing compliance testing, and periodic recertification.
The business also must show that each of its assessors has at least one year of full-time experience  in three specified security domains, a bachelor’s degree, and a specified security industry certification.
Additionally, the business must show that it has the facilities, equipment, capabilities, and procedures in  place to handle the assessment work.
Yearly recertification requires compliance with the original requirements as well as continuing education  credits assigned by the council.
2.3.5 Medical Devices  The Food and Drug Administration emphasizes that cybersecurity for medical devices and their  associated communication networks is a shared responsibility between medical device manufacturers and  medical device user facilities.
The proper maintenance of cybersecurity for medical devices and hospital  networks is vitally important to public health because it ensures the integrity of the computer networks  that support medical devices.
Perhaps more importantly, those medical devices that monitor critical life  functions and/or administer medicine have an elevated risk factor in terms of cyber-attack implications.
A rapidly growing cybersecurity problem can have devastating results to healthcare patients, and  healthcare operations of all sizes.
It is entirely possible that a virus or worm can makes its way into such systems that  can result in the destruction and hence the loss, or mishandled dispersion, of critical information.
Regulations in Place  FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) is responsible for regulating firms that  manufacture, repackage, and/or import medical devices sold in the United States.
Medical devices are classified into Class 1, 2, and 3 with regulatory control increasing from Class 1 to  Class 3.
The device classification regulation defines the regulatory requirements for a general device type.
Most Class 1 devices are exempt from Premarket Notification 510(k); most Class 2 devices require  Premarket Notification 510(k); and most Class 3 devices require premarket approval.
22     Medical devices distributed in the United States are subject to General Controls- pre-marketing and post  marketing regulatory controls.
The basic regulatory requirements that manufacturers of medical devices  distributed in the United States must comply with are:      •  Establishment Registration - 21 CFR Part 807;  •  Medical Device Listing - 21CFR Part 807;  •  Premarket Notification 510(k) - 21 CFR Part 807 Subpart E;  •  Premarket Approval (PMA) - 21 CFR Part 814;  •  •  Quality System Regulation (QS)/Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) - 21 CFR Part 820;  •  Labeling - 21 CFR Part 801; and  •  Medical Device Reporting - 21 CFR Part 803.
Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) - 21CFR Part 812;      Industry Issues  FDA is aware of misinterpretation of the regulations for the cybersecurity of medical devices that are  connected to computer networks.
Hospitals and device manufacturers do not agree on interpretation of  roles and responsibilities in FDA regulations with respect to cybersecurity.
To manage this process the  FDA has issued a document on cybersecurity that strives to answer specific questions on the issue.
FDA’s interpretation of the regulations can be found in the 2005 Guidance for Industry - Cybersecurity  for Networked Medical Devices Containing Off-the-Shelf (OTS) Software (January 14, 2005) and its  accompanying information for healthcare organizations.
FDA emphasizes the following:   •  Medical device manufacturers and user facilities should work together to ensure that   cybersecurity threats are addressed in a timely manner;   •  The agency typically does not need to review or approve medical device software changes made   for cybersecurity reasons;   •  All software changes that address cybersecurity threats should be validated before installation to   ensure they do not affect the safety and effectiveness of the medical devices;   •  One of the more important questions is one of responsibility.
The FDA makes it clear in 21 CFR  820.100 that the manufacturer is responsible stating that threats should be addressed directly to  the manufacturer (The FDA also states in 21 CFR 820.30(i) that manufacturers need to validate  any patches implemented (to ensure the device’s safety and efficacy.
However, device  manufacturers have major concerns regarding validation of implementation of changes or patches  to their software.
Hospitals and care providers point out that the  consequences of this inactivity can be devastating to the industry.
Enforcement Efforts  Most enforcement efforts are conducted with inspections and punitive damages for violations that hurt the  medical device manufacture’s profits and market position.
Application Integrity Policy - Regarding the integrity of data and information in applications   submitted for FDA review and approval   2.
Disqualified/Restricted/Assurance List for Clinical Investigators- Restricted from receiving   investigational drugs, biologics, or devices if FDA determines that the investigator has repeatedly  or deliberately failed to comply with regulatory requirements for studies or has submitted false  information to the study's sponsor   4.
Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures, 21 CFR Part 11- Background information and  updates on the rule that allows the use of electronic records and electronic signatures for any  record that is required to be kept and maintained by other FDA regulations   5.
FDA Debarment List - Firms or individuals convicted of a felony under Federal law for conduct   (by a firm) relating to the development or approval, including the process for development or  approval, of any abbreviated drug application; or (an individual convicted) for conduct relating to  development or approval of any drug product, or otherwise relating to any drug product under the  Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act   6.
FDA Notice of Initiation of Disqualification Proceedings and Opportunity to Explain   (NIDPOE) Letters - A NIDPOE letter informs the recipient clinical investigator that FDA is  initiating an administrative proceeding to determine whether the clinical investigator should be  disqualified from receiving investigational products pursuant to the Food and Drug  Administration's regulations.
Generally, FDA issues a NIDPOE letter when it believes it has  evidence that the clinical investigator repeatedly or deliberately violated FDA's regulations  governing the proper conduct of clinical studies involving investigational products or submitted  false information to the sponsor   7.
Reading Room (Electronic Freedom of Information Act) – FDA’s Office of Regulatory   Affairs (ORA) documents frequently requested by the public through the Freedom of Information  Act     New and Ongoing Challenges   Some of the challenges and issues FDA is focused on include the following.
Risk Assessment   •  FDA has limited resources and is seeking good guidance in obtaining better cybersecurity   controls for medical devices;) risk assessment is a huge challenge, and an evolving problem.
•  Advances of ISO Standard 14971 (which is focused on RA) is a good engagement point to   improve the FDA’s risk mitigation position.
24         International Manufacturing   •  There is an increasing set of problems due to medical devices and other FDA regulated items   in general being manufactured overseas and importing sub-par devices.
•  Punitive damages are harder to enforce and control in this international environment, and   tighter controls are needed.
•  FDA is currently performing more inspections to these international manufacturing sites to   curtail and slow down mismanaged operations that try to circumvent FDA regulatory  compliance via international law.
Engineering & Architectural Controls   •  A new guidance document is needed to standardize and improve architectures for medical   devices.
•  FDA is working with NRC gain insight on how best to address component vendors.
2.3.6 Automotive  While not explicitly a subject for this study, the automotive industry began to come into focus in the latter  stages of the research process.
A next step was an examination of how best practices from other industries  could affect the need for cybersecurity in the automotive industry.
Some key activities helped this shift  into examining the needs of the automotive industry, which are described below.
European Activities  Several European programs have produced helpful information on this subject.
Third, the Infineon SME interview yielded discussion of the development of new CAN bus alternatives  that are based on time-triggered protocol.
Examples include the FlexRay approach being fielded in high- end German models.
FlexRay was developed by the FlexRay consortium, whose membership included  multiple automotive OEMs, suppliers, and microcontroller technology vendors such as Motorola, Philips,  and ST Micro.
The SAE Security Committee actively discusses leading edge approaches to automotive security.
This  discussion has included the European research efforts.
25        SAE Security Committee   NHTSA is a non-voting liaison member participating in the SAE Security Committee (Web site at  www.sae.org/servlets/works/committeeHome.do?comtID=TEVEES18).
Members of the  committee tend to be functional safety engineers and system/hardware/software developers.
The cybersecurity skillset does not often reside in operational competency areas - even if the labor  resources are technical in nature.
The cybersecurity skillset historically is deemed a function of IT  personnel - the CIO, chief security officer (CSO), and subordinates.
We observed this in all industries studied.
The SAE Security Committee’s mission is to develop and maintain recommended practices and  information reports in the area of vehicle electrical systems’ security.
The committee’s scope is on- board vehicle electrical systems that affect vehicle control or otherwise act contrary to the  occupants’ interests if the systems are manipulated by an attacker.
The SAE Security Committee submitted a response to the Request for Information (RFI).
The group seems to be involved in general cybersecurity best  practices information gathering having investigated both the EVITA program and the NIST cybersecurity  standards documents.
They are focused on not only building their cybersecurity body of knowledge, but  also finding a baseline document to use to develop automotive industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines.
EVITA  The objective of EVITA is to design, verify, and prototype a modular, cost-efficient security solution for  automotive on-board networks.
This will protect sensitive data within such networks against compromise  and, in doing so, enable secure communication among cars and between cars and infrastructure.
•  The EVITA Security Risk Management approach drew upon cybersecurity risk management best   practices in cybersecurity (NIST standards) and functional safety (ISO 26262).
•  The EVITA Security Risk Management approach is a candidate for use as a baseline for a tailored   Risk Management Guideline for the SAE Security Committee.
It is to be determined if the technical Hardware Security Module (HSM) specification is an appropriate  source for a baseline technical security specification in the United States.
However, as noted above,  EVITA’s proposed Security Risk Management approach may be beneficial as baseline guidance for the  U.S. automotive industry.
Using these security guidelines as a baseline in the U.S. automotive industry   26     will leverage the EVITA work that modified cybersecurity and functional safety best practices to  delineate automotive industry-specific guidelines.
2.4 Request for Information  The RFI for Cybersecurity and Safety of Motor Vehicles Equipped with Electronic Control Systems was  released on August 2, 2011.
SAE Security Committee  First, the SAE Security Committee submitted a response.
The highlights of this response included the  identification of the EVITA project as having done ”significant work in the area of automotive security  risk assessment” and added “the committee feels that this [EVITA] is a subject that will need additional  investigation as the industry continues to work in the area cybersecurity.”   Another noteworthy issue in the response is that “currently the CAN protocol has no explicit support for  security mechanisms,” and “...it is challenging to add effective security layered on top of the protocol”,  finally, adding that “the committee will likely also investigate techniques to secure other in-vehicle  networking technologies.”   The last significant suggestion of the SAE Security Committee is that an Information Sharing and  Analysis Center (ISAC) would be beneficial.
However, the committee noted that, due to the participation  of competitive private sector suppliers and OEMs within SAE, and owing to the need to openly share  sensitive information about risks and vulnerabilities, SAE would not be the appropriate forum for an  ISAC.
EVITA  EVITA focused much of its response on the technology solution the EVITA project developed - the  Hardware Security Module (HSM).
By virtue of both their RFI response and ongoing conversations, it is believed that the automotive  industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines developed by EVITA could be a basis for the US industry.
Delineating potential attacks and related security requirements served as the starting point for   developing a technical solution   2.
V2X security efforts are focused on the V2X communication and vehicles and infrastructure in   the connected vehicle ecosystem must be secure.
The EVITA consortium is stating that in a V2X world, security  should be examined holistically from end-to-end.
The vehicle itself- the in-vehicle network and its  security from “the outside world,” as well as the security of any roadside infrastructure, should be  addressed in addition to the security of the communications and V2X transactions.
This is a key  observation for the U.S. marketplace with respect to connected vehicle development.
It highlighted the importance of determining accountability for security countermeasures’  2.
It highlighted the necessity for developing cybersecurity countermeasures within the on-board   diagnostics (OBD) protocol.
2.5 Challenges and Issues  This section brings together the various challenges and issues seen throughout the industries studied.
When formulating a strategy regarding cybersecurity in the automotive industry the following challenges  and issues are important:   •  The transportation mission is currently safety focused not security focused.
–  Transportation modes are now correlating security and safety; one can’t have a safe   system without it being a secure system     •  There is a perception that there is “no Return on Investment for security.”   –  But what is the “cost” of a security breach (monetary, liability, loss of good name, etc.)?
•  Operations systems now use Information Technology and wireless communications extensively.
–   IT security best practices are being applied to operational systems.
•  The normal approach to cybersecurity of operational systems, hardware, and software is to add   security measures after they are developed and fielded.
•  Skillsets for cybersecurity tend to lie in the IT core competency and are not resident in the   developers of operations systems, hardware, and software.
2.6 Observations  The research of the various industries studied has yielded some best practices for consideration.
These  best practices may become elements of a strategic cybersecurity roadmap.
Attributions to industries where  the finding was derived are in parentheses.
Cybersecurity is a lifecycle process that includes elements of assessment, design, implementation, and  operations as well as an effective testing and certification program.
(All Industries)   28     Multiple industries studied all point to the need to be continually vigilant in securing systems, networks,  hardware, and software.
The aviation industry has some similarities to the automotive industry (FAA)   The aviation industry and automotive industry share some similarities.
Additionally, the migration to the NEXTGEN air traffic  control environment mirrors the development of the Cooperative Vehicle environment, both yielding  exponentially more issues with respect to cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Leadership from the Federal government can help the development of industry-specific cybersecurity  standards, guidelines, and best practices (FAA)   It was observed that leadership from the Federal government can help the development of industry- specific cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices.
Some industries support the idea of  Federal minimum-security requirements.
Ongoing shared learning with other Federal Government agencies is beneficial (FAA, NRC, FDA, NIST)   This research was a first step in the process of elevating NHTSA’s baseline knowledge of cybersecurity.
Use of NIST Cybersecurity Standards is a way to accelerate development of an industry-specific  cybersecurity guideline (All Industries)   The NIST cybersecurity suite of standards documents is often used as a baseline to industry-specific  security guidelines.
International cybersecurity efforts are an important source of information (FAA, automotive)   The research has revealed several efforts in Europe that have been ongoing and show some success  addressing cybersecurity issues.
Examples are:   •  The annual ESCAR Conference, which highlights security developments, is in its 9th year.
29         •  The FlexRay Consortium developed an alternative approach to the CAN communications bus   based on Time-Triggered Protocol that addresses a baseline security issue in the CAN approach.
•  The EVITA security guidelines documents.
Consider developing a cybersecurity simulator that can facilitate identification of vulnerabilities and  risk mitigation strategies (FAA)   FAA engaged the Volpe Center to work with academia to develop the ANSS and initially do “white hat”  hacking exercises to highlight vulnerabilities in the Gatelink, a vital device that communications flight  data with aircraft at the gate.
While this laboratory environment has been valuable for collaborative learning between government,  academia, private sector, and internationally, FAA is now beginning rulemaking (discussed above) and  will use the ANSS to examine each of their identified eEnabled “points of pain” as a starting point to the  rulemaking process.
There should be cybersecurity standards for the entire supply chain (financial payments, automotive)   This was a key observation from the financial payments industry, which has a unique distributed risk  model since the financial payments network is a complicated ecosystem where many organizations handle  sensitive transaction and cardholder data.
formed the  Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI-SSC) and developed the Payment Card Industry  Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS).
This requirement can be a model for the need to ensure security throughout the supply chain (both  pre-production and post-sale) in the automotive industry.
Foster industry cybersecurity groups    Establishing an Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) and an automotive industry  Cybersecurity Emergency Response Team (CERT) should be investigated.
CERTs act as a resource for  cybersecurity professionals to highlight cybersecurity incidents and provide support for incident response  and forensic analysis as well as act as a conduit for topical cybersecurity information.
For example,  Federal agencies are required identify IT breaches to US-CERT.
ISACs are extremely valuable, cross-industry organizations that act as clearinghouses for information on  cyber and physical threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions.
They help members better understand their  threats and vulnerabilities and are forums for anonymous submission regarding specific vulnerabilities  and security breaches.
The SAE Security Committee highlighted the need for an automotive industry  ISAC in their RFI response.
30     Use Professional Capacity Building to develop cybersecurity skillsets in system designers and engineers  (All)   Many industries see a disconnect between the security skillsets of the technical resources developing  operation systems and those needed.
Traditionally cybersecurity has been seen as the domain of the IT  department, but this is clearly no longer the case.
Momentum is gaining in the US automotive industry  due to the Toyota Camry sudden acceleration incident in 2010 and the various academic research projects  demonstrating the vulnerabilities of modern vehicles.
Connected Vehicle security should be end-to-end; vehicles, infrastructure, and V2X communication  should all be secure (aviation, automotive [specifically EVITA])   This was an issue highlighted by EVITA in their RFI submission.
They stated that in their research of  various European V2X security efforts, none were examining security beyond the communications itself.
Rather, these security efforts simply noted that vehicles and infrastructure must be secure.
Therefore,  there is a strong need for NHTSA and the Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office to  work together to ensure end-to-end security in a Connected Vehicle world.
Mapping Best Practices to the Information Security Lifecycle   Mapping these key observations to the process of a lifecycle information security program is a good  exercise to show a process that may provide input to NHTSA’s development of a strategic roadmap.
First,  Figure 5 provides a reminder of what the Information Security Lifecycle Process entails.
31            Figure 5: Information Security Lifecycle Process      The key observations are mapped to this lifecycle process in Figure 6.
Cyber security and safety of motor vehicles   equipped with electronic control systems (RFI Solicitation Number: DTRT57-11-SS- 00007).
Retrieved from http://blog.elementps.com/element_payment_solutions/2009/02/pci- compliance-costs.html    34      Technical Guidelines for the implementation  of minimum security measures for Digital  Service Providers          DECEMBER, 2016      www.enisa.europa.eu                    European Union Agency For Network And Information Security   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       About ENISA   The European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) is a centre of network and in- formation security expertise for the EU, its member states, the private sector and Europe’s citizens.
ENISA  works with these groups to develop advice and recommendations on good practice in information security.
It assists EU member states in implementing relevant EU legislation and works to improve the resilience of  Europe’s critical information infrastructure and networks.
ENISA seeks to enhance existing expertise in EU  member states by supporting the development of cross-border communities committed to improving net- work and information security throughout the EU.
More information about ENISA and its work can be  found at www.enisa.europa.eu.
Acknowledgements  Special thank the experts of the ENISA Cloud Security and Resilience expert group, BSI, ANSSI, Microsoft,  Google, VMWare, Palo Alto Networks and cyber security experts from the EU Member States, who pro- vided useful comments and feedback on earlier drafts of this document: https://resilience.enisa.eu- ropa.eu/cloud-security-and-resilience   Legal notice  Notice must be taken that this publication represents the views and interpretations of ENISA, unless  stated otherwise.
ENISA is not responsible for the content of the external  sources including external websites referenced in this publication.
This publication is intended for information purposes only.
It must be accessible free of charge.
Copyright Notice  © European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA), 2016  Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
ISBN 978-92-9204-203-5, doi 10.2824/456345         02   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Table of Contents   Executive Summary   1.
List of security objectives and measures for DSPs     Description     The role of risk assessment     SO 01 - Information security policy  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 02 – Risk Management  Description  Security measures in sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 03 – Security Roles  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 04 – Third party management  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 05 – Background checks  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 06 – Security knowledge and training  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping     SO 07 – Personnel changes  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels   6   7   7  7  7  7  8  9   11   11   12   12  12  13  14   14  14  14  15   15  15  16  17   17  17  17  19   19  19  19  20   20  20  20  22   22  22  22   03   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    SO 08 – Physical and environmental security   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 09 – Security of supporting utilities   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 10 – Access control to network and information systems   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 11 – Integrity of network components and information systems   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 12 – Operating procedures   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 13 – Change management   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 14 – Asset management   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 15 – Security incident detection & Response   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 16 – Security incident reporting   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 17 – Business continuity   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 18 – Disaster recovery capabilities   23   23  23  23  25   26  26  26  26   27  27  27  28   29  29  29  30   30  30  30  31   31  31  31  32   32  32  32  34   34  34  34  36   36  36  36  37   37  37  37  39   39   04      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 19 – Monitoring and logging   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 20 – System tests   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 21 – Security assessments   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 22 – Compliance  Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 23 – Security of data at rest   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 24 –Interface security   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 25 –Software security   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 26 – Interoperability and portability   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping    SO 27 – Customer Monitoring and log access   Description  Security measures within sophistication levels  Mapping   3.
Summary         39  39  40   40  40  40  41   41  41  42  43   43  43  43  44   44  44  44  45   46  46  46  48   48  48  49  50   50  50  50  51   51  51  52  52   52  52  52  53   54   05   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Executive Summary   Online marketplaces, online search engines and cloud computing services are considered as Digital Service Pro- viders (DSPs) in the context of the recently adopted Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and  of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and infor- mation systems across the Union, hereafter referred to as the Network and Information Security (NIS) Directive.
The NIS Directive aims to bring cybersecurity capabilities on the same level of development in all the EU Mem- ber States.
Its purpose is to ensure that exchange of information and cooperation related to security amongst  Member States are efficient, including at the cross-border level1.
With NIS becoming a requirement, the intro- duction of specific laws in this area across the European Union will have a significant impact to all industry sec- tors including those relating to DSP categories.
Some digital services could  be an important resource for their users, including Operators of Essential Services (OES), and as such users  might not always have alternatives available.
The security, continuity and reliability of the type of digital ser- vices referred to in this Directive are of the essence for the smooth functioning of many businesses.
Such digital services might there- fore be critical for the smooth functioning of businesses that depend on them, for the internal market and  cross- border trade across the Union2.
It is essential for all Member States to make sure that they have minimum capabilities to ensure a high level of  NIS in their territory and to improve the functioning of the internal market.
Commonly defined security  measures can support harmonised security practices across EU Member States and potentially enhance the  overall level of NIS in the EU.
Therefore, ENISA has issued this report to assist Member States and DSPs in providing a common approach re- garding the security measures for DSPs.
Although ENISA has already drafted a set of security objectives in the  context of cloud security in 20143, this study goes further than that by broadening the scope of its work and by  including security objectives for all three categories of digital service providers.
This study lists 27 Security Ob- jectives (SOs) for DSPs.
In those 27 SOs, security measures that map to the NIS Directive requirements4 are also  included.
This particular initiative has been achieved by examining current information and network security practices for  the DSPs across the EU.
It has brought light to some important findings that can add to existing security objec- tives and measures in information technology infrastructures in Europe.
It is recommended that stakeholders  and responsible parties analyse their information security needs in detail in order to evaluate and adapt each of  the security objectives and measures according to their specific business requirements.
1 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/directive-security-network-and-information-systems-nis-direc- tive   2 Preamble 48, Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning  measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union.
4 Namely: (a) the security of systems and facilities, (b)incident handling, (c) business continuity management, (d)  monitoring, auditing and testing, (e) compliance with international standards   06   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       1.
Introduction     Background   1.1.1  General introduction   The world is becoming increasingly interconnected as industries continue to revolutionize and knowledge  continues to be shared.
With the advent of digital services, network and information systems and services  are becoming highly crucial to the society.
Thus, it is imperative that their security and reliability is signifi- cantly ensured.
In fact, if security and resilience of networks and information systems are not ensured, this can impede the  pursuit of economic activities, lead to financial losses, undermine the confidence or cause major damage to  the economy of a country.
For example, network and information systems, and primarily the Internet, play  an essential role in facilitating the cross–border movement of goods, services and people.
Knowing how to properly address network and  information security is key to avoid any damaging effects.
DSPs  operate  in a fast changing environment and  should ensure a level of security  proportionate  to the  degree of risk posed to the digital services they provide.
Responsibilities in ensuring the security of network  and information systems lie to a great extent with DSPs themselves.
A culture of risk management, involving  risk assessment and the implementation of security measures appropriate to the risks faced, should be pro- moted and developed through appropriate regulatory requirements, standards and commonly acceptable  industry practices.
Define common baseline security objectives for Digital Service Providers (DSPs).
Describe different levels of sophistication in the implementation of security objectives.
Map the security objectives against well-known industry standards, national frameworks and certi-  fication schemes.
1.1.3  Scope & Target Audience   This study analyses the security objectives by providing security measures and examples of implementation  concerning the digital service providers and in particular:    ?
It does not                                                                  5 Preambles (15), (16) and (17) of the NIS Directive   07      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    cover online services that serve only as an intermediary to third-party services where a contract  can ultimately be concluded.
For the purposes of this report, "cloud computing services" means services that enable  access to a scalable and elastic pool of shareable computing resources.
The term "computing re- sources" covers resources such as networks, servers or other infrastructure, storage, applications  and services.
This is because, there is a good deal of data protection requirements (i.e.
The identification of  the entire set of organisational and technical measures which are deemed adequate to GDPR is a subject for  thorough analysis which exceeds the boundaries of the current undertaking.
For this reason, this report fo- cuses only on the objectives which are solely considered most relevant to the security element of the infor- mation systems and data maintained by the DSPs.
However, some security measures described herein i.e.
encryption, secure disposal of data, media access policy etc.
are extensively used to address data protection  requirements as well.
1.1.4  Document overview      The report lists and describes  the high-level security objectives for the DSP  categories together with the  different  sophistication  levels  in  the  implementation  of  security  measures.
For  each  sophistication  level  (basic, industry-standard and state of the art), the corresponding measures and examples are provided.
08      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    The report also provides a mapping between security objectives, industry standards, certification schemes  and national frameworks.
The goal of the mapping is to allow DSP communities to understand more easily  if their NIS requirements and security objectives meet the requirements of those frameworks.
This tool is a meta-framework that provides a neutral high-level  mapping from the customer's Network and Information Security requirements to security objectives in ex- isting cloud certification schemes.
Additional security objectives concerning cloud services that may have come into play since 2014 have also  been examined.
The list of objectives has been validated with the ENISA Cloud Expert Group through extra  consultation and a validation workshop.
A questionnaire was developed and a publicly available online survey was launched in order to identify sev- eral security controls and measures implemented, along with good practices and standards deployed by DSP  and in particular online market places and online search engines.
The diagram below illustrates the relationship between security requirements, security objectives and se- curity measures which are key terminologies that have been used throughout the document.
Figure 1: Terminology explained in a diagram extracted from “Cloud Certification Schemes Meta framework”                                                                  6 https://resilience.enisa.europa.eu/cloud-computing-certification/cloud-certification-schemes-metaframework       09      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       ?
Security requirement:    Customers have security requirements.
In the procurement phase customers usually check  which security requirements are met by the security objectives of the provider.
Security objectives:    Providers have security objectives.
Objectives are high-level goals and usually do not include  many technical details.
For example, “we offer an uptime of 99.9%”, or “customer data cannot  be accessed by unauthorized personnel”.
Security objectives are sometimes grouped in “security  domains” (e.g.
“software security”).
Security objectives are sometimes called “control objec- tives”).
Security measures:    Providers have security measures in place, to reach the security objectives.
Security measures  are sometimes called “controls” or “security controls”-.
The report also provides a mapping between security objectives and the following industry standards, cer- tification schemes and national frameworks:   ?
CSA CCM:  Cloud Controls Matrix v3.0.1   ?
BSI C5: Cloud Computing Compliance Controls Catalogue (C5), criteria to assess the information se-  curity of cloud services, version 1.0 – as of February 2016    ?
COBIT5:  Framework for the governance and management of enterprise IT   ?
CCS CSC: The CIS Critical Security Controls for Effective Cyber Defence, Version 6.1, August 31, 2016   ?
NIST:  Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.0, National Institute   of Standards and Technology, February 12, 2014   ?
PCI DSS: Payment Card Industry (PCI) Security Standards Council, Data Security Standard Require-  ments and Security Assessment Procedures, Version 3.2, April 2016    ?
CES: Cyber Essentials Scheme, Requirements for basic technical protection from cyber attacks, June   2014      10      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    2.
List of security objectives and measures for DSPs     Description     For each security objective we provide:      ?
Brief description of the security objective.
Levels of sophistication on the implementation of security measures with examples.
A mapping with industry standards, certification schemes and national frameworks      The list below, categorizes security measures into three sophistication levels.
Each level contains the practices to  assess the adequacy of the design and evidence that should be provided in order to check the effective implemen- tation of the security practice.
For each security objective, we have provided security measures that are either basic,  industry-standard or state of the art.
Readers can refer to the table below for the definition of each of these sophis- tication levels7 and can also refer to the list below for an overview of the security levels of each objective.
SOPHISTICATION LEVEL   DESCRIPTION OF SOPHISITICATION LEVELS   1 –Basic    2 – Industry standard   -Basic security measures that could be implemented to reach the security objective   -Examples that basic measures are in place   -Industry standard security measures to reach the objective and an ad-hoc review of the imple- mentation, following changes or incidents.
-Examples of industry standard measures and evidence of reviews of the implementation re- acting to changes and/or incidents.
-State of the art (advanced) security measures, and continuous monitoring of implementation,  structural review  of  implementation,  taking  into  account changes,  incidents,  tests  and  exer- cises, to proactively improve the implementation of security measures   -Examples of state of the art (advanced) implementation, evidence of a structural review pro- cess, and evidence of pro-active steps to improve the implementation of security measures.
For example, for a provider with only 5 employees it may be unnecessary to have a security policy  that is fully aligned with best practice industry standards, or to have a documented formal procedure for  hiring personnel.
The practices that complete each sophistication level are selected from relevant standards, guidelines and  frameworks which have been identified during the stock taking exercise and described in the section 1.1.5.
7 https://resilience.enisa.europa.eu/article-13/guideline-for-minimum-security-measures/Article_13a_ENISA_Techni- cal_Guideline_On_Security_Measures_v2_0.pdf    11   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016         The role of risk assessment   DSPs wishing to establish, implement, operate, monitor and continuously maintain and improve an appro- priate level of security, must also carefully and continuously consider and assess the actual level of prepar- edness and the related security risks they face.
A risk assessment should be performed throughout the system life cycle: during requirements definition,  procurement, control definition and configuration, system operations, and system close-out.
A “Risk Assessment” (RA) would be, in this context, an important step to be performed before deciding the  required sophistication levels needed by the DSP.
The extent and granularity of the Risk Assessment should  take  into  account  several  factors  such  as  the  size  of  the  organisation,  the  implementation  cost  of  the  measures etc.
Therefore, a risk  assessment is a key preliminary  step that should be  conducted in order to  understand what risk  level is  appropriate/acceptable  for  each  organisation  before  deciding  upon  the  required  sophistication  levels  needed by DSPs.
The organisation should select specific controls, measures and sophistication levels by considering and ef- fectively using the results of the risk assessment.
This way, the proposed security measures could be consid- ered as an appropriate benchmark enabling the security managers to determine which specific aspects of  security require attention and priority within their respective organisations.
Establishing a security benchmark within a context that has been defined by DSP security experts is consid- ered to be a successful formula, because such a benchmark can be properly focused on DSP specific security  issues.
Such benchmark can complement the outcome of the risk assessment and provide an additional input  for defining and selecting the specific controls, measures and sophistication levels for the security of the  services offered by the DSPs.
The  above-described  proposed  approach  is  aligned  with  general  risk  management  good  practices  –  and  therefore will help create synergies between the risk management and the security efforts of the DSP.
The use of sophistication levels allows the definition of different quality requirements for each measure.
This approach is different from a maturity level approach because, in practice, an organisation will probably  not have all its measures developed to the same level of maturity.
Only the relevance and usefulness of performing a suitable  risk assessment, before deciding the required sophistication levels, was highlighted (SO 02: Risk Manage- ment).
SO 01 - Information security policy      Description   The DSP establishes and maintains an information security policy.
The document details information on  main assets and processes, strategic security objectives.
12   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Security measures within sophistication levels     LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   ?
Set  a  high  level  security  policy,  which  is  aligned  with  business  objectives  and  ad- dresses  the  security  and  continuity  of  the  communication  networks8  and/or  services  provided.
Make  key personnel  aware  of  the  security   policy.
Set  detailed  information  security  policies  for critical assets and business processes.
Make  all  personnel  aware  of  the  security   policy and what it entails for their work.
Review  the  security  policy  following  inci-  dents.
Documented  security  policy,  including  networks,  systems  and  services  in  scope,  critical  assets  supporting  them,  and  the security objectives.
Key personnel are aware of the security policy and its objec- tives (interview).
Documented information security policy, approved by man- agement, including applicable laws and regulations, accessi- ble to personnel.
The information security policy is easily accessible to staff.
Personnel are aware of the information security policy and  what it implies for their work (interview).
Review the information security policies period- ically,  and  take  into  account  significant  system  changes,  violations,  exceptions,  past  incidents,  past  tests/exercises,  and  incidents  affecting  other (similar) providers in the sector.
Information security policies are up to date and approved by  senior management.
o  Records of the management review.
o  Feeds and insights collected from internal security   solutions and external databases                                                                  8 These security and continuity requirements come from the risk analysis a DSP should perform (SO 02 – Risk Manage- ment)   13   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: A.5 Information Security policies CSA CCM: (GRM-01, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM- 07, GRM-08, GRM-09)   CSA CCM: (GRM-01, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09) Governance and Risk  Management   BSI C5: OIS-01, OIS-01H, OIS-02, SA-01, SPN-02, SPN-03    CCS: 5.15 Configuration Management, 5.16 Data Management, 6.1 Location of Data and Data Centers, 6.2  Compliance Management, 6.3 Policy Management, 6.4 Audit Management, 6.12 Security Management    OCF: (GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11)  Governance and Risk Management   NIST: ID.GV-1: Organizational information security policy is established   PCI-DSS:  Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.1 &  12.1.1     SO 02 – Risk Management   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains an appropriate governance and risk management framework, to identify and  address risks for the security of the offered services.
Risks management procedures can include (but are not lim- ited to), maintaining a list of risks and assets, using Governance Risk management and Compliance (GRC) tools and  Risk Assessment (RA) tools etc.
Security measures in sophistication levels     LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Create a list of the main risks for secu- rity  and  continuity  of  the  provided  communication  networks,  systems  or  services, taking into account the main  threats for critical assets.
List of main risks described at a high level, including the underlying  threat(s) and their potential impact on the security, continuity and  privacy of networks and services.
Set  up  a  risk management methodol- ogy  and/or  tools  based  on  industry  standards.
Documented risk management methodology and/or tools which   contains, at least:   o  Objectives, roles, and responsibilities;  o  Scope of the risk management methodology;   1   2   14      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    ?
Ensure that key personnel use the risk  management methodology and tools.
Review the risk assessments following  changes,  security  incidents  or  data  breaches.
Ensure  residual  risks  are  accepted  by  management.
Management approval of residual risks.
3   Review the risk management methodology  and/or  tools,  periodically,  taking  into  ac- count changes and past incidents.
Documentation  of  the  review  process  and  updates  of  the  risk   management methodology and/or tools.
o  Records of the management review.
o  Meeting minutes of review sessions      Mapping    ISO27001: ISO27001:2013 (all)   CSA CCM: CSA CCM (GRM-02, GRM-04, GRM-08, GRM-10, GRM-11, STA-01, STA-04, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06)  Governance and Risk Management, Supply Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability   BSI C5: OIS-06, OIS-07, OIS-07H, OIS-03H, SA-01, SA-03, BEI-04, SPN-02, SPN-03   CCS: CCS, 6.2 Compliance Management, 6.3 Policy Management, 6.11 Risk Management, 6.12 Security Man- agement   OCF: OFC, (GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10,  GRM-11) Governance and Risk Management, (STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA- 08, STA-09) Supply Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability   NIST: ID.BE-2: The organization’s place in critical infrastructure and its industry sector is identified and commu- nicated   PCI-DSS:  Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.2        SO 03 – Security Roles   Description  The DSP assigns appropriate security roles and security responsibilities to designated personnel.
9 This objective might be merged with SO 01: ‘Information Security Policy’ in case that the DSP decides to include the  management of the security policy into the policy itself.
15   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Assign security roles and responsibili-  ties to personnel.
Make  sure  the  security  roles  are  reachable in case of security incidents.
Make personnel aware of the security  roles  in  your  organization  and  when  they should be contacted.
List of security roles (CISO, DPO, business  continuity manager, etc.
),  who occupies them and contact information.
), and description of respon- sibilities and tasks for security roles (CISO, DPO, etc.).
Formal appointment of the key security roles and responsibilities.
Structure of security roles and responsibil- ities  is  regularly  reviewed  and  revised,  based on changes and/or past incidents.
Up-to-date  documentation  of  the  structure  of  security  role  as-  signments and responsibilities.
1   2   3      16   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: A.6.1 Internal organization   CSA CCM: (BCR-10, CCC-01, DSI-06, GRM-06, HRS-03, HRS-07, IAM-02, IAM-05, IAM-09, IAM-10, SEF-01, SEF- 02, SEF-03) Business Continuity Management & Operational Resilience, Change Control & Configuration Man- agement, Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management, Governance and Risk Management, Identity &  Access Management, Security Incident Management, E-Discovery & Cloud Forensics   BSI C5: OIS-02, OIS-03, OIS-04, SA-01, BCM-01    CCS: 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 6.5 Data Protection, 6.10 Employee Management    OCF: OCF, (BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03,BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11) Busi- ness Continuity Management & Operational Resilience, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Con- trol & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Infor- mation Lifecycle Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08,  GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS- 06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Resources, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03, IAM-04, IAM-05,  IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09, IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM-12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Management, SEF-01,  SEF-02, SEF-03, SEF-04, SEF-05 Security Incident Management, E-Discovery & Cloud Forensics   NIST: ID.AM-6: Cybersecurity roles and responsibilities for the entire workforce and third-party stakeholders  (e.g., suppliers, customers, partners) are established   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.4      SO 04 – Third party management   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains a policy with security requirements for contracts with suppliers and customers.
SLAs, security requirements in contracts, outsourcing agreements etc., are established to ensure that the depend- encies on suppliers and residual risks do not negatively affect security of the offered services.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Include  security  requirements  and  relevant  tasks  in  contracts  with  third-parties and customers.
List of customer access request.
Documented contractual agreements containing at least:   o  Service description;   o  Security measures;   o  Non-disclosure agreements;   17      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Explicit  security  requirements  in  the  contracts  with  third  parties  supplying IT  products,  IT  services,  outsourced  business  processes,  helpdesks, call centers, interconnections, shared facilities, et cetera.
Set  a  security  policy  for  contracts  with third-parties.
Documented security policy for contracts with third parties.
Contracts for third party services contain security requirements, in   line with the security policy for procurement.
Review security policy for third par- ties, following incidents or changes.
Documented third parties’ contractual agreements contains special   requirements in case of:   o  Major blackouts;  o  Natural catastrophes;  o  Accidents or other possible emergency situations;  o  Blackout resistance.
Keep  track  of  security  incidents  re- lated to or caused by third-parties.
List of security incidents related to or caused by engagement with  third-parties.
Identify the process(es) applied to manage recent changes and con- firm:   o  Adequate warning to all stakeholders is provided;  o  o   Involves relevant personnel;  Includes procedures for backing-out from failed changes.
3      18   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: A.15.1 Information security in supplier relationships   CSA CCM: (CCC-02, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09) Change  Control & Configuration Management and Supply Chain Management, Transparency & Accountability   BSI C5: HR-03H, DLL-01, DLL-02, UP-01, BEI-02    CCS: 6.6 Terms and Conditions of Use, 6.8 Contract Management, 6.13 Embedding External Services, 7.7 Ser- vice Level Management    OCF: OFC, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, STA-01,  STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and  Accountability   NIST: PR.AT-3: Third-party stakeholders (e.g., suppliers, customers, partners) understand roles & responsibili- ties   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.8.3      SO 05 – Background checks   Description  The DSP performs appropriate background checks on personnel (employees, contractors and third party users) be- fore hiring, if required, for their duties and responsibilities provided that this is allowed by the local regulatory frame- work.
Background checks may include checking past jobs, checking professional references, etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   3   Check professional references of key personnel (system admin- istrators, security officers, guards, et cetera).
Individuals  screening  criteria  is  established  and  reviewed  for organization’s position.
Documented screening requirements.
19   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016          LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Mapping    ISO27001: A.7.1 Human resource security - Prior to employment   CSA CCM: CSA CCM, (HRS-02) Human Resources   BSI C5: HR-01    CCS: 5.11 System Administration and Management, 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 6.10 Em- ployee Management    OCF: OFC, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human  Resources   NIST: PR.
IP-11: Cybersecurity is included in human resources practices (e.g., deprovisioning, personnel screen- ing)   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.7        SO 06 – Security knowledge and training   Description  The DSP verifies and ensures that personnel have sufficient security knowledge and that they are provided with  regular security training.
This is achieved through for example, security awareness raising, security education, secu- rity training etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Key personnel has followed security trainings and has sufficient  security knowledge (interview).
Third parties have sufficient security knowledge (interview).
with relevant training and material  on security issues.
Ensure that third parties are trained  and aware of security issues   1   2   ?
Implement a program for training,  making sure that key personnel   ?
Personnel have participated in awareness sessions on security  topics.
20   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Documented program for training on security skills, including, ob-  jectives for different roles and how to reach it (by e.g.
Updated security awareness and training program.
List of contacts with security groups and associations.
Results of tests of the security knowledge of personnel.
The program is approved by the  management.
Organize trainings and awareness  sessions for personnel on security  topics important for the organiza- tion.
Contents of security training are   based on assigned roles and respon- sibilities and specific requirements  of the organization and the infor- mation system to which personnel  have authorized access.
Test the security knowledge of per- sonnel.
Contacts and communication chan- nels with security groups and asso- ciations have been established in or- der to stay up to date with the lat- est recommended security prac- tices, techniques, and technologies.
Provide to the organization person- nel training sessions to obtain rec- ognized security certifications.
21   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: A.7.2.2, A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2   CSA CCM: CCS CCM (HRS-08, HRS-09) Human Resources   BSI C5: HR-02, HR-03, SA-01    COBIT5: COBIT 5 APO07.03, BAI05.07, COBIT 5 APO07.02, DSS06.03, COBIT 5 APO07.03, APO10.04, APO10.05,  COBIT 5 APO07.03    CCS: CCS, 5.11 System Administration and Management, 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 6.10 Em- ployee Management    OCF: OCF, BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03, BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11 Business  Continuity Management & Operational Resilience, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06,  GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03,  HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Resources, SEF-01, SEF-02, SEF-03,  SEF-04, SEF-05   NIST: PR.AT-1: All users are informed and trained   PCI-DSS: Requirement 6 - Develop and maintain secure systems and applications: 6.5, Requirement 9: Restrict  physical access to cardholder data: 9.9, 9.9.3, Requirement 12: Maintain a policy that addresses information  security for all personnel:12.6.1, 12.10.4, A3.1 -  Implement a PCI DSS compliance program: A3.1.4        SO 07 – Personnel changes   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains an appropriate process for managing changes in personnel or changes in their  roles and responsibilities.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
1   2   Following changes in personnel re- voke access rights, badges, equip- ment, et cetera, if no longer neces- sary or permitted.
Evidence that personnel changes have been followed up with  revocation of access rights, badges, equipment, et cetera    Evidence that new personnel has been briefed and educated  about policies and procedures in place.
Implement policy/procedures for  personnel changes, taking into ac- count timely revocation access  rights, badges, equipment.
Documentation of process for personnel changes, including, re- sponsibilities for managing changes, description of rights of ac- cess and possession of assets per role, procedures for briefing  and training personnel in new roles.
22   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Implement policy/procedures for  education and training for person- nel in new roles.
Evidence that personnel changes have been carried according to  the process and that access rights have been updated timely (e.g.
Evidence of checks of access rights etc.
Up to date policy/procedures for managing personnel changes.
Automated process review access   permissions that are initiated by  personnel changes.
Mapping    ISO27001: A.7.3.1   CSA CCM: CSA CCM, (HRS-04) Human Resources   BSI C5: HR-02, HR-05    CCS: 5.11 System Administration and Management, 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 6.10 Em- ployee Management    OCF: HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Re- sources   NIST: PR.
IP-11: Cybersecurity is included in human resources practices (e.g., deprovisioning, personnel screen- ing   PCI-DSS: A3.2- Document and validate PCI DSS scope: A3.2.3       SO 08 – Physical and environmental security   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains policies and measures for physical and environmental security of datacenters  such as physical access controls, alarm systems, environmental controls and automated fire extinguishers etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      23      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Basic implementation of physical security measures and environ-  mental controls, such as door and cabinet locks, burglar alarm, fire  alarms, fire extinguishers, CCTVs, et cetera.
List of personnel with authorized access.
Basic implementation of environmental controls.
Prevent unauthorized physical ac- cess to facilities and infrastructure  and set up environmental controls,  to protect against unauthorized ac- cess, burglary, fire, flooding, etc.
A list of personnel with authorized  access to facilities containing infor- mation systems and appropriate au- thorization credentials (e.g., badges,  identification cards) is maintained  by the organization.
Visitors are authenticated before  authorizing access to the facility.
Data center environmental condi- tions (e.g., water, power, tempera- ture and humidity controls) shall be  secured, monitored, maintained,  and tested to ensure protection  from unauthorized interception or  damage.
Implement a policy for physical se- curity measures and environmental  controls.
Documented policy for physical security measures and environ-  mental controls, including description of facilities and systems in  scope.
A designated official within the or- ganisation to review and approve  the list of personnel with authorized  access has been identified.
Visitors are escorted as required ac- cording to security policies and pro- cedures.
Visitor’s access records to the facil- ity are maintained by the organisa- tion.
The Physical access to the premises  is monitored by the organisation.
Industry standard implementation  of physical and environmental con- trols.
Evaluate the effectiveness of physi- cal and environmental controls peri- odically.
Physical and environmental controls, like electronic control of en- trance and audit trail, segmentation of spaces according to author- ization levels, automated fire extinguishers with halocarbon gases,  et cetera.
Records of visitors’ access to the facility.
Up to date policy for physical security measures and environmen-  tal controls.
Documentation about evaluation of environmental control, review   comments or change logs.
Proof of different versions of physical access records.
24   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
List with different access zones.
Review and update the policy for   physical security measures and envi- ronmental controls taking into ac- count changes and past incidents.
Physical access records are kept and  stored in case of an audit or investi- gation.
Physical access records are retained  as dictated by applicable regulations  or based on an organization-defined  period by approved policy.
Mapping    ISO27001: A.11   CSA CCM: CSA CCM (DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09, DCS- 10, DCS-11) - Datacenter security   BSI C5: PS-01, PS-02, PS-03, PS-04, PS-05, BCM-05    CCS: 5.17 Physical Security    OCF: OCF, DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09 Datacenter Security,   HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Resources   NIST: ID.AM-1: Physical devices and systems within the organization are inventoried, PR.AC-2: Physical access  to assets is managed and, PR.AT-5: Physical and information security personnel understand roles & responsibil- ities, PR.IP-5: Policy and regulations regarding the physical operating environment for organizational assets are  met, PR.IP-5: Policy and regulations regarding the physical operating environment for organizational assets are  met   PCI-DSS: Requirement 8 - Identify and authenticate access to system components: 8.6, Requirement 9 - Re- strict physical access to cardholder data: all         25   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016        SO 09 – Security of supporting utilities   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains appropriate security measures to ensure the security of supporting utilities such  as electricity, fuel, HVAC etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   3   Ensure security of supplies, such as elec- tric power, fuel or HVC.
Security of supplies is protected in a basic way, for example, backup  power and/or backup fuel is available   ?
Implement a policy for security of  critical supplies, such as electrical  power, fuel, etc.
Implement industry standard secu- rity measures to protect supplies  and supporting facilities.
power, fuel, etc., describing different types of supplies, and the se- curity measures protecting the supplies.
Evidence of industry standard measures to protect the security of  supplies, such as for example, passive cooling, automatic restart af- ter power interruption, battery backup power, diesel generators,  backup fuel, etc.
Advanced security measures to pro-  tect supplies.
Review and update policy and pro-  cedures to secure supplies regularly,  taking into account changes and  past incidents.
Advanced implementation controls to protect security of supplies, such  as active cooling, UP, hot standby power generators, sufficient fuel de- livery SLA, SLAs with fuel delivery companies, redundant cooling and  power backup systems.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC/27001 A.11.2.2   BSI C5: PS-04, BCM-05    CCS: 5.17 Physical Security    OCF: BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03,BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11 Business Con- tinuity Management & Operational Resilience, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Secu- rity & Information Lifecycle Management, DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08,  DCS-09 Datacenter Security, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS- 10, HRS-11 Human Resources, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS- 11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security      26      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016     SO 10 – Access control to network and information systems   Description  The DSP established and maintains appropriate policies and measures for access to business resources.
For exam- ple, zero trust model, ID management, authentication of users, access control systems, firewall and network secu- rity etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Access logs show unique identifiers for users and systems when   ?
Implement (logical) access control  mechanism for network and infor- mation systems to allow only au- thorized use.
Implement policy for protecting ac- cess to network and information  systems, addressing for example  roles, rights, responsibilities and  procedures for assigning and revok- ing access rights.
Based on the results of risk analysis,  choose the relevant authentication  mechanisms which are deemed rel- evant to different types of access.
Monitor access to network and in- formation systems, have a process  for approving exceptions and regis- tering access violations.
Security functions are restricted to  the least amount of users necessary  to ensure the security of the infor- mation system.
Segment information access within  network and information systems  based on security requirements.
Evaluate the effectiveness of access  control policies and procedures and   1   2   3   granted or denied access.
Overview of authentication and access control methods for sys-  tems and users.
Documented methods of access control containing at least:   o  Authentication type;   o  Authorization schema.
Access control policy including description of roles, groups, access   rights, procedures for granting and revoking access.
of access, e.g.
Single-Sign-On, two-factor authentication, multi-fac- tor authentication, etc, (including remote and WiFi mechanisms)  Log of access control policy violations and exceptions, approved by  the security officer.
List of authorized users who can access to security functions.
Network isolation and implementation of segmented network se-  curity zones that limit the impact of a malware incident  Segregation of duties control matrix.
Access control matrix.
Reports of (security) tests of access control mechanisms.
27   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   implement cross checks on access  control mechanisms.
Access control policy and access   control mechanisms are reviewed  and when needed revised.
Restrictions in the number of con-  current sessions are defined and im- plemented by the organization.
Updates of access control policy, review comments or change logs.
Real-time alerting when the number of defined consecutive invalid   access attempts is exceeded.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.9.2.1, A.9.2.2, A.9.2.4, A.9.3.1, A.9.4.2, A.9.4.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.1,  A.11.1.2, A.11.1.4, A.11.1.6, A.11.2.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.2.2, A.13.1.1, A.13.2.1, ISO/IEC 27001:2013  A.6.1.2, A.9.1.2, A.9.2.3, A.9.4.1, A.9.4.4, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.13.1.1, A.13.1.3, A.13.2.1   CSA CCM: CCA CCM (EKM-01, EKM-02, EKM-03, EKM-04) Encryption & key management   BSI C5: IDM-01, IDM-02, IDM-03, IDM-04, IDM-05, IDM-06, IDM-07, IDM-08, IDM-09, IDM-10, IDM-11, IDM-12,  KOS-01, KOS-02, KOS-03, KOS-04, KOS-05, KOS-06, KOS-07, KOS-08  COBIT 5:  COBIT 5 DSS05.04, DSS06.03, COBIT 5 DSS01.04, DSS05.05, COBIT 5 APO13.01, DSS01.04, DSS05.03    CCS: CCS, 5.3 Client Separation, 5.4 Security Architecture, 5.6 Network Segmentation, 5.7 Network Architec- ture, 5.11 System Administration and Management, 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 6.5 Data Pro- tection    OCF: OCF, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI- 02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management, EKM-01, EKM- 02, EKM-03, EKM-04 Encryption & Key Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06,  GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03,  HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Resources, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03,  IAM-04, IAM-05, IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09, IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM-12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Manage- ment, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infra- structure & Virtualization Security, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09  Supply Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability   NIST: PR.AC-5: Network integrity is protected, incorporating network segregation where appropriate   PCI-DSS: Requirement 1: Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data: all Require- ment 2: Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other security parameters: all                                                                     10 Of either known or unknown attacks or both.
28      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016     SO 11 – Integrity of network components and information systems   Description  The DSP establishes, protects, and maintains the integrity of its own network, platforms and services by taking steps  to prevent successful security incidents.
The goal is the protection from viruses, code injections and other malware  that can alter the functionality of the systems or integrity or accessibility of information.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Make sure software of network and   ?
Software and data in network and information systems is pro- tected using prevention, input controls, firewalls, encryption and  signing.
information systems is not tam- pered with or altered, for instance  by using input controls.
Protect security critical data (like  passwords, shared secrets, private  keys, etc.)
Take measures against malicious  software on (internal) network and  information systems.
Implement industry standard secu- rity measures, providing defense-in- depth and protection against tam- pering and altering of systems.
The malware protection mecha- nisms are centrally managed.
Spam protection mechanisms are  employed at system entry points  such as workstations, servers, or  mobile computing devices on the  network.
Sophisticated controls to protect in- tegrity of systems.
Evaluate and review the effective- ness of measures to protect integ- rity of systems.
Security critical data is protected using protection mechanisms  like separate storage, encryption, hashing, etc.
Documentation about how the protection of software and data in   network and information system is implemented.
Documented alternative countermeasures such as:   o  Securing of all physical and logical data interfaces;  o  Network isolation and implementation of segmented  network security zones that limit the impact of a mal- ware incident;   o  Comprehensive system hardening measures to minimize   the risk of malware incidents.
Documented description of centrally management tools.
Interactive access to critical systems is performed using hardened  hosts which have built in controls to inhibit phishing attacks, lat- eral movement, and persistent compromise.
Sophisticated controls to protect integrity of systems, such as  code signing, tripwire, et cetera.
29   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016          Mapping    ISO27001: A.13.1   BSI C5: RB-05, RB-17, RB-18, RB-23, IDM-08, IDM-11, KOS-02, KOS-03, KOS-05, BEI-01    CCS: 5.4 Security Architecture, 5.5 Encryption, 5.6 Network Segmentation, 5.7 Network Architecture, 6.5 Data  Protection    OCF: CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02,  DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management, EKM-01, EKM-02,  EKM-03, EKM-04 Encryption & Key Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06,  GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03,  IAM-04, IAM-05, IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09, IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM-12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Manage- ment, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infra- structure & Virtualization Security, IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability, MOS- 01,MOS-02,MOS-03,MOS-04,MOS-05,MOS-06,MOS-07,MOS-08,MOS-09,MOS-10,MOS-11,MOS-12,MOS-13 to  MOS-20 Mobile Security, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply  Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability, TVM-01, TVM-02, TVM-03 Threat and Vulnerability  Management   NIST: PR.AC-5: Network integrity is protected, incorporating network segregation where appropriate, PR.IP-5:  Policy and regulations regarding the physical operating environment for organizational assets are met   PCI-DSS: Requirement 4: Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks       SO 12 – Operating procedures   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains procedures for the operation of key network and information systems by person- nel.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   Set up operational procedures and as- sign responsibilities for operation of  critical systems.
Implement a policy for operation of  systems to make sure all critical sys- tems are operated and managed in  line with predefined procedures.
Documentation of operational procedures and responsibilities for key  network and information systems.
Documented policy for operation of critical systems, including an over- view of network and information systems in scope.
30   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016          LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   3   Review and update the policy/proce- dures for operation of critical systems,  taking into account incidents and/or  changes.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A12.1.1, A.12.5.1, A.13.2.1, A.14.2.2   CCS: 4.1 Service Desk, 4.2 Application Management, 4.3 Technical Management, 4.4 Operations Management    BSI C5: SA-01, AM-03, AM-07, PS-05, RB-06, RB-10, RB-11, RB-17, RB-19, IDM-01, KRY-01, KOS-07, PI-03, BEI- 01, BEI-03, SIM-01, BCM-02, MDM-01    OCF: BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03,BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11 Business Con- tinuity Management & Operational Resilience, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Con- figuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Information  Lifecycle Management, DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09 Datacenter  Security, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM- 11 Governance and Risk Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS- 10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security       SO 13 – Change management   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains change management procedures for key network and information systems.
These  may include for example, change and configuration procedures and processes, change procedures and tools, proce- dures for applying patches etc.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
1   2   Follow predefined procedures when  making changes to critical systems,  according to licensing agreements   Inform the customer of significant  changes to critical systems which af- fect the offered services.
Documentation of change management procedures for critical   systems.
Documentation of a customer update on significant changes   Implement and test policy/proce- dures for change management, to  make sure that changes of critical   ?
Documentation of change management policy/procedures in-  cluding, systems subject to the policy, objectives, roll back proce- dures, etc.
31      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   systems are always done following a  predefined way.
Document change management  procedures, and record for each  change the steps of the followed  procedure.
Review and update change management  procedures regularly, taking into ac- count changes and past incidents.
3      Mapping    Up to date change management procedures, review comments  and/or change logs.
ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.2, A.12.5.1, A.12.6.2, A.14.2.2, A.14.2.3, A.14.2.4   CSA CCM: CSA CCM (CCC-01, CCC-02, CC03, CC04, CC05, CC06) Change control & configuration management   BSI C5: BEI-03, BEI-04, BEI-05, BEI-06, BEI-07, BEI-08, BEI-09, BEI-10, BEI-11, BEI-12, DLL-02, BCM-02, BCM-04    COBIT 5:  COBIT 5 BAI06.01, BAI01.06    CCS: 4.2 Application Management, 4.4 Operations Management, 7.5 Change Management    OCF: DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management,  DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09 Datacenter Security, GRM-01, GRM- 02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk  Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13  Infrastructure & Virtualization Security   NIST: PR.
IP-3: Configuration change control processes are in place   PCI-DSS: Requirement 6: Develop and maintain secure systems and applications: 6.4.6, Requirement 12 - Main- tain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.1.1.1, A3.2- Document and validate PCI  DSS scope: A3.2.2.1, A3.4.1       SO 14 – Asset management   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains asset management procedures and configuration controls for key network and  information systems.
Security measures within sophistication levels      32   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016          LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   3   ?
A secure baseline configuration of  components and information sys- tems is developed, documented and  maintained.
Manage critical assets e.g.
software,  hardware, information and configu- rations of critical systems.
Implement policy/procedures for asset  management and configuration control.
Documented secure baseline configuration containing at least:   o  Essential capabilities of operation;   o  Restricted use of functions;   o  Security by default;   o  Ports, protocols and/or services allowed.
Documented policy/procedures for asset management, including   roles and responsibilities, the assets and configurations that are  subject to the policy, the objectives of asset management   ?
A configuration control inventory or inventories, containing con-  figurations of critical systems.
Up to date asset management policy/procedures, review com-  ments and/or change logs.
Documented and approved exceptions to the configuration base-  line containing the alternative controls in place to ensure the  confidentiality, availability and integrity of the information sys- tem.
Documented secure baseline configuration for development and   ?
A secure baseline configuration for   test environments.
development and test environments  is managed separately from the op- erational baseline configuration.
33   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.1.1, A.8.1.2, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.13.2.1, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.1,   ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1   CSA CCM: (DSI-01) Datacenter security - Asset management, (HRS-01) Human resources- Asset returns   BSI C5: AM-01, AM-02, AM-03, AM-04, AM-05, AM-06, AM-07, AM-08  COBIT 5: BAI09.01, BAI09.02, COBIT 5 BAI09.01, BAI09.02, BAI09.05, DSS05.02, APO02.02, APO01.02, DSS06.03    CCS: 4.2 Application Management, 5.1 Principles of Cloud Architecture, 5.16 Data Management, 6.1 Location of  Data and Data Centers, 7.6 Service Asset and Configuration Management    OCF: DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management,  DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09 Datacenter Security, HRS-01, HRS- 02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS-10, HRS-11 Human Resources, IVS-01, IVS- 02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtual- ization Security   NIST: PR.DS-3: Assets are formally managed throughout removal, transfers, and disposition   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.1, 12.2       SO 15 – Security incident detection & Response   Description  The  DSP  establishes and maintains procedures for detecting and responding  to  security  incidents appropriately.
These should consider detection, response, mitigation, recovery and remediation from a security incident.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Make sure personnel is available   and prepared to manage and handle  incidents.
Implement industry standard sys- tems and procedures for incident  detection and response.
Past incidents were detected and timely forwarded to the appro- priate people, including customers.
Incident detection systems and procedures, such as Security Inci- dent and Event Management (SIEM) tools, security helpdesk for  personnel and customers, reports and advisories from Computer  Emergency Response Teams (CERTs), tools to spot anomalies, et  cetera.
34   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Implement systems and procedures  for registering and forwarding inci- dents timely to the appropriate  people.
Policy/procedures for incident detection and response, including,  types of incidents that could occur, objectives, roles and respon- sibilities, detailed description, per incident type, how to manage  the incident, when to escalate to senior management (CISO e.g.
Management commitment with the incident response program.
Records of cyber exercises.
Regular cyber exercises and related  results to test the incident response  effectiveness are scheduled and  documented.
35   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.5   CSA CCM: (SEF-03, SEF-04, SEF-05) Security incident management (reporting & response metrics)   BSI C5: SIM-01, SIM-02, SIM-03, SIM-04, SIM-05, SIM-06, SIM-07, RB-10, RB-11, RB-14, RB19, RB-20, DLL-01,  DLL-02    COBIT 5:  BAI01.10    CCS: 4.1 Service Desk, 5.18 Response to Security Incidents, 6.12 Security Management, 7.1 Resolution Pro- cesses    OCF: CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, IVS-01, IVS-02,  IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualiza- tion Security, SEF-01, SEF-02, SEF-03, SEF-04, SEF-05 Security Incident Management, E-Discovery & Cloud Fo- rensics   NIST: DE.AE-5: Incident alert thresholds are established, RS.AN-2: The impact of the incident is understood   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.10,  12.10.1.
12.10.2       SO 16 – Security incident reporting   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains appropriate procedures for reporting and communicating about security inci- dents.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Communicate and report about on-go- ing or past incidents to third parties, cus- tomers, and/or government authorities,  when necessary.
List of authorities contacts containing at least:   o  National and international agencies together with struc- tures for co-operation for the protection of critical infra- structures;   o  National and international CERT organizations;   o  Disaster control organizations and disaster-relief teams;   o  Documented communication channels.
Implement policy and procedures for  communicating and reporting about inci- dents.
), the type   1   2   36   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   of incidents in scope, the required content of communications, no- tifications or reports, the channels to be used, and the roles re- sponsible for communicating, notifying and reporting.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.5    CSA CCM: CSA CMM (SEF-01, SEF-02, SEF-04,) Security incident management (contact/authority maintenance,  management & legal preparations)   BSI C5: SIM-04, SIM-06, OIS-03, DLL-01, DLL-02    COBIT 5:  EDM03.02, MEA03.02    CCS: 4.1 Service Desk, 5.18 Response to Security Incidents, 6.12 Security Management, 7.1 Resolution Pro- cesses    OCF: CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, IVS-01, IVS-02,  IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11, IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualiza- tion Security, SEF-01, SEF-02, SEF-03, SEF-04, SEF-05 Security Incident Management, E-Discovery & Cloud Fo- rensics   NIST: PR.
IP-9: Response plans (Incident Response and Business Continuity) and recovery plans (Incident Re- covery and Disaster Recovery) are in place and managed   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.10.2,  12.10.4, 12.10.5, 12.10.6       SO 17 – Business continuity   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains contingency plans and a continuity strategy for ensuring continuity of the ser- vices offered.
Security measures within sophistication levels      37   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016          LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   3   Implement a service continuity strategy for the com- munications networks and/or services provided.
Management commitment with the conti-  nuity strategy.
Implement contingency plans for critical systems.
Logs of activation and execution of contin- gency plans, including decisions taken, steps  followed, final recovery time.
Personnel involved in the continuity operations  plan are trained in their roles and responsibilities  with respect to the information system and re- ceive refresher training on an organization-de- fined frequency.
38   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC/27001:2013 A.17.1   CSA CCM: (BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03, BCR-04-BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11) Busi- ness continuity management & operational resilience retention policy   BSI C5: BCM-01, BCM-02, BCM-03, BCM-04, BCM-05    CCS: 5.12 Backup, 7.2 IT Service Continuity Management    OCF: BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03, BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11 Business Con- tinuity Management & Operational Resilience, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM- 07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management   NIST: PR.
IP-9: Response plans (Incident Response and Business Continuity) and recovery plans (Incident Re- covery and Disaster Recovery) are in place and managed   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.10.1       SO 18 – Disaster recovery capabilities   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains an appropriate disaster recovery capability for restoring the offered services in  case of natural and/or major disasters.
Security measures within sophistication levels11      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   Prepare for recovery and restoration of services fol- lowing disasters.
Implement policy/procedures for deploying disas- ter recovery capabilities.
Implement industry standard disaster recovery ca- pabilities or be assured they are available from  third parties (such as national emergency net- works).
Measures are in place for dealing with disasters, such as  failover sites in other regions, backups12 of critical data to  remote locations, et cetera.
Documented policy/procedures for deploying disas-  ter recovery capabilities, including list of natural  and/or major disasters that could affect the services,  and a list of disaster recovery capabilities (either  those available internally or provided by third par- ties).
Industry standard implementation of disaster capa- bilities, such as mobile equipment, mobile sites, fail- over sites, et cetera.
39   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Advanced implementation controls for disaster re- covery capabilities to mitigate natural and/major  disasters.
Advanced implementation controls for disaster re-  covery capabilities, such as full redundancy and failo- ver mechanisms to handle natural and/or major dis- asters.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.1, A.17.1.1, A.17.1.2   CSA CCM: (BCR-09, BCR-11) Business continuity management & operational resilience retention policy   BSI C5: BCM-04, BCM-05    COBIT 5: DSS04.03    CCS: 5.1 Principles of Cloud Architecture, 5.12 Backup, 7.2 IT Service Continuity Management    OCF: BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03,BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11 Business Con- tinuity Management & Operational Resilience, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM- 07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management   NIST: PR.
IP-10: Response and recovery plans are tested   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.10.1        SO 19 – Monitoring and logging    Description  The DSP establishes and maintains procedures and systems for monitoring and logging of the offered services (logs  of user actions, system transactions/performance monitors, automated monitoring tools etc.).
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Implement monitoring and logging of critical systems.
1   Logs and monitoring reports of critical network and infor- mation systems.
40      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Implement policy for logging and monitoring of  critical systems.
o  Date and time of the event;  o  Component of the information system   where the event concurred;   o  Type of event;  o  User/subject identity;  o  Outcome of the event.
2   3      Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4   CSA CCM: CSA CCM (IVS-01)- Infrastructure & Virtualization Security (Audit Logging / Intrusion Detection)   BSI C5: RB-02, RB-07, RB-10, RB-11, RB-12, RB-13, RB-14, RB-15, RB-16, KOS-02, DLL-02    CCS: 5.11 System Administration and Management    OCF: OCF, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11, IVS-12, IVS-13  Infrastructure & Virtualization Security   NIST: DE.CM: Security continuous monitoring   PCI-DSS: A1: Additional PCI DSS Requirements for Shared Hosting Providers: A1.3       SO 20 – System tests   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains appropriate procedures for testing key network and information systems un- derpinning the offered services.
41   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Test networks and information systems before  using them or connecting them to existing sys- tems.
Test reports of the network and information sys- tems, including tests after big changes or the intro- duction of new systems.
1   2   3   Implement policy/procedures for testing net- work and information systems.
Implement tools for automated testing.
The installation or de-installation of patches is  done periodically in an organized manner.
Policy/procedures for testing networks and infor- mation systems, including when tests must be car- ried out, test plans, test cases, test report templates.
Updated policy/procedures for testing networks and   information systems, review comments, and/or  change log.
42   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.14.2   BSI C5: RB-18, RB-21, BEI-01, BSI-02, BEI-03, BEI-07, BEI-09    CCS: 4.3 Technical Management, 6.2 Compliance Management, 6.4 Audit Management, 6.12 Security Manage- ment    OCF: OCF, AIS-01, AIS-02, AIS-03, AIS-04 Application & Interface Security, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04,  CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07  Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06,  GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS- 04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security,  IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability, MOS-01,MOS-02,MOS-03,MOS-04,MOS- 05,MOS-06,MOS-07,MOS-08,MOS-09,MOS-10,MOS-11,MOS-12,MOS-13 to MOS-20 Mobile Security, STA-01,  STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and  Accountability, TVM-01, TVM-02, TVM-03 Threat and Vulnerability Management   NIST: PR.
IP-10: Response and recovery plans are tested   PCI-DSS: A3.2- Document and validate PCI DSS scope: A3.2.4, A3.2.5.1    SO 21 – Security assessments   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains appropriate procedures for performing security assessments of critical assets.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   ?
Ensure critical systems undergo security scans  and security testing regularly, particularly  when new systems are introduced and follow- ing changes.
Implement policy/procedures for security as- sessments and security testing.
A single point of contact and communication   channels for information security related is- sues with manufacturers or vendors have  been identified.
Reports from past security scans and security tests.
Documented policy/procedures for security assess- ments and security testing, including, which assets,  in what circumstances, the type of security assess- ments and tests, frequency, approved parties (inter- nal or external), confidentiality levels for assessment  and test results and the objectives security assess- ments and tests.
43   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Evaluate the effectiveness of policy/proce- dures for security assessments and security  testing.
List of reports about security assessments and secu- rity tests.
Review and update policy/procedures for se-  curity assessments and security testing, taking  into account changes and past incidents.
Information obtained from the vulnerability  scanning process is shared with designated  personnel throughout the organization and  authorities to help eliminate similar vulnerabil- ities in other information systems.
Up to date policy/procedures for security assess-  ments and security testing, review comments,  and/or change log.
Records of vulnerabilities information sharing.
Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1, A.18.2.2   CSA CCM: (AAC-02) Audit assurance & compliance independent audits   BSI C5: COM-02, COM-03, RB-17, RB-18, RB-19, RB-21    CCS: 6.2 Compliance Management, 6.4 Audit Management, 6.12 Security Management, 6.13 Embedding Exter- nal Services    OCF: OCF, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, GRM-01,  GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and  Risk Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS- 12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security, IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Port- ability, MOS-01,MOS-02,MOS-03,MOS-04,MOS-05,MOS-06,MOS-07,MOS-08,MOS-09,MOS-10,MOS-11,MOS- 12,MOS-13 to MOS-20 Mobile Security, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA- 09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability   PCI-DSS: Requirement 6: Develop and maintain secure systems and applications: 6.6       SO 22 – Compliance   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains a policy for checking and enforcing the compliance of internal policies against the  national and EU  legal requirements and industry  best practices  and standards.
Security measures within sophistication levels      44      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Monitor compliance to standards and legal re- quirements.
Implement policy/procedures for compliance mon- itoring and auditing.
Documented policy/procedures for monitoring com-  pliance and auditing, including what (assets, pro- cesses, infrastructure), frequency, guidelines who  should carry out audits (in- or external), relevant se- curity policies that are subject to compliance moni- toring and auditing, the objectives and high level ap- proach of compliance monitoring and auditing, tem- plates for audit reports.
Detailed monitoring and audit plans, including long   term high level objectives and planning.
1   2   3      Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC/27001:2013 A.18   CSA CCM: CSA CCM (AAC-01, AAC-02, AAC-03) Audit assurance & compliance   BSI C5: COM-01, COM-02, COM-03    COBIT 5: 5.15 Configuration Management, 6.2 Compliance Management, 6.4 Audit Management, 6.12 Security  Management, 6.13 Embedding External Services    OCF: OCF, AAC-01, AAC-02, AAC-03 Audit Assurance & Compliance, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05  Change Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Secu- rity & Information Lifecycle Management, EKM-01, EKM-02, EKM-03, EKM-04 Encryption & Key Management,  GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Govern- ance and Risk Management, HRS-01, HRS-02, HRS-03, HRS-04, HRS-05, HRS-06, HRS-07, HRS-08, HRS-09, HRS- 10, HRS-11 Human Resources, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03, IAM-04, IAM-05, IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09,  IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM-12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06,  IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security, IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY- 03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability, MOS-01,MOS-02,MOS-03,MOS-04,MOS-05,MOS-06,MOS- 07,MOS-08,MOS-09,MOS-10,MOS-11,MOS-12,MOS-13 to MOS-20 Mobile Security, SEF-01, SEF-02, SEF-03,  SEF-04, SEF-05 Security Incident Management, E-Discovery & Cloud Forensics, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04,  STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and  accountability      45   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016        SO 23 – Security of data at rest   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains appropriate mechanisms for the protection of the data at rest13.
Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   ?
The access control, sharing, copying, transmittal and  distribution of confidential and restricted data are  defined   Safeguards to protect the secrecy of secret (private)  key(s) are in place   Limited or ad hoc processes exist to protect elec- tronic media   Evidence from regular reviews of devices/storage  media to examine that data is removed or securely  overwritten prior to disposal.
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to pro- tect the confidentiality and integrity of infor- mation stored on digital media during  transport outside of controlled areas and in  transit when moving within and between com- pany data locations.
Implement cryptographic mechanisms such as  digital signatures and hashes to detect unau- thorized changes to critical data at rest.
Implement mechanisms for the secure dis- posal of the data after their lawful use.
Data retention policy exists and is complete   scheme which takes into account data’s value,  legal requirements, sensitivity, and criticality  to the organization.
Use of removable media is prohibited unless   strictly required.
Establish a policy around confidentiality and  integrity of data at rest and make all personnel  to whom it is relevant, are aware of the policy  and procedure and what it implies for their  work.
Set detailed cryptographic key establishment  and management policies and procedures for  data at rest (only if cryptography has been im- plemented).
Formal standard to govern protection of electronic  transportable media is in place.
Evidence for the existence of mechanisms which  support in ensuring confidentiality and integrity of  the data at rest such as cryptographic mechanisms,  file share scanning, secure offline storage, removal  of sensitive data from storage media etc.
Evidence of the existence of a mechanism (either  manual or automated) for the establishment and  management of cryptographic keys (only if cryptog- raphy has been implemented).
46         Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
A set of best practice procedures are in place   ?
Obtain evidence of written authorization to dispose   for the secure disposal of physical assets.
Implement information labelling and handling  procedures in accordance with the classifica- tion scheme   The data retention policy considers the value  of data over time and the data retention laws  the organization may be subject to.
Strong controls are in place surrounding con- nection of media devices.
Use automated key management mechanisms.
Labelling of information of information is reviewed  on a regular basis   The data retention policy is supported by a compre- hensive data retention schedule, which contains the  retention period for each type of data used by the  organization    ?
Reports of the data retention policy and configura- tion which ensure that they are in line with require- ments and good practices   ?
Technology infrastructure automatically encrypts  and protects electronic transportable media in the  environment.
Portable media standards are reviewed at least an- nually and on an ad hoc basis for any new technol- ogy or threats.
Personnel are aware of the confidentiality and integ- rity of the data at rest policy and procedures and  what it implies for their work (interview).
Evidence of secure key generation, use, storage and  destruction of data.
All devices leaving the controlled environment must  be purged of data using disk wiping utilities or degas- sing methods (reformatting is not enough)   47   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3, A.13.1.1, A.13.2.1, A.13.2.3, A.14.1.2,  A.14.1.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.2, A.7.1.1, A.7.1.2, A.7.3.1, A.8.2.2, A.8.2.3, A.9.1.1, A.9.1.2, A.9.2.3,  A.9.4.1, A.9.4.4, A.9.4.5, A.13.1.3, A.13.2.1, A.13.2.3, A.13.2.4, A.14.1.2, A.14.1.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.2.1,  A.12.5.1, A.14.1.2, A.14.1.3, ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.4   CSA CCM: (DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07) Data security   BSI C5: AM-05, SIM-02, RB-10, COM-01, KRY-01, KRY-02, KRY-03, KRY-04, PI-05, RB-11, RB-13, AM-04, AM-07,  RB-23, KOS-05, BEI-03, HR-02, HR-03    COBIT 5: APO01.06, BAI02.01, BAI06.01, DSS06.06    CCS: 5.1 Principles of Cloud Architecture, 5.2 Development Processes, 5.3 Client Separation, 5.5 Encryption, 5.7  Network Architecture, 5.9 Virtualization, 5.13 User Management and Authentication, 5.16 Data Management,  6.5 Data Protection    OCF: OCF, AIS-01, AIS-02, AIS-03, AIS-04 Application & Interface Security, AAC-01, AAC-02, AAC-03 Audit Assur- ance & Compliance, BCR-01, BCR-02, BCR-03,BCR-04, BCR-05, BCR-06, BCR-07, BCR-08, BCR-09, BCR-10, BCR-11  Business Continuity Management & Operational Resilience, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04, CCC-05 Change  Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07 Data Security &  Information Lifecycle Management, DCS-01, DCS-02, DCS-03, DCS-04, DCS-05, DCS-06, DCS-07, DCS-08, DCS-09  Datacenter Security, EKM-01, EKM-02, EKM-03, EKM-04 Encryption & Key Management, GRM-01, GRM-02,  GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Man- agement, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03, IAM-04, IAM-05, IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09, IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM- 12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09,  IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security, IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 In- teroperability & Portability, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply  Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability   NIST: Data Security (PR.DS): Information and records (data) are managed consistent with the organization’s  risk strategy to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information.
ID.GV-3: Legal and regula- tory requirements regarding cybersecurity, including privacy and civil liberties obligations, are understood and  managed   PCI-DSS: Requirement 12 - Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel: 12.6       SO 24 –Interface security   Description  The DSP should establish and maintain an appropriate policy for keeping secure the interfaces of services which  use personal data.
14                                                                  14 Customer interface is considered a powerful tool offered by the DSPs to the customers as a means to enhance customer’s  control on his own data in the cloud.
48   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Set a high level security policy for keeping the  cloud and online market interfaces secure    ?
Make key personnel aware of the security pol-  ?
Documented security policy, including networks and   services in scope, critical assets supporting them,  and the security objectives.
Enable secure channels for data transmission  (e.g.
Key personnel are aware of the security policy and  its objectives (interview).
At least one secure channel is enabled.
Set detailed security policies for data security  to include protection of customer administra- tion interfaces (TLS2.0, 2-Factor authentica- tion) etc.
Make all personnel aware of the security pol-  icy and what it implies for their work.
Review the security policy following incidents.
Implement 2-Factor authentication   ?
Documented security policies, approved by manage-  ment, including applicable law and regulations, ac- cessible to personnel.
Personnel are aware of the security policy and what  it implies for their work (interview).
Review the security policy periodically, and   take into account violations, exceptions, past  incidents, past tests/exercises, and incidents  affecting other (similar) providers in the sec- tor.
Security policies are up to date and approved by sen- ior management.
1   2   3      49   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Mapping    CSA CCM: (AIS-01, AIS-02, AIS-03, AIS -04) Application & Interface Security   BSI C5: OIS-02, SA-01, PI-01, HR-02, HR-03, KRY-01, KRY-02, SIM-07, SIM-01, SIM-03, SIM-04, SIM-05, SIM-06  IDM-08    CCS: 5.1 Principles of Cloud Architecture, 5.2 Development Processes, 5.4 Security Architecture    OCF: OCF, AIS-01, AIS-02, AIS-03, AIS-04 Application & Interface Security, EKM-01, EKM-02, EKM-03, EKM-04  Encryption & Key Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06, GRM-07, GRM-08,  GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, IAM-01, IAM-02, IAM-03, IAM-04, IAM-05,  IAM-06, IAM-07, IAM-08, IAM-09, IAM-10, IAM-11,IAM-12,IAM-13 Identity & Access Management, IVS-01, IVS- 02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtual- ization Security, IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability, STA-01, STA-02, STA-03,  STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and Accountability,   PCI-DSS: Requirement 2: Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other security param- eters: 2.3       SO 25 –Software security   Description  The DSP establishes and maintains a policy which ensures that the software is developed in a manner which re- spects security15.
Security measures within sophistication levels16      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   1   2   Establish guidelines for maintaining software secu- rity    ?
Implement a defined set of security measures  to secure development environments, includ- ing measures for protecting test data.
Depending on the type of requirement include   software testing methods (e.g.
Evidence of the test results to secure development  environments, including measures for protecting test  data are maintained.
15 In case that software development is outsourced the DSP should take provisions to include Software Lifecycle  Agreements (SLA) as an essential part of the procurement process.
16 Although patching has been already described under SO 13: ‘Change Management’, one can include it under this  objective as well.
50   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Security by design is tested at various stages of  the SDLC prior to Go-live utilizing independent  tools and a self-service testing platform  throughout SDLC.
Results of application assessments are used to   regularly enhance developer training and the  SDLC process.
Test results are main- tained and approved by senior management    ?
Documented evidence of the review process of the   patch development process, security training for  software developments and secure by design soft- ware configurations   Evidence that a software testing method is chosen at  each stage of the software development lifecycle   ?
3         Mapping    CSA CCM: (AIS -04) -Application & Interface Security/Data Security Integrity   BSI C5: BEI-01, BEI-02    CCS: 5.1 Principles of Cloud Architecture, 5.2 Development Processes, 5.9 Virtualization, 5.14 Patch Manage- ment    OCF: OCF, AIS-01, AIS-02, AIS-03, AIS-04 Application & Interface Security, CCC-01, CCC-02, CCC-03, CCC-04,  CCC-05 Change Control & Configuration Management, DSI-01, DSI-02, DSI-03, DSI-04, DSI-05, DSI-06, DSI-07  Data Security & Information Lifecycle Management, GRM-01, GRM-02, GRM-03, GRM-04, GRM-05, GRM-06,  GRM-07, GRM-08, GRM-09, GRM-10, GRM-11 Governance and Risk Management, IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS- 04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11,IVS-12,IVS-13 Infrastructure & Virtualization Security,  IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability, MOS-01,MOS-02,MOS-03,MOS-04,MOS- 05,MOS-06,MOS-07,MOS-08,MOS-09,MOS-10,MOS-11,MOS-12,MOS-13 to MOS-20 Mobile Security, STA-01,  STA-02, STA-03, STA-04, STA-05, STA-06, STA-07, STA-08, STA-09 Supply Chain Management, Transparency and  Accountability, TVM-01, TVM-02, TVM-03 Threat and Vulnerability Management   NIST: ID.AM-2: Software platforms and applications within the organization are inventoried, ID.AM-5: Re- sources (e.g., hardware, devices, data, and software) are prioritized based on their classification, criticality, and  business value, PR.DS-6: Integrity checking mechanisms are used to verify software, firmware, and information  integrity, DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unauthorized personnel, connections, devices, and software is performed   PCI-DSS: Requirement 2: Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other security param- eters: 2.4       SO 26 – Interoperability and portability   Description  Online market place and cloud providers use standards which allow customers to interface with other digital ser- vices and/or if needed to migrate to other providers offering similar services.
51   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       Security measures within sophistication levels      LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   Implement processes and procedures which allow  customers to interact with services and/or if  needed to migrate to other providers offering simi- lar services, in an easy and basic way   ?
Use of OVF standard format for virtual machines    Implement industry standard security measures,  which promote interoperability and portability, in- cluding fall-back procedures (for example in the  case of cloud computing services).
Set up state of the art controls to facilitate in- teroperability & portability.
Evaluate and review the effectiveness of in- teroperability & portability measures.
Use of SAML/XACML that acts as an interface to   manage the provision of identification and user au- thentication between user and provider    ?
Documentation about how the protection and integ- rity of infrastructure & virtualization security is main- tained.
Information on the fallback procedures is explicitly  described.
State of the art controls exist and are a crucial aspect  to mitigate security related risks for customers    ?
Where applicable, tools for detection of anomalous   usage or risks associated is used, which allows the  option for customer to plan in advance the interop- erability & portability measures.
1   2   3      Mapping    CSA CCM: (IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05) - Interoperability & Portability   BSI C5: PI-01, PI-02, PI-03, PI-04, PI-05    CCS: 5.8 Network Monitoring, 5.10 System Monitoring    OCF: IPY-01, IPY-02, IPY-03, IPY-04, IPY-05 Interoperability & Portability       SO 27 – Customer Monitoring and log access   Description  The cloud provider grants customers access to relevant transaction and performance logs so customers can inves- tigate issues or security incidents when needed.
Security measures within sophistication levels      52      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    LEVEL   SECURITY MEASURES   EXAMPLES   ?
Separate the logging information between the  different customers.
Implement monitoring and logging of cus- tomer data.
Implement policy for logging and monitoring  of customer data depending on the type of  service.
1   2   3      Mapping    ISO27001: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.12.4.2, A.12.4.3 & A.12.4.4   CSA CCM: (IVS-01)- Infrastructure & Virtualization Security, (Audit Logging / Intrusion Detection)   BSI C5: RB-13H, RB-14, RB14H, RB-10, RB-11, RB-12, RB-13, RB-15, RB-16H, RB-23    COBIT 5: APO11.04    CCS: 5.8 Network Monitoring, 5.10 System Monitoring    OCF: IVS-01, IVS-02, IVS-03, IVS-04, IVS-05, IVS-06, IVS-07, IVS-08, IVS-09, IVS-10, IVS-11, IVS-12, IVS-13 Infra- structure & Virtualization Security   NIST: PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are determined, documented, implemented, and reviewed in accordance with  policy, PR.MA-1: Maintenance and repair of organizational assets is performed and logged in a timely manner,  with approved and controlled tools            53   Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       3.
Summary   To summarise, the level of sophistication to which security measures are implemented from one organization to  another can vary for a multitude of reasons.
For instance, this may depend on the industry sector, the size of the  company or the time and effort that the management can afford to invest in implementing security measures.
As a result, some  security objectives may be prioritized over others and thus the sophistication levels may also differ.
There are high level security objectives, which are interchangeable among all three DSP categories, while a few  belong to specific DSP categories.
In the following table, the common security objectives for all DSPs are marked  with a check mark.
54         SECURITY OBJECTIVES   SO 01 - Information security policy   SO 02 – Risk Management   SO 03 – Security Roles   SO 04 – Third party management    SO 05 – Background checks   SO 06 – Security knowledge and training   SO 07 – Personnel changes   SO 08 – Physical and environmental security   SO 09 – Security of supporting utilities   ??
SO 10 – Access control to network and information sys- tems   ??
SO 11 – Integrity of network components and information  systems   ??
SO 12 – Operating procedures   SO 13 – Change management   SO 14 – Asset management   SO 15 – Security incident detection & Response   SO 16 – Security incident reporting   SO 17 – Business continuity   SO 18 – Disaster recovery capabilities   SO 19 – Monitoring and logging   SO 20 – System tests   ??
Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016       SO 21 – Security assessments   SO 22 – Compliance    SO 23 –Security of data at rest   SO 24 –Interface security   SO 25 –Software security   SO 26 – Interoperability and portability   SO 27 – Customer Monitoring and log access   ??
If a security objec- tive is covered in one of the schemes below it is marked with a dot.
SECURITY OBJECTIVES   ISO27001  CSA CCM   BSI C5   COBIT 5   CCS  OCF  NIST   PCI-DSS   CES17   SO1 Information Security Pol- icy   SO2 Risk management   SO3 Security roles    SO 04 Security in supplier re- lationships   SO 05 Background checks    SO 06 Security knowledge  and training    SO 07 Personnel changes    SO 08 Physical and environ- mental security    SO 09 Security of supporting  utilities    SO 10 Access control to net- work and information sys- tems    SO 11 Integrity of network  and information systems   SO 12 Operating procedures    SO 13 Change management   SO 14 Asset management    SO 15 Security incident detec- tion & response    SO 16 Security incident re- porting   SO 17 Business continuity                                                                   17 Including CES+   ??
55      Technical guidelines for the implementation of minimum security measures for DSPs  December 2016    SECURITY OBJECTIVES   ISO27001  CSA CCM   BSI C5   COBIT 5   CCS  OCF  NIST   PCI-DSS   ??
CES17      SO 18 Disaster recovery capa- bilities    SO 19 Monitoring and logging  policies   SO 20 System tests   SO 21 Security assessments    SO 22 Compliance    SO 23 Security of data at rest   SO 24 Interface security    SO 25 - Software security   SO 26 Interoperability and  portability    SO 27 Customer monitoring  and log access   ??
56   ENISA  European Union Agency for Network   and Information Security  Science and Technology Park of Crete (ITE)  Vassilika Vouton, 700 13, Heraklion, Greece      Athens Office  1 Vasilissis Sofias  Marousi 151 24, Athens, Greece   TP-05-16-077-EN-N   PO Box 1309, 710 01 Heraklion, Greece  Tel: +30 28 14 40 9710  info@enisa.europa.eu  www.enisa.europa.eu   ISBN: 978-92-9204-203-5  DOI: 10.2824/456345