4, JULY 2010  853  Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructures:  Attack and Defense Modeling  Chee-Wooi Ten, Student Member, IEEE, Govindarasu Manimaran, Senior Member, IEEE, and  Chen-Ching Liu, Fellow, IEEE  Abstract—Disruption of electric power operations can be catastrophic on national security and the economy.
Due to the complexity of widely dispersed assets and the interdependences among computer, communication, and power infrastructures, the requirement to meet security and quality compliance on opera- tions is a challenging issue.
In recent years, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) established a cybersecu- rity standard that requires utilities’ compliance on cybersecurity of control systems.
This standard identi?es several cyber-related vulnerabilities that exist in control systems and recommends several remedial actions (e.g., best practices).
In this paper, a comprehensive survey on cybersecurity of critical infrastructures is reported.
A supervisory control and data acquisition security framework with the following four major components is proposed: 1) real-time monitoring; 2) anomaly detection; 3) impact analy- sis; and 4) mitigation strategies.
In addition, an attack-tree-based methodology for impact analysis is developed.
The attack-tree formulation based on power system control networks is used to evaluate system-, scenario-, and leaf-level vulnerabilities by iden- tifying the system’s adversary objectives.
The measure of vulnerabilities in the power system control framework is determined based on ex- isting cybersecurity conditions, and then, the vulnerability indices are evaluated.
Index Terms—Attack tree, cybersecurity, defense systems,  power system control, security vulnerability.
INTRODUCTION  C RITICAL infrastructures are complex physical and cyber-  based systems that form the lifeline of a modern soci- ety, and their reliable and secure operation is of paramount importance to national security and economic vitality.
In most sense, the cyber system forms the backbone of a nation’s critical infrastructures, which means that a major security incident on cyber systems could have signi?cant impacts on the reliable and safe operations of the physical systems that rely on it.
This work was supported by the Elec- tric Power Research Center, Iowa State University.
The focus of this paper is the cybersecurity of an electric power infrastructure.
Physical security of the power infrastructure has been recog- nized by the power community as an important issue.
Due to the growing concern over the potential sabotage, the focus of physical security has been broadened to incorporate critical substations that may result in cascading effects, leading to a wide-area blackout [10].
Electronic security is as important as physical security due to the potential impact that can be made through operations of critical cyberassets.
Electronic security here refers to the security of critical cyberassets of the power infrastructure.
It includes the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems that are widely used in the industry for monitoring and control of the power grid.
These systems include computer and communication devices installed in power plants, substa- tions, energy control centers, company headquarters, regional operating of?ces, and large load sites.
Cybersecurity of crit- ical infrastructures systems encompasses three major control systems.
SCADA systems are the central nerve system of a wide-area control network that constantly gathers the latest status from remote units [1].
A process control system (PCS) is implemented with a closed-loop control for an ongoing task.
A distributed control system (DCS) is the complex combinations of SCADA and PCS.
A variety of communica- tion systems are deployed on the power grid for the purpose of monitoring and control.
The analog and status data acquired by SCADA are utilized by an energy management system (EMS) in the control center to perform a wide range of system func- tions, including real-time control.
The communication system for wide-area protection and control of a power system can be weakened due to component failures or communication delays [14].
Failure of an important communication channel in the operational environment could result in an inability to control or operate important facilities, leading to possible power outages.
Other than the communication between the control center and substations that has long been established, the inter- control center communication through the Internet serves as the data exchange mechanism between interconnected networks [15].
The use of standard protocols on critical systems leads to a source of vulnerability [17].
Due to technological changes over the last decade, protocols have been re?ned to become more ?exible in their interoper- ability and maintainability, speci?cally in an open architecture with high-speed communications [12], [18].
Although the complex infrastructure provides great capabilities for operation, control, business, and analysis, it also increases security risks due to cyber-related vulnerabilities.
Technological advances can help to reduce the de?ciencies of current power and communication systems [20].
However, tech- nological complexity can also lead to security breaches that are prone to electronic intrusions.
A successful intrusion into the control networks can lead to undesirable switching operations executed by attackers, resulting in widespread power outages.
The vulnerabilities of a power system include three main compo- nents, i.e., computer, communication, and power system [21]– [24].
Entities in the control center, substation automation system (SAS) [25], [26], distribution management system, Independent System Operator (ISO), and power plant process control system [27]–[31] are interlinked.
An enhanced authentication process on the critical cyberassets, such as access to certain control functions, should be validated through the biometric features of an individual [32].
Security awareness for emerging technologies is critical to prevent cyberattacks.
Information security in an open system architecture, with respect to potential threats and goals (in terms of con?dentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability), is a challenging task [33].
ISO/IEC 17779 recommends a list of important controls on the information security management system [34].
A virtual enterprise is one way to promote a collaborative group of managing existing network enterprises by coordinating, controlling, and communicating remotely to the networks with different roles and user types [35].
Govern- ments have responded by increasing national readiness as the connectivity of control networks increases [4].
Vulnerability assessment for process control systems has been recognized as an important task that has an impact on power system operation [36], [37].
The International Electrotechnical Com- mission Technical Council (IEC TC 57), i.e., power system management and associated information exchange, has ad- vanced the standard communication protocol security in IEC62351 with stronger encryption and authentication mecha- nisms [38].
Aside from the de?ciencies of the commu- nication architecture on availability, scalability, and quality of service in real time, a new approach has been envisioned for strengthening power grid in terms of security, ef?ciency, and reliability [39], [40].
Increasingly sophis- ticated tools help to penetrate existing network connections [42].
Reference [7] identi?es the latest cybersecurity technolo- gies for protection.
A survey conducted by electric utilities indicates the growing concern over the attacks on power grid through communi- cation security breaches.
Intrusion into the control networks remains the highest concern based on the survey [43].
Recent computer crime and security surveys from the Computer Se- curity Institute (CSI) indicate that the system penetration by outsiders may cause high ?nancial losses [44].
The analysis identi?es the possible consequences and measures to prevent them from attacks [45].
Awareness programs about exploited vulnerabilities are set up to improve the control system security [46].
Traditional IT solutions may not be well positioned to control systems in which CERT and national test beds are set up for strengthening the defense for the domain-speci?c purpose [49].
The initial intention of the American Gas Association 12 Task Group is to establish the protection guidelines for gas SCADA systems [50].
A comparison between compliance standards of power entity and other similar SCADA systems has been reported in [6] and [53].
Research on information security has stressed on modeling dependability [54] and risk assessment framework [55], [56].
A new paradigm for classi?cation of the security level using declustering in database is introduced [57].
Correlation is also a technique to identify intrusion into a network [58].
A game approach to modeling of response strategies for attackers and administrators is used as a technique to enhance network security [59].
SCADA SECURITY FRAMEWORK  A strategic roadmap framework has been developed to ad- dress the security issue in a proactive manner [1], [60], [61].
To assess the information security of control systems, it is useful to quantify the resiliency of a power grid in terms of threats and the impact that they can make.
Security system engineering deals with adversary models that describe attack objectives and relevant impact/mission based on hypotheses [64].
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  855  Fig.
Proposed SCADA Security Framework: RAIM Framework.
Analysis of the economic impact helps to identify the appropriate measures that mitigate risks at pivotal network nodes [66], [67].
1 shows the proposed security SCADA framework, which encompasses four key components: 1) real-time moni- toring; 2) anomaly detection; 3) impact analysis; and 4) miti- gation strategies (RAIM).
A. Real-Time Monitoring  A variety of information networks are interconnected to the electric power grid for the purposes of sensing, monitoring, and control [68], [69].
These information networks are closely asso- ciated with the SCADA system.
The environment of a SCADA system involves a control center, intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) at substations, distributed sensors that measure electrical and other quantities on the network, and a variety of communi- cation links between the control center and substations.
As mentioned, the data acquired through the SCADA system are utilized in the EMS for a wide range of system operation and real-time control functions.
A typical  resource exhaustion attack, such as a packet ?ooding attack, involves compromised machines sending a large number of spurious packets to a target server(s) and/or network, which is the potential victim.
In addition, there have been large-scale worm propagation activities in recent years that consume a signi?cant amount of compute and network resources, causing disruptions to information infrastructure systems.
Information and commu- nication infrastructures that are integral parts of the electric power system are not exempt from this potential trend and the consequences.
In fact, these issues are more pronounced in critical infrastructure systems due to the legacy nature of the information/communication technologies used therein and the catastrophic nature of the consequences.
For example, a DoS attack on power infrastructure elements such as the substation, control center, or the communication network can have a serious effect on the SCADA system and the associ- ated critical functions.
These functions include state estima- tion, alarm processing, and preventive or emergency controls.
1) They slow down or bring down the control center network, causing degradation in its real-time control performance.
Resource-exhaustion-based DoS attacks can be launched even if control centers and substations are fully secured by the latest security technologies and secure versions of SCADA protocols.
Examples of secure versions are Modbus and Inter- Control Center Communication Protocols (ICCP) [15].
Sources in SASs that can be correlated in the substation-level (local) and control center (global) networks include the follow- ing : 1) relay setting of IEDs [73], [74]; 2) user credentials and application logs; 3) traf?c logs, such as volume within local and global networks; and 4) status of running applications.
1) Temporal correlation: This is a data extraction from a local environment that can be learning- or rule-based by training the instrumental devices to detect the malicious modi?cation in relay settings.
There has been a work by Su et al.
How- ever, such an implementation has only considered limited perspectives of abnormality, which can be re?ned through correlations among other local sources.
2) Spatial correlation: This involves properties for the analysis of events occurring in multiple substations, in control centers, or at substations and control centers.
This is to ensure a higher security level when a system is under sophisticated attacks that may lead to signi?cant economic losses and equipment damage.
To perform anomaly detection and associated impact analy- sis, the various system logs of the SCADA network need to be  periodically monitored and correlated.
The system logs include the following:  1) Communication systems: Status of the communication server to all IEDs, such as communication link failure (temporary or permanent), or degradation of the expected throughput.
An irregular frequency and volume of usage on a speci?c application should be included.
The number of reset, shutdown, or stopping (dead heartbeat) system applications or controllers, including timestamps on all relevant events.
The proposed method is used to assess the vulnerability of computer networks and power systems, pos- sibly the potential loss of load in a power system as a result of a cyberattacks.
A compromised cybersecurity of a SCADA system can cause serious damage to a power system if the attack is able to launch disruptive switching actions leading to a loss of load or equipment damage.
This is particularly troublesome if the attack can penetrate the control center network that is connected to substations under the SCADA system.
An inte- grated risk modeling approach that captures both power control system vulnerabilities and the resulting impacts on the real- time operation of the power system was proposed in [80].
1) Cybernet: Network that incorporates combinations of intrusion scenarios into the SCADA system.
The impact of isolating a substation in the overall system is measured by an impact factor corresponding to the substation.
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  857  3) Vulnerability index calculation: The scenario vulnera- bility index is computed as the product of steady-state intrusion probability for the scenario (obtained through cybernet analysis) and the impact factor of the component (obtained through power ?ow simulation).
4) Security improvements: Improve the cybersecurity of the SCADA system based on vulnerability assessment results with the available technologies.
If the associated risk is high in terms of the loss of load [80], equipment damages (costly devices such as generators and transformers), or other forms of economic losses, then suitable control actions will be initiated to prevent/mitigate the risks.
In case of an intrusion attempt, suitable security improvements need to be made at the most vulnerable components of the system that are associated with the identi?ed vulnerability scenario.
Implementation of the proposed framework can be evaluated through test-bed studies to quantify cyber-based vulnerabilities and associated risks in power systems and to also evaluate the effectiveness of risk mit- igation under realistic and sophisticated attack scenarios [81]– [83].
ATTACK-TREE MODELING  The contribution of this paper is a new algorithm for eval- uation of cybersecurity incorporating both password policies and port auditing.
The algorithm has been implemented as a software prototype.
Attack trees are simpli?ed methodologies for impact analysis of a computer network system by identifying the adversary objectives.
The proposed methods in this paper provide a similar framework to identify system dependences of SCADA systems without including the outage costs.
Each attack leaf may include one or more defense nodes that are direct successors of the attack leaf.
Introduction to the Methodology  A cybersecurity vulnerability index is a measure of the likelihood that an attack tree or attack leaf will be compromised by hackers.
Condition 2 is met when there are one or more countermeasures implemented for an attack leaf.
Any technology that is applied to defend the attack leaf would satisfy condition 2.
An example is a web server installed with a ?rewall that monitors the access to prevent malicious intrusions through online traf?c.
Password implementation for each attack leaf is considered for assessment.
Poor password practices result in unauthorized access.
A system can face the risks of unauthorized access, even though it may be password protected.
4, JULY 2010  reduce access from anonymous users.
This would reduce at- tempted intrusions and enhance system security.
Evaluation of Vulnerability Indices  This section is concerned with the cybersecurity vulnerability of an attack tree.
There are four steps to assess the security vulnerability: 1) identifying the intrusion scenarios; 2) evalu- ating vulnerability indices for the system, intrusion scenarios, and attack leaves; 3) port auditing; and 4) password strength evaluation.
(cid:6)  (1)  (2)  =  V (iK) =  j?sK  v(Gj)  A leaf vulnerability is evaluated by incorporating the strengths of the implemented countermeasures, such as auditing the ports va and password combination vß in a computer.
The cybersecurity condition ?
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT OF CYBERSECURITY  The procedure to evaluate vulnerability indices is shown in Fig.
This section describes the procedure to evalu- ate the vulnerability indices: 1) cybersecurity conditions and 2) evaluation of vulnerability indices.
A. Cybersecurity Conditions  This section evaluates the cybersecurity conditions (?
The cybersecurity condition assessment is based on technological countermeasures and enforcement of the password policy.
The cybersecurity condition is measured by a number ?, which assumes the value of 0.33, 0.67, or 1.
For instance, implementation of the new technological coun- termeasures can reduce the likelihood of intrusions.
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  859  proposed analytical method.
This includes local security checks, root access, remote ?le access, default account, Trojan horse, worm, or possible backdoor.
The low risk level is typically not severe and can only serve as a conjunction to other vulnerability risk that may lead to a security breach.
The relevant level is not classi?ed as risky, but for informational purposes, the system administrator should determine if there are malicious indications.
The strength of password vulnerability can be measured as  sß = CL  (6) where C is the combination of character types and L is the length of a password.
5) Evaluating Security Improvements: Security improve- ment can be achieved by a replacement or additional coun- termeasures.
The improvement for an attack leaf and intrusion scenario can be measured with the implementation of defense (cid:8)(i), respectively, for the leaf and nodes denoted as v scenario vulnerability after an improvement is implemented.
4, JULY 2010  V. CASE STUDY: INTRUSION MODELING  USING AN ATTACK TREE  TABLE II  RISK VULNERABILITY EVALUATION AND NUMBER OF  PASSWORDS ON COMPUTER NETWORK SYSTEMS  The methodology proposed in the previous section is applied to the study cases in this section.
The purpose is to identify the access points of power system control networks and evaluate the network vulnerability.
The objective of the proposed attack tree is focused on the ports and passwords of the computer systems on the control networks, e.g., substation or process control networks with virtual private network connection.
The case study is based on the computer networks set up at Iowa State University.
A total of 43 computer systems orga- nized in ?ve subnets, emulating subnets of electric power con- trol networks, are evaluated based on the proposed methodology.
Although all networks are protected by ?rewalls, they are  distinctive in roles, technologies, and architecture.
1) Primary control center: This is a wide-area control that consists of real-time communication servers, EMS appli- cation servers, and relational databases.
2) Backup control center: It has identical settings, con?g- urations, and system architecture as the primary control center that serves as “site-backup” mode for disastrous coordination in case of a primary center failure.
It pe- riodically updates the latest databases of the primary control center through ICCP servers for real-time data ex- change, including real-time and historical power system information.
The main role of substation control is within the sub- station.
The computer in the substation also serves as a server that sends real-time data to other networks and receives control commands from the control center.
4) Power plant: The power plant is deployed with high redundancy for data reliability purposes within the net- work.
The power plant network involves complex process control and monitoring functions.
It is a high-speed and large capacity network that acquires real-time data from physical devices, e.g., boiler or gas turbine.
5) Web-based SCADA: It is a portal page of user interfaces that manages the municipal (smaller) control network, in which data reliability and backup are maintained by third-party vendors.
It is a client–server technology that provides same role as a control center.
The evaluation is performed from a server outside the cam- pus’ network to determine the vulnerability of the machines and how effective the boundary protection is.
Since each computer has been exhaustively scanned through the ports, i.e., 65 535  combinations and speci?c vulnerability tests, the time required for each machine ranges from 5 to 9 h. The setup of the studies includes different platforms to ensure that local security checks are covered in the test.
Tests for DoS are also included in the evaluation.
Table II shows the risk vulnerability assessment on 43 computer systems distributed in the control network.
This evaluation shows the number of ?ndings that is grouped in each category, i.e., high, medium, low, and relevant, with more than 10 000 vulnerabilities scanned.
It appears that the backdoor can be accessed through ports 5800 and 5900.
Lower risk factors include traceroute from a scanning server and other unknown services that are detected as nonmalicious.
Aside from backdoors that pose the threat of a computer network system, accessing the control network with administrative privilege passwords is one way that can access the SCADA system.
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  861  PASSWORD COMBINATION AND ITS VULNERABILITY OF IP 1.1.1.1  TABLE III  a set of administrative passwords are randomly generated for the case study for evaluation of their password strengths.
This also incorporates the existence of factory default password and insuf?cient security improvement [52].
Table III shows a set of passwords that can be used to access IP 1.1.1.1.
This maximum value will be multiplied with the precondition of cybersecurity to determine v(G)  0, 2.5×10-16sß, 2.5×10-21sß +0.25, 2.5×10-36sß +0.5, 2.5×10-51sß +0.75, 1,  if sß <1000 if 1000= sß <1×1015 if 1×1015= sß <1×1020 if 1×1020= sß <1×1035 if 1 1035= sß <1×1050 if sß =1×1050.
5 demonstrates the network relationship between a power plant, a substation, a web-based SCADA, and the primary and backup control centers.
The formulation of the attack tree is based upon the abstraction of the power control networks that is monitored through control systems.
These combinations may result in an intrusion into the control center.
To derive the scenario combination, groups of attack leaves are arranged as follows:  ?
Group 1 : (G13 × G14 × ··· × G17) ?
Group 2 : Group 3 : (Group 2 × Group 4 × Group 5 ?
G27 × G28 G29 × G30 × G1 × ··· × G10) G31 × G32 G33 × G34 × ··· × G36 G37 × G38  Group 4 :  ?
G40 × G41 G42 × G43  Group 5 :  Each group represents the computer systems of a subnetwork from a power plant, substation networks, and a web-based SCADA system.
Group 1 represents the disruption of the web- based SCADA system, where security breaches in a web server may be exploited by intruders.
Groups 2 and 3 represent a  disruption of the backup control center and real-time services in the primary control center.
The importance of a backup control center is to continue functions of the primary control cen- ter under extreme circumstances.
Communication, relational database, and real-time application services in control centers are critical elements.
Groups 4 and 5 represent a disruption of power plant operations and substation automation.
Security breaches in these groups may also result in penetration into the control center.
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18)  i=1,2,...,12,29,30,42,43  The preconditions of cybersecurity (?)
Attack Tree of the Power System Control Framework.
Leaf vulnerability with implemented and improved countermeasures.
Since the password combination in the set reveals a weakness, a password policy with at least eight characters and four different character types has been enforced for security improvement.
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  863  REFERENCES  [1] J. Eisenhauer, P. Donnelly, M. Ellis, and M. O’Brien.
Roadmap to Secure Control Systems in the Energy Sector.
Available: http://www.controlsystemsroadmap.net/pdfs/roadmap.pdf  [2] Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Systems, Nat.
gov/new.items/d05434.pdf  [4] Challenges and Efforts to Secure Control Systems, Government Ac- countability Of?ce, Washington, DC, Mar.
Available: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04354.pdf  [5] M. R. Permann and K. Rohde, Cyber Assessment Methods for SCADA Security, Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrum.
Available: http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/Cyber_ Assessment_Methods_for_SCADA_Security_Mays_ISA_Paper.pdf  [6] R. E. Carlson, J. E. Dagle, S. A. Shamsuddin, and R. P. Evans, A Summary of Control System Security Standards Activities in the Energy Sector, DC: U.S. Dept.
Available: http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/Control_ System_Security_Standards_Activities.pdf  [7] Information Security: Technologies to Secure Federal Systems, Mar.
Available: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04467.pdf  [8] M. Amin, “Security challenges for  the electricity infrastructure,”  Computer, vol.
[10] J. Salmeron, K. Wood, and R. Baldick, “Analysis of electric grid security under terrorist threat,” IEEE Trans.
[11] R. A. Leon, V. Vittal, and G. Manimaran, “Application of sensor network for secure electric energy infrastructure,” IEEE Trans.
[13] R. L. Krutz, Securing SCADA Systems, 1st ed.
Hsiao, “Simulation study of Internet based inter control center data exchange for complete network modeling,” IEEE Trans.
[17] T. Mander, F. Nabhani, L. Wang, and R. Cheung, “Data object based security for DNP3 over TCP/IP for increased utility commercial aspects security,” in Proc.
[20] F. F. Wu, K. Moslehi, and A. Bose, “Power system control centers: Past, present, and future,” Proc.
Ten, C.-C. Liu, and G. Manimaran, “Vulnerability assessment of cybersecurity for SCADA systems using attack trees,” in Proc.
[23] T. D. Nelson, “Mitigations for security vulnerabilities found in control system networks,” in Proc.
Joint ISA POWID/EPRI Controls Instrum.
Ten, G. Manimaran, and C.-C. Liu, “Cybersecurity for electric power control and automation systems,” in Proc.
vulnerability with  implemented  and  improved  intrusion scenario is the product of attack leaves.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  Cybersecurity for critical infrastructures is an emerging area that requires extensive new research.
New research needs to be done in each of the components of the RAIM framework, such as the following: 1) SCADA-system-speci?c real-time correlation and intrusion detection algorithms; 2) online risk monitoring and mitigation algorithms capturing both cyber system vulnerabilities and the resulting consequences; 3) advanced modeling techniques that capture the dynamic nature of the attacker behavior, as well as the system behavior; and 4) advanced modeling that accounts for impacts such as load loss, loss due to equipment damage, and economic loss.
Vulnerability assessment can be performed periodically, and the validation of the proposed framework can be conducted through test-bed development.
For instance, the components include instrumenting logs (both power equip- ment logs and computer system logs), real-time monitoring of logs, event correlations and hypothesis formation, what- if impact analysis, and proactive/mitigation countermeasures to restore a power system.
Ef?cient delivery of information from substations or control centers may be needed to help power system dispatchers identify critical messages quickly.
Various techniques for visualization of the system health, in terms of vulnerability level and other critical information, are desirable.
4, JULY 2010  [25] M. Naedele, D. Dzung, and M. Stanimirov, “Network security for sub- station automation systems,” in SAFECOMP, U. Voges, Ed.
[27] P. Baybutt, “Cybersecurity risk analysis for process control systems using rings of protection analysis (ROPA),” Process Safety Progr., vol.
Rep.  [28] N. Ye, J. Giordano, and J. Feldman, “A process control approach to cyber  attack detection,” Commun.
[29] J.-W. Park and J.-M. Lee, “Transmission modeling and simulation for Internet-based control,” in Proc.
[30] A. Miller, “Trends in process control systems security,” IEEE Secur.
[31] C. DeMarco and Y. Braden, “Threats to electric power grid security through hacking of networked generation control,” in Proc.
[33] S. A. Klein and J. N. Menendez, “Information security considerations in open system architectures,” IEEE Trans.
[34] G. N. Ericsson and A. Torkilseng, “Management of information se- curity for an electric power utility—On security domains and use of ISO/IEC17799 standard,” IEEE Trans.
Wang, “A formal virtual enterprise access control model,” IEEE Trans.
[36] T. Brown, “Security in SCADA systems: How to handle the growing menace to process automation,” IEE Comput.
Control Eng., vol.
[37] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. Langston, “Assessment and remediation of vulnerabilities in the SCADA and process control systems of utilities,” Internet Security Systems (white paper), 2005.
[38] F. Cleveland, “IEC TC57 security standards for power system’s infor- mation infrastructure—Beyond simple encryption,” in Proc.
Available: http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/attack_trends.pdf  [42] S. McClure, J. Scambray, and G. Kurtz, Hacking Exposed: Network Secu-  rity Secrets and Solutions, 4th ed.
[43] M. Amin, “North America’s electricity infrastructure: Are we ready for more perfect storms?” IEEE Secur.
[44] R. Richardson, “2007 CSI computer crime and security survey,” in Proc.
Crime Security Survey, 2007, pp.
[45] E. Goetz, “Cybersecurity of the electric power industry,” in Report of Investigative Research for Infrastructure Assurance (IRIA).
Security Technol.
[46] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. Langston, Control Systems Cybersecurity Awareness.
[47] J. Tang, R. Hovsapian, M. Sloderbeck, J. Langston, R. Meeker, P. McLaren, D. Becker, B. Richardson, M. Baca, J. Trent, Z. Hartley, R. Parks, and S. Smith, “The CAPS-SNL power system security test bed,” in Proc.
[48] G. Dondossola, F. Garrone, J. Szanto, and G. Fiorenza, “Emerging in- formation technology scenarios for the control and management of the distribution grid,” in Proc.
[49] J. M. Weiss, “Control systems cybersecurity–maintaining the reliability of the critical infrastructure,” Testimony of Joseph M. Weiss Control Systems Cybersecurity Expert before the House Government Reform Committee’s Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Inter- governmental Relations, and the Census U.S. House of Representatives, Mar.
Rep. Cybersecurity Standards.
Cybersecurity Standards Workshop  [53] A. Torkilseng and G. Ericsson, “Some guidelines for developing a frame- work for managing cybersecurity for an electric power utility,” ELECTRA Report—JWG D2/B3/C2.01, Oct. 2006.
[54] D. M. Nicol, W. H. Sanders, and K. S. Trivedi, “Model-based evaluation from dependability to security,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Com- put., vol.
Wing, “Game strategies in network security,” in Proc.
[63] G. Dondossola, O. Lamquet, and A. Torkilseng, “Key issues and re- lated methodologies in the security risk analysis and evaluation of elec- tric power control systems,” in Proc.
[64] S. Evans, D. Heinbuch, E. Kyle, J. Piorkowski, and J. Wallner, “Risk- based systems security engineering: Stopping attacks with intention,” IEEE Secur.
[65] S. M. Rinaldi, J. P. Peerenboom, and T. K. Kelly, “Identifying, under- standing, and analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies,” IEEE Control Syst.
[66] S. E. Schechter, “Toward econometric models of the security risk from remote attack,” IEEE Secur.
[67] S. Bistarelli, F. Fioravanti, and P. Peretti, “Defense trees for economic  evaluation of security investments,” in Proc.
Hung, “Denial of service attacks on network-based control system: Impact and mitigation,” IEEE Trans.
[72] S. Nadjm-Tehrani, S. Burschka, K. Burbeck, and T. Chyssler, “Safeguard- ing information infrastructures: Alarm reduction and anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[74] S. Su, W.-L. Chan, K.-K. Li, X. Duan, and X. Zeng, “Context information- based cybersecurity defense of protection system,” IEEE Trans.
: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES  865  Govindarasu Manimaran (M’99–SM’10) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineer- ing from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 1998.
His research expertise is in the areas of resource management in real-time systems and networks, overlay networks, network security, and their applications to critical infrastruc- tures such as the electric grid.
He is the coauthor of the book entitled Resource Management in Real-Time Systems and Networks (MIT Press, 2001).
He has given tutorials on Internet infrastructure security in conferences, such as the IEEE Infocom 2004 and IEEE ComSoc Tutorials Now (2004), and served as Workshop Cochair, Symposium Cochair, and Session Chair on many occasions.
[76] E. Jonsson and T. Olovsson, “A quantitative model of the security intru- sion process based on attacker behavior,” IEEE Trans.
[78] L. Lavalle, C. Balducelli, and G. Vicoli, “A CBR-based algorithm to monitor and information intensive critical infrastructure,” in Proc.
Ten, C.-C. Liu, and G. Manimaran, “Vulnerability assessment of cybersecurity for SCADA systems,” IEEE Trans.
[81] G. Dondossola, J. Szanto, M. Masera, and I. N. Fovino, “Evaluation of the effects of intentional threats to power substation control systems,” in Proc.
[82] C. M. Davis, J. E. Tate, H. Okhravl, C. Grier, T. J. Overbye, and D. Nicol, “SCADA cybersecurity test bed development,” in Proc.
[84] B. Schneier, “Attack trees: Modeling security threats,” Dobb’s J., vol.
[85] A. Moore, R. Ellison, and R. Linger, Attack modeling for informa- tion security and survivability, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, CMU/SEI-2001-TN-001.
Available: http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/ moore01attack.html  [86] G. Conti, M. Ahamad, and J. Stasko, “Attacking information visual- ization system usability overloading and deceiving the human,” in Proc.
Usable Privacy Security, Pittsburgh, PA, Jun.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the School of Electrical, Electronic, and Mechanical Engineering, University College Dublin, National University of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
He was a Summer Intern with the MidAmerican Energy Control Center in 2000.
He was also an Application Engineer with Siemens Energy Manage- ment and Information System, Singapore, from 2002 to 2005.
His research interests include interdependence modeling for power infrastructure.
EXAMINING  THE  CYBER  THREAT  TO  CRITICAL   INFRASTRUCTURE  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ECONOMY   HEARING   BEFORE THE   SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY,   INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,  AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES   OF THE   COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES   ONE  HUNDRED  TWELFTH  CONGRESS   FIRST  SESSION   MARCH  16,  2011   Serial No.
112–11   Printed  for  the  use  of  the  Committee  on  Homeland  Security   Available  via  the  World  Wide  Web:  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/   72–221 PDF   WASHINGTON  :   2012   U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office  Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800  Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001  COMMITTEE  ON  HOMELAND  SECURITY   PETER T.  KING,  New  York,  Chairman   LAMAR SMITH,  Texas  DANIEL E.  LUNGREN,  California  MIKE ROGERS,  Alabama  MICHAEL T.  MCCAUL,  Texas  GUS M.  BILIRAKIS,  Florida  PAUL C.  BROUN,  Georgia  CANDICE S.  MILLER,  Michigan  TIM WALBERG,  Michigan  CHIP CRAVAACK,  Minnesota  JOE WALSH,  Illinois  PATRICK MEEHAN,  Pennsylvania  BEN QUAYLE,  Arizona  SCOTT RIGELL,  Virginia  BILLY LONG,  Missouri  JEFF DUNCAN,  South  Carolina  TOM MARINO,  Pennsylvania  BLAKE FARENTHOLD,  Texas  MO BROOKS,  Alabama   BENNIE G.  THOMPSON,  Mississippi  LORETTA SANCHEZ,  California  SHEILA JACKSON LEE,  Texas  HENRY CUELLAR,  Texas  YVETTE D.  CLARKE,  New  York  LAURA RICHARDSON,  California  DANNY K.  DAVIS,  Illinois  BRIAN HIGGINS,  New  York  JACKIE SPEIER,  California  CEDRIC L.  RICHMOND,  Louisiana  HANSEN CLARKE,  Michigan  WILLIAM R.  KEATING,  Massachusetts  VACANCY  VACANCY   MICHAEL J.  RUSSELL,  Staff  Director/Chief  Counsel   KERRY ANN WATKINS,  Senior  Policy  Director   MICHAEL S.  TWINCHEK,  Chief  Clerk   I.  LANIER AVANT,  Minority  Staff  Director   SUBCOMMITTEE  ON  CYBERSECURITY,  INFRASTRUCTURE  PROTECTION,   AND  SECURITY  TECHNOLOGIES   DANIEL E.  LUNGREN,  California,  Chairman   MICHAEL T.  MCCAUL,  Texas  TIM WALBERG,  Michigan,  Vice  Chair  PATRICK MEEHAN,  Pennsylvania  BILLY LONG,  Missouri  TOM MARINO,  Pennsylvania  PETER T.  KING,  New  York  (Ex  Officio)   YVETTE D.  CLARKE,  New  York  LAURA RICHARDSON,  California  CEDRIC L.  RICHMOND,  Louisiana  WILLIAM R.  KEATING,  Massachusetts  BENNIE G.  THOMPSON,  Mississippi  (Ex  Officio)   COLEY C.  O’BRIEN,  Staff  Director   ALAN CARROLL,  Subcommittee  Clerk   DR.  CHRIS BECK,  Minority  Subcommittee  Director   (II)   C O N T E N T S   STATEMENTS   The  Honorable  Daniel  E.  Lungren,  a  Representative  in  Congress  From  the  State  of  California,  and  Chairman,  Subcommittee  on  Cybersecurity,  Infra- structure Protection, and Security Technologies  ...............................................
The  Honorable  Yvette  D.  Clark,  a  Representative  in  Congress  From  the  State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,  Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technologies  .......................................
WITNESS   Mr.  Philip  Reitinger,  Deputy  Under  Secretary,  National  Protection  and  Pro-  grams Directorate, Department of Homeland Security:  Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  ............................................................................................. Mr. Gregory Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues, Government   Accountability Office:  Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  ............................................................................................. Mr.  James  A.  Lewis,  Director  and  Senior  Fellow,  Technology  and  Public   Policy Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies:  Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Page   1   2   5  6   14  16   32  34   39  40   46  47   Question From Chairman Daniel E. Lungren of California  .................................  63   APPENDIX   (III)   EXAMINING  CRITICAL  AMERICAN  ECONOMY   THE  TO  INFRASTRUCTURE  AND  THE   THREAT   CYBER   Wednesday,  March  16,  2011   U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,  COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY,   SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE  PROTECTION, AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES,   Washington, DC.
The  Committee  on  Homeland  Security,  Sub- committee  on  Cybersecurity,  Infrastructure  Protection,  and  Secu- rity Technologies will come to order.
The  subcommittee  is  meeting  today  to  hear  testimony  from  Phil  Reitinger, the Deputy Under Secretary for National Protection and  Programs  Directorate  of  DHS;  Gregory  Wilshusen,  the  Director  of  Information  Security  Issues  at  GAO;  Phyllis  Schneck,  Vice  Presi- dent  and  Chief  Technology  Officer  at  McAfee,  Inc.;  James  Lewis,  Director  and  Senior  Policy  Fellow  at  the  Center  for  Strategic  and  International  Studies;  and  Mischel  Kwon,  President  of  Mischel  Kwon Associates, LLC.
Today  we  will  examine  the  cyber  threat  to  U.S.  critical  infra- structure,  how  it  affects  the  economy,  and  what  Government  is  doing to address the threat.
Twenty-five years ago, the concept of cyber threat, or a cyber at- tack,  was  an  issue  of  interest  to  really  only  a  few  researchers  in  academics.
In  this  post-9/11  terrorist  era  the  cyber  threat  is  seri- ous,  multifaceted,  and  boundless,  posing  a  significant  risk  to  U.S.  economic and National security.
The  Director  of  National  Intelligence  stated  in  testimony  before  the  Congress,  ‘‘The  growing  connectivity  between  information  sys- tems,  the  internet,  and  other  infrastructures  creates  opportunities  for  attackers  to  disrupt  telecommunications,  electrical  power,  en- ergy  pipelines,  financial  networks,  and  other  critical  infrastruc- tures.’’   The information revolution launched by the internet has reached  into  every  corner  of  our  lives.
These  new  risks include cyber criminals, spies and terrorists, using the digital   (1)   2   internet as a pathway to personal bank accounts as well as Govern- ment  and  industrial  secrets.
Cyber  attacks  are  growing  more  fre- quent, targeted, sophisticated, and dangerous.
Cyber  attacks  have  been  launched  against  nations,  Estonia  in  2007, Georgia in 2009, and Iran in 2010.
They were all the subject  of  cyber  attacks  that  either  paralyzed  Government  operations  or  targeted  critical  infrastructure.
If  terror  groups  are  watching  this  cyber  activity  and  targeting  our critical infrastructure—and we believe they are—this raises the  stakes  in  our  war  on  terror.
Attacks on this critical infrastructure will im- pact  our  National  and  economic  security  as  well  as  the  health  and  safety of our fellow citizens.
Today,  our  critical  infrastructure  relies  extensively  on  computer- ized  information  systems  and  the  internet  which  cannot  be  pro- tected as in the traditional way with guns, gates, and guards.
This  reliance  on  computers  and  the  internet  makes  our  critical  infra- structure  operations  vulnerable  to  cyber  attack.
The computer security company, McAfee, reports that 54 percent  of  executives  of  critical  infrastructure  companies  surveyed  said  their  companies  had  been  the  victims  of  denial  of  service  attacks  and  network  infiltration  from  organized  crime,  terrorists,  or  other  nation states.
Recent  media  reports  have  described  a  new  cyber  threat  called  Stuxnet,  which  can  target  critical  infrastructure,  including  nuclear  facilities.
According  to  these  published  reports,  Stuxnet  is  a  com- plex  piece  of  malware  designed  to  interfere  with  the  seamen’s  in- dustrial  control  systems  operating  the  Iranian  nuclear  facilities.
This  makes  Stuxnet,  at  least  according  to  published  reports,  it  makes that malware a very dangerous offensive cyber weapon that  overtakes critical control system operations.
So  if  an  anonymous  enemy  or  terrorist  ever  seizes  the  control  systems  of,  let’s  say,  dams  or  chemical  or  power  plants  via  the  cyber world, that terrorist could cause death and destruction in the  real world.
What  solutions,  policies,  or  technology  can  we  develop  to  improve  our Nation’s cybersecurity?
3   I would like to thank Chairman Lungren for holding this hearing  on  cybersecurity  and  for  your  intention  to  move  expeditiously  on  what I know we both recognize as a critical issue.
While there are a number of new faces up here on the dais, I be- lieve  this  subcommittee  will  continue  to  place  significant  focus  on  the issue of cybersecurity just as we did during the 110th Congress.
I  know  Mr.  Lungren  takes  this  responsibility  as  seriously  as  I  do,  and  I  look  forward  to  partnering  with  him  again  over  the  next  2  years  to  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the  American  people,  American  businesses,  American  infrastructure,  and  the  American  way of life.
Today’s  hearing  will  likely  be  the  first  of  several  cybersecurity  hearings  that  the  subcommittee  will  hold,  and  it  is  easy  to  under- stand why this issue dominates our agenda.
We rely on information  technology in every aspect of our lives, from our electric grid, bank- ing  systems,  military  and  government  functions,  to  our  e-mail  and  web  browsers.
Interconnected  computers  and  networks  have  led  to  amazing  developments  in  our  society.
Increased  productivity,  knowledge, services, and revenues are all benefits generated by our  modern  networked  world.
But  in  our  rush  to  network  everything,  few stopped to consider the security ramifications of this new world  we  were  creating,  and  so  we  find  ourselves  in  an  extremely  dan- gerous situation today.
Too  many  vulnerabilities  exist  on  too  many  critical  networks  which are exposed to too many skilled attackers who can inflict too  many  intrusions  into  our  systems.
This committee will continue to sound the  alarm, raise awareness of the problems we face, and move forward  with practical, effective solutions.
This  hearing  comes  at  a  critical  moment  in  our  Nation’s  ap- proach  to  the  cyber  threat.
There  is  a  very  real  and  significant  threat  to  our  National  and  economic  security  that  we  now  face  in  cyberspace, and we must do something equally real and significant  to meet this challenge.
We are expecting, and this committee is eager to see, a National  cybersecurity  strategy  from  the  White  House  to  be  released  very  soon.
The  Department  is  finalizing  its  National  cyber  incident  re- sponse plan and will also include a cybersecurity strategy as called  for in the 2010 Quadrennial Homeland Security Review.
The previous two decades have seen countless  reports from America’s thought leaders in cybersecurity containing  hundreds of recommendations about how to improve America’s pos- ture in cyberspace.
What has been lacking is the courage and lead- ership  to  actually  implement  these  recommendations.
To  ensure  our  National  and  economic  security,  now  is  the  time  we  must  act.
The private sector must also be a full partner and accept its share  of responsibility for our combined security.
We know that our Gov- ernment networks are attacked tens of thousands of times per day  and  private  sector  networks  are  attacked  even  more  often.
We need to absorb this information, get up to speed  quickly,  and  move  forward  to  address  this  issue.
To the witnesses appearing before us today, I thank you for being  here, and I welcome your thoughts on the issues before us, includ- ing  what  you  think  an  effective  National  cybersecurity  policy  should  look  like.
Chairman  Lungren  and  I  intend  for  this  sub- committee,  as  well  as  the  full  committee,  to  play  a  leading  role  in  shaping our National cyber posture in the years to come.
He  also  serves  as  the  Director  of  the  National  Cybersecurity  Center.
In  this  role,  he  provides  strategic  direction  to  the  Depart- ment’s  cybersecurity  efforts.
Prior  to  joining  the  Department,  he  was  the  senior  security  strategist  for  Microsoft’s  trustworthy  com- puting  program,  so  he  is  well  versed  in  the  challenges  facing  both  Government  and  the  private  sector  in  dealing  with  the  important  issue of cybersecurity.
Greg  Wilshusen  has  been  with  the  GAO  for  over  13  years  and  has been over 29 years in auditing financial management informa- tion  systems.
He  is  a  certified  public  accountant,  certified  internal  auditor,  certified  information  systems  auditor.
An  MS  in  information  management  from  George  Washington  University School of Engineering and Applied Sciences.
At GAO, he   5   has overseen multiple reports on information security, both at DHS  and Government-wide.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Reitinger, who will testify on behalf of   the Department of Homeland Security.
STATEMENT  OF  PHILIP  REITINGER,  DEPUTY  UNDER  SEC- RETARY,  NATIONAL  PROTECTION  AND  PROGRAMS  DIREC- TORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY  Mr.  REITINGER.
The three points I wanted to quickly raise are that cybersecurity  is a critical issue; second, there is no simple solution, neither entity  or  technology,  that  is  going  to  solve  the  problem;  and  three,  that  although  we  have  made  significant  progress  over  the  course  of  my  15  to  20  years  involved  in  this  space  and  the  more  significant  ef- forts of many more people over a longer period of time, we are not  yet where we need to be.
So  let  me  start  with  the  first  point,  that  cybersecurity  is  a  crit- ical  issue.
Perhaps more important, we are depending more on infor- mation networks every day—not just for looking at a cute video on-  line  or  our  ability  to  send  an  e-mail,  but  for  the  basic  functioning  of our economy.
It  is  not  just  a  security  issue,  it  is  an  economic  issue.
We  don’t  have power, we don’t have phone service, we don’t have 9–1–1 serv- ice,  we  don’t  get  water,  we  don’t  have  banking  without  the  proper  functioning  of  the  internet  and  the  systems  that  are  connected  to  it.
Cybersecurity  has  been  a  bipartisan  issue,  going  from  the  launch  of  the  Comprehen- sive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  in  the  prior  administration  through the current Presidents’s Cyberspace Policy Review and the  on-going work to cross both administrations and across both parties  in both Houses of Congress to move the issue forward.
We  actually  do  have  to  work  this  broadly  in  partnership.
I mean, we ac- tually  work  together  to  drive  outcomes,  that  we  have  known  roles  and responsibilities and we execute on those things.
Everybody  has  got  to  build security into their own operations—private sector companies,  civilian government agencies and DHS; we have got to build it into  our  DNA.
The Chairman mentioned the creation of the first real National in- cident response plan to bring all of Government and private sector  together  so  we  can  respond  as  one  Nation  to  a  significant  cyber  event.
So  as  the  Ranking  Member  indicated,  what  we have to do is focus on implementation.
[The statement of Mr. Reitinger follows:]   PREPARED STATEMENT OF PHILIP REITINGER   MARCH 16, 2011  INTRODUCTION   Chairman Lungren, Vice Chairman Walberg, Ranking Member Clarke, and distin- guished  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  you  today  to  discuss  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  (DHS)  cybersecurity  mission.
I  will provide an overview of the current cybersecurity environment, the Department’s  cybersecurity mission as it relates to critical infrastructure, and the coordination of  this mission with our public and private sector partners.
We  would  like  to  work  more  with  you  to  convey  the  relevance  of  cybersecurity  to  average Americans.
Increasingly, the services we rely on for daily life, such as water  distribution  and  treatment,  electricity  generation  and  transmission,  health  care,  transportation,  and  financial  transactions  depend  on  an  underlying  information  technology  and  communications  infrastructure.
Cyber  threats  put  the  availability  and security of these and other services at risk.
7   THE CURRENT CYBERSECURITY ENVIRONMENT   The United States confronts a combination of known and unknown vulnerabilities,  strong  and  rapidly  expanding  adversary  capabilities,  and  a  lack  of  comprehensive  threat  and  vulnerability  awareness.
Sensitive information is routinely stolen from both Government and private sector  networks,  undermining  confidence  in  our  information  systems  and  the  information  collection  and  sharing  process,  and  as  bad  as  the  loss  of  precious  National  intellec- tual capital is, we increasingly face threats that are even greater.
We currently can- not  be  certain  that  our  information  infrastructure  will  remain  accessible  and  reli- able during a time of crisis.
We  face  persistent,  unauthorized,  and  often  unattributed  intrusions  into  Federal  Executive  Branch  civilian  networks.
These  intruders  span  a  spectrum  of  malicious  actors, including nation states, terrorist networks, organized criminal groups, or in- dividuals  located  here  in  the  United  States.
They  have  varying  levels  of  access  and  technical  sophistication,  but  all  have  nefarious  intent.
Several  are  capable  of  tar- geting  elements  of  the  U.S.  information  infrastructure  to  disrupt,  dismantle,  or  de- stroy  systems  upon  which  we  depend.
Motives  include  intelligence  collection,  intel- lectual  property  or  monetary  theft,  or  disruption  of  commercial  activities,  among  others.
In addition, terrorist groups and their sym- pathizers  have  expressed  interest  in  using  cyberspace  to  target  and  harm  the  United  States  and  its  citizens.
Malicious  cyber  activity  can  instantaneously  result  in  virtual  or  physical  con- sequences that threaten National and economic security, critical infrastructure, pub- lic  health  and  welfare,  and  confidence  in  Government.
Securing  cyber- space  requires  a  layered  security  approach.
Moreover,  securing  cyberspace  is  also  critical to accomplishing nearly all of DHS’s other missions successfully.
We need to support the efforts of our State and local government and private sec- tor partners to secure themselves against malicious activity in cyberspace.
Similarly,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  Federal  civilian  environment  is  secure  and  that  legiti- mate traffic is allowed to flow freely while malicious traffic is prevented from pene- trating  our  defenses.
In  addition,  other  departments,  such  as  the  Department  of  Education,  are  working  to  educate  parents  and  students  on  internet  safety  and  privacy  protection.
CYBERSECURITY MISSION   Let  me  be  clear  that  no  single  technology—or  single  Government  entity—alone  can  overcome  the  cybersecurity  challenges  our  Nation  faces.
Cybersecurity  must  start with informed users taking necessary precautions and extend through a coordi- nated effort between the private sector, critical infrastructure owners and operators,  and  the  extensive  expertise  that  lies  across  coordinated  Government  entities.
The  National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate  (NPPD)  within  DHS  is  responsible  for the following key cybersecurity missions:  • Leading the effort to secure Federal Executive Branch civilian departments and  • Providing  technical  expertise  to  the  private  sector  and  critical  infrastructure  and key resources (CIKR) owners and operators—whether private sector, State,  or municipality owned—to bolster their cybersecurity preparedness, risk assess- ment, mitigation and incident response capabilities;   agencies’ unclassified networks;   • Raising cybersecurity awareness among the general public; and  • Coordinating the National response to domestic cyber emergencies.
• Leveraging  cyber  defense  capability  across  all  departments  and  agencies  to  de- tect, respond, isolate, and remediate cyber attacks or practices dangerous to se- curity and privacy.
In  a  reflection  of  the  bipartisan  nature  with  which  the  Federal  Government  con- tinues to approach cybersecurity, President Obama determined that the Comprehen- sive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  (CNCI)  and  its  associated  activities  should  evolve  to  become  key  elements  of  the  broader  National  cybersecurity  efforts.
Following  the  publication  of  those  rec- ommendations in May 2009, DHS and its components developed a long-range vision  of cybersecurity for the Department and the Nation’s homeland security enterprise,  which  is  encapsulated  in  the  Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  (QHSR).
One  of  the  five  priority  areas  detailed  in  the  QHSR  is  safe- guarding and securing cyberspace.
Within the cybersecurity mission area, the QHSR  identifies  two  overarching  goals:  To  help  create  a  safe,  secure,  and  resilient  cyber  environment; and to promote cybersecurity knowledge and innovation.
In alignment with the QHSR, Secretary Napolitano consolidated many of the De- partment’s cybersecurity efforts under NPPD.
The Office of Cybersecurity and Com- munications (CS&C), a component of NPPD, focuses on reducing risk to the Nation’s  communications and information technology infrastructures and the sectors that de- pend  upon  them,  as  well  as  enabling  timely  response  and  recovery  of  these  infra- structures  under  all  circumstances.
These functions include co- ordinating  operations  among  the  six  largest  Federal  cyber  centers.
CS&C  also  co- ordinates  National  security  and  emergency  preparedness  communications  planning  and  provisioning  for  the  Federal  Government  and  other  stakeholders.
CS&C  com- prises  three  divisions:  the  National  Cyber  Security  Division  (NCSD),  the  Office  of  Emergency  Communications,  and  the  National  Communications  System.
Within  NCSD,  the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  is  working more closely than ever with our public and private sector partners to share  what we learn from EINSTEIN 2, a Federal executive agency computer network in- trusion  detection  system,  to  deepen  our  collective  understanding,  identify  threats  collaboratively,  and  develop  effective  security  responses.
EINSTEIN  enables  us  to  respond  proactively  to  warnings  and  other  indicators  of  operational  cyber  attacks,  and  we  have  many  examples  showing  that  this  program  investment  has  paid  for  itself several times over.
Teamwork—ranging from intra-agency to international collaboration—is essential  to  securing  cyberspace.
Simply  put,  the  cybersecurity  mission  cannot  be  accom- plished by any one agency; it requires teamwork and coordination.
NCSD  collaborates  with  Federal  Government  stakeholders,  including  civilian  agencies, law enforcement, the military, the intelligence community, State and local  partners, and private sector stakeholders, to conduct risk assessments and mitigate  vulnerabilities  and  threats  to  information  technology  assets  and  activities  affecting  the  operation  of  civilian  government  and  private  sector  critical  infrastructures.
NCSD also provides cyber threat and vulnerability analysis, early warning, and inci- dent  response  assistance  for  public  and  private  sector  constituents.
To  that  end,  NCSD  carries  out  the  majority  of  DHS’  non-law  enforcement  cybersecurity  respon- sibilities.
NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE   The  President’s  Cyberspace  Policy  Review  called  for  ‘‘a  comprehensive  framework  to  facilitate  coordinated  responses  by  government,  the  private  sector,  and  allies  to  a significant cyber incident.’’ DHS coordinated the interagency, State and local gov- ernment, and private sector working group that developed the National Cyber Inci- dent  Response  Plan.
The  plan  provides  a  framework  for  effective  incident  response  capabilities and coordination among Federal agencies, State and local governments,  the  private  sector,  and  international  partners  during  significant  cyber  incidents.
In  September  2010,  DHS  hosted  Cyber  Storm  III,  a  response  exercise  in  which  members  of  the  domestic  and  international  cyber  inci- dent response community addressed the scenario of a coordinated cyber event.
Dur- ing the event, the National Cyber Incident Response Plan was activated and its inci- dent  response  framework  was  tested.
Cyber Storm III also tested the National Cybersecurity and Communications Inte- gration  Center  (NCCIC)—DHS’  24-hour  cyber  watch  and  warning  center—and  the  Federal  Government’s  full  suite  of  cybersecurity  response  capabilities.
The  NCCIC  works  closely  with  Government  at  all  levels  and  with  the  private  sector  to  coordi- nate the integrated and unified response to cyber and communications incidents im- pacting homeland security.
9   Numerous DHS components, including US–CERT, the Industrial Control Systems  Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS–CERT), and the National Coordinating Cen- ter  for  Telecommunications  (NCC),  are  collocated  into  the  NCCIC.
Currently,  representatives  from  the  Information  Technology  and  Communica- tions  sectors  are  located  at  the  NCCIC.
By leveraging the integrated operational capabilities of its member organizations,  the NCCIC serves as an ‘‘always on’’ cyber incident response and management cen- ter,  providing  indications  and  warning  of  imminent  incidents,  and  maintaining  a  National  cyber  ‘‘common  operating  picture.’’  This  facilitates  situational  awareness  among  all  partner  organizations,  and  also  creates  a  repository  of  all  vulnerability,  intrusion,  incident,  and  mitigation  activities.
The  NCCIC  also  serves  as  a  National  point  of  integration  for  cyber  expertise  and  collaboration,  particularly  when  devel- oping guidance to mitigate risks and resolve incidents.
PROVIDING TECHNICAL EXPERTISE TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND CRITICAL   INFRASTRUCTURE   DHS has significant cybersecurity capabilities, and we are using those capabilities  to great effect as we work collaboratively with the private sector to protect the Na- tion’s  CIKR.
Over the past year, we  have  repeatedly  shown  our  ability  to  materially  and  expeditiously  assist  companies  with cyber intrusion mitigation and incident response.
Initiating technical assistance with a pri- vate company to provide them analysis and mitigation advice is a sensitive endeav- or—one that requires trust and strict confidentiality.
Our efforts are unique among Federal agencies’ capabili- ties  in  that  DHS  focuses  on  computer  network  defense  and  protection  rather  than  law  enforcement  or  intelligence  functions.
DHS  engages  precisely  to  mitigate  the  threat to the network to reduce future risks.
Our  approach  requires  vigilance  and  a  voluntary  public-private  partnership.
In- deed, we are continuing to build our capabilities and our relationships; we must be- cause the cyber threat trends only more sophisticated and more frequent.
Over  the  past  year,  we  stood  up  the  NCCIC  and  are  adding  staff  to  that  center,  both from existing DHS personnel and from partner organizations in the public and  private  sectors.
More  broadly,  we  are  continuing  to  hire  more  cybersecurity  profes- sionals  and  are  increasing  training  available  to  our  employees.
We  have  an  oper- ational National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP), and we continue to update  and  improve  it  with  input  from  senior  cybersecurity  leaders.
We are executing within our current mis- sion and authorities now: Receiving and responding to substantial netflow data from  our  intrusion  detection  technologies  deployed  to  our  Federal  partners,  and  leveraging  that  data  to  provide  early  warnings  and  indicators  across  Government  and industry.
With our people, processes, and technology, we stand ready to execute  the responsibilities of the future.
US–CERT provides remote and on-site response support and defense against ma- licious cyber activity for the Federal Executive Branch civilian networks.
US–CERT  also collaborates, provides remote and on-site response support and shares informa- tion  with  State  and  local  government,  critical  infrastructure  owners  and  operators,  and  international  partners  to  address  cyber  threats  and  develop  effective  security  responses.
In addition to specific mitigation work we conduct with individual companies and  sectors, DHS looks at the interdependencies across critical infrastructure sectors for  a  holistic  approach  to  providing  our  cyber  expertise.
For  example,  the  electric,  nu- clear,  water,  transportation,  and  communications  sectors  support  functions  across   10   all levels of government including Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments, and  the  private  sector.
Government  bodies  and  organizations  do  not  inherently  produce  these  services  and  must  rely  on  private  sector  organizations,  just  as  other  busi- nesses  and  private  citizens  do.
Therefore,  an  event  impacting  control  systems  has  potential implications at all these levels, and could also have cascading effects upon  all  18  sectors.
NCCIC’s  operations  are  complemented  in  the  arena  of  industrial  control  systems  by ICS–CERT.
The term ‘‘control system’’ encompasses several types of systems, in- cluding  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition  (SCADA),  process  control,  and  other  automated  systems  that  are  found  in  the  industrial  sectors  and  critical  infra- structure.
Control systems se- curity  is  particularly  important  because  of  the  inherent  interconnectedness  of  the  CIKR sectors and their dependence on one another.
As  such,  assessing  risk  and  effectively  securing  industrial  control  systems  are  vital  to  maintaining  our  Nation’s  strategic  interests,  public  safety,  and  economic  well-being.
A  successful  cyber  attack  on  a  control  system  could  result  in  physical  damage,  loss  of  life,  and  cascading  effects  that  could  disrupt  services.
DHS  recog- nizes that the protection and security of control systems is essential to the Nation’s  overarching  security  and  economy.
In  this  context,  as  an  example  of  many  related  initiatives and activities, DHS—in coordination with the Department of Commerce’s  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Department of Energy,  and  DoD—has  provided  a  forum  for  researchers,  subject  matter  experts  and  practi- tioners  dealing  with  cyber-physical  systems  security  to  assess  the  current  state  of  the  art,  identify  challenges,  and  provide  input  to  developing  strategies  for  address- ing  these  challenges.
Specific  infrastructure  sectors  considered  include  energy,  chemical,  transportation,  water  and  wastewater  treatment,  health  care  and  public  health,  and  commercial  facilities.
ICS–CERT provides on-site support to owners and operators of critical infrastruc- ture  for  protection  against  and  response  to  cyber  threats,  including  incident  re- sponse,  forensic  analysis,  and  site  assessments.
ICS–CERT  also  provides  tools  and  training  to  increase  stakeholder  awareness  of  evolving  threats  to  industrial  control  systems.
A real-world threat emerged last year that significantly changed the landscape of  targeted  cyber  attacks  on  industrial  control  systems.
DHS  analysis  concluded  that  this  highly  com- plex computer worm was the first of its kind, written to specifically target mission-  critical control systems running a specific combination of software and hardware.
ICS–CERT  analyzed  the  code  and  coordinated  actions  with  critical  infrastructure  asset  owners  and  operators,  Federal  partners,  and  Information  Sharing  and  Anal- ysis Centers.
Our analysis quickly uncovered that sophisticated malware of this type  potentially  has  the  ability  to  gain  access  to,  steal  detailed  proprietary  information  from, and manipulate the systems that operate mission-critical processes within the  Nation’s infrastructure.
To date, ICS–CERT has briefed doz- ens of Government and industry organizations and released multiple advisories and  updates  to  the  industrial  control  systems  community  describing  steps  for  detecting  an  infection  and  mitigating  the  threat.
As  always,  we  attempt  to  balance  the  need  for  public  information  sharing  while  limiting  the  information  that  malicious  actors  may  exploit.
After  conducting  in-depth  malware  analysis  and developing mitigation steps, we were able to release actionable information that  benefited our private sector partners.
Looking ahead, the Department is concerned that attackers could use the increas- ingly  public  information  about  the  code  to  develop  variants  targeted  at  broader  in-  11   stallations  of  programmable  equipment  in  control  systems.
ICS–CERT  will  continue  to  work  with  the  industrial  control  systems  community  to  investigate  these  and  other  threats  through  malicious  code  and  digital  media  analysis,  on-site  incident  response  activities,  and  information  sharing  and  partner- ships.
PROTECTING FEDERAL CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT NETWORKS   In addition to its support of private sector owners and operators of infrastructure,  DHS also collaborates with its partners to increase the security of Federal Executive  Branch civilian agency networks.
The fundamental ways that DHS works to secure  Federal  networks  are  by  improving  the  ability  of  departments  and  agencies  to  de- fend  their  systems  and  by  directly  providing  expertise  and  specific  technology  that  detects, mitigates, and prevents malicious activity on these networks.
As  part  of  the  CNCI,  DHS  works  with  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  to  reduce  and  consolidate  the  number  of  external  connections  that  Federal  agencies have to the internet through the Trusted Internet Connection (TIC) initia- tive.
This  initiative  reduces  the  number  of  entry  points  for  potential  vulnerabilities  into  Government  networks  and  allows  DHS  to  focus  monitoring  efforts  on  limited  and  known  avenues  through  which  internet  traffic  must  travel.
DHS  conducts  on-  site evaluations of agencies’ progress toward implementing TIC goals.
In  conjunction  with  the  TIC  initiative,  the  EINSTEIN  system  is  designed  to  pro- vide  the  U.S.  Government  with  an  early  warning  system  for  intrusions  to  Federal  Executive Branch civilian networks, near real-time identification of malicious activ- ity,  and  automated  disruption  of  that  malicious  activity.
The  second  phase  of  EIN- STEIN,  known  as  EINSTEIN  2  and  developed  in  2008  as  part  of  the  CNCI,  incor- porates intrusion detection capabilities into the original EINSTEIN system.
DHS is  currently  deploying  EINSTEIN  2  to  Federal  Executive  Branch  civilian  agency  TIC  locations  and  Networx  Managed  Trusted  Internet  Protocol  Services  (MTIPS)  pro- viders,  which  are  private  internet  service  providers  that  serve  Federal  agencies,  to  assist them with protecting their computers, networks, and information.
DHS is currently developing the third phase of the EINSTEIN system—an intru- sion prevention capability which will provide DHS with the ability to automatically  detect  and  disrupt  malicious  activity  before  harm  is  done  to  critical  networks  and  systems.
In  advance  of  this  development,  DHS,  in  coordination  with  the  National  Security  Agency  (NSA),  conducted  the  CNCI  Initiative  3  Exercise,  which  advanced  the potential capabilities of the EINSTEIN system by demonstrating defensive tech- nology, sharing near real-time threat information with DoD for enhanced situational  awareness, and providing a platform upon which an oversight and compliance proc- ess can be implemented for the evolving set of EINSTEIN capabilities.
The Depart- ment’s Privacy Office and its Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties carefully re- viewed  the  exercise  concept  of  operations,  and  the  Privacy  Office  worked  with  US–  CERT to publicly release a detailed Privacy Impact Assessment evaluating the exer- cise.
US–CERT  also  briefed  the  exercise  to  the  cyber  subcommittee  of  the  inde- pendent DHS Data Privacy and Integrity Committee.
Beyond  the  TIC  initiative  and  the  EINSTEIN  system,  DHS,  OMB,  and  the  Na- tional  Institute  for  Standards  and  Technology  work  cooperatively  with  agencies  across  the  Federal  Government  to  coordinate  the  protection  of  the  Nation’s  Federal  information  systems  through  compliance  with  the  Federal  Information  Security  Management Act of 2002 (FISMA).
US–CERT monitors EINSTEIN 2 sensors for in- trusion  activity  and  receives  self-reported  incident  information  from  Federal  agen- cies.
This  information  is  reported  to  OMB  for  use  in  its  FISMA  oversight  capacity.
In  2010,  DHS  also  began  to  administer  oversight  of  the  CyberScope  system,  which  was  developed  by  the  Department  of  Justice.
This  system  collects  agency  informa- tion  regarding  FISMA  compliance  and,  as  DHS,  OMB,  and  their  agency  partners  move  toward  automated  reporting,  the  system  will  enable  real-time  assessments  of  baseline  security  postures  across  individual  agencies  and  the  Federal  enterprise  as  a  whole.
This  activity  complements  the  development  of  reference  architectures  that   12   DHS  designs  for  Federal  agency  stakeholders  that  are  interested  in  implementing  security  solutions  based  on  standards  and  best  practices.
DHS  also  works  with  the  General  Services  Administration  to  create  Blanket  Purchase  Agreements  that  ad- dress various security solutions for Federal agencies.
THE DHS CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE   As  DHS  continues  to  make  progress  on  initiatives  such  as  TIC  and  EINSTEIN,  the  Department  is  also  mindful  that  the  Nation’s  cybersecurity  challenge  will  not  be  solved  by  a  single  technology  solution.
Multiple  innovative  technical  tools  are  necessary and indeed, technology alone is insufficient.
The mission requires a larger  cybersecurity  professional  workforce,  governance  structures  for  enhanced  partner- ships, more robust information sharing and identity protection, and increased cyber- security  awareness  among  the  general  public.
DHS  is  focused  on  building  a  world-class  cybersecurity  team  by  hiring  a  diverse  group of cybersecurity professionals—computer engineers, scientists, and analysts—  to secure the Nation’s digital assets and protect against cyber threats to our critical  infrastructure  and  key  resources.
NCSD  continues  to  hire  cybersecurity  and  infor- mation technology professionals, nearly tripling its cybersecurity workforce in fiscal  year  2009  and  nearly  doubling  that  number  again  in  fiscal  year  2010.
NCSD  cur- rently  has  more  than  230  cybersecurity  professionals  on  board,  with  dozens  more  in the hiring pipeline.
Several  initiatives  are  designed  to  increase  the  Nation’s  number  of  highly  quali- fied  cybersecurity  professionals.
DHS  and  NSA  co-sponsor  the  Centers  of  Academic  Excellence in Information Assurance Education and Research programs, the goal of  which  is  to  produce  a  growing  number  of  professionals  with  information  assurance  expertise  in  various  disciplines.
DHS  and  the  Department  of  State  co-hosted  Oper- ation  Cyber  Threat  (OCT1.0),  the  first  in  a  series  of  Government-wide  experiential  and interactive cybersecurity training pilots designed to apply learning concepts and  share best practices in a secure, simulated environment to build capacity within the  Federal workforce.
In December 2010, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En- gineers  Computer  Society,  the  world’s  leading  organization  of  computing  profes- sionals,  formally  recognized  the  Master  of  Software  Assurance  (MSwA)  Reference  Curriculum,  which  DHS  sponsored  through  its  Software  Assurance  (SwA)  Cur- riculum  Project.
The  MSwA  program  is  the  first  curriculum  of  its  kind  to  focus  on  assuring  the  functionality,  dependability,  and  security  of  software  and  systems.
Fi- nally,  DHS  co-sponsored  the  annual  Colloquium  for  Information  Systems  Security  Education  and  the  Scholarship  for  Services  (SFS)  Job  Fair/Symposium,  which  brought together 55 Federal agencies and more than 200 SFS students.
The  National  Initiative  for  Cybersecurity  Education  (NICE)  has  the  dual  goals  of  a  cyber-savvy  citizenry  and  a  cyber-capable  workforce.
Working  with  NIST,  which  is  the  overall  interagency  lead,  DHS  heads  the  NICE  awareness  elements  and  co-  leads  the  training  and  professional  development  components  with  DoD  and  the  Of- fice of the Director of National Intelligence.
INTERAGENCY AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE COORDINATION   Overcoming  new  cybersecurity  challenges  requires  a  coordinated  and  focused  ap- proach  to  better  secure  the  Nation’s  information  and  communications  infrastruc- tures.
President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy Review reaffirms cybersecurity’s signifi- cance to the Nation’s economy and security.
Establishment of a White House Cyber- security Coordinator position solidified the priority the administration places on im- proving cybersecurity.
No single agency controls cyberspace and the success of our cybersecurity mission  relies on effective communication and critical partnerships.
Many Government play- ers  have  complementary  roles—including  DHS,  the  intelligence  community,  DoD,  the  Department  of  Justice,  the  Department  of  State,  and  other  Federal  agencies—  and they require coordination and leadership to ensure effective and efficient execu- tion  of  our  collective  cyber  missions.
The  creation  of  a  senior-level  cyber  position  within  the  White  House  ensures  coordination  and  collaboration  across  Government  agencies.
DHS  works  closely  with  its  Federal,  State,  and  local  partners  to  protect  Govern- ment  cyber  networks.
In  September  2010,  DHS  and  DoD  signed  a  memorandum  of  agreement that aligns and enhances America’s capabilities to protect against threats  to  our  critical  civilian  and  military  computer  systems  and  networks,  including  de- ploying a National Security Agency support team to the NCCIC to enhance the Na- tional Cyber Incident Response Plan and sending a full-time senior DHS leader and  support team to the National Security Agency.
13   In  November  2010,  the  MS–ISAC  opened  its  Cyber  Security  Operations  Center,  a  24-hour  watch  and  warning  facility,  which  will  both  enhance  situational  aware- ness at the State and local level for the NCCIC and allow the Federal Government  to  quickly  and  efficiently  provide  critical  cyber  risk,  vulnerability,  and  mitigation  data  to  State  and  local  governments.
Private industry owns and operates the vast majority of the Nation’s critical infra- structure  and  cyber  networks.
Consequently,  the  private  sector  plays  an  important  role in cybersecurity, and DHS has initiated several pilot programs to promote pub- lic-private sector collaboration.
In its engagement with the private sector, DHS rec- ognizes the need to avoid technology prescription and to support innovation that en- hances  critical  infrastructure  cybersecurity.
In  February  2010,  DHS,  DoD,  and  the  Financial  Services  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Center  (FS–ISAC)  launched  a  pilot  designed  to  help  protect  key  crit- ical  networks  and  infrastructure  within  the  financial  services  sector  by  sharing  ac- tionable, sensitive information.
In  June  2010,  DHS  implemented  the  Cybersecurity  Partner  Local  Access  Plan,  which  allows  security-cleared  owners  and  operators  of  CIKR,  as  well  as  State  tech- nology officials and law enforcement officials, to access secret-level cybersecurity in- formation  and  video  teleconference  calls  via  State  and  local  fusion  centers.
In  No- vember  2010,  DHS  signed  an  agreement  with  the  Information  Technology  Informa- tion  Sharing  and  Analysis  Center  (IT–ISAC)  to  embed  a  full-time  IT–ISAC  analyst  and  liaison  to  DHS  at  the  NCCIC,  part  of  the  on-going  effort  to  collocate  private  sector  representatives  alongside  Federal  and  State  government  counterparts.
The  IT–ISAC consists of information technology stakeholders from the private sector and  facilitates cooperation among members to identify sector-specific vulnerabilities and  risk mitigation strategies.
In  July  2010,  DHS  worked  extensively  with  the  White  House  on  the  publication  of a draft National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, which seeks to se- cure the digital identities of individuals, organizations, services, and devices during  on-line  transactions,  as  well  as  the  infrastructure  supporting  the  transaction.
The  strategy  is  based  on  public-private  partnerships  and  supports  the  protec- tion  of  privacy,  and  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties  by  enabling  only  the  minimum  necessary amount of personal information to be transferred in any particular trans- action.
Its implementation will be led by the Department of Commerce.
The goal of the agreement is to  speed  the  commercialization  of  cybersecurity  research  innovations  that  support  our  Nation’s  critical  infrastructures.
This  agreement  will  accelerate  the  deployment  of  network  test  beds  for  specific  use  cases  that  strengthen  the  resiliency,  security,  in- tegrity, and usability of financial services and other critical infrastructures.
While  considerable  activity  is  focused  on  public  and  private  sector  critical  infra- structure  protection,  DHS  is  committed  to  developing  innovative  ways  to  enhance  the general public’s awareness about the importance of safeguarding America’s com- puter  systems  and  networks  from  attacks.
Every  October,  DHS  and  its  public  and  private  sector  partners  promote  efforts  to  educate  citizens  about  guarding  against  cyber  threats  as  part  of  National  Cybersecurity  Awareness  Month.
In  March  2010,  Secretary  Napolitano  launched  the  National  Cybersecurity  Awareness  Challenge,  which called on the general public and private sector companies to develop creative  and innovative ways to enhance cybersecurity awareness.
The winning proposals helped inform the development of the National Cybersecurity  Awareness  Campaign,  Stop.
Connect.,  which  DHS  launched  in  conjunction  with private sector partners during the October 2010 National Cybersecurity Aware- ness Month.
Connect., a message developed with the private sector, has  evolved  into  an  on-going  National  public  education  campaign  designed  to  increase  public understanding of cyber threats and how individual citizens can develop safer   14   cyber habits that will help make networks more secure.
The campaign fulfills a key  element of President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy Review, which tasked DHS with de- veloping a public awareness campaign to inform Americans about ways to use tech- nology  safely.
The  program  is  part  of  the  NIST  National  Initiative  for  Cyber  Edu- cation (NICE).
Accordingly, the Depart- ment  has  implemented  strong  privacy  and  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties  standards  into  all  of  its  cybersecurity  programs  and  initiatives  from  the  outset.
To  support  this,  DHS  established  an  Oversight  and  Compliance  Officer  within  NPPD,  and  key  cybersecurity  personnel  receive  specific  training  on  the  protection  of  privacy  and  other  civil  liberties  as  they  relate  to  computer  network  security  activities.
In  an  ef- fort to increase transparency, DHS also publishes privacy impact assessments on its  website, www.dhs.gov, for all of its cybersecurity systems.
CONCLUSION   Set  within  an  environment  characterized  by  a  dangerous  combination  of  known  and  unknown  vulnerabilities,  strong  and  rapidly  expanding  adversary  capabilities,  and  a  lack  of  comprehensive  threat  and  vulnerability  awareness,  the  cybersecurity  mission is truly a National one requiring collaboration across the homeland security  enterprise.
The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  committed  to  creating  a  safe,  secure,  and  resilient  cyber  environment  while  promoting  cybersecurity  knowledge  and innovation.
We must continue to secure today’s infrastructure as we prepare for  tomorrow’s challenges and opportunities.
It is important to recognize that we do not  undertake  cybersecurity  for  the  sake  of  security  itself,  but  rather  to  ensure  that  Government,  business,  and  critical  societal  functions  can  continue  to  use  the  infor- mation technology and communications infrastructure on which they depend.
We are deploying intrusion detection  and  prevention  technologies  across  the  Federal  enterprise,  aiding  departments  and  agencies in securing their networks, and providing analysis, vulnerability, and miti- gation  assistance  to  private  sector  CIKR  partners.
Our  continued  dedication  to  pri- vacy, civil rights, and civil liberties ensures a positive, sustainable model for cyber- security  engagement  in  the  future.
Finally,  we  work  closely  with  our  interagency  partners in law enforcement and intelligence, providing the full complement of Fed- eral  capabilities  in  preparation  for,  and  in  response  to,  significant  cyber  incidents.
STATEMENT  OF  GREGORY  WILSHUSEN,  DIRECTOR  OF  INFOR- MATION SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY  OFFICE  Mr.  WILSHUSEN.
Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  at  today’s  hearing  on  cyber  threats  to  critical  infrastruc- ture and the American economy.
As  you  mentioned  in  your  opening  statements,  pervasive  and  sustained  cyber  attacks  against  the  United  States  continue  to  threaten  Federal  and  non-Federal  systems  and  operations.
Thus, it is increasingly impor- tant  that  Federal  and  non-Federal  entities  carry  out  concerted  ef- forts  to  safeguard  their  systems  and  the  information  they  contain.
15   Mr. Chairman, today we will discuss the threats to cyber-reliant  critical  infrastructures  and  with  Federal  information  systems  and  the challenges agencies face in protecting them.
Cyber  threats  to  critical  infrastructure  and  Federal  services  are  evolving  and  growing  and  can  come  from  a  variety  of  sources,  in- cluding  criminals  and  foreign  nations,  as  well  as  hackers  and  dis- gruntled  employees.
Potential  hackers  have  a  variety  of  techniques  at  their  dis- posal  that  can  vastly  expand  the  risk,  the  reach,  and  impact  of  their  operations,  including  use  of  social  engineering  and  malicious  software.
The  interconnectivity  between  information  systems,  the  internet, and other infrastructure also presents increasing opportu- nities for such attacks.
Not surprisingly, security incidents reported  by  Federal  agencies  are  on  the  rise,  increasing  over  650  percent  during the past 5 years to nearly 42,000 in fiscal year 2010.
Cyber  attack  incidents  can  seriously  impact  our  National  and  economic  security  and  have  resulted  in  the  loss  of  classified  infor- mation  and  intellectual  property,  and  financial  crimes  reportedly  totaling  billions  of  dollars.
Key  actions  to  improve  our  Na- tional  approach  to  cybersecurity  have  not  been  fully  implemented,  Federal capacity to protect against cyber threats needs to improve,  and  Federal  agencies  have  not  fully  addressed  persistent  control  weaknesses or consistently implemented effective information secu- rity  programs.
For  these  reasons,  GAO  once  again  identified  pro- tecting the Federal Government’s information systems and the Na- tion’s  critical  infrastructure  as  a  Government-wide  high-risk  area  in its biennial report to the Congress on high-risk Government pro- grams.
Mr.  Chairman,  much  work  remains  to  be  done.
Additional  Fed- eral  efforts  are  needed  to  implement  actions  recommended  by  the  President’s Cybersecurity Policy Review, update the National strat- egy  for  securing  the  information  and  communications  infrastruc- ture,  develop  a  National  strategy  for  addressing  the  global  aspects  of  cybersecurity,  and  create  a  prioritized  National  and  Federal  cy- bersecurity research and development agenda.
Federal  agencies,  and  in  particular  DHS,  need  to  enhance  their  cyber analysis and warning capabilities and help strengthen the ef- fectiveness  of  public-private  sector  partnerships  in  securing  cyber  critical  infrastructure.
Federal  agencies  also  need  to  mitigate  known  vulnerabilities,  fully  implement  comprehensive  information  security programs, and facilitate Government-wide efforts to secure  their systems.
GAO has made numerous recommendations to assist agencies in  these  areas,  and  agencies  have  implemented  or  are  in  the  process  of implementing many of them.
In  summary,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  threats  to  information  systems  are  evolving  and  growing,  and  systems  supporting  Federal  oper- ations  and  the  Nation’s  critical  infrastructures  are  not  sufficiently  protected  to  consistently  thwart  those  threats.
Until  the  adminis- tration  and  Federal  agencies  working  with  the  private  sector  fully  address the challenges before them, our Nation’s cybersecurity crit- ical infrastructure will remain vulnerable.
[The statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:]   PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREGORY WILSHUSEN   MARCH 16, 2011   CYBERSECURITY: CONTINUED ATTENTION NEEDED TO PROTECT OUR NATION’S CRITICAL   INFRASTRUCTURE AND FEDERAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS   Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, and Members of the subcommittee:  Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  at  today’s  hearing  on  the  cyber  threats  to  critical infrastructure and the American economy.
Pervasive and sustained cyber attacks against the United States continue to pose  a  potentially  devastating  impact  on  Federal  and  non-Federal  systems  and  oper- ations.
In February 2011, the Director of National Intelligence testified that, in the  past  year,  there  had  been  a  dramatic  increase  in  malicious  cyber  activity  targeting  U.S. computers and networks, including a more than tripling of the volume of mali- cious  software  since  2009.1 Recent  press  reports  that  computer  hackers  broke  into  and stole proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six  U.S.  and  European  energy  companies  also  demonstrate  the  risk  that  our  Nation  faces.
Such  attacks  highlight  the  importance  of  developing  a  concerted  response  to  safeguard Federal and non-Federal information systems.
Mr.  Chairman,  GAO  recently  issued  its  high-risk  list  of  Government  programs  that have greater vulnerability to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement or need  transformation  to  address  economy,  efficiency,  or  effectiveness  challenges.2 Once  again,  we  identified  protecting  the  Federal  Government’s  information  systems  and  the  Nation’s  cyber  critical  infrastructure  as  a  Government-wide  high-risk  area.
We  have  designated  Federal  information  security  as  a  high-risk  area  since  1997;  in  2003, we expanded this high-risk area to include protecting systems supporting our  Nation’s critical infrastructure, referred to as cyber critical infrastructure protection  or cyber CIP.
In  my  testimony  today  I  will  describe:  (1)  Cyber  threats  to  cyber-reliant  critical  infrastructures  and  Federal  information  systems  and  (2)  the  continuing  challenges  Federal agencies face in protecting the Nation’s cyber-reliant critical infrastructures  and  Federal  systems.
In  preparing  this  statement  in  March  2011,  we  relied  on  our  previous work in these areas (please see the related GAO products page at the end  of this statement).
The  work  on  which  this  statement  is  based  was  performed  in  ac- cordance  with  generally  accepted  Government  auditing  standards.
Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  audits  to  obtain  sufficient,  appropriate  evidence  to  provide  a  reasonable  basis  for  our  findings  and  conclusions  based  on  our  audit  objectives.
BACKGROUND   As  computer  technology  has  advanced,  Federal  agencies  and  our  Nation’s  critical  infrastructures 3—such  as  power  distribution,  water  supply,  telecommunications,  and  emergency  services—have  become  increasingly  dependent  on  computerized  in- formation systems to carry out their operations and to process, maintain, and report  essential information.
Public and private organizations rely on computer systems to  transfer  increasing  amounts  of  money  and  sensitive  and  proprietary  information,  conduct operations, and deliver services to constituents.
The security of these systems and data is essential to protecting National and eco- nomic security, and public health and safety.
Conversely, ineffective information se- curity  controls  can  result  in  significant  risks,  including  the  loss  of  resources,  such  as  Federal  payments  and  collections;  inappropriate  access  to  sensitive  information,  such as National security information, personal information on taxpayers, or propri-  1 Director  of  National  Intelligence,  Statement  for  the  Record  on  the  Worldwide  Threat  Assess- ment  of  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Community,  statement  before  the  Senate  Select  Committee  on  In- telligence (Feb. 16, 2011).
3 Critical  infrastructures  are  systems  and  assets,  whether  physical  or  virtual,  so  vital  to  the  Nation  that  their  incapacity  or  destruction  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on  National  secu- rity,  National  economic  security,  National  public  health  or  safety,  or  any  combination  of  those  matters.
17   etary business information; disruption of critical operations supporting critical infra- structure, National defense, or emergency services; and undermining of agency mis- sions due to embarrassing incidents that diminish public confidence in Government.
CYBER-RELIANT CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND FEDERAL SYSTEMS FACE INCREASING   CYBER THREATS   Threats to systems supporting critical infrastructure and Federal information sys- tems  are  evolving  and  growing.
Government  officials  are  concerned  about  attacks  from individuals and groups with malicious intent, such as criminals, terrorists, and  foreign  nations.
Federal  law  enforcement  and  intelligence  agencies  have  identified  multiple  sources  of  threats  to  our  Nation’s  critical  information  systems,  including  foreign  nations  engaged  in  espionage  and  information  warfare,  criminals,  hackers,  virus writers, and disgruntled employees and contractors.
These groups and individ- uals have a variety of attack techniques at their disposal that can be used to deter- mine vulnerabilities and gain entry into targeted systems.
For example, phishing in- volves  the  creation  and  use  of  fake  e-mails  and  websites  to  deceive  internet  users  into disclosing their personal data and other sensitive information.
The connectivity between information systems, the internet, and other infrastruc- tures  also  creates  opportunities  for  attackers  to  disrupt  telecommunications,  elec- trical power, and other critical services.
For example, in May 2008, we reported that  the Tennessee Valley Authority’s (TVA) corporate network contained security weak- nesses  that  could  lead  to  the  disruption  of  control  systems  networks  and  devices  connected  to  that  network.4 We  made  19  recommendations  to  improve  the  imple- mentation  of  information  security  program  activities  for  the  control  systems  gov- erning  TVA’s  critical  infrastructures  and  73  recommendations  to  address  weak- nesses  in  information  security  controls.
TVA  concurred  with  the  recommendations  and  has  taken  steps  to  implement  them.
As  Government,  private  sector,  and  per- sonal  activities  continue  to  move  to  networked  operations,  the  threat  will  continue  to grow.
Reported Security Incidents Are on the Rise   Consistent  with  the  evolving  and  growing  nature  of  the  threats  to  Federal  sys- tems, agencies are reporting an increasing number of security incidents.
These inci- dents  put  sensitive  information  at  risk.
Personally  identifiable  information  about  U.S.  citizens  has  been  lost,  stolen,  or  improperly  disclosed,  thereby  potentially  ex- posing those individuals to loss of privacy, identity theft, and financial crimes.
Agen- cies  have  experienced  a  wide  range  of  incidents  involving  data  loss  or  theft,  com- puter intrusions, and privacy breaches, underscoring the need for improved security  practices.
When incidents occur, agencies are to notify the Federal information security inci- dent  center—the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT).
The  three  most  prevalent  types  of  incidents  and  events  reported  to  US–CERT  dur- ing fiscal year 2010 were: (1) Malicious code (software that infects an operating sys- tem or application), (2) improper usage (a violation of acceptable computing use poli- cies), and (3) unauthorized access (where an individual gains logical or physical ac- cess  to  a  system  without  permission).
Additionally,  according  to  Department  of  Homeland Security (DHS) officials, US–CERT detects incidents and events through  its  intrusion  detection  system,  supplemented  by  agency  reports,  for  investigation  (unconfirmed incidents that are potentially malicious or anomalous activity deemed  by the reporting entity to warrant further review).
Reports  of  cyber  attacks  and  information  security  incidents  against  Federal  sys- tems  and  systems  supporting  critical  infrastructure  illustrate  the  effect  that  such  incidents could have on National and economic security.
• In  July  2010,  the  Department  of  Defense  (DOD)  launched  an  investigation  to  identify  how  thousands  of  classified  military  documents  (including  Afghanistan  and Iraq war operations, as well as field reports on Pakistan) were obtained by  the  group  WikiLeaks.org.
According  to  DOD,  this  investigation  was  related  to  an on-going investigation of an Army private charged with, among other things,  transmitting National defense information to an unauthorized source.
4 GAO,  Information  Security:  TVA  Needs  to  Address  Weaknesses  in  Control  Systems  and  Net-  works, (Washington, DC: May 21, 2008).
18   • In 2010, the Deputy Secretary of Defense stated that DOD suffered a significant  compromise of its classified military computer networks in 2008.
It began when  a  flash  drive’s  malicious  computer  code,  placed  there  by  a  foreign  intelligence  agency, uploaded itself onto a network and spread on both classified and unclas- sified systems.5  • In  February  2011,  media  reports  stated  that  computer  hackers  broke  into  and  stole proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six  U.S. and European energy companies.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN ACTIONS TO ADDRESS CYBER THREATS, BUT   CHALLENGES REMAIN IN PROTECTING CRITICAL SYSTEMS   The  Federal  Government  has  a  variety  of  roles  and  responsibilities  in  protecting  the  Nation’s  cyber-reliant  critical  infrastructure,  enhancing  the  Nation’s  overall  cy- bersecurity  posture,  and  ensuring  the  security  of  Federal  systems  and  the  informa- tion  they  contain.
In  light  of  the  pervasive  and  increasing  threats  to  critical  sys- tems,  the  Executive  branch  is  taking  a  number  of  steps  to  strengthen  the  Nation’s  approach to cybersecurity.
For example, in its role as the focal point for Federal ef- forts to protect the Nation’s cyber critical infrastructures,6 DHS issued a revised Na- tional infrastructure protection plan in 2009 and an interim National cyber incident  response  plan  in  2010.
Executive  branch  agencies  have  also  made  progress  insti- tuting  several  Government-wide  initiatives  that  are  aimed  at  bolstering  aspects  of  Federal  cybersecurity,  such  as  reducing  the  number  of  Federal  access  points  to  the  internet,  establishing  security  configurations  for  desktop  computers,  and  enhancing  situational  awareness  of  cyber  events.
Despite  these  efforts,  the  Federal  Govern- ment continues to face significant challenges in protecting the Nation’s cyber-reliant  critical infrastructure and Federal information systems.
Key  Actions  to  Improve  Our  Current  National  Approach  to  Cybersecurity  Have  Not   Yet Been Fully Implemented   The administration and Executive branch agencies have not yet fully implemented  key  actions  that  are  intended  to  address  threats  and  improve  the  current  U.S.  ap- proach to cybersecurity.
• Implementing  actions  recommended  by  the  President’s  Cybersecurity  Policy  Re- view.
In  February  2009,  the  President  initiated  a  review  of  the  Government’s  cybersecurity  policies  and  structures,  which  resulted  in  24  near-  and  mid-term  recommendations  to  address  organizational  and  policy  changes  to  improve  the  current  U.S.  approach  to  cybersecurity.7 In  October  2010,  we  reported  that  2  recommendations  had  been  implemented  and  22  were  partially  implemented.8  Officials  from  key  agencies  involved  in  these  efforts  (e.g.,  DHS,  DOD,  and  the  Office of Management and Budget (OMB)) stated that progress had been slower  than  expected  because  agencies  lacked  assigned  roles  and  responsibilities  and  because  several  of  the  mid-term  recommendations  would  require  action  over  multiple  years.
We  recommended  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator  (whose role was established as a result of the policy review) designate roles and  responsibilities  for  each  recommendation  and  develop  milestones  and  plans,  in- cluding measures to show agencies’ progress and performance.
• Updating  the  National  strategy  for  securing  the  information  and  communica- tions  infrastructure.
In  March  2009,  we  testified  on  the  needed  improvements  to  the  Nation’s  cybersecurity  strategy.9 In  preparation  for  that  testimony,  we  convened  a  panel  of  experts  that  included  former  Federal  officials,  academics,  and private sector executives.
The panel highlighted 12 key improvements that  are, in its view, essential to improving the strategy and our National cybersecu- rity  posture,  including  the  development  of  a  National  strategy  that  clearly  ar- ticulates strategic objectives, goals, and priorities.
• Developing  a  comprehensive  National  strategy  for  addressing  global  cybersecu- rity and governance.
In July 2010, we reported that the U.S. Government faced  a  number  of  challenges  in  formulating  and  implementing  a  coherent  approach   5 Foreign  Affairs,  Defending  a  New  Domain:  The  Pentagon’s  Cyberstrategy,  William  J.  Lynn   III, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense (New York, NY: September/October 2010).
6 As  established  by  Federal  law  and  policy,  including  the  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002,  Homeland  Security  Presidential  Directive—7,  and  the  National  Strategy  to  Secure  Cyberspace.
7 The  White  House,  Cyberspace  Policy  Review:  Assuring  a  Trusted  and  Resilient  Information   and Communications Infrastructure (Washington, DC: May 29, 2009).
8 GAO, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy Re- view Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO–11–24 (Washington, DC: Oct.  6, 2010).
9 GAO,  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  Key  Improvements  Are  Needed  to  Strengthen  the  Na-  tion’s Posture, GAO–09–432T (Washington, DC: Mar.
19   to  global  aspects  of  cyberspace,  including,  among  other  things,  providing  top-  level  leadership  and  developing  a  comprehensive  strategy.10 Specifically,  we  found  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator’s  authority  and  capacity  to  effectively  coordinate  and  forge  a  coherent  National  approach  to  cybersecurity  were  still  under  development.
In  addition,  the  U.S.  Government  had  not  docu- mented a clear vision of how the international efforts of Federal entities, taken  together,  support  overarching  National  goals.
We  recommended  that,  among  other  things,  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator  develop  with  other  rel- evant entities a comprehensive U.S. global cyberspace strategy.
• Finalizing  cybersecurity  guidelines  and  monitoring  compliance  related  to  elec- tricity  grid  modernization.
In  January  2011,  we  reported  on  efforts  by  the  Na- tional  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  to  develop  cybersecurity  guidelines  and  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  (FERC)  efforts  to  adopt  and monitor cybersecurity standards related to the electric industry’s incorpora- tion  of  IT  systems  to  improve  reliability  and  efficiency—commonly  referred  to  as  the  smart  grid.11 We  determined  that  NIST  had  not  addressed  all  key  ele- ments  of  cybersecurity  in  its  initial  guidelines  or  finalized  plans  for  doing  so.
We  also  determined  that  FERC  had  not  developed  an  approach  for  monitoring  industry  compliance  with  its  initial  set  of  voluntary  standards.
Further,  we  identified  six  key  challenges  with  respect  to  securing  smart  grid  systems,  in- cluding  a  lack  of  security  features  being  built  into  certain  smart  grid  systems  and  an  ineffective  mechanism  for  sharing  information  on  cybersecurity  within  the industry.
We recommended that NIST finalize its plans for updating its cy- bersecurity  guidelines  to  incorporate  missing  elements  and  that  FERC  develop  a  coordinated  approach  to  monitor  voluntary  standards  and  address  any  gaps  in compliance.
• Creating a prioritized National and Federal cybersecurity research and develop- ment  (R&D)  agenda.
In  June  2010,  we  reported  that  while  efforts  to  improve  cybersecurity  R&D  were  under  way  by  the  White  House’s  Office  Science  and  Technology  Policy  (OSTP)  and  other  Federal  entities,  six  major  challenges  im- peded these efforts.12 Among the most critical was the lack of a prioritized Na- tional  cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda.
We  found  that  despite  its  legal  responsibility  and  our  past  recommendations,  a  key  OSTP  sub- committee  had  not  created  a  prioritized  National  R&D  agenda,  increasing  the  risk that research pursued by individual organizations will not reflect National  priorities.
We recommended that OSTP direct the subcommittee to take several  actions,  including  developing  a  National  cybersecurity  R&D  agenda.
We  are  in  the  process  of  verifying  actions  taken  to  implement  our  recommenda- tions.
In  addition,  we  have  on-going  work  related  to  cyber  CIP  efforts  in  several  other  areas  including:  (1)  Cybersecurity-related  standards  used  by  critical  infra- structure sectors, (2) Federal efforts to recruit, retain, train, and develop cybersecu- rity  professionals,  and  (3)  Federal  efforts  to  address  risks  to  the  information  tech- nology supply chain.
Federal Capacity to Protect Against Cyber Threats Needs to Improve   In  addition  to  improving  our  National  capability  to  address  cybersecurity,  Execu- tive branch agencies, in particular DHS, also need to improve their capacity to pro- tect  against  cyber  threats  by,  among  other  things,  advancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning capabilities and strengthening the effectiveness of the public-private sector  partnerships in securing cyber critical infrastructure.
• Enhancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities.
In  July  2008,  we  reported  that  DHS’s  US–CERT  had  not  fully  addressed  15  key  attributes  of  cyber  anal- ysis  and  warning  capabilities.13 As  a  result,  we  recommended  that  the  Depart- ment address shortfalls associated with the 15 attributes in order to fully estab- lish  a  National  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capability  as  envisioned  in  the  Na- tional  strategy.
DHS  agreed  in  large  part  with  our  recommendations  and  has  reported  that  it  is  taking  steps  to  implement  them.
We  are  currently  working   10 GAO,  Cyberspace:  United  States  Faces  Challenges  in  Addressing  Global  Cybersecurity  and   Governance, GAO–10–606 (Washington, DC: July 2, 2010).
11 GAO, Electricity Grid Modernization: Progress Being Made on Cybersecurity Guidelines, but   Key Challenges Remain to be Addressed, GAO–11–117 (Washington, DC: Jan. 12, 2011).
12 GAO, Cybersecurity: Key Challenges Need to Be Addressed to Improve Research and Develop-  ment, GAO–10–466 (Washington, DC: June 3, 2010).
13 GAO, Cyber Analysis and Warning: DHS Faces Challenges in Establishing a Comprehensive   National Capability, GAO–08–588 (Washington, DC: Jul.
• Strengthening  the  public-private  partnerships  for  securing  cyber  critical  infra- structure.
In  July  2010,  we  reported  that  the  expectations  of  private  sector  stakeholders  were  not  being  met  by  their  Federal  partners  in  areas  related  to  sharing  information  about  cyber-based  threats  to  critical  infrastructure.14 Fed- eral partners, such as DHS, were taking steps that may address the key expec- tations  of  the  private  sector,  including  developing  new  information-sharing  ar- rangements.
We  also  reported  that  public  sector  stakeholders  believed  that  im- provements  could  be  made  to  the  partnership,  including  improving  private  sec- tor sharing of sensitive information.
We recommended that the National Cyber- security Coordinator and DHS work with their Federal and private sector part- ners to enhance information-sharing efforts, including leveraging a central focal  point for sharing information among the private sector, civilian government, law  enforcement, the military, and the intelligence community.
Federal Agencies Have Not Addressed Persistent Control Weaknesses or Implemented   Effective Information Security Programs   Federal systems continue to be afflicted by persistent information security control  weaknesses.
Specifically,  agencies  did  not  consistently  implement  effective  controls  to prevent, limit, and detect unauthorized access or manage the configuration of net- work  devices  to  prevent  unauthorized  access  and  ensure  system  integrity.
Most  of  the  24  major  Federal  agencies  had  information  security  weaknesses  in  five  key  in- ternal  control  categories,15 as  illustrated  in  Figure  1.
In  addition,  GAO  determined  that serious and widespread information security control deficiencies were a Govern- ment-wide  material  weakness  in  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  part  of  its  audit  of  the  fiscal  year  2010  financial  statements  for  the  United  States  Govern- ment.
14 GAO,  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection:  Key  Private  and  Public  Cyber  Expectations  Need  to   Be Consistently Addressed, GAO–10–628 (Washington, DC: July 15, 2010).
15 The five internal controls are access controls, which ensure that only authorized individuals  can read, alter, or delete data; configuration management controls, which provide assurance that  only  authorized  software  programs  are  implemented;  segregation  of  duties,  which  reduces  the  risk that one individual can independently perform inappropriate actions without detection; con- tinuity  of  operations  planning,  which  provides  for  the  prevention  of  significant  disruptions  of  computer-dependent  operations;  and  an  agency-wide  information  security  program  (security  management),  which  provides  the  framework  for  ensuring  that  risks  are  understood  and  that  effective controls are selected and properly implemented.
21   Over  the  past  several  years,  we  and  inspectors  general  have  made  hundreds  of  recommendations  to  agencies  for  actions  necessary  to  resolve  prior  significant  con- trol  deficiencies  and  information  security  program  shortfalls.
For  example,  we  rec- ommended  that  agencies  correct  specific  information  security  deficiencies  related  to  user identification and authentication, authorization, boundary protections, cryptog- raphy, audit and monitoring, physical security, configuration management, segrega- tion  of  duties,  and  contingency  planning.
We  have  also  recommended  that  agencies  fully  implement  comprehensive,  agency-wide  information  security  programs  by  cor- recting  weaknesses  in  risk  assessments,  information  security  policies  and  proce- dures, security planning, security training, system tests and evaluations, and reme- dial actions.
The effective implementation of these recommendations will strengthen  the  security  posture  at  these  agencies.
Agencies  have  implemented  or  are  in  the  process of implementing many of our recommendations.
In  addition,  the  White  House,  OMB,  and  selected  Federal  agencies  have  under- taken Government-wide initiatives to enhance information security at Federal agen- cies.
For  example,  the  Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative,  a  series  of  12  projects,  is  aimed  primarily  at  improving  DHS’s  and  other  Federal  agencies’  ef- forts to reduce vulnerabilities, protect against intrusion attempts, and anticipate fu- ture  threats  against  Federal  Executive  branch  information  systems.
However,  the  projects  face  challenges  in  achieving  their  objectives  related  to  securing  Federal  in- formation,  including  better  defining  agency  roles  and  responsibilities,  establishing  measures  of  effectiveness,  and  establishing  an  appropriate  level  of  transparency.
These challenges require sustained attention, which agencies have begun to provide.
In  summary,  the  threats  to  information  systems  are  evolving  and  growing,  and  systems supporting our Nation’s critical infrastructure and Federal systems are not  sufficiently protected to consistently thwart the threats.
Administration and Execu- tive branch agencies need to take actions to improve our Nation’s cybersecurity pos- ture, including implementing the actions recommended by the President’s cybersecu- rity  policy  review  and  enhancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities.
In  addi- tion,  actions  are  needed  to  enhance  security  over  Federal  systems  and  information,  including fully developing and effectively implementing agency-wide information se- curity  programs  and  implementing  open  recommendations.
Until  these  actions  are  taken,  our  Nation’s  Federal  and  non-Federal  cyber  critical  infrastructure  will  re- main  vulnerable.
As  we  look  at  what  is  happening  in  Japan,  you  see  the  effects  of  one  of  the  largest  recorded,  most  powerful  earthquakes  in  history,  a tsunami that, if you watch it via the internet, if you watch it via  YouTube, you see something that is stronger than any words could  present.
So  what  is  the  most  serious  threat  that  you  see  to  our  critical  infrastructure  as  a  result  of  something  that  may  visit  it  by  way  of  cybersecurity,  or  a  lack  of  cybersecurity,  an  invasion  of  our  cyber  system,  penetration  of our cyber system.
Certainly I do worry very much about things  like  attacks  on  control  systems,  where  it  is  not  just,  well,  we  can’t  get access to our data, but we can’t have the power on; or it is not  just we can’t get access to our data or somebody access to our data,   22   somebody  may  have  filled  with  our  data,  not  just  attacks  on  con- fidentiality, but integrity.
So if someone got access to a major med- ical  database  and  changed  the  contents  of  it,  that  could  have  sig- nificant consequences in terms of human life for a large number of  people.
Are  we now prepared for that type of cyber attack and are we doing the  things  that  we  need  to  do  now  to  be  ready  when  and  if  that  sort  of event takes place?
We have done considerable things to raise the  priority of cybersecurity.
Just  last  year,  the  Ranking  Member  mentioned  the  first-ever  Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  which  identified  cyberse- curity as one of the top mission areas for the entire homeland secu- rity enterprise on a par with protecting our borders and having do- mestic security and providing resilience to disasters.
On a par with  those  things,  cybersecurity  is  just  as  important.
Can  you  outline,  in  your  opinion,  for  instance,  what  is  hin- dering DHS’s cybersecurity mission right now?
One  of  the  things  that  DHS  could  do  to  help  the  private  sector  and  others  to  better  protect  their  systems  is  to  provide  clear,  ac- tionable,  and  alert  threat  information  and  share  techniques  with  the private sector to improve their security.
Well,  we  recently  completed  a  review  in  which  we asked private sector organizations what its key expectations are  of the private sector/public partnerships.
Over 98 percent of the re- spondents  indicated  that  having  actionable  and  timely  threat  and  alert  information  was  essential  to  a  great  or  moderate  extent,  but  only  27  percent  felt  that  they  were  actually  receiving  that  type  of  information to a great or moderate extent.
It is attempting to and has taken actions to help improve its cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities,  but  as  Mr.  Reitinger  mentioned  in his opening remarks, more needs to be done.
Mr.  Reitinger  and  Mr.  Wilshusen,  DHS  has  many  detractors on any number of issues, but we want to make sure that   23   the right people are tasked with doing the job of addressing cyber- security  to  our  critical  infrastructure.
The  other  agencies  in  the  Federal  Government  with  considerable  cybersecurity  expertise  are  the  NSA  and  the  DOD.
Is  DHS  the  proper  agency  to  lead  Federal  cybersecurity  efforts?
There is a long way to go in terms of being able to share  the  right  information  with  the  private  sector.
We have had significant successes, for example, in terms of shar- ing  actionable  information.
We  have  shared  literally  hundreds  of  pieces  of  actionable  information  with  the  financial  services  sector,  which  has  also  shared hundreds of pieces of information back to us.
We then take  that  information,  it  comes  back  to  us  in  an  itemized  form,  we  can  glean  data  from  it  and  pass  that  out.
DOD  has  an  essential  role  to  play  protecting  military  systems  and  providing  a  core  and  deep  technical  expertise  in  the  National  Security  Agency  and  Cyber  Command on which all of us in appropriate cases rely.
We  have  not  done  that  in  a  unitary  network  that is subject to command and control, but in, so far, 15 of 19 dif- ferent  major  Federal  agencies  and  at  four  internet  service  pro- viders.
So  we  have  developed  the  expertise  on  how  to  act  in  that  envi- ronment,  move  forward  to  protect  security,  and  to  protect  privacy  at the same time.
It  has  also  received  responsibility  for  providing  increased  oversight  and  assistance  to  other  Federal  agencies  in  implementing  their  infor- mation security programs and practices.
At  present,  under  the  Federal  Information  Security  Management  Act,  many  of  the  authorities  are  granted  to  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget.
But  last  year,  in  July,  OMB  assigned  some  of  those  responsibilities  over  to  DHS,  and  DHS  is  working  to  build  out  its  capacity to perform those services.
To  my  knowledge,  they  have  been  working  with  DHS  to  some  extent  in  transferring some of those skills and abilities as DHS builds out its  own capabilities.
Just following up, Mr. Reitinger, on the EINSTEIN  issue,  the  National  Cybersecurity  Division  is  currently  planning  to  deploy five EINSTEIN monitors or five key nodes in the dot-gov do- main  that  will  be  used  to  prevent  and  detect  intrusions  on  com- puter  systems.
It  is  actually  a  budget  cut  not  spe- cifically  to  cyber,  but  more  broadly  to  NPPD,  but  there  is  no  way  in  our  budget  to  do  that  without  a  cut  to  cyber.
In which sector could a cyber attack do the most damage?
There  are,  however,  critical  entities  in  many  sectors,  and  some  of  the sectors we worry most about are, for example, financial services  and electric power, primarily because those are sectors, along with  information  and  communications,  where  you  notice  adverse  effects   in  milliseconds—and  I  mean  that,  milliseconds—as  opposed  to  sec- onds, minutes, hours, or days.
Now  this  was  an  unintended  inci- dent,  it  was  not  due  to  a  cyber  attack,  but  it  does  represent  and  illustrate  the  impact  that  could  occur  from  such  an  attack.
It  was  due  to  an  equipment  failure  on  a  network  that  was  connected  to  one of the control systems.
Its  due  to,  in  part,  because  of  the  interconnectivity  of  these  systems  to  control  systems.
Certainly  on  the  financial  services  side,  there  have  been  numer- ous  reports  where  literally  millions  of  dollars  have  been  lost  and  absconded with through cyber attacks.
The pri- vate  sector  has  created  wholly  new  technical  capabilities  over  the  last 10 years and has itself built new ways of working together and  sharing  information,  not  only  expanding  their  information  sharing  and  analysis  centers,  but  creating  other  mechanisms  to  work  to- gether.
One  of  the  things  that  we  are  trying  very  much  to  do  in  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  do  less  of  the  talk- ing  to  ourselves,  and  as  we  raise  awareness,  making  sure  we  are  talking  to  the  right  people,  talking  not  just  to  CISs,  chief  informa- tion security officers or chief risk management officers, but talking  to  chief  financial  officers  and  chief  operating  officers,  the  people  who cut the checks and say this will affect your bottom line.
There is broad willingness and interest across the public and pri- vate  sectors  to  work  together.
So that would be one  area  that  DHS  could  work  on.
Do  we  have,  in  the  event  of  a  cyber  attack,  a  clear  chain  of  com- mand  with  defined  roles  and  responsibilities  within  Government?
Overall,  cyber incidents are going to be incredibly complex, and so it is hard  to generalize.
But it is clear that the President is in charge overall,  that  with  regard  to  domestic  response,  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security,  under  her  Homeland  Security  Act  and  authorities  under  the  various  Presidential  directives,  is  responsible,  and  DOD  is  re- sponsible  for  National  defense.
We  built  the  mechanisms  to  work  effectively  together.
We  now  have  a  National  cyber  incident  re- sponse  plan  that  defines  roles  and  responsibilities,  and  we  are  going to continue to improve that as our experience develops.
We have also established a mechanism so that two of the largest  players—DOD  and  DHS—can  work  effectively  together,  notably  signing  a  memorandum  of  agreement  which  was  driven,  I  will  tell  you,  at  the  Secretarial  level;  so  directly  between  the  Secretary  of  Homeland Security and the Secretary of Defense to enable effective  synchronization between DOD.
So we have a team of senior people,  are deploying a team of senior people at NSA and Cyber Command,  and  they  are  deploying  two  groups—one  from  NSA  and  one  from  Cyber  Command—to  our  cyber  operation  center  so  they  can  effec- tively support us.
One  of  the  things  that  we  are  doing  in  DHS  is—and  this  is  not  just  about  cyber,  it  is  also  about  infrastructure  protection—is,  as  we  develop  capability,  we  are  becoming  an  operational  entity.
I  would  just  add  that  one  of  the  key  aspects  to  this  that  would  also  be  helpful  to  have  a  straight  line  of  chain  of  command  is  for  the  administration  and  Federal  agencies  to  estab- lish  and  update  the  National  Policy  for  Securing  Cyberspace.
It  has  had  a  number  of  issues  with  it  that  have  impeded  its  progress  in  being  able  to  be   27   implemented.
One  thing  that  needs  to  be  developed  is  just  a  clear  articulation of the objectives, goals, and priorities for Federal agen- cies  and  the  private  sector  to  implement  security  over  cyberspace  and the systems that they operate.
Do  we  have  an  industry  standard  or  is  there  a  published  standard  that  these  companies  have  to  have  in  relation  to  protecting  their  elec- tronic  health  records?
Well,  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services, under HIPAA, issues a security rule that health care pro- viders  are  required  to  follow  certain  security  and  privacy  guide- lines.
So  that  is  probably  as  close  as  anything  that  exists  to  a  standard, if you will, or guidelines and requirements for protecting  the confidentiality and integrity of health information.
But  under  HIPAA,  have  they—I  hate  to  put  it  this  way,  have  they  gotten  to  the  level  of  sophistication  to  address  cybersecurity  in  terms  of  protecting  those  health  records?
Well, the security rule does provide some guide- lines,  but  probably  not  to  the  level  that  you  are  referring  to  in  terms  of  the  very  detailed  technical  standards  that  may  be  re- quired.
One  of  the  issues  that  also  comes  up  is  in  terms  of  data  inter- operability  between  various  different  health  organizations  and  States  to  make  sure  that  this  health  information  is  actually  inter- operable  among  different  States  as  they  develop  their  own  indi- vidual  standards.
Let me ask both of you, 15 million reports in the course of a year,  and  yet  we  are  trying  to  communicate  with  the  private  sector  si- multaneously,  particularly  those  with  these  control  systems.
In a time that we all have those scarce resources, what is the   28   most effective way to institute protections to get the private sector  not only to understand the threat, but implement the threat?
So  one  of  the  things  that  we  did  this  year  for  the  first  time  as  a  response  to  the  President’s  Cyberspace Policy Review, instead of just having an annual Cyber- security  Security  Awareness  Month,  we  have  now  got  an  annual  campaign, the ‘‘Stop.
That is something a partnership can do; it is people in the  private  sector  and  the  public  sector  working  together  to  come  up  with a message that we can all work together to implement, some- thing fairly actionable.
In some sense it is because of the act, in some sense it is because  of  a  prioritization,  that  team  is  typically  deployed  for  control  sys- tems-type incidents because that is one of the things that we worry  about  significantly.
We  keep  talking  about  these  control  systems  and  the  capacity  to  be  able  to  impact  entire  areas  which  are  inter- dependent.
How  can  we  create  the  kind  of  requirement,  so  to  speak, from the private sector to collaborate with you to be able to,  as  we  say,  meet  some  kind  of  National  policy  standards  or  objec- tives  so  that  we  are  working  together?
As  Greg  has  indicated,  sharing  classi- fied and unclassified threat information so that they are really sen- sitized to what the issues are.
Second,  we  can  work  on  things  like  helping  develop  standards  and  working  with  the  private  sector  to  make  sure  that  they  have  available solutions so that there is a known path to better security.
My time will run out, but are there minimal stand- ards  right  now  that  we  have  in  the  industry  that  we  can  expect  people to abide by so that at least there is some kind of a baseline   29   that we can expect collaboration that they will address within their  own institution so that they are capable of communicating with you  about these issues?
So there are many standards, sir, of differing de- grees  or  prescriptiveness,  if  you  will,  and  effectiveness.
One  of  the  things  that  I  don’t  think  we  have  right  now  is  what  one  might  think  of  as  a  baseline  ability  to  say  across  all  of  the  critical  infra- structures we are meeting the standard that we need.
So one of the  things  that  we  are  doing  is  working  with  not  only  other  agencies  within the Federal Government so that they are aware of what the  requirements  are,  but  we  have,  in  one  case,  DHS  has  specific  au- thority,  and  that  is  for  the  chemical  facilities  sector,  or  the  chem- ical sector where we have put in a risk-based performance standard  into  the  existing  CFATS  regime  related  to  cybersecurity.
We  will  be  continuing  to  look  at  that  going  forward  to  make  sure  that  it  meets National requirements.
If  I  may  add,  we  have  an  on-going  engagement  right  now  looking  at  what  standards  are  in  effect  at  various  dif- ferent  critical  infrastructure  sectors  and  to  assess,  to  the  extent  that  those  standards  exist,  whether  they  are  voluntary;  and  how  those  sectors  either  enforce  or  assure  that  their  members  actually  implement  those  standards.
Thank you for your hard work on the CSIS Commission.
Can  you  explain  how  that  is  working?
We  signed,  at  the  Secretarial  level,  an  MOA,  a  memo- randum of agreement—sorry, I fall back into acronyms too much—  between the Department of Defense and the Department Homeland  Security.
Under that agreement, DHS, so that  we  can  stay  fully  synched  with  our  partners  in  the  Department  of  Defense, has and is deploying a team of people to Fort Meade that   30   will  be  led  by  a  DHS  senior,  who  is  currently  Rear  Admiral  Mike  Brown,  who  has  been  in  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  on  detail from DOD for a number of years.
He will have a team of people that will comprise first a joint co- ordination element to do joint planning at DOD, make sure we can  stay  operationally  synched,  a  group  of  people  who  are  going  to  work with NSA on its technology, and another group of people who  will  be  embedded  in  the  NTOC  at  NSA  so  that  we  have  full  assay  of the NSA’s knowledge of the threat.
NSA and Cyber Command are both deploying teams of people to  our  Cyber  Operation  Center  to  support  our  domestic  cyber  oper- ations.
So  there  will  be  a  cryptologic  support  group  from  NSA  and  a  cyber  support  element—I  am  more  comfortable  with  CSG  and  CSE,  but  those  are  what  they  are  called—from  Cyber  Command  that  will  directly  support  us.
We  are  in  the  initial  stages  of  devel- oping  these  capabilities,  but  it  is  already  working  very  well.
So we literally hold a weekly SVTC, a secure video tele- conference, with our partners in DOD to make sure we are staying  coordinated.
We  work  with  them  at  deputies  committee  meetings  and  lots  of  other  administrative  policy  and  other  processes.
They  have  the  assets,  the  expertise,  and  the  capabilities,  so  it  makes  no  sense  for  them  not to work with you and share that.
Private  sector  sharing  threat  information,  it  is  always  difficult  for  the  private  sector  to  share  that  with  the  Federal  Government.
Would an exception  to  FOIA  be  helpful  in  terms  of  that  threat  information  not  being  subjected to a FOIA request?
With  regard  to  at  least  some  information  sub- mitted under the Protected Critical Information Infrastructure pro- gram,  the  PCII  program,  there  is  a  FOIA  exception.
The  issue  I  think  is  a  little  broader,  and  that  is  that  there  remains  a  lack  of  clarity  about  the  costs  and  risks  of  sharing  information  from  the  private  sector  to  the  Government.
So  sometimes  one  has  the  prob- lem  that  when  the  private  sector  and  Government  want  to  talk—  I think generally if something is happening, the private sector will  lean  forward  to  figure  out  a  way  to  share  information,  as  will  the  Government.
If it is more on-going, the prob- lem  is,  nowadays,  if  you  get  together  and  you  want  to  work  to- gether,  you  want  to  share  information,  not  just  to  share  informa- tion  to  solve  a  particular  problem,  sometimes  the  first  thing  you  have  to  do  is  call  the  lawyers  into  the  room.
So we have some internal processes going now to  try  and  generate  some  clarity  with  the  private  sector  about  what   31   the  rules  are  so  that  you  can  have  a  more  rapid  and  effective  con- versation.
Last, if I could indulge the Chair, the National Pol- icy for Cyberspace—it was mentioned earlier—sir, the last one was  developed in 2003, I think one of the recommendations we had with  the  Commission  was  to  develop  a  National  policy.
I  would  personally  favor,  while  I  think  we  knew  new  ways  to  do  things,  focusing  very  heavily  on  implementation.
We  at  DHS  are  working right now on the strategy which will underlie the cyberse- curity part of the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review that the  Ranking  Member  brought  up.
So  for  us  this  is  mission  four  or  cy- bersecurity across the Homeland Security enterprise.
We are work- ing  now  across  Government  and  with  the  private  sector  to  develop  that strategy that will roll out to the broader National strategy.
She also serves as a volun- teer  as  chairman  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  National  Cyber-  Forensics  &  Training  Alliance,  which  is  an  important  partnership  between  Government,  law  enforcement,  and  the  private  sector  for  information  analytics  and  has  been  used  to  prosecute  over  150  cyber criminals worldwide.
Earlier  Dr.  Schneck  worked  as  vice  president  of  Threat  Intel- ligence  at  McAfee  and  was  responsible  for  the  design  and  applica- tion  of  McAfee’s  internet  reputation  intelligence.
She  has  Ph.D.  in  computer  science  from  Georgia  Tech  where  she  pioneered  the  field  of information security and security-based higher-performance com- puting.
Dr. James Lewis is a senior fellow and program director at CSIS  where  he  writes  on  technology,  National  security,  and  the  inter- national economy.
Before  joining  CSIS,  he  worked  in  the  Federal  Government  as  a  Foreign  Service  officer  and  as  a  member  of  the  Senior  Executive   32   Service.
Most  recently  he  was  the  project  director  of  CSIS’s  Com- mission on Cyber Security for the 44th Presidency.
Mischel Kwon is an IT executive with more than 29 years of ex- perience  ranging  from  application,  design,  and  development  to  building organizational and National level computer emergency in- stant  response  and  readiness  teams.
She  is  most  recently  the  vice  president of Public Sector Security for RSA, the security division of  the EMC Corporation, and prior to that, she was the director of the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team,  US–CERT,  at DHS.
Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  other  distin- guished  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  requesting  McAfee’s  views  on  cyber  threat  to  critical  infrastructure  and  the  American economy.
Your  committee  is  playing  a  vital  role  in  helping  to  define  the  contours  of  cybersecurity  debate,  and  your  aim  to  write  thoughtful  and incentives-based legislation must be commended.
As  you  mentioned,  I  focused  my  entire  career  on  cybersecurity,  looking  at  both  the  technology  and  the  applications  and  certainly  the  trust  engaged  in  public-private  partnership  and  the  need  for  more information sharing.
McAfee  is  the  largest  dedicated  cybersecurity  company  in  the  world,  and  we  are  also  a  wholly-owned  subsidy  of  the  Intel  Cor- poration.
We  protect  the  cyber  spectrum,  from  the  biggest  com- puters and the big cloud computing, as we all refer, to the smallest  components, even down to our cell phones or airplane avionics sys- tems and our cars and certainly now to the chip.
My testimony will focus on the following key areas: The evolution  of  the  cyber  threat  landscape;  McAfee’s  Global  Threat  Intelligence  Solution;  and  the  paradigm  change  that  we  need  to  make  in  order  to protect our cyber infrastructures and thus our global critical in- frastructures; two major cyber security events, advanced persistent  threats  that  we  have  seen,  these  are  just  two  of  many,  many,  just  two  that  have  been  vocalized;  and  certainly  some  policy  rec- ommendations  to  improve  public-private  sector  information  shar- ing.
So  when  you  look  at  the  landscape  from  20  years  ago  and  you  look at ‘‘antivirus,’’ all of the adversary’s ability over the past 2 dec- ades,  all  of  the  damage  we  have  talked  about  this  morning,  has  been enabled by malicious code, the ability of an adversary to exe- cute their will somewhere else, and whether it causes, as in the old  days,  just  something  to  prove  that  somebody  can  do  something  all  the  way  to  financial  organized  crime  with  a  financial  motivation,  and  now,  as  we  are  seeing,  government-structured  or  nation-state  attacks  that  look  for  destruction  and/or  the  taking  of  intellectual  property.
That doesn’t work anymore.
We need a full paradigm shift to re- take  the  global  cybersecurity  picture  that  we  have  as  a  private  in- dustry  and  Government  and  infuse  that  into  our  network  fabric,  again  from  cloud  to  chip,  where  the  enemy’s  will  is  blocked  before  it reaches a target.
When  you  think  about  global  threat  intelligence  and  what  we  mean by that, McAfee and other companies in the IT infrastructure  and other infrastructures have the ability and have developed very  sophisticated  information-gathering  capabilities  where  we  have  a  weather  map,  a  cyber  weather  map  of  events  that  happen  all  over  the  world,  an  understanding  of  traffic  volumes,  an  understanding  of  what  machines  are  doing,  what  harm  and  to  where,  where  they  are targeting, where malicious code that looks just like other mali- cious code is being sent.
The  one  thing  this  enemy  can’t  do  is  understand  how  the  entire  system  works  and  block it in real time, so the disease never reaches your body or your  body  can  fight  the  disease  in  real  time  without  understanding  the  name of the germ first.
The  second  thing  we  have  to  do  is  better  enable  ourselves  to  share  information  at  the  human  level.
We  estimate  it  took  teams  of  people  many  weeks  to  target  the  20  or  so  companies  they  looked  for,  the  infor- mation  they  wanted  to  get,  and,  most  powerfully,  the  people  in  those  companies  that  had  an  access  to  code  stores  of  that  size,  meaning  the  people  that  tested  the  code,  the  people  that  have  to  see all of it working together.
Leading  to  the  policy  recommendations,  the  private  sector  needs  some  stronger  protections  to  share  information  with  Government  and law enforcement.
It creates in many cases ma- terial  information  that  affects  shareholders,  companies’  bottom  lines,  and  it  can  breach  trust.
We have to beat this adversary, and we have to—we all of the—  we have a lot of the information we need among the private sector  to use the great collaborative organizations that DHS and the FBI  and  others  have  created  for  us  with  the  private  sector.
If we can put more information into those, we can use  those constructs to their fullest potential.
McAfee is very committed  to  working  with  the  U.S.  Government  to  solve  the  cybersecurity  challenges and to beat this adversary.
[The statement of Ms. Schneck follows:]   PREPARED STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK   MARCH 16, 2011   Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  other  distinguished  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  requesting  McAfee’s  views  on  the  cyber  threat  to  critical  infrastructure  and  the  American  economy.
Your  committee  is  playing  a  vital  role  in  helping  to  define  the  contours  of  the  cyber  security  debate,  and  your  aim to write thoughtful, incentives-based legislation must be commended.
My  name  is  Phyllis  Schneck  and  I  have  dedicated  my  entire  professional  career  to  the  security  and  infrastructure  protection  community.
In  addition  to  serving  as  Vice  President and Chief Technology Officer, Global Public Sector, for McAfee, I serve as  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  National  Cyber  Forensics  and  Training  Alliance, a partnership between Government, law enforcement, and the private sec- tor  for  information  analytics  that  has  been  used  to  prosecute  over  150  cyber  crimi- nals  world-wide.
Earlier,  I  worked  as  Vice  President  of  Threat  Intelligence  at  McAfee  and  was  responsible  for  the  design  and  application  of  McAfee’sTM internet  reputation intelligence.
I have also served as a commissioner and working group co-  chair on the public-private partnership for the CSIS Commission to Advise the 44th  President on Cyber Security.
Before joining McAfee, I was Vice President of Research Integration at Secure Com-  35   puting.
I  hold  a  Ph.D.  in  Computer  Science  from  Georgia  Tech,  where  I  pioneered  the field of information security and security-based high-performance computing.
My testimony will focus on the following key areas:  • The evolution of the cyber security threat landscape;  • McAfee’s  Global  Threat  Intelligence  Solution  and  the  role  it  plays  in  enabling  us  to  detect  and  remediate  a  wide  range  of  cyber  security  attacks  on  our  Na- tion’s critical infrastructures;  • Two  major  cyber  security  attacks,  Night  Dragon  and  Operation  Aurora,  and  • Policy  recommendations  to  improve  public/private  sector  information  sharing  that  is  essential  to  give  the  Government  the  capabilities  it  needs  to  respond  to  the modern cybersecurity challenge.
their implications for our homeland security; and   First I would like to provide a little background on McAfee and some of our cyber-  security initiatives.
MC AFEE’S ROLE IN CYBER SECURITY   McAfee,  Inc.  protects  businesses,  consumers,  and  the  public  sector  from  cyber  at- tacks, viruses, and a wide range of on-line security threats.
Headquartered in Santa  Clara, California, and Plano, Texas, McAfee is the world’s largest dedicated security  technology company and is a proven force in combating the world’s toughest security  challenges.
McAfee  delivers  proactive  and  proven  solutions,  services,  and  global  threat  intel- ligence  that  help  secure  systems  and  networks  around  the  world,  allowing  users  to  safely  connect  to  the  internet  and  browse  and  shop  the  web  more  securely.
Fueled  by  an  award-winning  research  team,  McAfee  creates  innovative  products  that  em- power  home  users,  businesses,  the  public  sector  and  service  providers  by  enabling  them  to  prove  compliance  with  regulations,  protect  data,  prevent  disruptions,  iden- tify vulnerabilities, and continuously monitor and improve their security.
To help organizations take full advantage of their security infrastructure, McAfee  launched  the  Security  Innovation  Alliance,  which  allows  organizations  to  benefit  from  the  most  innovative  security  technologies  from  thousands  of  developers  who  can now snap into our extensible management platform.
The  initiative  is  anchored  by  a  multi-point  plan  that  in- cludes  calls  for  action  from  law  enforcement,  academia,  service  providers,  Govern- ment,  the  security  industry  and  society  at  large  to  deliver  more  effective  investiga- tions and prosecutions of cybercrime.
Key elements of the plan include:  • Education  and  Awareness.—McAfee  works  to  ensure  that  officials  around  the  world  have  the  capacity  to  properly  fight  cybercrime,  while  helping  users  build  ‘‘street smarts’’ so that they don’t become easy victims.
• Legal  Frameworks  and  Law  Enforcement.—McAfee  works  to  facilitate  inter- national  collaboration  and  mutual  assistance  on  cybercrime  among  govern- ments, industry, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
• Innovation.—McAfee  works  with  the  technology  industry  to  provide  technology   solutions that stay one step ahead of the threats.
McAfee is also supportive of the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyber- space  (NSTIC),  working  with  our  partners  in  Government  and  industry  to  enable  innovation  for  more  efficient  authentication  and  other  technologies  facilitating  a  safer and more pleasant experience for electronic transactions.
McAfee  is  committed  to  bringing  the  best  security  products  and  services  to  the  market, partnering with leading IT vendors to ensure that customers have the abil- ity to pick and choose the best solutions to close their security gaps, and giving con- sumers  and  organizations  additional  resources  and  support  to  fight  cyber-crime  ranging from organized financial crime to attacks that user the cyber infrastructure  to  gain  access  to  intellectual  property  or  physical  infrastructure.
Likewise,  McAfee  is  committed  to  taking  part  in  a  constructive  dialogue  with  policy  makers  on  cyber  security initiatives, as we are pleased to do in this hearing today.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE CYBER SECURITY THREAT LANDSCAPE   For  purposes  of  this  testimony,  we  define  malware  as  a  set  of  instructions  for  a  computer that causes the computer to behave in the will of the malware owner, such  as providing unauthorized access to information or systems that control physical/ki- netic  infrastructure.
Malware  puts  the  enemy’s  in-  36   struction next on the list, and then the adversary controls all actions forward, some- times  hiding  its  presence.
Malware  enters  a  machine  from  a  variety  of  ports,  typi- cally  email,  web,  or  connection-level  access  that  is  unprotected  or  ill  advised  to  admit  these  harmful  instructions.
Historically,  security  software  relied  on  antivirus  ‘‘signatures’’  to  recognize  and  block  malware.
Once  a  virus  was  detected,  a  signature  was  developed  by  the  secu- rity software vendor and deployed in the form of a DAT file downloaded to the secu- rity  software  on  customers’  computers.
That  software  would  then  be  in  a  position  to recognize and block the malware—an approach much like a vaccine that requires  advance  knowledge  of  the  threat.
However,  this  approach  is  not  sufficiently  fast  to  fight  today’s  cyber  adversary,  and  that  is  why  McAfee  is  changing  the  paradigm  to  proactive  defence  in  real-time:  to  make  our  networks  sufficiently  intelligent  to  pre- vent  malicious  instructions  from  reaching  the  target—instead  of  requiring  that  the  target be vaccinated with a signature.
Today,  malware  developers  combine  web,  host,  and  network  vulnerabilities  with  spam,  rootkits,  spyware,  worms,  and  other  means  of  attack.
Significantly,  malware  is  often  distributed  with  micro-variations  (polymorphism),  or  the  ability  to  change  quickly, with the effect that a signature developed when the malware is first discov- ered  is  ineffective  against  the  multiple,  very  slightly  different  forms  of  the  same  malware.
Malware may be distributed indirectly by networks of computers that have  been corrupted by a criminal (a ‘‘botnet’’).
The  malicious  software  distributed  by  botnets  will  often  actively  evolve  to  become  whatever  is  needed  by  its  controller  and  is  not  limited  by  the  boundaries  of  antivirus  labels.
This  means  that  code  that  appears  otherwise harmless in order to be let into the network can be told to spread rapidly.
It  means,  for  example,  that  malware originally configured to generate spam messages can be instructed to steal  banking information.
Again, cyber actions rely on the execution of instructions, and  a  compromised  machine  often  follows  the  adversary’s  instructions  to  reach  out  to  a  server in another location for its next set of instructions, which can vary widely.
By  leveraging  multiple  threat  vectors  and  ‘‘one-time  usage,’’  hackers  are  able  to  extend  the  time  period  in  which  their  malware  remains  undetected  and  are  thus  able  to  steal  the  money,  personal  data,  and  other  valuable  information  of  users  throughout the United States and the world.
Some types of software can be  engineered  to  gain  access  to  and  maintain  control  over  the  victim’s  machine.
Once  the malware is on the system, it seeks to communicate with its controlling entity—  the  criminal  actor.
Once  communication  is  established  over  the  internet,  any  com- promised  machine  can  be  instructed  both  to  pass  over  any  data  of  value  to  the  criminal  and  to  act  as  an  instrument  of  attack  against  other  computers  and  net- works.
MC AFEE GLOBAL THREAT INTELLIGENCE   McAfee and other sophisticated cyber security providers have developed multi-vec- tor,  real-time,  predictive  protection  against  these  more  sophisticated  attacks  on  in- formation  systems.
Cybersecurity  solutions  based  on  this  GTI  approach  protect  the  customer’s  computer by calculating the potential risk of a piece of content based on experience  with the IP address from which it originates, the website, or other elements associ- ated with the content in question.
Thus cybersecurity providers offer solutions enabling the customer to stop content  that  is  analyzed  as  having  a  risk  probability  score  that  in  the  customer’s  view  is  ‘‘too  risky’’  to  be  loaded  into  the  memory  of  the  customer’s  computer.
McAfee  GTI  tracks  the  anomalous  behavior  and  proactively  adjusts  an  entity’s  reputation—its  website, IP address, domain, file, network connection, and so forth—so that McAfee   37   products  can  block  the  threat  and  protect  customers.
Then  McAfee  GTI  looks  out  across  its  broad  network  of  sensors  and  connects  the  dots  between  the  website  and  associated malware, email messages, IP addresses, and other associations, adjusting  the  reputation  of  each  related  entity  so  that  McAfee’s  security  products—from  end- point  to  network  to  gateway—can  protect  users  from  cyber  threats  at  every  angle.
With  visibility across all threat vectors—file, web, message, and network—and a view into  the  latest  vulnerabilities  across  the  IT  industry,  McAfee  correlates  real-world  data  collected from millions of sensors around the globe and delivers real-time, and often  predictive, protection via its security products.
Our  cyber  enemies  are  smart  and  fast.
They  maintain  their  knowledge  of  net- works and techniques by freely sharing information, enjoying a lack of legal or intel- lectual property barriers that often block the defenders.
This  is  why  our  cyber infrastructures have become their play land.
The ability to see a global cyber  picture  and  to  have  situational  awareness  is  what  the  adversary  cannot  do.
This  is  where  we  can  win—by  making  the  network  fabric  reject  malicious  instructions  in  real-time,  at  the  speed  of  light,  before  they  can  hit  a  target.
This  is  how  we  can  be faster than the adversary, and this is the paradigm shift from vaccines to a cyber  immune system that enhances cross-sector cyber resiliency.
Our Global Threat Intelligence service as well as a number of our other products  and  services  helped  us  first  detect  and  then  remediate  two  important  global  cyber  security attacks—Night Dragon and Operation Aurora.
These attacks are significant  because  they  were  managed  by  coordinated  and  organized  teams  that  succeeded  in  extracting  billions  of  dollars  of  intellectual  property  from  leading  American  compa- nies in the information technology, defense, and energy sectors—strategic industries  vital to the country’s long-term economic success and National security.
OPERATION AURORA   On  January  14,  2010  McAfee  Labs  identified  a  zero-day  (previously  publicly  un- known) vulnerability in Microsoft Internet Explorer that was used as an entry point  for  Operation  Aurora  to  exploit  Google  and  at  least  20  other  companies.
Microsoft  has since issued a security bulletin and patch.
Operation Aurora was a coordinated attack that included a piece of computer code  that  exploits  the  Microsoft  Internet  Explorer  vulnerability  to  gain  access  to  com- puter  systems.
The  attack,  which  was  initiated  surreptitiously  when  targeted  users accessed a malicious web page (likely because they believed it to be reputable),  ultimately  connected  those  computer  systems  to  a  remote  server.
That  connection  was  used  to  steal  company  intellectual  property  and,  according  to  Google,  addition- ally gain access to user accounts.
We  also  discovered  that  intruders  used  a  social  engineering  message,  known  as  spear-phishing,  to  target  employees  with  a  high  level  of  access  in  these  companies  (either software developers, quality assurance engineers, or domain administrators).
As  we  uncovered  and  then  reported  to  Microsoft,  the  web  link  hosted  an  obfuscated  and  encoded exploit for a zero-day vulnerability in Internet Explorer.
If  a  user  had  clicked  on  a  link  with  Internet  Explorer  version  6,  their  machine  would  be  automatically  compromised  and  malicious  code  would  be  downloaded  and  executed  stealthily  on  the  computer.
The  Trojan  would  establish  an  evasive  back- door command and control channel to the same server in Taiwan through which live  attackers  would  jump  onto  the  system  and  proceed  to  escalate  their  privileges  on  the  local  machine  as  well  as  other  servers  within  the  network.
As  they  moved  rap- idly through the network, they would identify and compromise repositories of intel- lectual property and exfiltrated data of interest out of the company.
In many cases,  this  data  included  source  code—the  crown  jewels  of  these  information  technology  companies—which  then  could  be  used  by  attackers  to  discover  new  vulnerabilities  in  software  that  is  used  by  the  critical  infrastructure  industry,  Government  agen- cies, and many other organizations across the globe.
McAfee  is  continuing  to  work  with  multiple  organizations  that  were  impacted  by  this attack, as well as with various Government agencies, to address this major sup- ply chain attack in the U.S. commercial sector.
38   NIGHT DRAGON   McAfee has identified a string of attacks designed to steal sensitive data from tar- geted  organizations.
Unlike  opportunistic  attacks,  the  perpetrators  appear  to  be  highly organized, premeditative, and motivated in their pursuits.
Night  Dragon  attacks  are  similar  to  Operation  Aurora  and  other  advanced  per- sistent  threats,  or  APTs,  in  that  they  employ  a  combination  of  social  engineering  and  well-coordinated,  targeted  cyber  attacks  using  remote  control  software  and  other malware.
Night Dragon attacks leverage coordinated, covert, and targeted cyber attacks in- volving social engineering, spear-phishing, vulnerability exploits in the Windows op- erating  system,  Active  Directory  compromises,  and  remote  administration  tools,  or  RATs.
The attack sequence is as follows:  • Public-facing  web  servers  are  compromised  via  SQL  injection;  malware  and  • The compromised web servers are used to stage attacks on internal targets.
• Spear-phishing  email  attacks  on  mobile,  VPN-connected  workers  are  used  to  • Attackers  use  password-stealing  tools  to  access  other  systems—installing  RATs  • Systems  belonging  to  executives  are  targeted  for  emails  and  files,  which  are   gain additional internal access.
The  Night  Dragon  attackers  are  currently  targeting  global  oil,  energy,  and  petrochemical  companies  with  the  apparent  intent  of  stealing  sen- sitive  information  such  as  operational  details,  exploration  research,  and  financial  data  related  to  new  oil  and  gas  field  bid  negotiations.
And  unlike  Stuxnet,  the  tools  and  techniques  behind  Night  Dragon  are  not  specific  to  critical  infrastructure  and  can  be  used  to  launch  attacks  against  any  industry.
With  good  informa- tion,  the  collaboration  enabled  by  these  constructs  will  help  us  to  achieve  what  the  enemy  already  has:  Speed  and  alacrity  of  information  sharing  and  acting  on  it  for  high impact.
In many cases, private sector companies can solve a cybersecurity puzzle by evalu- ating  many  disparate  clues.
Private  companies  need  protected  ways  to  share  their  big-picture  research  findings  with  the  Government  without  loss  of  trust  or  creation  of material events for stockholders, so that the most significant cybersecurity infor- mation  is  expeditiously  actionable.
We  need  both  in  order  to  defeat  cyber  adversaries, whose aim is to harm our way of life.
Existing public/private partnerships should ensure that senior corporate and Gov- ernment officials are positioned to share vital information and best practices.
Among  other  things,  this  means  access  to  sensitive  (or  classified)  information  and  a  secure  mechanism for sharing it.
Broad-based  situational  awareness  is  vital  to  securing  our  global  cyber  systems  and  ensuring  our  National  security.
Policies  that  enable  companies  and  govern- ments  to  work  together,  using  global  threat  intelligence  (e.g.,  combining  cyber,  en- ergy, finance, and other data) to enhance correlation and predictive capabilities, are  critical to real-time responsiveness within the network switching/routing fabric.
The  Lieberman-Collins-Carper  bill  supports  such  information  sharing  by  requiring  the  Government  to  share  information,  including  threat  analysis  and  warning  informa- tion, with owners and operators regarding risks to their networks.
The cybersecurity challenge faced by our country is a serious matter that requires  an  evolution  in  the  way  in  which  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  collaborate.
Each sector has its own set of core capabilities; only the Government can implement   CONCLUSION   39   the  complex  set  of  organizational  and  policy  responses  necessary  to  counter  the  growing  cybersecurity  threat.
Leading  information  technology  companies  and  their  customers are uniquely positioned to act as early warning systems that can identify  and help address cybersecurity attacks as a real-time cyber immune system.
With  the  right  industry-Government  collaboration,  networks  of  the  future  can  comprise  intelligence  and  create  resiliency  by  instantly  rejecting  harmful  code  in  milliseconds as opposed to the hours it traditionally takes to make a signature, just  as  our  bodies  reject  viruses  even  though  we  may  not  know  the  name  of  the  par- ticular  disease.
Information  technology  companies  focused  on  cybersecurity  in  par- ticular have the resources and the economic incentives to continue to invent and de- velop  the  technologies  and  solutions  needed  to  stay  ahead  of  sophisticated  cyber  attackers.
In  the  best  American  tradition  of  collaboration,  the  public  and  private  sectors  have  made  important  strides  to  address  the  cybersecurity  challenge  and  to  enhance  trusted  working  relationships.
As  we  work  together  to  further  evolve  our  collaboration models, we can succeed in protecting our homeland from the threat of  cyber attacks.
STATEMENT OF JAMES A. LEWIS, DIRECTOR AND SENIOR FEL- LOW,  TECHNOLOGY  AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  PROGRAM,  CEN- TER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES  Mr. LEWIS.
This  will  be  a  good  year  for  cyber  security  because  of  the  work  of  this  committee  and  others.
With  luck,  I  think  in  this  Congress,  we will see real progress in making our Nation more secure.
We  have  been  trying  for   years to secure our networks, and we have not succeeded, right.
We  have  lost  sensitive  military  information,  oil  exploration  data,  valuable  commercial technologies and millions of dollars from banks.
What  we  are  doing  now  to  secure  cyberspace  is  not  working.
First, a few advanced militaries have the  ability  to  use  cyber  attacks  to  disrupt  critical  infrastructure  and  service.
They  will  not  launch  a  cyber  attack  because  they  are  not  going  to  start  a  war  for  no  reason  with  the  United  States;  they  are  de- terred  by  our  military.
Terrorists do not yet have the capability to launch cyber attacks,  but  groups  like  al-Qaeda  in  the  Arabian  Peninsula  are  seeking  to  acquire  these  capabilities.
Perhaps  more  worrisome,  Iran  and  North  Korea  are  developing  cyber  attack  capabilities.
When  these   40   terrorist and rogue states can launch a cyber attack, they, too, will  find that we are unprepared.
Cyber  espionage  and  cyber  crime  are  daily  occurrences  in  the  United  States,  and  they  do  long-term  damage  to  our  economy  and  to our global competitiveness.
They also help set the stage for cyber  attack.
Some  of  our  opponents  use  cyber  criminals  as  mercenaries,  as  proxy  forces.
Our  most  advanced  opponents  in  cyber  crime  and  cyber  espionage  can  overpower  even  the  most  technologically  so- phisticated  U.S.  company,  and  we  have  seen  many  examples  of  that.
There are three key issues that I call to  the  committee’s  attention,  how  to  give  Government  a  leading  role  in  cybersecurity,  how  to  ensure  cybersecurity  at  critical  infrastruc- ture, something we cannot do now, and how to create international  rules  to  reduce  the  risk  of  cyber  crime  and  the  risk  of  cyber  war?
Our  funda- mental point, and this gets to the question about the 2003 National  strategy,  our  fundamental  point  is  that  the  old  approach  doesn’t  work, and we need a new strategy that uses all the tools of Amer- ican power, military, law enforcement, Homeland Security, partner- ship with the private sector.
Cybersecurity  first  came  to  the  attention  of  the  public  in  the  mid-1990s,  some  15  years  ago.
The  first  major  policy  for  cybersecurity,  Presidential  Decision  Directive  63, appeared in 1998.
We  can  get  a  sense  of  the  state  of  cybersecurity  and  whether  there  has  been  any  progress  the  United  States  by  reviewing  major  cybersecurity  events  that  have  oc- curred since the start of 2010.
• January  2010.—Google  announced  that  an  attack  had  penetrated  its  networks,  along  with  the  networks  of  more  than  80  other  U.S.  high-tech  companies.
The  goal  of  the  penetrations,  which  Google  ascribed  to  China,  were  to  collect  tech- nology, gain access to activist Gmail accounts and to Google’s password manage- ment system.
• January 2010.—Intel Corporation also disclosed that it has experienced a harm- • January  2010.—Global  financial  services  firm  Morgan  Stanley  experienced  a  ‘‘very  sensitive’’  break-in  to  its  network  by  the  same  hackers  who  attacked  Google, according to leaked e-mails.
• March  2010.—NATO  and  the  European  Union  warned  that  the  number  of  suc- cessful  cyber  attacks  against  their  networks  have  increased  significantly  over  the past 12 months.
• March 2010.—Australian authorities say there were more than 200 attempts to  hack into the networks of the legal defense team for executives from Australian  energy company Rio Tinto, to gain inside information on the trial defense strat- egy.
ful cyber attack at the same time.
41   • April  2010.—Hackers  break  into  classified  systems  at  the  Indian  Defence  Min- istry  and  Indian  embassies  around  the  world,  gaining  access  to  Indian  defense  and armament planning.
• May  2010.—A  leaked  memo  from  the  Canadian  Security  and  Intelligence  Serv- ice  (CSIS)  says,  ‘‘Compromises  of  computer  and  combinations  networks  of  the  Government  of  Canada,  Canadian  universities,  private  companies  and  indi- vidual  customer  networks  have  increased  substantially .
In  addition  to  being  virtually  unattributable,  these  remotely  operated  attacks  offer  a  produc- tive, secure, and low-risk means to conduct espionage.’’  • October  2010.—Stuxnet,  a  complex  piece  of  malware  designed  to  interfere  with  Siemens  Industrial  Control  Systems  discovered  in  Iran,  Indonesia,  and  else- where,  results  in  significant  physical  damage  to  the  Iranian  nuclear  program.
• January  2011.—The  Canadian  government  reports  a  major  cyber  intrusion  in- volving  the  Defence  Research  and  Development  Canada,  a  research  agency  for  the Department of National Defence, the Department of Finance, and the Treas- ury Board, Canada’s main economic agencies.
The intrusions forced the Finance  Department and the Treasury Board, to disconnect from the internet.
• March  2011.—Hackers  penetrate  French  government  computer  networks  in  • March  2011.—The  Republic  of  Korea  said  that  foreign  hackers  penetrated  its  defense  networks  in  an  attempt  to  steal  information  on  the  U.S.-made  Global  Hawk unmanned aircraft, provided to Korea as it considers whether to buy the  UAV.
search of sensitive information on upcoming G–20 meetings.
There  are  of  course  many  more incidents stretching back into the 1990s, that include the loss of tens of thou- sands of pages of sensitive military information, market and exploration data worth  millions  from  oil  companies,  the  loss  of  valuable  commercial  technologies,  and  hun- dreds  of  millions  of  dollars  from  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.
Classified  military networks have been penetrated by foreign intelligence agencies.
Whatever we are doing is not working.
Since 1998,  we  have  repeatedly  tried  a  combination  of  information  sharing,  market-based  ap- proaches, public/private partnership and self-regulation in a vain effort to strength- en  our  cyber  defenses.
Many of the reports and essays we see emerging now will advo- cate  tired  ideas  in  order  to  block  change  rather  than  increase  cybersecurity.
While  individual  Government  agencies  have  made  strenuous  efforts  to  improve  our  cyber  defenses, as a Nation, despite all the talk, we are still not serious about cybersecu- rity.
This  is  due  to  a  reluctance  to  make  the  changes  cybersecurity  requires.
People  still  advocate  strategies  and  policies  that  appeared  more  than  a  decade  ago  and  which have not worked.
We have consistently underestimated the risks and damage  from weak cybersecurity.
Everyone is for better security, but there has always been  some other objective that seemed more important.
Cybersecurity  is  another  of  those  situations  in  American  history,  ranging  from  Pearl Harbor to 9/11, where we knew there was risk and that we were unprepared,  but  assumed  it  would  never  happen  because  America  is  too  powerful  or  too  big  to  attack.
The effect of this over confidence is to make tolerable the slow erosion of our  National  power  due  to  feeble  cybersecurity.
The chal- lenges  to  our  financial  system  and  the  loss  of  manufacturing  and  innovative  capa- bilities  are  subjects  for  another  hearing,  but  weak  cybersecurity  exacerbates  these   problems.
Business  as  usual  means  long-term  decline  as  our  economic  and  techno- logical leadership is damaged by cyber espionage.
Two  of  our  potential  military  opponents  have  the  capability  to  launch  damaging  cyber  attacks  against  America’s  critical  infrastructure.
The  Aurora  test  at  the  Idaho  National  Labs  and  the  Stuxnet  worm  showed  that  cyber  attacks  can  do  physical  damage.
These  oppo- nents  have  carried  out  network  reconnaissance  against  critical  infrastructure  to  allow them to plan their attacks.
The issue for this committee is that after 12 years  of information sharing, public private partnership, and voluntary action, critical in- frastructure in the United States is not ready for an attack.
While  these  militaries  have  the  capability  to  launch  a  damaging  cyber  attack,  they are unlikely to do so short of an armed conflict.
Only  if  we  were  to  get  into  a  shooting  war  with  them, over Taiwan or Estonia, could we expect to see cyber attacks.
Deterrence  not  a  solution  for  cybersecurity’s  most  pressing  problems.
Cyber terrorism is still a distant threat, but it is a threat that is increasing.
Ter- rorists  lack  the  capability  to  launch  cyber  attacks.
Our original emphasis on ‘‘cyber terrorism’’ was wrong.
The day a terrorist group gets cyber attack capabilities, they will use them.
At that  moment,  if  we  have  not  improved  our  cyber  defenses,  they  will  succeed  in  causing  disruption and damage.
It is concerning to note that a few terrorist groups have ex- pressed  interest  in  acquiring  cyber  attack  capabilities—the  most  recent  was  al-  Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP).
This group is worrisome.
They are inven- tive  in  using  the  internet  for  propaganda  and  organization,  and  they  have  said  one  of  their  goals  is  to  disrupt  the  American  economy—this  was  the  alleged  motive  for  their  effort  using  printer  cartridges  in  air  shipments.
We  have  some  number  of  years—I hope—before AQAP or another group, or an irresponsible nation like North  Korea  or  Iran,  acquires  cyber  attack  capabilities,  because  we  will  not  be  able  to  deter them from attacking and our defenses are inadequate.
If  there  is  one  conclusion  that  we  can  draw  from  the  long  list  of  cyber  incidents,  it  is  that  we  are  not  prepared  to  defend  ourselves.
Our  current  approach  to  cybersecurity  leaves  initiative  and  control  to  our  opponents.
It  also  is  ineffective  in stopping the slow but steady damage to our economy and to our National security  that comes from cyber espionage.
We  will  hear  that  the  internet  must  be  protected  because  it  is  a  source  of  innovation.
Now,  in  other  fora,  it  is  common  to  hear that the United States is lagging behind in innovation, so it is fair to ask just  how much the internet has helped.
Innovation is a complex process and focusing on  the  internet  as  its  source  is  probably  wrong,  perhaps  a  last  left-over  form  the  dot-  com  bubble.
But  the  notion  that  ability  to  better  protect  intellectual  property  and  proprietary  business  information  will  somehow  hurt  innovation  is  bound  to  re- appear.
We  will  hear  that  technology  moves  too  fast  for  regulation,  but  this  is  true  only  if  you  try  to  write  prescriptive  regulations.
No  sector  has  a  greater  incentive  than  banks  to  protect  their  networks.
This is not surprising considering the thou- sand  of  probes  they  face  each  year,  but  even  with  all  the  incentives  in  the  world  and  with  a  strong  focus  on  cybersecurity  that  is  matched  in  few  other  critical  sec- tors, they cannot be secure.
The business implications for spending on cybersecurity by private companies, es- pecially  critical  infrastructure  companies,  are  straightforward.
Investing  in  in- creased cybersecurity requires them to spend on nonproductive assets.
There  is  a  notion  that  if  we  could  only  demonstrate  the  scope  of  the  losses,  companies  would  be  incentivized to recalculate the business case for cybersecurity and spend more.
Additionally, it is likely that some industry sectors are more important than oth- ers for cybersecurity.
On  the  other  hand,  providing  incentives  without  also  being  able  to  en- force  compliance  means  at  best,  we  will  get  a  very  uneven  level  of  implementation  and  continued  vulnerability.
Incentives  only  make  sense  if  increased  authority  for  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  accompanies  them.
Incentives  by  themselves are a give-away without benefit to security.
Incentives  will  not  solve  the  problem  of  our  reliance  on  a  disaggregated,  point  cyber defense, where each network or user is responsible for their own defense.
Providing incentives without being able  to  coordinate  our  cyber  defenses  and  ensure  a  common  level  of  performance  is  not  an improvement.
Is there a more sophisticated technology com- pany  than  Google?
Efforts  to  secure  the  Smart  Grid  are  a  good  example  of  the  problems  with  a  vol- untary approach.
Security standards published by the National Institute for Stand- ards  and  Technology  in  August  2010  were  developed  by  a  consensus  process  that  included  475  participants  from  the  private  sector  participants.
A report by the General Accountability Office from  January 2011 found that since these consensus standards are voluntary, there is no  way  to  enforce  them  or  even  know  if  companies  are  following  them.
Perhaps  unsurprisingly,  the  GAO  also  found  that  critical  smart  grid  elements  ‘‘do  not  have  adequate security built in, thus increasing their vulnerability to attack.’’1   Voluntary action has not worked, but some argue it deserves another chance and  that we should pay companies to put better cybersecurity in place, using incentives,  but that we should also not tell them what to do.
There  is  no  other  area  of  National  security  were  we  rely  on  voluntary  action  reinforced  by incentives.
A policy of voluntary efforts for better cybersecurity reinforced by in- centives is not a serious effort to protect National security against real damage and  a  growing  threat.
These  proposals  are  best  seen  as  intended  to  block  reform  rather  than to promote cybersecurity.
Information  sharing  is  a  more  difficult  problem.
The National Security Agen- cy,  Cyber  Command,  and  DHS  have  part  of  the  puzzle,  the  big  telecom  companies  have  another  part,  the  antivirus  companies  and  big  internet  service  providers  an- other.
Perhaps  20  or  30  companies  and  two  or  three  agencies  would need to share information and be partners in a National defense.
Our  laws  and  our  policies block the one area where we could have meaningful public private partner- ship and information sharing that could make a difference.
44   meaningful  information  sharing,  the  one  area  where  public-private  partnership  makes sense.
After 12 years of experience, we can now say with confidence that a voluntary ap- proach to cybersecurity based on public-private partnership and information sharing  is  inadequate  to  defend  America.
They  must  be  reinforced  by  an  active  de- fense that uses our military and intelligence assets, by flexible regulation of critical  infrastructures  and  internet  service  providers,  by  a  strong  diplomatic  effort  to  ex- tend the rule of law into cyberspace, and by expanding law enforcement cooperation  in every country to which we are connected.
In  December  2008,  CSIS  issued  a  report  by  its  Commission  on  Cybersecurity  for  the 44th Presidency that laid out a number of recommendations for a comprehensive  National approach to cybersecurity.2 While the report was well received, the imple- mentation of the recommendation has been slow.
The  most important of these were the need for coherent Federal leadership, clear author- ity  to  mandate  better  cybersecurity  in  critical  infrastructure,  and  a  foreign  policy  that  used  both  military  and  diplomatic  tools  to  bring  the  rule  of  law  to  cyberspace.
One  issue  is  whether  DHS  or  at  the  White  House  should  lead  cybersecurity  efforts.
DHS  is  best  placed,  working  with  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST),  to  develop  standards  and  regulations.
DHS  is  best  placed  to  work  with  first-party  regulators—FERC,  FCC,  FFIEC,  and  others—  to ensure compliance.
On the other hand, the White House is best placed to develop  a National strategy, to coordinate military, intelligence, law enforcement, and diplo- matic  activities,  and  to  provide  Executive  branch  oversight  and  guidance  for  cyber- security activities and for privacy protection.
Public safety and National security  require it.
The  approach  proposed  in  draft  legislation,  which  is  based  on  the  Chemical  Facilities  Anti-Terrorism  Standards  found  in  the  Homeland  Security Act, offers a reasonable approach to better cybersecurity.
Precedents for a new approach can be found in recent changes to the implementa- tion  of  the  Federal  Information  Systems  Management  Act  Reporting  Guidelines  or  in  the  Consensus  Audit  Guidelines  developed  by  a  consortium  of  Federal  agencies  including  NSA  and  private  organizations.
These  guidelines  identify  technical  secu- rity  controls  that  are  effective  in  blocking  high-priority  attacks.
They  show  that  is  possible to identify practices that improve cybersecurity and measure their effective- ness, since technology does not change too fast.
I recently spoke to the Deputy Chief  Information Officer of an agency that had implemented the guidelines—this was an  agency  that  suffered  major  losses  to  hacking  a  few  years  ago—and  he  said  the  im- provement  in  their  defenses  has  been  dramatic.
I  asked  if  the  Guidelines  are  not  getting  out  of  date,  as  they  are  2  years  old,  and  he  replied  that  not  only  are  they  are  still  effective,  that  implementing  the  first  four  guidelines  stops  most  of  the  at- tacks.
It  is  now  possible  to  identify  effective  practices  and  continuously  measure  how well they work—if they are implemented.
A comprehensive strategy that coordinates military, intelligence, law enforcement,  and  diplomatic  activities  is  essential  for  securing  a  global  network.
Reducing  cyber  crime  will  require  a  strategic,  National-level  approach  that  uses  law  enforcement,  intelligence, and diplomacy.
The most sophisticated cyber criminals live overseas, in  countries  that  do  not  cooperate  with  U.S.  law  enforcement.
The  problem  is  com- plicated  by  the  fact  that  a  few  countries  tolerate  and  even  encourage  cyber  crimi- nals.
Limitations  on  the  use  of  our  military  and  intelligence  capabilities  continue  to  weaken  cybersecurity  in  the  United  States.
We are told that a leading American bank had its networks penetrated by Rus- sian  hackers.
As an intelligence agency with no domestic authority, there  was  nothing  it  could  do  other  than  relay  the  information  to  law  enforcement  agen- cies, a cumbersome process under today’s laws.
Active defense would have let the intelligence agency detect the incoming  attack on the internet backbone, on the borders of America’s National networks, and  stop  it.
It  is  not  perfect,  but  it  works  and  other  nations  are  deploying  this  kind  of  defense  against  foreign  attacks.
Active  defense  is  the  future  of  cybersecurity.
Stronger  cybersecurity  prob- ably  requires  a  new  approach  to  privacy  and  a  strengthening  of  existing  oversight  mechanisms.
To give two examples, the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board,  PCLOB, does not have cybersecurity in its legislative charter, nor is there Executive  branch  guidance  (along  the  lines  of  Executive  Order  12333,  which  governs  intel- ligence  activities)  for  agencies  in  how  to  perform  their  cybersecurity  missions.
Both  of  these  reflect  the  need  to  adjust  our  laws  and  regulations  to  the  new  cyber  envi- ronment.
DHS  and  DOD  both  have  important  and  potentially  complementary  roles  to  play  in  cybersecurity.
DHS  is  best  placed  to  work  with  critical  infrastructure  and  to  en- sure  domestic  preparedness.
There  are  still  coordination  issues  that  need  to  be  worked  through,  and  some of these issues will be resolved only when the White House has a stronger role  in cybersecurity, but the recently signed Memorandum of Understanding signed be- tween Secretaries Napolitano and Gates is an important first step in building a co- ordinated defense.
The problem of international engagement is challenging, in part because for years  the  United  States  believed  that  cyberspace  would  be  some  kind  of  self-governing  utopia.
As the security situation worsened, as cyberspace became a new domain for  conflict,  and  as  the  political  implications  of  the  new  technologies  became  apparent,  other nations have decided to extend government control into cyberspace.
The United States must engage with these nations in order to influ- ence, if not lead, this restructuring of cyberspace governance, in order to ensure that  the  political  values  we  cherish—openness,  global  connectivity,  and  freedom  of  speech—continue  to  guide  development  of  the  global  network.
New  kinds  of  expertise  are  required  and  there  are  only  a  handful  of  people  with  relevant  experience.
The  State  Department  has  just  created a new cyber coordinator position and with the right support form Congress,  this could allow the United States to regain international influence.
People  are  wedded  to  old  ideas,  even  if  they  do  not  work.
New  kinds  of  expertise  are required for understanding cybersecurity.
Above all, many still place some other  priority above securing our Nation’s networks.
When we look at nations that have  fallen on hard times, losing their power and their international standing, very often  it was because of internal problems.
So far, this  has  been  the  case  with  cybersecurity  in  America.
Better  cybersecurity is possible, but not if we continue to use failed approaches.
We have a real  opportunity in the next 2 years to improve our cyber defense.
Doing this will require  leaving  old  ideas  behind,  even  though  many  will  still  advocate  them,  and  moving  to a new, comprehensive approach to cybersecurity that treats it as a major compo- nent  of  National  defense  and  homeland  security.
My  name  is  Mischel  Kwon,  and  I  am  the  president  of  Mischel  Kwon  and  Associates,  LLC,  a  consulting  firm  specializing  in  tech- nical  defense  security,  security  operations,  and  information  assur- ance.
None  of  these  organizations  will  have  large  data  centers  and  in- frastructures,  e-mail  servers,  or  application  programmers.
We  have  the  oppor- tunity  to  build  security  in,  to  fix  the  IT  refresh  problem,  to  enable  innovative  technology,  and  to  collapse  the  IT  community,  allowing  better collaboration, communication, and sharing.
We  must  look  at  where  IT  is  going  in  the  next  10  years  and  prioritize  what  we  are  working on so that we are addressing the issues head on.
We  have  had  significant  progress  over  the  10  years  in  height- ening  the  importance  of  securing  our  IT  systems  and  infrastruc- tures.
We clearly understand the need for information sharing.
We now  also realize we are all in the same infrastructure, the internet, and  that the idea of sharing infrastructure is the wave of future.
Much-needed  progress  is  being  made  in  the  modernization  of  FISMA,  understanding  the  need  for  continuous  monitoring  and  cyber scope that will enable the departments and agencies to have  a  real  understanding  of  the  health  and  well-being  of  the  systems  and networks supporting the Federal missions.
It  is  critical  that  as  we  move  into  this  era  of  the  cloud  that  we  are careful not to create home-grown solutions but rely on the pri- vate  sector  and  the  COTS,  commercial  off-the-shelf  products,  that  can accomplish the requirements needed.
Difficulties  have  challenged  us  in  security  governance,  authori- ties, and information sharing.
I do believe good efforts by good people with good intentions have  been made at the Department of Homeland Security and across the  U.S. Federal Government.
47   Today,  many  of  the  impediments  in  Federal  Government  that  slow  down  efforts  to  improve  cybersecurity  are  caused  by  a  lack  of  clear  governance  structure,  clear  defined  mission  spaces,  and  the  authorities  and  budgets  to  successfully  accomplish  those  missions  and understanding where collaboration is needed.
I do believe DHS has a primary role in cyber.
Though I have not  always thought DHS could handle the important and broad mission  of cyber because of the maturation level of this young agency, I do  believe  the  operational  mission  of  US–CERT  belongs  to  DHS,  but  as  an  autonomous,  operational  component,  similar  to  FEMA,  with  direct reporting capabilities to the Secretary.
It  must  be  enabled  to  succeed  in  the  important operational mission and firewalled away from the strug- gles  of  policy  and  relationship  development.
Effective and actionable information sharing and a public-private  partnership is essential for cyber today and for the future.
As  we  move  to  the  new  model  of  IT  and  the  cloud,  we  will  need  to  take  two  steps:  One  to  understand  how  we  can  technologically  share information more efficiently; and two, how the private sector  can  take  a  leadership  role,  possibly  through  a  non-profit  organiza- tion, to help free us from the holding pattern from both sides.
We  are  moving  rapidly  to  the  new  world  in  IT,  a  new  world  in  cyber  with  many  opportunities.
We  must  defend  the  shared  space  together  with  the  ability  to share information through a healthy, public-private partnership.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify be- fore  the  Subcommittee  for  Cybersecurity,  Infrastructure  Protection,  and  Security  Technologies.
My  name  is  Mischel  Kwon  and  I  am  the  President  of  Mischel  Kwon  and  Associ- ates,  LLC,  a  consulting  firm  specializing  in  Technical  Defensive  Security,  Security  Operations and Information Assurance.
Previously  I  served  as  the  Director  of  the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  at  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  and  as  the  Deputy  Chief  Information  Security  Officer  and  Director  of  the  Justice  Secu- rity  Operations  Center  at  the  Department  of  Justice.
Most  recently  I  was  the  Vice  President of Public Sector Security Solutions for RSA, the Security Division of EMC  Corporation.
I  received  my  Bachelor  of  Science  and  Master  of  Science  from  Marymount  University  and  a  Master  Certificate  in  Information  Assurance  from  George Washington University.
I was a Cyber Corps Scholar.
In the nearly 30 years  of my career to date as an IT professional I have been a programmer, systems devel- oper, network engineer, program manager, and security professional.
Over  the  past  10  years  the  U.S.  Federal  Government  has  been  struggling,  learn- ing, and discovering what to do about ‘‘cyber’’.
We have been moving on a continuum   48   that  started  with  the  discovery  of  adversaries  in  our  networks,  has  found  us  strug- gling  with  how  to  manage  our  systems  through  the  Federal  Information  Security  and  Management  Act  (FISMA)  and  compliance,  how  to  identify  threats,  attacks,  vulnerabilities,  and  how  to  work  together  to  defend  our  networks.
As  we  move  for- ward  in  a  constantly  evolving  world  of  technology,  life  as  we  know  it  is  changing  rapidly.
Soon, most companies, even Government departments and agencies, will no  longer  have  data  centers  or  continue  to  own  or  manage  their  own  e-mail  servers,  applications, or desktops.
This is not only an  innovative  solution  to  a  much-needed  technology  refresh  in  the  civil  government  space, but if done correctly, could be the answer to information sharing, infrastruc- ture-based  defensive  security,  the  cyber  talent  pool  shortage  and  guaranteed  life-  cycle  management  of  our  infrastructure  resources.
No  longer  will  companies  or  de- partments  and  agencies  with  missions  different  than  Information  Technology  need  to  be  in  the  ‘‘IT’’  business.
No  longer  will  we  need  to  educate  the  heads  of  these  organizations  and  have  them  making  IT  risk  decisions  outside  of  the  scope  of  their  knowledge  base.
We  will  deliver  the  requirements  to  the  vendors;  the  vendors  will  then  supply  the  appropriate  infrastructure  and  services,  with  security  built  right  into the technologies and the offerings.
This brings us to a critical crossroads in the continuum of cybersecurity.
This  point  was  driven  home  during  the  initial  phases  of  the  Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  (CNCI)  when the Federal Government realized just how much of the internet is private sec- tor-owned and -operated, and that even if we do better at securing Federal systems,  we  can’t  improve  our  Nation’s  cybersecurity  posture  without  improvements  in  the  private  sector  in  partnership  with  industry.
Understanding  the  Information  Technology  roadmap  that  we  are  all  moving  rap- idly on also increases the importance of enhancing the governance, authorities, and  relationships that the Federal Government has between and among the civilian de- partments  and  agencies,  the  homeland  security  and  law  enforcement  communities,  the defense and intelligence community and of course, the private sector.
First  of  all,  cyber  is  a  new  field.
At  most,  we  can  say  this  is  a  25–30-year-old  industry.
but  we  must  work  together  to  overcome  these  challenges,  quickly  and  effectively.
Second,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  is  a  new  Department  and  because  of  that  it  struggles  with  the  fundamental  daily functions of being a Department from procurement and budgets to hiring and  operations.
DHS  is  going  to  take  some  time  to  develop  the  processes,  policies,  and  procedures needed to run smoothly and efficiently.
Cybersecurity  often  takes  a  back  seat  to  physical  threats  and  natural  disasters  in  the  daily  and  weekly  grind  of  the  Department.
Congress  should  do  more  to  enable  the  cybersecu- rity  components  in  the  Department  to  operate  more  effectively  and  independently  without  getting  bogged  down  in  other  DHS  mission  spaces,  allowing  cyber  to  effec- tively  operate  as  an  independent  component;  allowing  cyber  to  separate  itself  from  the  quagmire  of  internal  politics  and  jostling  for  resources  and  mindshare.
Third,  there are a lot of really good people who have worked this problem in the past and  are working on cybersecurity challenges today.
As we point out the weaknesses and  problems, we must be cautious of tying the hands of dedicated security professionals  who  are  currently  doing  battle  on  a  daily  basis  (unfortunately  not  just  with  adver- saries  in  cyberspace,  but  with  the  bureaucracy  within  DHS).
We  should  take  the  time  to  remember  their  service  and  take  care  not  to  diminish  their  contributions  as  we  examine  and  address cybersecurity challenges in both the public and private sector.
During  my  tenure  at  US–CERT,  we  were  at  the  very  early  stages  of  developing  critical relationships with Federal civilian departments and agencies as well as rela- tionships  with  the  homeland  security,  law  enforcement,  defense  and  intelligence  communities,  and  the  private  sector.
FISMA,  which  was  enacted  in  late  2002,  was  a  start  in  attempting  to  set  up  roles  and  responsibilities,  including  defining  the  roles  of  Federal  CIOs  and  CISOs  enabling  security  structures  to  be  built  in  Federal  Execu- tive  branch  departments  and  agencies,  as  well  as  establishing  reporting  process  for  incidents  to  US–CERT.
This  all  being  said,  there  were  overarching  and  important  components  of  a  success  risk  management  strategy  that  have  been  missing.
As  it  stands today, the only requirement a Federal department or agency has is to report  the incident to US–CERT in the dictated time frame based upon incident categoriza- tion using a 20-year-old taxonomy that no longer describes the types of attacks that  organizations are experiencing.
US–CERT  does not have the authority to require the departments or agencies to share detailed  information, or follow any specific instructions.
Departments and agencies interpret  their  reporting  requirements  differently  and  therefore  each  reports  incidents  using  different definitions and methodologies.
When I was the Director of US–CERT if we  needed  Federal  departments  and  agencies  to  follow  specific  instructions,  we  would  have  to  have  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  require  them  to  follow  the instructions.
Because  many  of  the  existing  IT  systems  are  owned  and  operated  by  Federal  de- partments and agencies, there is no existing direct authority for DHS to require co- operation  with  US–CERT.
The security operations centers at State Department, Department of Justice,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  have  a  much  higher  technical  monitoring  and  response  capability  than  US–CERT.
In  order  for  US–CERT  to  accomplish  the  mis- sion of protecting the Federal civilian agencies and departments day in and day out,  US–CERT  must  be  empowered  and  its  capabilities  must  continue  to  be  developed.
These  tools  must  be  determined  by  what  will  support  the  mission,  not  be  tied  to  legacy  systems,  management,  or  contractors.
Even more  important  is  to  clearly  define  US–CERT’s  role  and  the  authorities  the  organization  and  Director  carry.
Developing  a  ‘‘council’’  of  Federal  department  and  agency  Secu- rity  Operations  Center  Directors  and  the  Director  of  US–CERT  to  help  guide  this  mission  makes  sense  in  order  to  ensure  the  mission  of  US–CERT  stays  on  track,  serves its Government customers, and has a focused and effective mission strategy.
To even confuse the issue more,  US–CERT is a part of the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration  Center.
In my view, in order to be success- ful, US–CERT should be removed from the National Cybersecurity Division (NCSD)  and  treated  as  a  component  organization  similar  to  FEMA.
It  should  have  its  own  budget that is not constantly diluted by other, projects, programs and internal poli- tics  in  NPPD,  CS&C  and  NCSD.
The  work  is  often  clouded  by poorly defined expectations and internal politics.
Even  in  some  of  the  current  draft  legislation  in  both  the  House  and  Senate,  participation  in  Government-led  cyber  activities  is  by  invitation  only.
Most  of  the  communications  is  done  by  the  CSCSWG  (Cross  Sector  Cybersecurity  Work- ing  Group,  a  working  group  of  the  ISACs)  and  most  of  the  members  are  not  actual  security professionals running security organizations, but a confusing mix of IT and  communications  companies  with  individual  company-focused  agendas  and  little  or  no  focus  on  the  operational  agenda.
Prioritizing  work  with  the  infrastructure  providers—not  indi- vidual  IT  product  vendors—such  as  ISPs,  web  hosting  and  caching,  cloud  providers  and  IT  infrastructure  providers—to  enable  the  focus  on  the  operational  response  mission.
So  far,  I  haven’t  painted  a  very  pretty  picture  of  what  is  going  on  at  DHS  in  re- gards  to  cyber,  but  I  want  to  re-iterate  that  I  do  believe  DHS  is  the  right  place  for  cyber.
I also believe changes need to be made in order for DHS to have a successful  cyber  mission.
Creating  a  successful  public-private  partnership  to  help  secure  cyber  space  is  yet  another  mission  that  must  be  addressed.
We  must  not  look  at  it  as  a  ‘‘cyber  space’’  problem.
Internet  infrastructure:  Internet  Service  Providers,  Cloud  Providers,  Web  Providers  and Information Infrastructure Providers.
Separate this from the ‘‘cyber war’’ issue,  separate  this  from  the  policy  and  legislative  issues.
Work on the information sharing problem with an operational lens.
I truly  believe a technical solution must come in order to break the stalemate we find our- selves in with regards to cooperation and information sharing.
The stalemate is cen- tered  on  procurement,  legal,  privacy  and  proprietary  information  issues.
We  must  determine  a  technical  function  for  anonymously  exchanging  information.
We  must  spend time redefining the taxonomy and vernacular we use to work the cyber prob- lem.
I believe as it becomes a more defined industry and who  actually  runs  the  ‘‘IT  infrastructures’’  (i.e.
We  all  have  critical  information  that,  if  shared,  would  help  the  community  as  a  whole.
This  non-profit  entity  would  facilitate  the  information  sharing  both  on  the  private  side  as well as a focused conduit for information sharing with the Government.
I  clearly  understand  there  is  a  Na- tional defense role for the Government in times of war, but we need to clearly define  what  that  means  in  terms  of  cyber,  and  yes  that  is  clearly  a  DoD  role—not  a  civil  Government role.
This  being  said,  I  do  see  technology  developments  that  will  remove  the  legal  and  privacy issues around information sharing.
We must technologically come to a place  where we can exchange information on a technical level about threats, attacks, and  mitigations without disclosing information about the entity or entities involved.
We  must  be  mindful  of  the  circular  rhetoric  trap  we  get  caught  in  when  we  hear the words—public-private partnership—and realize the actual work that needs  to  happen  to  accomplish  the  goal—defending  our  IT  assets  and  missions.
The  work  that  needs  to  be  done  is  to  create  technical  processes,  overcome  procurement  and  legal issues.
In  conclusion,  I  do  believe  DHS  has  a  primary  role  in  cyber.
Dr.  Schneck,  how  do  we  solve  this  problem  of  stronger  protec- tions for sharing information from the private sector to the Govern- ment?
If  I  am  a  credit  card  holder  and  all  of  a  sudden,  I  find  that  my  credit card has been cancelled through no action of my own, which  happened  one  time  when  I  tried  to  present  it  at  a  restaurant,  and  then  2  days  later,  after  we  called  one  of  the  major  credit—that  night  when  we  tried  to  call  them—well,  first  of  all,  my  wife  went  on  the  internet  to  find  out  what  our  account  was,  and  our  account  was  gone.
Now, obviously there had been some sort of a loss  of  security  within  their  operation,  but  they  didn’t  tell  me  what  it  was all about.
But  they  obviously didn’t want to share with me whatever that was; they be- lieve that they took care of it internally.
52   But  members  of  the  public  might  be  a  little  skeptical  if  there  is  this  broad  protection  that  no  matter  what  the  company  involved  with  that  information  did,  as  long  as  they  shared  it  with  the  Gov- ernment,  they  were  protected  from  any  liability,  on  the  one  hand.
We  reach  out  to  the  FBI  National  Cyber  Investigative  Joint  Task  Force  with  this  kind  of  data of, and then it builds into a much bigger picture.
The  analogy  I  would  use  is  from  my  days  working  as  an  intern  in  a  weather  lab.
The problem is when you share out that big picture, such as XYZ  is  happening  in  this  sector,  are  we  endangering  the  companies  in  those sectors that we have already protected, both electronically as  well as informing the humans in those companies, do we risk them  having  material  shareholder  issues?
Well, I would love to work with you and any law- yers  that  you  might  run  into  on  that,  because  I  do  think  that  we  have  to  have  a  greater  accessibility  of  information  in  both  direc- tions, and sometimes liability issues will interfere.
You used a great analogy, you said vaccina- tion doesn’t work any more.
First  of  all,  any  security  provider  that  says  you   are 100 percent safe, I would get rid of them.
Believe it or not, you are able to be protected  against  something  that  might  have  been  developed  on  the  other  side  of  the  planet  that  comes  in  with  a  risk  score  so  high  it  may  not have a name, but you are going to block it.
What  is  the  energy  sector  seeing  in  cyber?
Ms.  Kwon,  cyber  intrusions  affect  the  private  sector  even  more  than  Government  networks.
Some  of  these  private  networks  in- volve critical infrastructures necessary for our society and our econ- omy to function.
What  can  DHS  do  to  foster  better  cybersecurity  practices  in  the  private sector?
But  even  more  than  that,  DHS  helping  the  security  teams  that  work  in  those  critical  infra- structure  environments  to  communicate  with  their  executives  and  their  board  members  to  enable  the  financing  that  needs  to  be  put   nication.
54   behind securing critical infrastructure is critical and important and  to helping them accomplish their mission.
So, on the question of, is the industry fully aware,  from  reports  like  these  that  we  have  done  with  CSIS,  we  consist- ently get surprise answers back.
So, for example, security spending  last  year  went  down  with  the  recession,  even  though  awareness  of  the  threat  went  up.
One  is,  if  you  are  not  running  any  systems  that  that  code  can  actually access or use to your harm, you don’t need to worry about  that  particular  threat,  so  we  need  to  do  some  risk  analysis,  back  to the comment earlier about looking to the CFOs and the risk peo- ple in each company; this is all a question of the risk.
But  the  second  thing  is  there  is  technology  today  that  can  sit  very  quietly  on  a  system  and  just  decide  these  X  processes  may  run,  that  is  it.
So  we  are  working  with  our  colleagues  and  our  partners  on  how  you  embed  this  kind  of  technology  into  the  big  component  levels  of  industrial  control  systems,  because  we  can’t  always  as- sume everyone is aware.
Mr.  Lewis,  in  your  writings,  you  have  talked  a  lot  about  public-  private partnerships for the cybersecurity mission.
The  obvious  place  to  start  for  me  is  that  development  of  technology  has  to  be  left  to   55   the  private  sector,  and  they  are  just  the  masters  at  it.
A  place  where  public-private  partnership  makes  sense  is  on  in- formation  sharing,  and  it  is  easy  to  get  sort-of  distracted  by  the  numbers in information sharing, but basically, there is a small set  of  companies  that  have,  including  McAfee  and  Symantec  and  oth- ers,  the  big  telco  operators,  the  big  ISPs  like  Comcast  or  Cox,  put  them together with DHS and with NSA, and we will have a pretty  complete picture of what is going on, on the internet.
Now  there  are  legal  impediments  to  doing  that,  right,  and  that  is  a  harm  to  the  ability  to  secure  our  Nation’s  networks.
But  that  kind  of  focused  information  sharing  with  a  small  group  of  compa- nies is a perfect place for a public-private partnership.
If  we  are  talking  about  the  Russian  military  or  the  German  military  or  al-Qaeda  or  the  Iranian  and  North  Ko- rean military, that is a government response, and there is no com- pany—the  story  I  like  to  show  is  Google,  greatest  technology  com- pany  in  the  world,  some  would  say,  didn’t  take  the  Chinese  very  long to get through their defenses.
Perhaps  we  should  call  you  the  bots  herder  in  cyber terms, I don’t know.
The  answer,  I  think,  is, ‘‘Depends.’’   When  you  look  at  the  Department  of  Defense,  some  tremendous  efforts with the creation of Cyber Command.
When you look at the  Department  of  Homeland  Security,  significant  improvement.
So,  overall  as  a  Nation,  OMB  with  its  efforts  to  revise  FISMA  and  to  find  a  better  way  to  secure  Federal  systems,  those  are  all  signs  of  progress,  but  it  is  not  enough.
So  do  I  feel  like  we  were  more  secure?
We  were  on  the  path  to  being  more  secure,  and  I  think  the  work  that  this  committee  and  others  in  Congress  can  do  might  get  us  there  by  2012,  but  we  are  not there yet.
They  have,  over  the  past  several  years,  stood  up  several  security  operation  centers  and  have  improved  the  security amongst some of the larger departments and agencies, and  I think that needs to be recognized.
I  think  a  lot  of  that  comes  from  the  actual  awareness  that  has  been  brought  to  bear  through  the  CSIS  Commission  and  other  ef- forts in getting the word out that cyber needs to be a priority.
But I do think, in looking towards the future and things that we  need  to  improve  is  improving  that  communication  within  the  Gov- ernment  on  the  Federal,  civil,  civilian  side  of  the  house,  getting  DHS  to  work  more  closely,  not  only  with  private  sector  but  with  the  civil  agencies,  CIOs  and  CISOs  and  work  that  improvement  across the Federal space together.
The  problem  with  that  is  reporting  is  simply  reporting,  working   together is not working together.
So being able to work from a position of authority during an inci- dent  with  the  departments  and  agencies,  to  request  information  from  them,  to  have  certain  actions  performed,  it  is  very  important  for  them  to  have  that  authority  over  the  space  they  are  trying  to  protect, and they don’t have that authority today.
So sharing information about a cyber   57   attack  is  very  difficult.
I also think that there are different levels of information that we  are  talking  about  here,  whether  we  are  talking  about  broad-threat  information with attribution or whether we are talking about tech- nical  TTPs,  ways  in  which  the  malware  works,  the  actual  code  itself, how to detect it.
Being  able  to  put  together  an  organization  that  can  share  those  very  granular,  technical  bits  of  information  I  think  is  critical  and  important in moving forward and a way in which we can do it cir- cumventing some of the problems of law.
You were here when I was  asking the question about the health, electronic health records and  a  baseline  or  a  set  of  standards  that  we  should  have,  and  I  am  looking  at  part  of  your  testimony  where  we  talk  about  the  smart  grids and the voluntary approach.
You  know,  a  lot  of  times  you  will  hear  people  say  that  we  don’t  know what standards to put in place and there are too many stand- ards  or  there  are  lots  of  standards,  and  that  was  probably  true  a  few years ago.
But we are now at the point where between our ability to collect  data,  our  ability  to  identify  best  practices,  we  can  now  start  to  do  things.
We  can  now  start  to  think  of  standards  or  mandatory  best  practices  that  would  improve  cybersecurity,  either  in  health  or  in  smart grids, in the electrical sector.
You  can  look  at  places  like  the  Department  of  State  that  have  put  into place a set of standards that have been very effective.
In 2003, State lost 3 to 4 terabytes of information to an unknown  foreign opponent who probably lived in China.
Today  that  couldn’t  happen  because  they  have  identified  best  practices  and things you can do.
Smart  grids,  well,  it  will  take  a  while  before  it’s  secure,  that   might be the nicest thing to say.
It is not secure now.
People are trying hard, but as I think I mentioned in my written  testimony, the process that the National Institute of Standards and  Technology  used  was  a  consensus  process  of  475  members.
We can come up with standards.
It is possible to say what works,   but we don’t have the processes in place to do that yet.
I  know,  as  a  lawyer,  the  law  changes  a  little  less  frequently,  but  we  are  required  to  do  con- tinuing education on changes in the law.
Is  there  an  industry  practice  where  the  chief  technology  officer  or whoever is responsible for threat assessments, do we have an in- dustry  standard  or  something  where  they  stay  up-to-date  with  the  new  threats,  new  technology,  and  as  it  comes  abroad?
I  can  speak  for  McAfee,  and  I  can  speak for the colleagues with whom we work.
We grew that from 2,000 members  to 33,000 members, bringing subject-matter experts across the crit- ical  infrastructure  sectors  into  relationships  with  their  Federal,  State, and, most importantly, local community law enforcement of- ficers  and  Government  officials  to  share  information  about  cyber  and about all the sectors as they are all connected.
One  of  the  things  we  learned  very  quickly  is  our  small  to  me- dium business base, about 60 percent of our GDP, was probably the  biggest  beneficiary  of  these  relationships  because  without  that,  they don’t have the access and the resources that we are privileged  to  have  in  larger  companies  to  educate  our  executives,  to  give  our   59   executives  the  time  to  go  out  and  learn  what  is  really  outside  of  your four walls.
I  would  recommend  that,  not  just  our  organization  but  others,  small  to  medium  businesses,  to  your  point,  need  to  educate  their  executives  on  the  crossover  between  the  legal,  the  policy,  and  the  technical  because  it  really—they  work  together  so  much  now.
This  is  a  program  for  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  that lets the Department set standards in cooperation with the op- erators  and  owners  of  chemical  facilities  for  anti-terrorism  pur- poses to make the chemical facilities more secure.
But  it  is  a  way  to  say  to  the  companies,  here  is  our  goal,  you  need  to  make  your  network  secure  and  here  are  some  hints,  here  are  some  suggestions  on  how  you  can  do  that.
But  you  can  do  whatever  you  think  is  best  to  secure  your  networks.
We  have the ability to come in and look and say is it actually working.
I  think  it  is  a  good  point  to  note  also,  and  Ms.  Kwon  made  this  point  earlier,  there  are  many  agencies  that  work  together  in  this  cyber  endeavor.
The  Secret  Service,  not  only  part  of  DHS  and  their  efforts,  but  they are an integral part of the National Cyber Investigative Joint  Task  Force,  which  I  analogize  a  little  bit  to  Noah’s  ark.
There  are  one  or  two  of  each  in  that  task  force,  so  when  we  have  a  cyber  in- vestigation,  we  call  them  directly  because  I  know  that  that  data  that  we  can  share  will  get  all  across  the  agencies  more  quickly  than if I make 20 phone calls.
So  the  Secret  Service  or  the  FBI,  one  may  be  working  it  at  one  point; the other organizations, like the US–CERT, the NCIC, every- body is engaged at that point.
You can meet your State Homeland Security officers.
Go in and meet, I would rec- ommend,  the  cyber  people,  meet  the  Secret  Service  people  that  work there.
Well, this actually goes back to the question with Mr.  Richmond  and  is  a  very  difficult  question  because  often  imple- menting  defensive  security  is  expensive  and  often  it  is  not  afford- able  for  a  small  business  or  even  a  medium-sized  business,  or  in  large corporations where large budget cuts have been seen over the  past year, this is often a problem.
That  way  the  security  costs  can  be   61   spread  over  many  doctors’  offices  as  opposed  to  being  burdened  with  one.
So  I  definitely  see  moving  to  new  ways  of  implementing  IT as a good solution for particularly small businesses.
I  have  also  wondered  where  the  insurance  industry  is  appro- priate  in  this,  since  they  seem  to  have  a  record  for  risk  manage- ment  in  the  world,  and  how  you  join  all  those  things  together?
The  various  drafts  of  comprehensive  cyber  legislation  that  have  been  circulating  recently  have  attempted  to  re-organize  the  Department.
As  detailed  in  the  Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  (QHSR),  cy- bersecurity  is  a  recognized  and  vital  mission  responsibility  of  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS).
The  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team (US–CERT) is the operational component of the integrated capabilities within  the  Department  to  satisfy  its  cybersecurity  responsibilities.
US–CERT  has  an  en- hanced  ability  to  keep  DHS  informed  about  important  cybersecurity  events  since  2009.
US–CERT  provides  watch,  warning,  and  response  functions  through  the  Na- tional  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  Integration  Center  to  the  Government  and  to  our  international  and  private  sector  partners.
The  US–CERT  provides  daily  input  to  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security.
The  current  reporting  arrangement  has proven successful through CyberStorm III as well as all cyber events that have  occurred over the past year.
Moreover,  the  QHSR  was  followed  by  the  Bottom-Up  Review  (BUR),  which  in-  cluded a plan for DHS to:  ‘‘Increase  the  focus  and  integration  of  DHS’s  operational  cybersecurity  and  infra- structure resilience activities.
DHS has substantial operational cybersecurity respon- sibilities,  which  are  inextricably  intertwined  with  its  responsibilities  to  manage  all  hazards  risk  to  critical  infrastructure.
DHS  typically  manages  its  operational  re- sponsibilities  through  operating  components.
However,  the  majority  of  DHS’s  oper- ational  activities  relating  to  cybersecurity  and  infrastructure  protection  and  resil- ience  are  currently  administered  by  NPPD,  which  is  designated  as  a  DHS  head- quarters  element.
DHS  will  focus  NPPD’s  activities  on  operations  and  more  closely  align  cyber  and  critical  infrastructure  protection  and  resilience  efforts,  in  coopera- tion  with  the  private  sector,  to  secure  cyber  networks  and  make  critical  infrastruc- ture resilient.’’   Thus,  DHS  is  moving  to  increasingly  integrate  physical  and  cybersecurity  oper- ations across critical infrastructure.
The Department of Defense (DOD) and the Department of Homeland Se- curity (DHS) already work closely together, and this agreement formalizes a process  to  increase  the  ability  of  each  agency  to  work  in  its  mission  space.
In  particular,  DHS leverages DOD’s significant technical capabilities through its National Security  Agency  (NSA).
To  support  DHS  activities  in  protecting  Government  civilian  net- works  and  critical  infrastructure,  DOD  has  collocated  a  Cryptologic  Services  Group  and  a  Cyber  Support  Element  at  DHS’s  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communica- tions  Integration  Center  (NCCIC),  the  hub  for  responding  to  domestic  cyber  inci- dents.
The  MOA  will  not  extend  DOD’s  cyber  in- volvement  with  the  private  sector  beyond  its  current  role.
DOD  already  operates  within DHS’s National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) framework as the Sec- tor  Specific  Agency  for  the  Defense  Industrial  Base.
Within  the  critical  infrastruc- ture and key resources community, DOD works directly with defense industrial base  partners,  DHS  and  Sector  Specific  Agencies  (SSA),  and  other  critical  infrastructure  partners  in  developing  plans  to  assist  in  reducing  risk  and  better  securing  critical  infrastructure information systems.
Moreover,  the  MOA  provides  a  framework  that  enables  DHS  to  fuse  DOD  and  NSA information, through the NCCIC, with that of the private sector.
This provides  all  parties  with  a  more  comprehensive  situational  awareness  of  cyber  activity  im- pacting  the  Nation,  and  permits  all  parties  to  respond  more  effectively  to  those  threats.
How  has  the  OMB  memo  providing  DHS  with  operational  review  of  Federal  CIO’s  compliance  with  FISMA  going  to  affect  the  cybersecurity  program  within NPPD?
How will the cyber mission be affected?
Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  Memorandum  M–10–28  ‘‘out- lines and clarifies the respective responsibilities and activities of OMB, the Cyberse- curity  Coordinator,  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  in  particular  with  respect  to  the  Federal  Government’s  implementation  of  the  Federal  Informa- tion  Security  Management  Act  of  2002  (FISMA).’’  It  assigns  DHS  immediate  pri- mary responsibility for the operational aspects of Federal agency cybersecurity with  respect to FISMA, including, but not limited to:   1.
Overseeing  the  Government-wide  and  agency-specific  implementation  of  and  reporting on cybersecurity policies and guidance;  2.
Overseeing and assisting Government-wide and agency-specific efforts to pro- vide adequate, risk-based and cost-effective cybersecurity;  3.
Overseeing the agencies’ compliance with FISMA and developing analyses for  OMB to assist in the development of the FISMA annual report;  4.
Overseeing  the  agencies’  cybersecurity  operations  and  incident  response  and  providing appropriate assistance; and,  5.
Annually reviewing the agencies’ cybersecurity programs.
The memorandum enables new, proactive protection activities, which complement  the  Department’s  pre-existing,  reactive  incident  response  activities  in  the  area  of  Federal  Executive  branch  agency  cybersecurity.
While  the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  is  already  focused  on  detecting  malicious  activity  and  providing  incident  response  support,  the  new  activities  permit  DHS  to  better  understand  the  Federal  Executive  branch’s  cybersecurity  posture  from  both  an agency-specific perspective and on an enterprise-wide basis.
Examples of specific  activities  include:  FISMA  reporting  to  OMB  based  on  agency  periodic  reporting  through  the  CyberScope  platform;  recurring  Cybersecurity  Compliance  Validation  (CCV)  program  engagements  with  agencies;  and  establishment  of  Government  or  private  sector  Shared  Service  Centers  (SSCs)  and  Blanket  Purchase  Agreements  (BPAs)  that  deliver  cost-effective  security  solutions  to  Federal  agencies  and  further  permit those agencies to allocate limited resources to more mission-critical activities.
As it continues to implement the memorandum, DHS will conduct annual agency  Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO)/Chief  Information  Security  Officer  (CISO)  inter- views  to  maintain  awareness  of  agency-specific  successes  and  challenges.
DHS  recently  also  began  conducting  CyberStat  reviews  with  Agency  CIOs  and  CISOs in coordination with the National Security Staff and OMB to assist agencies  in defining action plans to improve FISMA-related cybersecurity capabilities.
Undertaken by the Federal Network Security (FNS) branch within DHS’ National  Cyber  Security  Division,  the  activities  pursuant  to  the  memorandum  enable  DHS  and  its  agency  partners  to  enhance  their  security  posture  before  incidents  occur.
They  also  provide  US–CERT  with  a  clearer  picture  of  an  agency’s  networks,  sys- tems, and policies when investigating an incident and providing support.
The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  has  a  clear  authority  to  conduct analysis, develop mitigation plans, and provide warnings with regards to cy- bersecurity.
For  instance,  both  the  Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program  and  the  Control  Sys- tems  Security  Program  (CSSP)  conducted  more  than  50  on-site  voluntary  assess- ments  in  fiscal  year  2010.
Within  CSSP,  the  Industrial  Control  Systems  Cyber  Emergency Response Team (ICS–CERT) provides on-site support to owners and op- erators of critical infrastructure for protection against and response to cyber threats,  including incident response, forensic analysis, and site assessments.
ICS–CERT also  provides tools and training to increase stakeholder awareness of evolving threats to  industrial  control  systems.
The  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  also  provides  similar  vulnerability,  assessment,  and  mitigation  information  for  private  sector  business  networks,  upon  request.
Similarly,  a  large  number  of  private  sector  participants  take  part  in  the  Cyber  Exercise  Program,  in- cluding the recent Cyber Storm III.
The challenge for  dot-gov  protection  increases  as  the  complexity  of  the  Information  Technology  (IT)  environment  and  the  data  and  services  consumed  become  more  distributed.
The  technologies used to manage information and to create services that defend informa- tion must evolve with the larger environment.
Dot-gov  protection  must  transition  from  network  and  signature-based  security  to  security  that  also  incorporates  information  and  user-centric  security.
To effect this transition, Government must  make fundamental changes in the following areas:  Security Operations   Coordinated  Risk  Management.—Policy  and  standards  must  build  on  knowledge  and experience drawn from various sources, including intelligence, law enforcement,  industry,  Government  departments  and  agencies  (D/As),  and  others.
The  Federal  Government  will  continue  to  play  a  significant  role  in  the  development  of  policy,  standards, and countermeasures.
Information  Sharing.—Information  sharing  that  ensures  the  rights,  privacy,  and  protection of individuals and their information is critical—particularly with the con- tinued  expansion  of  cloud  computing,  solutions  as  a  service,  and  social  networking.
Distributed Execution.—Distributed execution requires increased partnership with  D/As  and  industry.
D/As  must  continuously  monitor  their  networks  and  hosts  in  order to provide insight into the health and status of Federal systems.
Government  relies  on  industry  to:  (1)  Build  product  capabilities  that  secure  customers,  (2)  de- velop system capabilities to provide increased capability to self-heal, and (3) provide  prevention-oriented  solutions  to  seek  out,  detect,  and  protect  the  user  from  mali- cious actors.
Technology Attributes   Identity  Awareness.—Full  protection  of  dot-gov  requires  development  of  ‘‘identity  awareness,’’  which  is  a  capability  that  provides  every  component  in  the  ‘‘service  chain’’  with  the  ability  to  validate  identity,  ensure  its  authenticity,  and  provide  ac- cess based on the role of that identity.
Agility.—Advances  in  mobile  computing,  cloud-based  systems,  and  telework  are  posing  new  security  challenges  to  the  traditional  concept  of  a  static  security  perim- eter  protecting  private  Government  systems  and  information.
Government  must  be  able to adapt as Government information is stored and accessed wherever an agency  mission  requires  it.
The  security  challenge  associated  with  this  agility  is  deciding  which  new  risks  are,  or  are  not,  acceptable  when  operating  in  a  dynamic,  mobile,  and  cloud-based  computing  environment,  which  may  be  only  partially  under  the  agency’s control.
Now,  we  see  a  proliferation  of  device  types  (netbooks,  smart-  phones,  and  tablets)  joining  traditional  workstations  and  laptops.
The  industry  de- velopment cycle is now measured in months.
We can’t predict the next great device  or  program,  however,  we  know  the  trend  runs  towards  smaller,  more  capable,  and   66   cheaper  devices.
The  security  challenges  associated  with  this  diversity  of  devices  ultimately  impacts  our  ability  to  secure  these  devices  without degrading their capabilities.
Convergence.—As  device  diversity  grows,  we  begin  to  see  a  convergence  in  net- work  space  and  functionality.
Accessing  dot-gov  no  longer  requires  a  user  to  sit  in  front  of  a  computer.
They  may  access  our  networks  from  any  type  of  network,  in- cluding traditional Ethernet, telephone systems, cellular lines, or wireless networks.
Gone are the days when we could devise protections based on relatively stable, pred- icable  network  paths.
The  security  challenge  associated  with  this  convergence  ulti- mately  concerns  our  ability  to  secure  these  pathways  without  disrupting  connectivity.
In order to address these changes, Government must partner with the private sec- tor and academia to develop new security ideas.
These  considerations  are  among  those  addressed  in  Enabling  Dis- tributed  Security  in  Cyberspace:  Building  a  Healthy  and  Resilient  Cyber  Ecosystem  with  Automated  Collective  Action.
Due to the variety of Department of Homeland Security (DHS) programs  and  activities  engaged  in  collaboratively  improving  cybersecurity,  and  the  diverse  nature  of  the  private  sector,  private  sector  responsiveness  varies  considerably.
United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT).—Formed  in  2003,  US–CERT  is  the  operational  arm  of  DHS’  National  Cyber  Security  Division.
US–CERT’s  mission  is  to  lead  and  direct  efforts  to  improve  the  Nation’s  cybersecu- rity  posture,  coordinate  cyber  information  sharing,  and  proactively  manage  cyber  risks to the Nation while protecting the Constitutional rights of Americans.
In  addition,  US–CERT  provides  standardized warning and mitigation information products to its private sector part- ners  and  constituents  through  its  secure  portal  and  through  its  public  facing  website.
Some  issues  that  may  inhibit  private  sector  responsive- ness include concerns about: (1) Exposure of proprietary data; (2) prosecution or reg- ulatory action; and (3) negative publicity.
Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program.—Since  2009,  the  National  Cyber  Security  Division’s  (NCSD)  Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program  has  conducted  on-site  as- sessments  through  its  Cyber  Resilience  Review.
In  2010,  NCSD  deployed  its  first  Cyber  Security  Advisor  (CSA),  located  in  the  mid-Atlantic  region,  to  promote  cyber  preparedness,  risk  mitigation,  and  incident  response.
In  this  short  period  of  time,  it has become apparent that many critical infrastructure owners and operators have  a  general  awareness  of  cybersecurity  issues,  but  only  those  partnering  with  fusion  centers,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation’s  (FBI)  Infragard  program,  local  com- munities-of-interest, or those that subscribed to the United States Computer Emer- gency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  informational  products,  routinely  receive  Gov- ernment-provided threat warnings.
To date, only a limited set of owners and opera- tors  have  been  directly  engaged  in  assessments  or  other  targeted  cybersecurity  ac- tivities.
Private sector entities, however, respond well when the Government solicits their  participation  in  specific  initiatives  and  they  readily  work  with  the  Government  to  identify  appropriate  subject  matter  experts  within  their  organizations.
They  also  work  with  DHS  personnel  and  other  Government  representatives  to  develop  threat  mitigations.
For example, recent Cyber Unified Coordination Group Integrated Man- agement  Team  operations,  under  the  National  Cyber  Incident  Response  Plan   67   (NCIRP),  used  joint  private-public  partnerships  to  raise  alerts,  and  to  focus  subject  matter expertise and create tractable risk mitigations.
Cyber  Exercise  Program.—Private  sector  partners  repeatedly  mention  that  Cyber  Storm  and  other  DHS-sponsored  exercises  help  improve  their  individual  and  collec- tive  cybersecurity  and  incident  response  capabilities.
The  number  of  private  sector  organizations that played in Cyber Storm III represented a 75 percent increase over  Cyber  Storm  II  (from  40  to  70  participants).
Private  sector  organizations  also  ac- tively  participated  in  initiatives  resulting  from  Cyber  Storm  III,  including  develop- ment of the Cyber Storm III summary and observations report, making edits to the  NCIRP,  and  continuing  active  membership  in  the  Unified  Coordination  Group,  an  interagency and inter-organizational coordination body that incorporates public and  private sector officials.
Private sector organizations from three critical infrastructure  sectors  already  have  engaged  with  NCSD  to  conduct  follow-on  exercise  activities  that examine operational changes made as a result of Cyber Storm III.
Control  Systems  Security  Program.—The  private  sector  has  shown  growing  inter- est  in  the  services  of  the  DHS  Control  Systems  Security  Program  (CSSP),  which  works  with  public  and  private  sector  partners  to  improve  cybersecurity  of  critical  infrastructure  industrial  control  systems.
Since  the  advent  of  their  activities,  CSSP  and  the  Industrial  Control  Systems  Cyber  Emergency  Response  Team  (ICS–CERT)  have grown in scope and received increasingly more requests for on-site incident re- sponse,  assessments,  control  systems  training,  and  other  offerings.
More  specifically,  ICS–CERT  works  on  a  voluntary  basis  with  critical  infrastruc- ture  owner-operators  to  respond  to  and  analyze  control  systems  related  incidents,  vulnerabilities,  and  threats.
The  team  can  perform  a  comprehensive  range  of  serv- ices  and  activities,  including  providing  sophisticated  analysis  of  malware  and  de- ploying full fly-away teams.
ICS–CERT incident response teams (also known as fly-  away  teams),  which  are  routinely  requested  by  the  private  sector,  deploy  to  critical  infrastructure facilities bringing advanced and unique malware evaluation capabili- ties  and  leveraging  our  control  systems  expertise  and  fused  intelligence  analysis.
The team then works with the company to develop and implement a mitigation plan  to  eliminate  the  malicious  activity  and  limit  the  risk  of  future  incidents.
The  team  appropriately  addresses  sensitive  information  using  Protected  Critical  Infrastruc- ture Information (PCII) protections and works to mitigate any privacy and civil lib- erties  issues.
Actionable alerts to  our  stakeholder  communities  include  threat  information,  validated  vulnerabilities,  and related patches and mitigation strategies.
Once the ICS–CERT actively engages with a specific private sector entity via the  voluntary incident response process, oftentimes the company will continue to imple- ment  the  mitigation  solutions  that  are  offered,  and,  if  needed,  request  additional  support from DHS in the area of control systems security.
In  addition  to  sending  fly-away  teams,  DHS  is  also  able  to  proactively  work  with  companies  to  conduct  cybersecurity  assessments  using  the  Cyber  Security  Evalua- tion  Tool  (CSET).
These  no-cost  assessments  enable  users  to  assess  their  network  and  ICS  security  practices  against  recognized  industry  and  Government  standards,  guidelines,  and  practices.
The  completed  CSET  assessment  provides  a  prioritized  list  of  recommendations  for  increasing  the  cybersecurity  posture  of  an  organization’s  ICS  or  enterprise  network  and identifies what is needed to achieve the desired level of security within the spe- cific standard(s) selected.
The CSET has increased in popularity among our partners  over  the  years;  in  2010,  for  example,  the  CSSP  conducted  50  on-site  assessments  spanning  12  critical  infrastructure  sectors  (including  the  Electric  subsector)  and  is  on  target  to  complete  75  in  fiscal  year  2011.
CSSP  also  works  closely  with  the  Department  of  Energy  Idaho  National  Labora- tory  (INL)  to  provide  cybersecurity  training  to  private  sector  employees.
The  train- ing consists of a weeklong class held at INL, instructing in cyber protection and in- trusion  mitigation  techniques.
Response  to  the  classes  has  been  highly  positive—  thus far, DHS and Idaho National Labs have trained over 16,000 control system of- ficials, from chief executive officers to technical operators.
DHS  has  worked  closely  with  the  private  sector  as  it  expands  its  diverse  set  of  resources  available  to  the  private  sector,  including  threat  and  vulnerability  situa- tional  awareness,  risk  assessment,  and  mitigation,  and  remote  and  on-site  assist- ance.
The  trusted  relationships  DHS  has  with  the  private  sector—through  engage- ments,  working  groups,  co-location  on  the  NCCIC  operations  floor,  and  outreach—  have allowed DHS to incorporate private sector input at every step as we build our  capabilities.
Private  sector  engagement  is  a  cornerstone  of  the  Department’s  cyber- security  mission  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  Congress  to  continue  to  im- prove private sector outreach efforts.
The  cyber  threat  environment  changes  continuously  as  malicious  actors  adjust  their  tactics  and  adopt  new  technologies.
Similarly,  the  evolution  of  network  architectures  necessitates  a  cybersecurity  posture  that  is  adaptable  and  focused  on  risk  mitigation.
Regardless  of  changes  in  network  architecture,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  will  continue  to  execute  its  critical  mission  to  create  a  safe and secure cyberspace.
Cloud  computing,  computing  as  a  service,  time-sharing,  and  utility  computing  raise many of the same security issues that emerged when shared computer services  were  created  in  the  1960’s.
Yet,  the  cybersecurity  mission  remains  the  same.
The  many  advantages  of  cloud  computing  also  create  many  security  challenges.
Even if private,  community, and public cloud computing business models use the same security tech- niques  and  tools,  different  business  models  create  different  security  risk  environ- ments.
DHS  encourages  cloud  computing  providers  to  propose  innovative  security  solu- tions that effectively protect Federal systems, information, communications, and ul- timately, the agency’s mission.
DHS  has  avoided  requiring  providers  to  follow  particular  designs  or  architecture  for cloud computing.
For example, due to a constantly evolving threat environment,  the  Federal  Risk  and  Authorization  Management  Program  (FedRAMP)  was  estab- lished to provide a standard approach to assessing and authorizing cloud computing  services and products.
The National Cyber Security Division is actively participating  in the FedRAMP development.
FedRAMP allows joint authorizations and continuous  security  monitoring  services  for  Government  and  commercial  cloud  computing  sys- tems intended for multi-agency use.
These considerations are among those addressed in Enabling Distributed Security  in  Cyberspace:  Building  a  Healthy  and  Resilient  Cyber  Ecosystem  with  Automated  Collective Action.
In  your  testimony  you  comment  how  the  Government  is  lacking  a   National cybersecurity strategy.
I have three related questions for that issue:   How  is  the  lack  of  a  National  cybersecurity  strategy  hindering  the  Government-   wide cybersecurity mission?
How,  in  your  opinion,  is  it  hindering  DHS’s  cybersecurity  mission?
The  lack  of  an  updated  National  cybersecurity  strategy  can  hinder  the  effective  implementation  of  the  Government-wide  cybersecurity  mission.
Our  work  has  demonstrated  the  importance  of  comprehensive  strategies  that  specify  over- arching  goals,  subordinate  objectives,  supporting  activities,  roles,  and  responsibil- ities, and outcome-oriented performance metrics, as well as time frames to help en- sure  accountability  and  align  agency  activities  with  National  priorities.
National  strategies  help  shape  the  policies,  programs,  priorities,  resource  allocations,  and  standards  that  can  enable  Federal  agencies  and  other  stakeholders  to  implement  the  strategies  and  achieve  the  intended  results.
Without  such  an  updated  com- prehensive National strategy for cybersecurity, increased risk exists that our Nation  will not be able to obtain the desired posture against sophisticated threats.
69   Our  work  has  shown  that  Federal  initiatives  and  efforts  to  improve  information  security have consistently fallen short of the mark.
The following are illustrative ex- amples:  • In  October  2010,  we  reported  that  only  2  of  the  24  recommendations  in  the  President’s May 2009 cyber policy review had been fully implemented.
Officials  from  key  agencies  involved  in  these  efforts  attributed  the  partial  implementa- tion status of the remaining 22 recommendations in part to the fact that agen- cies  had  not  been  assigned  roles  and  responsibilities  with  regard  to  rec- ommendation  implementation.1 One  of  these  recommendations  was  to  develop  an  updated  National  cyber  strategy;  however,  administration  officials  were  un- able  to  provide  a  draft  strategy  or  milestones  for  when  the  updated  strategy  is  to  be  finalized  and  issued.
We  concluded  that  Federal  agencies  appeared  to  be  making  progress  toward  implementing  the  recommendations,  but  lacked  mile- stones,  plans,  and  measures  that  are  essential  to  ensuring  successful  rec- ommendation  implementation,  including  the  development  of  an  updated  strat- egy.
We recommended that the National Cybersecurity Coordinator (whose role  was established as a result of the policy review) designate roles and responsibil- ities  for  each  recommendation  and  develop  milestones  and  plans,  including  measures to show agencies’ progress and performance.
• Our  examination  of  Federal  efforts  to  address  the  global  aspects  of  cyberspace  determined that the U.S. Government had not documented a clear vision of how  the international efforts of Federal entities, taken together, support overarching  National goals and that the Federal Government had not forged a coherent and  comprehensive strategy for cyberspace security and governance policy.2 As a re- sult,  the  United  States  is  hindered  in  promoting  our  National  interests  in  the  realm  of  cyberspace.
We  recommended  that,  among  other  things,  the  National  Cybersecurity Coordinator develop with other relevant entities a comprehensive  U.S.  global  cyberspace  strategy.
• Our  review  of  Federal  cybersecurity  research  and  development  efforts  found  that  among  the  most  critical  challenges  was  the  lack  of  a  prioritized  National  cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda,  which  increased  the  risk  that  research  and  development  efforts  will  not  reflect  National  priorities,  key  deci- sions will be postponed, and Federal agencies will lack overall direction for their  efforts.3 We recommended several actions, including developing such a National  cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda.
The  White  House  Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Policy  agreed  with  our  recommendation  and  provided  details on planned actions.
The  lack  of  an  updated  strategy  can  also  affect  the  Department  of  Homeland  Se- curity’s  (DHS)  and  the  private  sector’s  cybersecurity  efforts.
While  the  existing  strategy  encourages  action  by  private-sector  owners  and  operators  of  cyber  critical  infrastructure, we testified in March 2009 that a panel of experts agreed that there  were not adequate economic and other incentives (i.e., a value proposition) for great- er  investment  and  partnering  in  cybersecurity.4 The  panelists  also  stated  that  the  Federal  Government  should  provide  valued  services  (such  as  offering  useful  threat  or  analysis  and  warning  information)  or  incentives  (such  as  grants  or  tax  reduc- tions) to encourage action by and effective partnerships with the private sector.
In  addition,  we  reported  in  July  2010  that  public  sector  stakeholders  from  DHS  and  other  entities  stated  that  improvements  could  be  made  to  the  public-private  partnership,  including  improving  private  sector  sharing  of  sensitive  information.5  We also reported that the expectations of private sector stakeholders were not being  met  by  their  Federal  partners  in  areas  related  to  sharing  information  about  cyber-  based  threats  to  critical  infrastructure.
As  a  result,  increased  risk  existed  that  owners  of  critical  infrastruc- ture would not have the appropriate information and mechanisms to thwart sophis-  1 GAO, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy Re- view Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO–11–24 (Washington, DC: Oct.  6, 2010).
2 GAO,  Cyberspace:  United  States  Faces  Challenges  in  Addressing  Global  Cybersecurity  and   Governance, GAO–10–606 (Washington, DC: July 2, 2010).
3 GAO, Cybersecurity: Key Challenges Need to Be Addressed to Improve Research and Develop-  ment, GAO–10–466 (Washington, DC: June 3, 2010).
4 GAO,  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  Key  Improvements  Are  Needed  to  Strengthen  the  Na-  tion’s Posture, GAO–09–432T (Washington, DC: Mar.
5 GAO,  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection:  Key  Private  and  Public  Cyber  Expectations  Need  to   Be Consistently Addressed, GAO–10–628 (Washington, DC: July 15, 2010).
70   ticated cyber attacks that could have catastrophic effects on our Nation’s cyber-reli- ant  critical  infrastructure.
We  recommended  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coor- dinator  and  DHS  work  with  their  Federal  and  private  sector  partners  to  enhance  information-sharing efforts, including leveraging a central focal point for sharing in- formation among the private sector, civilian government, law enforcement, the mili- tary,  and  the  intelligence  community.
Updating  the  National  cybersecurity  strategy  can  increase  the  likelihood  of  im- proving  the  cybersecurity  posture  of  our  Nation.
Additionally,  an  updated  strategy  could help ensure accountability and align agency activities with the United States’  long-term  economic  and  National  security  interests,  including  globally  promoting  our National interests in the realm of cyberspace and ensuring that the Nation does  not fall behind in cybersecurity and will be able to adequately protect its digital in- frastructure.
Our responses to these questions are based on previous work that was performed  in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards.
Those stand- ards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  sufficient,  appropriate  evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our  audit  objectives.
How do you coordinate sharing the information with the Federal Government?
We are committed to sharing threat information to help the U.S. Govern- ment gain a deeper insight into the threat landscape and respond to specific attacks.
Toward  this  goal,  we  work  closely  with  our  customers  to  ensure  that  we  adhere  to  our  NDA’s  as  required  by  the  law.
Once  we  are  sure  that  we  have  met  all  of  our  obligations  to  our  customers,  we  contact  representatives  in  the  various  agencies  with  authority  over  cyber  security.
We often found  that  agencies  that  had  been  briefed  were  unwilling  to  share  information  with  their  colleagues in other agencies.
During  the recent Night Dragon event, we did one briefing, for instance, which included de- fense, NSA, and FBI officials.
Many  rules  regulate  the  way  in  which  information  sharing  is  done,  and  there  are  limitations  on  the  types  of  information  various  agencies  can  share  with  each  other.
These  limitations  derive  from  law  and  agency  regulations  that  seek  to  balance  National  security,  domestic  security,  and  privacy  rights.
Nevertheless,  we  would  urge  that  some  type  of  enhanced  procedure  be  put  in  place  to  facilitate  the  ability  of  companies  to  share  information  in  a  manner  that  enhances  their  ability  to share information in a rapid and efficient manner with the Government.
Remedi- ating  cyber  attacks  is  a  complex,  time-consuming  process  and  the  more  rapidly  the  private  and  the  public  sectors  can  respond,  the  sooner  our  teams  can  ensure  that  vital information and systems are protected from additional attacks.
Bringing down  the response time from weeks to a few days would do much to enhance the security  posture of our country.
Could you give us a little more information about the technique and how you see   it being used most effectively?
White  listing  technology  ensures  that  only  good  executable  code  can  run  on  protected  systems.
The  technology  is  used  to  protect  servers,  endpoints,  embed- ded  devices,  and  mobile  devices.
It  is  used  in  many  ATM’s,  point-of-sale  terminals,  and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems.
White listing is one of the exciting technologies of the future because it can enable  organizations to be much more proactive in protecting their systems—it gives them  much  more  control  because  only  good  communications  can  be  received.
This  con- trasts  in  a  considerable  way  with  the  older  model  of  security,  the  anti-virus  model,  which  is  inherently  defensive.
White listing is an important part of the cyber security solu- tion moving forward.
In some regulated industries, companies do only the minimum need- ed  to  stay  compliant  with  the  regulations.
In  the  world  of  security,  the  minimum  effort does not necessarily make one more secure.
How do we change that culture of security to one not of mere compli-  ance, but security?
That  said,  there  are  several  measures  that  can  to  prevent  a  ‘‘race  to  the  bottom.’’  The  first  is  to  increase  transparency  and  reporting  on  the  number  of  probes,  breaches,  or  service  disruptions  of  computer  networks.
By  reporting  on  the  number  of security failures, we would be able to assess the effectiveness of regulations.
The  larger goal is to move companies to automatic monitoring of networks and to adopt  something  like  the  ‘‘IT  Dashboard’’  OMB  is  putting  in  place  for  Federal  networks.
The Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) NIST is developing is an example  of emerging approaches that could automatic and accelerate cybersecurity efforts.
The second would be to allow for some kind of ‘‘spot checks’’ of computer systems,  random  checks  to  see  if  computer  networks  were  adequately  secured.
This  is  a  standard law enforcement and regulatory technique, and could involve DHS or some  outside  auditor  inspecting  the  adequacy  of  a  company’s  cybersecurity  efforts.
A  better  approach  would  be  to  require  companies to immediately inform the appropriate agency when their networks have  been successfully penetrated.
In  this,  a  regulatory  approach  would  be  part  of  a  larger  effort  to  develop  a  broad  understanding  of  the  level  and  kind  of  malicious  activities  in  cyberspace.
I’m  inter- ested  in  having  you  elaborate  a  bit  more  on  that:  How  does  separating  elements  of  the  cybersecurity  mission  benefit  the  Department  and/or  the  private  sector  espe- cially the critical infrastructure?
Cyber  is  a  fast-moving  space  where  nimbleness  is  important  for  success.
It  has  been  tasked  by  NCSD,  CS&S,  and  NPPD  to  participate  in  a  plethora  of  other  projects  that  take  US–CERT’s understaffed, under budgeted, and technology-limited National security  operations unit far away from its legislated mission space.
In  your  testimony,  you  stated  that  virtualization  through  ‘‘cloud’’   technologies is the future for information technology infrastructures.
What  are  the  security  risks  of  moving  systems  and  applications  to  the  ‘‘cloud’’?
The  security  risks  are  similar  to  those  of  any  IT  infrastructure.
The  key  here  is  that  moving  to  the  ‘‘cloud’’  is  an  opportunity  to  bake  security  in,  build  it  more securely, and revitalize IT infrastructure and share in the cost of better secu- rity mechanisms.
Will we be more secure or less secure from cyber attacks?
If  the  opportunity  to  improve  security  is  taken,  it  could  be   more secure, if not .
If the Federal Government and private companies are moving to the  ‘‘cloud,’’  what  precautionary  measures  should  be  taken  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  these information systems?
First  and  foremost,  we  should  be  looking  at  new  security  technologies.
Technologies  where  we  can  cleanse  the  known  malware  from  the  infrastructure  layer.
We  need  to  move  to  technologies  that  allow  us  to  understand  what  is  good  and what is bad.
In your testimony you discussed the stalemate of cooperation and in- formation  sharing  with  the  private  sector  as  a  result  of  procurement,  privacy,  and  proprietary information issues.
First  it  must  be  understood  that  most  networks  have  already  been  com- promised.
We cannot allow cyber attacks to defeat our private or public sector  entities.
What actions need to be taken to aggregate shared information about   known cyber vulnerabilities from the private sector?
I’m  not  sure  cyber  vulnerabilities  are  the  problem.
I believe,  for both private and public, we need an autonomous entity (I referred to this in my  testimony  as  a  non-profit  organization)  that  can  take  anonymous  TTP  information  and make it available for others to use.
What  other  measures  should  be  taken  to  encourage  private  sector’s   willingness to share information?
73   2013  Italian Cyber Security Report  Critical Infrastructure and Other Sensitive Sectors Readiness  Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  !
CIS Sapienza  Cyber Intelligence and information Security  2013 Italian Cyber Security Report  Critical Infrastructure and Other Sensitive Sectors Readiness  Research Center of Cyber Intelligence and Information Security  “Sapienza” Università di Roma  December 2013  2013  List of authors  Marco Angelini  Maria Cristina Arcuri  Roberto Baldoni  Claudio Ciccotelli  Giuseppe Antonio Di Luna  Luca Montanari  Ida Claudia Panetta  Leonardo Querzoni  Nino Vincenzo Verde  with the support of  Gabriella Caramagno  Elizabeth Lee  Copyright ©2013  Casa Editrice Università La Sapienza Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5 - 00185 Roma  www.editricesapienza.it editrice.sapienza@uniroma1.it  ISBN 978-88-98533-13-8  Iscrizione Registro Operatori Comunicazione n°11420  La traduzione, l’adattamento totale o parziale, la riproduzione con qualsiasi mezzo (compresi microilm, ilm, fotocopie), nonché la memorizzazione  elettronica, sono riservati per tutti i Paesi.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including  photocopy, recording or any other information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Finito di stampare nel mese di novembre 2013 presso  Centro Stampa Università Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza Piazzale Aldo Moro 5 – 00185 Roma  www.editricesapienza.it  Preface  Every economy of an advanced nation relies on information systems and interconnected networks, thus in order to ensure the prosperity of a nation, making cyberspace a secure place becomes as crucial as securing society from the presence of criminal bands.
Cyber security means ensuring the safety of this cyberspace from threats which can take different forms.
Stealing secret information from national companies and government institutions, attacking infrastructure vital for the functioning of the nation or attacking the privacy of the sin- gle citizen can all be seen as extreme examples of a large spectrum of threats.
Additionally, perpetrators of attacks on cyberspace are now professionals working for governments, hacktivist organizations or criminal bands rather than teenagers looking for some short-term celebrity as it was in the old days.
Improving cyber security knowledge, skills and capability of a nation will be essential for supporting an open society and for protecting its vital infrastructures such as telecommunication networks, power grid networks, industries, ?nancial infrastructures etc.
This report gives a break down of the Italian standpoint in the context of the protection of national critical infrastructure and other sensitive sectors from cyber attacks from the legal and technological viewpoints.
In particular Chapter 1 discusses the notion of critical infrastructures and cyber security in the US and the EU.
It goes on to discuss the evolution and the number of cyber attacks sector by sector reported in the world and in Italy and to provide some numbers related to the cost of cyber crime in Italy.
From this comparison, it seems Italy lags behind other developed countries in terms of implementation of cyber security strategy.
Italy still lacks a clear operational directive for the cre- ation of a national CERT which makes dif?cult, on one hand, assessing the exposure of Italy to cyber attacks and, on the other hand, quick and coordinated deployment of countermeasures, in particular, when advanced persistent threats are discovered.
In order to conduct a deep analysis of the Italian cyber security situation, an anonymous questionnaire was sent to the four main sectors of the Italian economy i.e.
public administration, utilities, large industries - sensitive to intellectual property theft - and the ?nancial sector.
Among other observations, the study points out that some sectors are not fully aware of being a sensitive sec- tor for cyber attack and that a breach in its information system could cause an economic/technical problem at national or EU level, that the defense measures (already employed) neglect advanced persistent threats, but that organizations have, on average, good recovery capability.
The report also proposes a cyber security readi- ness index which is computed through four indexes, namely the awareness index, the policy index, the defense index and the external independence index.
Results are reported in a radar chart showing cyber security readiness proportional to the area covered by the radar chart.
Considering the results of the questionnaire, the experiences of other countries and the Ital- ian legislative landscape, Chapter 5 presents a set of recommendations for a national cyber security strategy.
These recommendations span all the phases of the risk management process.
In this preface it is worthwhile highlighting that the following are considered priorities: the realization of a national CERT (with a clear role and mission), cooperation among operators in the same sector and with the best sectors of academia, the conceivability of a national cyber security agency that embeds necessary capabilities and skills for an ef?cient strategy implementation and a nationwide methodology for classifying threats and adapt the dimension of the response.
Securing the national cyberspace and protecting the critical infrastructure can also be seen as a giant na- tional economic opportunity for growth in terms of industrial capability and research.
At the time of writing, Italy has a very good worldwide standing in the cyber security sector with the presence of key sector players, high-tech small-medium enterprises and highly reputed research centers.
This makes Italy a breeding ground for cyber security initiatives that could be a source of employment for the current and next generations.
All other developed countries are investing huge amount of resources in this sector to make their cyberspace a safe place for their citizens to visit and for businesses to operate whilst Italy is investing zero resources.
Con- sidering the pervasiveness of cyberspace and its relevance in any form of economy for the present and the future, the security that a nation will be able to provide for its cyberspace will be a measure of its indepen- dence, of its economic strength and of its capability to maintain its wealth for the following generations.
This is why in the future the study will, hopefully, be extended to small-to-medium sized businesses, that are the heart of Italian economy, to assess their awareness of the cyber threats that can steal their intangible assets.
The work has been partially supported by the MIUR PRIN TENACE project and by Microsoft.
Roberto Baldoni Cyber Intelligence and Information Security Research Center Director Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza  Rome, 15 November 2013  ii  Contents  1 Critical Infrastructures, Sensitive Organizations and Cyber Threats  1 5 Critical infrastructures and sensitive organizations subject to cyber attacks .
The cyber threat: current situation and future trends .
14  1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5  2 Cyber Security: Italian Governance and Legislative Overview  17 Actors involved in cyber security governance .
24  2.1 2.2  3 Cyber Security Strategy in EU and Some Developed Countries  29 3.1 Germany .
34  4 Analysis of the Italian Cyber Security Landscape  37 4.1 Organization recognition of being a critical infrastructure .
39 4.2 4.3 Anomalies and cyber attacks .
41 4.4 Defensive measures .
48 4.7 How organizations would like to improve their security .
50 4.8 A cyber security readiness index .
51  5 Recommendations for a National Cyber Security Strategy  55 Recommendations for risk assessment .
59  5.1 5.2 5.3  Bibliography  Appendix A: Questionnaire  Appendix B: Score Structure of the Cyber Security Readiness Index  Acronyms  61  64  75  77  iii  List of Figures  1.1  1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5  1.6 1.7 1.8  Breakdown of number of attacks (percentage on 129 attacks analyzed) by sector in Italy (source: .
11 Evolution of cyber threat origins in Italy (source: Clusit, 2013).
People networked with at least one device (source: Audiweb, 2012).
12 Italy and social networks (source: Audiweb, 2012).
13 Percentage of personal computer attacked by malware while browsing the Internet (source: Kasper- sky Lab, 2012).
15  3.1  EU cyber security strategy: Interacting organizations at national and EU level [16].
29  Percentage of questionnaires returned per group.
38 4.2 Question #1.1.5 - Awareness of being critical infrastructure (per group).
39 4.3 Question #1.1.5 - Awareness of being critical infrastructure (breakdown for the PA group).
39 4.4 Question #1.2.1 - “Is your company using (or planning to use) cloud services?” Left chart shows  answer distribution by group.
40  4.5 Question #1.2.2 - “Do cloud services support core business processes that are necessary to deliver critical services?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
40  4.6 Question #1.2.5 - “Is it possible that an ICT service failure in one (or more) third-party company, will have a signi?cant impact on your company?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
41  4.7 Question #1.2.6 - “Do you know if your software providers are following a strategic approach to address application risks in each phase of the application development process?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
42 4.8 Question #1.3.10: Companies regularly registering anomalies per group.
4.9 Question #1.1.5 - Companies that have been attacked by an insider (per group).
42 4.10 Question #1.3.5 - Companies experiencing external cyber attacks (per group).
43 4.11 Question #1.3.7 - Aim of external attacks (per group).
43 4.12 Question #1.4.8 - “Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from mis- use by employees does your company implement?” Overall internal misuse countermeasures adop- tion.
44  4.13 Question #1.4.8 - “Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from mis- use by employees does your company implement?” Adoption rate for each of the countermeasures per group.
44  iv  4.14 Question #1.4.5 - “Do you have the infrastructure to detect active attacks?” Left chart shows an- swer distribution by group.
Responses: “Yes basic" We have an infrastructure to detect attacks that are based upon standard malware or basic techniques (sql- injection, known computer worms, phishing ecc), “Yes-APT" We have an infrastructure to detect sophisticated attacks carried out by an advanced adversary that uses 0-day vectors (Advanced Per- sistent Threats).
45  4.15 Distribution of response to question, “Are your web applications tested using standard methodolo- gies for security assessment of webapps?” Left chart is divided by group.
45  4.16 Distribution of response to the question, “Does your company actively audit (penetration testing) the security of your ICT systems?” The chart on the left is divided by group, that on the right is the overall picture.
46  4.17 Questions #1.4.13, #1.4.14 - “Do you have measures that prevent the spread of an attack if your systems are penetrated?
If so, what kind of measures?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
46  4.18 Question #1.5.1 - “Do you have processes and resources to respond to cyber security incidents ?”  Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
47  4.19 Question #1.5.2 - “Do you have processes and resources to recover from a signi?cant cyber security  incident ?” Left chart shows answer distribution by groups.
48 4.22 Question #1.4.1 - “Is your company using an Information Security Management System (ISMS) ?”  Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
49  4.23 Question #1.4.2 - “Has your company adopted the ISO/IEC 27001 ?”Left chart shows answer distri-  bution by group.
49  4.24 Question #1.4.6 - “Do you use an Operator Security Plan or an equivalent measure, as de?ned in the European Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December, 2008 ?” Left chart shows answer dis- tribution by group.
49  4.25 Question #1.4.7 - “If yes, is the Operator Security Plan regularly updated?” Left chart shows answer  distribution by groups.
- “Do you think that the security of your company could be improved with: (i) Better security policies, or strict implementation of the existents, (ii) More ICT security experts / security expert with expertise conformity externally tested, (iii) Improved security tools, (iv) Secu- rity focused training of all the employees with regard to their duties, (v) Security audit periodically executed by an external certi?ed organization”.
Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
50  4.27 Cyber security readiness index: Awareness, Defense, Policy and External Dependencies indexes per  group.
52  4.28 Question #1.5.3 - “Do you have situational awareness on the state of cyber threats to your organi-  zation?
"(per group) .
53  4.29 Cyber security readiness index for PA group.
5.1  Risk management process .
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Devices used by Italians to stay connected (source: Audiweb, 2012).
15  2.1 2.2  Taxonomy of private-public information sharing system .
25 List of private-public information sharing system as reported by ENISA web site (June 2013) .
27  4.1  Sent/Received Questionnaires per group.
The ?rst measures in the ?eld of CIP.
Cyber threat de?nition [31].
2 I 2 II 3 III Cyberspace and cyber security de?nitions [31].
19 VIII ADI line of action on Italian cyber security [23].
21  vii  List of recommendations  Understanding the dimension of cyber threats .
58 Research, development and technology investments .
59 International engagements .
59 Critical economic sector organizations should adopt solid risk management processes .
59 A national agency for cyber security .
60  viii  CHAPTER  1  Critical Infrastructures, Sensitive Organizations and Cyber Threats  In order to understand how Italy is facing the delicate issue of critical cyber infrastructure in terms of gover- nance, it is necessary to brie?y examine the de?nition of the scope of the analysis, i.e.
what critical infrastruc- tures are, which organizations can be considered sensitive due to their role in society and what cyber security is: the combination of these concepts allows for the identi?cation of the economic sectors that are sensitive to cyber attacks.
It is often identi?ed as the infrastructures whose incorrect functioning, even for a limited time period, may negatively affect the economy of individual subjects or groups, involving economic losses and/or even expose people and things to a safety and security risk [6].
The inter-sectoral evaluation criteria relate to:  a) potential victims, in terms of number of fatalities or injuries;  b) potential economic effects, in terms of ?nancial losses, deterioration of products or services and environ-  mental effects/damages;  c) potential effects on population, in terms of loss of public con?dence, physical suffering and disruption of  daily life, including the loss of essential services.
Brie?y, EU directive 114/2008 lays down rules for the owners and/or operators concerning the security of their infrastructure to prevent, or at least mitigate, consequences on other nations.
In other words, given the pan-European role played by such large infrastructure, security levels must conform to a high qualitative standard and, thus, the rules to be adopted are not de?ned only by the member state in which an infrastructure is located but, to some extent, they are imposed at European level.
An essential component of the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP)1 is the Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network (CIWIN), a protected public Internet-based information and communication system that allows subjects involved in Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) to share CIP-related information and good practices (Box II reports the ?rst initiatives in this ?eld).
In Italy, according to the Working Group on CIP(Gruppo di Lavoro sulla Protezione delle Infrastrutture Critiche) established by the Department of Innovation and Technology (Dipartimento per l’innovazione e le tecnologie) within the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, critical infrastructure is identi?ed as:  1EPCIP is the 2004 European program dedicated to the identi?cation and protection of ECI.
1  De?nition of critical infrastructure in the United States  The term critical infrastructure means systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those matters [45].
Critical Infrastructure (CI) means an asset, system or part thereof located in member states which is essential for the maintenance of vital society functions, health, safety, security, economic or social well- being of people, and the disruption or destruction of which would have a signi?cant impact in a member state as a result of the failure to maintain those functions.
This includes effects resulting from cross-sector dependencies on other types of infrastructure [20].
At the European level, only in June 2004 did the European Council call for a comprehensive strategy for the pro- tection of critical infrastructure and in October of the same year, the European Commission proposed measures to strengthen the European Union’s (EU) prevention, preparedness and response to terrorist attacks on critical infrastructure, with a series of proposals to enhance prevention, preparedness and response to terrorist attacks [14].
Box II: The ?rst measures in the ?eld of CIP.
“the combination of networks and systems including industry, institutions, and distribution facilities that  operate in synergy and produce a continuous ?ow of essential goods and services for the organization,  functionality and economic stability of a modern industrialized country, whose destruction or temporary  unavailability can cause a debilitating impact on the economy, daily life or the ability of a country to defend  itself”[32].
This de?nition highlights the systemic and network aspect of critical infrastructure, emphasizing that the crit- icality is not so much in the value of the single component, but rather in its systemic relevance.
Focusing on the concept of network and systemic nature to de?ne critical infrastructure, the presence of interdependencies is relevant.
Types of interdependencies: we can de?ne the following four principal classes of interdependencies: physical, cyber, geographic, and logical.
An infrastructure has a cyber interde- pendency if its state depends on information transmitted through cyberspace.
Finally,  2  two infrastructures are logically interdependent if the state of each one depends on the state of the other via a mechanism that is not a physical, cyber, or geographic connection.
Information systems are fundamental to the organizational structure and the mechanisms of operation of business, industry and government institutions.
Types of interdependence among infrastructures became more important, so increasing the cyber risk exposure for the private sector and the public sector in a national and an international context.
The importance of cyber risk is due to its potential disastrous effects, especially when you consider that one criteria de?ning the critical infrastructure is the analysis of the impact of any damage to the same infrastructure.
It is worth pointing out that only some of the damage resulting from a cyber risk can be evaluated in economic terms (production losses, damage to property, theft of cash, etc.
Interference with information systems could result in loss of consumer and shareholders’ con?dence, re- sulting in a negative reputation and, therefore, in value destruction [5].
If attention is focused on the aspects associated with the presence of cyberspace relating to CIP, it is referred to as Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP).
Literature often considers the two terms as interchangeable, and some authors have suggested the use of the acronym CI(I)P. Considering the peculiar traits due to the dig- ital domain, the cyber threat for CIIP in the cyberspace domain raises urgent and complex challenges in the ?eld of protection and security.
Box III provides de?nitions of cyberspace and cyber security.
It can be seen as the notion of cyber security includes (but it is not limited to) critical infrastructure protection from cyber attacks.
Cyber security includes also the protection of other economic sectors that are sensitive to cyber attacks.
Cyberspace  Cyberspace is a set of interconnected computing infrastructures, including hardware, software, data and users as well as the logical relationships between them.
It includes, among other things, the Internet, communication networks, process actuators systems and mobile devices equipped with a network connection.
Cyber Security  Cyber security is the condition in which cyberspace is protected with respect to voluntary or accidental events, consisting in the acquisition and transfer of data, in their modi?cation or unlawful destruction or the blocking of information systems, thanks to appropriate security measures.
These measures include safety audits, man- agement of security updates (patches), authentication procedures, access management, risk analysis, detection and response to incidents/attacks, mitigation of impacts, recovery of components subject to attack, training and education the personal, and veri?cation and enhancement of the physical security of the premises where information and communication systems are placed.
Box III: Cyberspace and cyber security de?nitions [31].
It is important to understand the differences among the following expressions: cyber security, cyber crime and cyber terrorism.
Cyber crime is identi?ed as the set of offenses ranging from identity theft to scams via Internet banking and cyber ransom.
Therefore, cyber crime concerns the civil area.
Cyber terrorism concerns the military area: it consists, in fact, in the set of actions that organizations or groups accomplish in cyberspace for subversive purposes.
For both areas, civil and military, cyber security is critical.
Cyber security is “the collection of tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches,  3  actions, training, best practices, assurance and technologies that can be used to protect the cyber environment and organization and user’s assets” [51].
This sector is characterized by an evolving and not fully completed regulatory framework and a complexity coming from the combination of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) with other systems essential to the sustainability of the key features of modern societies.
Therefore, cyber security is a very interesting issue for both academics and professionals [1, 9, 40].
In Europe two main priorities have been identi?ed:  1. protection of infrastructures based on ICT identi?ed as critical infrastructure;  2. protection from cyber crime.
In 2009, the European Commission outlined a plan of immediate action to strengthen the security and resilience2 of Critical Information Infrastructures (CIIs).
The action plan is organized in ?ve pillars (see table 1.1, ?rst column).
In 2011, the European Commission published the results achieved following the implementation of the action plan for the protection of CII, in each of the ?ve areas.
The ?ve pillars established in Action Plan 2009  Results achieved (Report 2011)  Preparedness and prevention: for the de?nition of common standards and the establishment of ade- quately prepared national Computer Emergency Re- sponse Teams (CERTs).
Detection and response: for the adoption of a Euro- pean Information Sharing and Alert System EISAS.
Mitigation and recovery: for the elaboration of na- tional emergency plans and the organization of na- tional and pan-European exercises on the response and the disaster recovery as a result of security inci- dents on large-scale networks.
International cooperation: for promoting European priorities in terms of safety, at the international level and to participate in exercises at the global level.
Criteria for European Critical Infrastructure in the ICT sector: for implementing the identi?cation and pro- tection plan of ECI imposed by Directive 114/08.
In 2009, ENISA (European Network and Information Security Agency) and the national CERTs established and approved CERTs minimum skills and services, in order to operate properly in support of pan-European cooperation.
In the same year the European Forum of Member States (EFMS) was established to facili- tate the communication and exchange of information between authorities of the member states.
In addi- tion, the European Commission adopted the Euro- pean Public-Private Partnership for Resilience (EP3R) to foster cooperation between the public sector and the private sector on security and resilience of ICT systems.
ENISA developed a roadmap for the development, by 2013, of EISAS.
ENISA has developed a good practice guide for ex- ercises at national level and strategic recommenda- tions for the development of national strategies.
On November 4, 2010 the ?rst pan-European exercise re- lated to security incidents on communication net- works (Cyber Europe 2010) was held.
Principles and European guidelines for the resilience and Internet stability were formulated on the basis of the EFMS’ work.
A ?rst draft of the criteria for identifying European Critical Infrastructure in the ICT sector was produced, with special focus on ?xed and mobile communica- tions and the Internet.
More recently (in February 2013), the European Commission published a European strategy for cyber se- curity [16] de?ning the principles that should guide the EU cyber security policy.
Although member states are primarily responsible for security in cyberspace within the national borders, the European strategy proposes actions to improve the overall EU performance.
Achieving cyber resilience.
The legislative proposal concerning the European strategy for cyber security  plans:  • To establish common minimum requirements of Network and Information Security (NIS) at the national level by requiring member states to appoint specialist national authorities in the ?eld of NIS, to establish well-functioning national CERTs, and to adopt a NIS strategy and a national cooperation plan.
• To foster cooperation and information sharing between the specialist national authorities, to re- spond to cyber incidents with an international dimension.
The majority of computer systems and telecommunications networks are in the private sector, thus it is essential to improve the involvement of the private sector in the context of cyber security.
Drastically reducing cyber crime.
Cooperation between the member states is important for responding to the growing threat of cyber crime.
The European Cybercrime Centre (EC3), formed in 2013 within Europol, is the European reference point for the ?ght against cyber crime.
EC3 facilitates collaboration and information sharing between the authorities of the member states, the private sector and other stakeholders.
Developing cyber defense policy and capabilities related to the Common Security and Defence Pol- icy (CSDP).
Cyber defense focused on the detection, response and recovery against cyber threats is es- sential to increase the resilience of systems in the NIS.
In this context, the European strategy involves strengthening the synergy of the civil and military sector for the protection of critical information in- frastructures.
This effort should be supported by research, development and collaboration between the governments of the member states, the private sector and the academic sector.
Developing the industrial and technological resources for cyber security.
The risk for Europe is to depend too much on non-EU ICT and security solutions.
Research and development provide the EU with the opportunity to promote a reliable European ICT sector, boost the internal market and reduce Europe’s dependence on foreign technology.
The European Commission intends to use Horizon 2020 to promote research and development in the ?eld of security and privacy in the ICT sector, and the development of tools to combat criminal and terrorist activities involving cyberspace.
Establishing a coherent international cyberspace policy for the European Union and promoting core EU values: the EU strategy is aimed at maintaining an open, free and secure cyberspace.
The Euro- pean Commission intends to develop a coherent international policy in the ?eld of cyberspace aimed at increasing engagement with key partners and key international organizations and improve the coor- dination, promoting the fundamental values of the EU.
This policy encourages the efforts for the devel- opment of standards of behavior and enforcement of international laws in cyberspace.
It also promotes the Budapest Convention to combat cyber crime.
1.1 Critical infrastructures and sensitive organizations subject to cyber  attacks  In 2006, the European Commission de?ned network and information security as “the ability of a network or an information system to resist, at a given level of con?dence, accidental events or malicious actions that compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity and con?dentiality of stored or transmitted data and the related services offered by or accessible via these networks and systems” [12].
CIP includes “the programs and activities of infrastructure owners, operators, manufacturers, users, and regulatory authorities which aim at keeping the performance of critical information infrastructures in case of failures, attacks or accidents above a de?ned minimum level of services and aim at minimizing the recovery time and damage”[12].
As regards cyber crime, there is still no single de?nition, mainly because of the differences in the legislation of the various member states.
The European Commission, in a communication of 2007 [13], said, in general, that it includes  5  “the criminal acts committed against electronic communications networks and information systems or by means of such networks and systems”.
Critical Sectors - American Government  Critical Sectors - European Commission Proposal  Food And Agriculture  Water and Wastewater Systems  Dams  Healthcare and Public Health  Nuclear Reactors, Materials and Waste  Emergency Services  Food Water  Research Facilities  Health  Nuclear Industry  Space  Information Technology  Information, Communication Technology (ICT)  Energy  Transportation systems  Financial Services  Chemical  Communications  Defence Industrial Base Commercial Facilities Critical Manufacturing Government Facilities  Energy*  Transport* Financial  Chemical Industry  *Critical sectors that have transitioned in the ?nal version of the European Commission Directive [20].
Electrical energy has various features, including the ease of conversion into other forms of energy (mechani- cal, light, thermal, etc.
The need to use ICT technologies exposes the mentioned areas to the risk of computer breaches.
The European ICT sector may correspond to the union of the two critical areas of American information technology and communications.
As such, the ?nal version of this Directive [20] solely concentrates on the energy and transport sectors, paving the way to future reviews in order to include other sectors within its scope.
The magnitude of such disruptions depends on asymmetric information and network externalities.
However, if not properly managed, they can pose signi?cant risks to the ?nancial system and be a potential source of contagion, particularly in periods of market stress.
An FMI is de?ned as a multilateral system among participating institutions, including the operator of the system, used for the purposes of clearing, settling, or recording payments, securities, derivatives, or other ?nancial transac- tions (“Principles for ?nancial market infrastructures”, BIS and OICV-IOSCO, April 2012).
The fall- out from the recent ?nancial crisis has illustrated that many sources of systemic risk were triggered or at least propagated by vulnerabilities in operational risk management of market and payment infrastructures.
The policy resolutions of the Group of Twenty (G-20) Summit in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in September 2009 mark a shift of ?nancial sector regulation from internal controls and sound risk management practices to macro prudential regulation for systemic risk and contingency planning.
For banking supervisors, operational risk is inherent in all banking products, activi- ties, processes, and systems, and the effective management of operational risk has always been a fundamental element of a bank’s risk management program.
In order to implement in our system the EBA’s Guidelines on In- ternal Governance (27 September 2011), the circular no.
Among others, the most important innovations are related to:  • The discipline of information systems, taking into account the main developments which emerged on the international scene and setting the main constituents of governance and organization of the infor- mation system, IT risk management, all the requirements to ensure the security and the system manage- ment of data.
The provisions also provide that the de?nition of principals security for access to critical systems and services through the Internet channel are applicable Recommendations of the ECB in the ?eld of security of online payments.
The total time for recovery will not exceed four hours, including times for the stages of analysis , decision-making , technical assistance and veri?cation.
• The formalization of the role of the CODISE Working Group (the business continuity working group set up in 2002 ) as the structure responsible for the coordination of crisis management operating in the Italian ?nancial system.
The group is coordinated by the Banca d’Italia in agreement with the CONSOB (the Italian stock exchange commission) and consists of representatives of the leading banking groups and the companies that manage infrastructures essential to the orderly working of the ?nancial system.
The problem of cyber threat in the ?nancial sector has been investigated in [3] and [2] where a complex event processing infrastructure supporting an information sharing system has been introduced to face cyber attacks and frauds happening at distinct organizations.
7  1.2 Italian critical IT infrastructure  In Italy, attacks on computer security have had an exponential growth in recent years.
Assinform3 estimated that 40% of attacks require at least 4 days to be solved.
In 90% of cases the attack is successful due to incorrect con?guration of the security system and the lack of speci?c skills.
These data show the increased importance of cyber security, as evidenced by the annual reports of the “Sistema di Informazione per la Sicurezza della Repubblica”5.
The 2010 report is very important because for the ?rst time cyber security was included in the category of Growing Challenges and deemed a matter of national security [27].
Moreover, the 2012 report highlights that the threat landscape is changing, also regarding the use of advanced technologies, “able to have a profound effect on the continuity of functions and vital interests of the country...”.
From here, the role of information policy for security is an essential component of the safeguarding of main national interests.
1 states:  “The critical information infrastructures of national interest are the systems and computer services support-  ing the institutional functions of:  a) Ministries, agencies and supervised authorities, operating in the ?elds of international relations, security,  justice, defence, ?nance, communications, transport, energy, environment, health;  b) Bank of Italy and independent authorities;  c) State-owned companies, regions and metropolitan areas covering at least 500,000 people, operating in the  ?elds of communications, transport, energy, health and water conservation;  d) Any other institution, administrative of?ce, authority, public or private legal person whose business is consid- ered of national interest because of public order or security, by the Minister for the Interior or at the proposal of the prefects - provincial authorities, public security”.
1.3 Critical economic sectors targeted by this report  This report considers the below list of economic sectors sensitive to cyber threats that include the ones in the EU directive n.124 [20] (European Critical Infrastructure) and the ones in a decree issued by the Italian Ministry for the Interior Decree n.101 of 2008[28].
Additionally, following a recent trend that considers the defense of the intellectual property of national industries as a priority for the economy of the nation, we put in the list the industries that are subject to intellectual property theft.
• plants and energy networks, e.g.
power plants, oil and gas plants, depots and re?neries, transmission  and distribution systems;  • communication systems and information technology and computer networks, e.g.
telecommunica-  tions, broadcasting services, software, hardware and networks, including the Internet;  • the ?nancial system: banks; ?nancial infrastructures that facilitate the clearing, settlement and record- ing of monetary and other ?nancial transactions; ?nancial institutions directly connected with their customers, to other ?nancial institution and to their service and utility providers;  • the health care system, e.g.
hospitals, pharmaceutical industry, rescue and emergency;  • food supply (food industry, hygiene safety systems, manufacturing and wholesale distribution);  • water supply, e.g.
reservoirs, storage and treatment of water supplies;  • transportation;  3Assinform is the National Association of Leading Information Technology Companies operating in Italy.
4Gartner is a world leader in consulting and research in the ?eld of information technology.
8  • the production, storage and transportation of hazardous substances, such as chemical or biological  materials;  • the delivery of public services (facilities, information networks, cultural and natural heritage);  • high-tech industry subject to intellectual property theft.
1.4 The cyber threat: current situation and future trends  The critical infrastructure of every country, ranging from oil pipelines to the electricity grid, from gas to water, from transportation, to ?nancial/banking systems, to public services, is increasingly electronically managed.
The progressive introduction of network, monitoring and control systems, as well as the interdependence that has arisen, has certainly improved the performance level of such infrastructure, but it has also allowed access to cyber criminals, with consequent cyber attacks and the increasing risk of a domino effect.
Therefore, the scenario has became more and more complex in recent years, as the introduction of ad- vanced technology added new sources of potential risk alongside the traditional threats.
An effective in- frastructure protection includes threat identi?cation, vulnerability reduction and attack source identi?cation.
The expression cyber threat denotes the set of behaviors that can be carried out in and through cyberspace.
It consists in cyber attacks: actions of individuals, states or organizations, aimed at destroying, damaging or in- terfering with the proper functioning of the systems and networks and/or systems actuators process controlled by them, or violating integrity and con?dentiality of data/information.
Depending on the actors and purposes, we have:  • cyber crime: all the activities with criminal purposes (such as, for example, fraud or wire fraud, identity  theft, the misappropriation of information or creative and intellectual property);  • cyber espionage: wrongful acquisition of sensitive property or classi?ed data or information;  • cyber terrorism: the set of ideologically motivated actions, aimed at in?uencing a country or an interna-  tional organization.
This categorization has a merely descriptive value, it being understood that the contraindicated action has often no peculiar characterization: an intrusion into a computer system, for example, can be instrumental in data theft for pro?t intent (criminal matrix), espionage or terrorism and even, in activities of so called hacktivism or cyber agitation (the use of computers and related systems, with or without the use of techniques of hacking as a form of ideologically motivated protest).
Box V: Cyber threat de?nition [31].
Typically, a cyber attack is launched:  1. to paralyze the critical infrastructure activities;  2. to steal infrastructure information assets.
Cyber threats are important challenges for the country, because they involve both the digital domain and because of their transnational nature.
Cyber threats are not easy to counter: the actors, means, objectives and attack techniques vary continuously (see Box V).
Moreover, the attacks may have different origins:  • cyber crime;  • cyber terrorism;  • cyber espionage.
These attacks may even cause a cyber war, a real con?ict between nations fought trying to paralyze their vital sectors.
In light of the above and of the awareness that this is a  9  continuously changing environment, it is urgent to intervene, at the national level and beyond, against all cyber crime forms, which represent a growing threat to critical infrastructure, society, business and citizens.
In 2012, according to the Verizon 2013 Data Breach In- vestigations Report[52], various sectors were hit by cyber attacks: 37% of the violations were against ?nancial institutions, 24% against retailers and restaurants, and 20% against industry, transport and utilities, and the re- maining percentage were violations against professional and information services.
Vendor  Telco  Contractors/consulting  Security industry  Religion Health  Chemical/Medical  Total  153 97 76 15 26 17 27 11 18 17 0 10 2  469  374 194 175 136 104 59 59 19 15 14 14 11 9  527 291 251 151 130 76 86 30 33 31 14 21 11  1183  1652  144% 100% 130% 807% 300% 247% 119% 73% -17% -18% 100% 10% 350% 152%  Since 2009 the number of criminal and terrorist actions against energy corporations has nearly doubled.
A recent survey [54] conducted by Carnegie Mellon University CyLab and promoted in Italy by AIIC (Association of Italian Experts in Critical Infrastructure) revealed that of 108 companies worldwide, organizations in the ?nancial sector are equipped with the best practices in the ?eld of cyber security and risk management, while companies in the energy and utilities sector have the worst.
Despite more than 90% of organizations adopting risk management, only 33% have the intention to manage security in terms of information risk, 29% showed interest in IT operations and only 13% intend to target the suppliers of software and other services.
As far as Italy is concerned, according to Clusit data [8], in 2012 the government sector was the most at-  tacked sector immediately followed by political organizations and industry (see Figure 1.1).
The Verizon report also revealed that, in 2012, the greatest number of cyber attacks were for economic reasons: 75% of attacks were ?nancial cyber crimes, followed by government espionage campaigns, aimed, primarily, at the theft of intellectual property (government information, trade secrets and technical resources), which determined 20% of cyber threats.
In particular, espionage attacks are not con?ned to government agen- cies and military departments but include production companies, IT and professional organizations.
Analyzing a sample of Italian cyber attacks, Clusit highlights [8] that in 2012 attacks motivated by cyber crime grew more than those related to hacktivism activities (see ?gure 1.2); despite this, attacks due to hacktivists still remain the most substantial portion (67%) of the total.
With regard to types of cyber threats, the McAfee annual report, 2013 Threats Prediction, revealed that mobile devices are already, and will be even more so, in the crosshairs of cyber crime.
The in?uence of the Anonymous group should decrease, while large-scale attacks against critical infrastructure will probably in- crease.
The trend is fueled by the changing technological landscape: smartphones and tablets are becoming very important for every type of service 6.
6Norton (2012) reveals that, compared to 2011, cases directly related to social networks and mobile devices are on the rise, affecting about 21% of the sample of respondents (about 13,000 adults aged between 18 and 64 years in 24 countries).
10  Government  Industry  Figure 1.1: Breakdown of number of attacks (percentage on 129 attacks analyzed) by sector in Italy (source: Clusit, 2012).
On the front of cyber crime, according to data from Symantec [41], in 2012 Italy was ranked ninth globally for the spread of malware and occupies the ?rst place in Europe (and fourth place in the world) for its number of infected PCs controlled by hackers (so-called botnets).
Figure 1.2: Evolution of cyber threat origins in Italy (source: Clusit, 2013).
Even if the percentage of people connected to the Internet in Italy with at least one device [25] is smaller than other EU countries (see ?gure 1.3), in the last year the number of people connected to the Internet (aged between 11 and 74 years old) has reached about 33 millions (+ 8,3% on a yearly basis).
The number of people actively connected to the Internet has also increased consistently on a daily basis (+13.2%), passing from 12 million in 2011 to 14.8 million in 2012.
Furthermore, the number of older people using social networks recorded an increase (see ?gure 1.4) as did the intensity of usage [25].
Speci?cally, the average time spent by Italians on social networks is equal to about one third of total online time during the month (6 hours out of 19).
In general, however, the development of apps and online services will bring more security threats, because, thanks to online services, users perform many more operations directly from their device.
11  Figure 1.3: People networked with at least one device (source: Audiweb, 2012).
Table 1.4: Devices used by Italians to stay connected (source: Audiweb, 2012).
Device  Percentage  Computer  Smartphone  Tablet  Connected TV  Videogame Console  73% 31% 4% 5% 8%  The main cause of the spread of attacks is the limited use of threat protection solutions.
Only 33% of Italian users (the percentage rises to 44% on a global scale) actually uses software able to ensure the necessary security of their data and only 45% of Italian users employ privacy settings to control the information they share with their contacts.
Despite the large and increasing use of the Internet among Italians, there is still a low level of awareness of the risks associated with careless use of the Internet.
Consequently people buy products and services which are inherently insecure, or implement and con?gure in an insecure manner, without any guarantee or protection.
As reported in ?gure 1.5, the main consequence [34] in Italy is that about 44% of PCs are attacked by malware while browsing the Internet, compared with 20% in Denmark [33].
Furthermore, the question of the direct costs generated by the activities of cyber criminals is very impor- tant.
A study conducted by ABI Research estimated that global spending on security will increase to $1.8 billion by 2018, partly as a result of the intensi?cation of electronic defenses with new Internet security solutions related to data center systems and control procedures (see Section 1.5).
In the light of the data provided and given its strength and spread, the cyber threat could be fought on two levels.
On the one hand, it is necessary to enhance international cooperation and create shared terminology, rules and practices in order to respond to any attacks made on a large scale.
On the other hand, it is necessary to build a national strategic framework for cyber security.
In this direction, in Europe, the following two most urgent objectives have been identi?ed: to increase the awareness of key risks related to cyber security and to improve European and national preparedness and re- sponse capabilities to cyber attacks or incidents.
Both with respect to the ?rst objective and with reference to European initiatives against cyber crime, the European Commission will support dialogue between the mem- ber states and between them and the European Community institutions, as well as between the key players in the public and private sector.
the aforemen-  12  Figure 1.4: Italy and social networks (source: Audiweb, 2012).
Figure 1.5: Percentage of personal computer attacked by malware while browsing the Internet (source: Kasper- sky Lab, 2012).
13  22 3.7 3.7 3.3 1.9 FacebookTwitterGoogle+LinkedInBadooSocial Network Users (mln) 15% 19% 13% 14% 20% 11% 6.5% 0-1819-2425-2930-3536-4546-55Over 5611% 29% 22% 18% 12% 3.5% 1.2% Social Network Users by Age Dec 08 Dec 12 tioned ENISA, the European Agency for Network Security and Information and Europol, the European Police Of?ce, which oversees the European Platform for Cyber crime, whose function it is to facilitate the collection, exchange and analysis of information on cyber crimes among the member states.
With regard to operational aspects, the reaction to attacks or cyber incidents varies considerably between EU member states.
According to the Norton Cybercrime Report [37] (September 2012), which analyzes the impact of cyber crime on consumer users, the total net cost of consumer cyber crime in Italy in the previous 12 months amounts to 2.45 billion euros, whereas the cost at global level amounts to $110 billion (about 85 billion euros).
The report estimates the number of cyber crime victims to be 8.9 million people, about one third of Internet users active in Italy in 2012 [8].
In particular, Norton registers an increasing number of victims among mobile and social network users, suggesting that cyber crime is evolving towards new technologies.
Indeed, approximately 17% of adults in Italy have been victim of social or mobile cyber crime in 2012, and about 10% of social network users have had someone hack into their pro?le.
In the business context, an analysis led by the Ponemon Institute[38] estimates the cost of data breach in Italy, in terms of direct, indirect and opportunity costs incurred by an organization in response to data breach.
As shown in ?gure 1.6, the average cost per record incurred by Italian organizations is 78 euros.
This cost is mainly due to abnor- mal turnover in customers (a higher than average loss of customers for the organization) and reputation loss.
Indeed, customers often abandon the organization after a data breach.
The Microsoft Security Intelligence Report [36] contains interesting statistics on software vulnerabilities and malicious software in Italy and worldwide, related to the period July through December 2012.
CCM represents a useful metric to measure infection rates.
15  CHAPTER  2  Cyber Security: Italian Governance and Legislative Overview  The intrinsic characteristics of cyber security require a national strategic plan for critical infrastructure protec- tion organizations and the identi?cation of practices to realize this as well as response actions to threats with technical and organizational tools able to face the new socio-technological context and the new interdepen- dencies produced by cyberspace.
In other words, a governance of cyber security.
The growing number of threats and security breaches has already caused considerable economic damage, leading to reduced user con?dence in the use of new services and technologies and hindering the development of electronic commerce and the realization of the so called digital agenda in Italy.
In fact in this area Italy presents a slight delay in the de?nition of the governance of cyber security.
Even though the cyber security issue has been debated since early 2000, signi?cant improvements in the identi?cation of a road-map for the implementation of a national Italian strategy have been observed only recently.
2.1 Actors involved in cyber security governance  This section describes the legislative landscape during the last decade and the assets that now are leading the process of making Italy a secure place from cyber threats.
378/September 1999, D.M 28 September 2001, D.M January 2003) The Inter- Ministerial decree of 21 September, 1999 established a working group made up of representatives from the Ministry of Communications (Ministero delle Comunicazioni), Ministry of Justice (Ministero della Giustizia), and Ministry of Interior (Ministero dell’Interno), with the task of operating in the sector of network security and communications protection as a support to administrative and regulatory interventions.
To achieve these goals the working group mainly dealt with internationally harmonized regulations in the telecommunication sector.
In 2003, the working group became the Permanent Observatory for Network and Communications Protec- tion and Security (Osservatorio permanente per la sicurezza e la tutela delle reti e delle comunicazioni) within the Ministry of Economic Development (Ministero dello Sviluppo Economico).
Its aim is to take into account the technological and regulatory evolution of the different aspects of the telecommunications sector, with particular attention to security.
17  In October 2001, the Technical Interdepartmental Committee of Civil Defense (Commissione Inter Minis- teriale Tecnica della Difesa Civile - CITDC) was established as a political and military unit (supporting Nucleo Politico Militare) supporting organ for the technical coordination of civil defense activities in case of crises.
It has the role of evaluating emergencies and planning the measures to be taken in the event of crisis.
The committee also considers other hypotheses of risk, not directly related to malicious acts, which can lead to situations of crisis for the continuity of government as well as damage to the population and, in general, the security of the country.
In this sense, the committee and the department delve into the issues related to critical infrastructure and, in close collaboration with the Ministry of Health, the management of a crisis produced by the spread of serious epidemic diseases.
In March 2003, the Ministry for Innovation and Technology established the Working Group on CIIP , in which representatives from ministries involved in critical infrastructure management (Interior, Infrastructure, Communication, etc.
In March 2004, this working group issued the document Critical Information Infrastructure Protection: The Italian Situation, in which the results of work carried out during the previous year are reported.
n. 155 of 31/7/05) In 2005, the Ministry of Communication established a special working group to analyze the responsibilities and security requirements that CII imposes on communication infras- tructure operators, and to analyze the dependencies of the latter on other critical infrastructure.
This working group has issued several guidelines1.
As far as critical information infrastructure protection is concerned, the legislative decree (D.L.)
n. 155 of 31/7/05 (the so called Legge Pisanu) conferred jurisdiction to the Ministry of Interior, identifying the Postal and Communications Police as the unit responsible for law enforcement initia- tives against cyber attacks on critical information infrastructures  In 2005 by Legislative Decree n.82/7 (March 2005) the Digital Administration Code (CAD) (Codice dell’amministrazione digitale) was introduced as a primary point of reference for the Italian PA sector; the code constitutes the necessary premise for implementing the process of digitalization of administrative activities as a prerequisite for real modernization of public bodies.
Since 2005 several working groups have been set up by DigitPA for the implementation of CAD and documentation related to the following topics:  • Formation and conservation of an electronic document system and management of document ?ows;  • Digital identity;  • Access to PA data;  • Business continuity and critical infrastructure in the PA sector;  • Digital signatures.
Tavolo PIC assigned the CITDC to set the CI identi?cation criteria and has determined, from time to time,  the national position on the initiatives and activities in the EU and other international forums.
1The Network Security of Critical Infrastructures (2005); Network Security: From Risk Analysis to Protection Strategies  (2005); Guideline on Managing Local Emergencies (2006).
18  2008 (CNAIPIC) To improve the protection of critical information infrastructures against cyber threats, in 2008 the Ministry of the Interior established the National Anti-Cybercrime Center for the Protection of Criti- cal Infrastructure (Centro Nazionale Anticrimine Informatico per la Protezione delle Infrastrutture Critiche - CNAIPIC) as a special unit within the Postal and Communication Police Service [28].
For this purpose CNAIPIC and critical infrastructures maintain and protect exclusive dedicated ICT links, for a mutual and constant shar- ing of data and information relevant to the assessment, prevention and repression of threats and cyber crime (see Box VII).
In 2012, the CNAIPIC managed a total of 286 events relating to the damage of critical information infrastructures of national interest (private and institutional).
In particular, the Operations Room of the CNAIPIC managed:  • 136 DDOS attacks or defacement, against internet services related to institutional sites and critical in-  formation infrastructure of national interest;  • 61 intrusions and unauthorized access to computer systems related to critical infrastructure or institu-  tional databases;  • 51 compromised authentication credentials on the computer systems of critical infrastructure, imple-  mented through computer viruses and BOTNETS.
The service is organized into distinct areas of intervention which include [30]:  • Cyber terrorism;  • Copyright;  • Hacking;  • Critical infrastructure protection;  • E-banking;  • Analysis of emerging criminal phenomena;  • Betting and gaming systems on line.
Furthermore, the Unit of Cybercrime Analysis (Unità d’analisi del crimine informatico - UACI) was established, within the service, to study and analyze the phenomenon of cyber crime in partnership with major Italian universities.
Territorial departments have an organization similar to this service, but with a more operative pro?le and more bounded to their jurisdictions.
These departments manage the legal cases and the emergencies that arise from reports made by citizens to police hot lines.
In order to enhance the effectiveness of strategy against cyber crime, the Communications Police partic- ipate with some of its representatives in permanent working groups established by the government or inter- national organizations, including the Inter Ministerial Group for Network Security (Gruppo Inter Ministeriale per la sicurezza delle reti), G8, the European Community, the Council of Europe, OCSE, Interpol, Europol.
In addition to the aspects of civil protection associated with risk CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear), SCIIC is responsible for coordinating Inter-Ministerial activities (including those of an international context) which regard critical infrastructure.
The SCIIC is under the control of Military Adviser to the President of the Council of Ministers.
2010 (DPCM 5 May 2010) In 2010, by decree, the President of the Council of Ministers established the Or- ganization for Crises Management, which led to a reorganization of the crises management system by creating new bodies, such as:  • (art.
It is chaired by the prime minister and is composed of the Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, Interior, Treasury, Economic Development; It meets exclusively during a state of crisis, and builds on the results of the pre-decisional phase undertaken by the technical staff.
The NISP, which replaced the Political Military Unit, is a non-permanent body which systematically moni- tors the national and international security situation to foresee and prevent possible crisis.
In the event of an international crisis or attack (including CBRN) involving more than one critical infras- tructure, the prime minister who is in charge of operations, uses CoPS’s structures and coordinates with CPS (Comitato Politico Strategico) and NISP; the latter one cooperates with CITDC in order to manage the emer- gency involving civil defense.
It has the task of looking after the inter ministerial coordination of all national and international activities and of all technical and scienti?c activities for the identi?cation and designation of ECI.
The decree made the NISP responsible for the individuation and designation of an ECI, and integrates its composition with representatives of the ministries involved (Economic Development, Infrastructure and Transportation, Interior, Foreign Affairs, and Civil Pro- tection Department).
From an operating point of view, the infrastructure’s operator, with the support of representatives of the ministries involved and the responsible structure, draws up the Operator Security Plan (on the basis of the minimum requirements stated by Annex B of the decree) PSO.
The PSO identi?es critical infrastructure assets and which security solutions exist or are being implemented for their protection.
At procedural level it covers: the identi?cation of important assets; risk analysis based on major threat scenarios, vulnerability of each asset, and potential impact; identi?cation, selection and prioritization of counter-measures and procedures with a distinction between permanent security measures and graduated security measures.
A secrecy classi?cation, according to in force legislation, is also attributed to sensitive information related to CI.
The decree covers infrastructure investments, support for easier creation and development of start-up companies, ?nancing schemes for small and medium sized enterprises and broadband deployment in speci?c areas.
As far as the government is concerned, it addresses open data, digital identities, electronic health records, electronic student records and measures to make the judicial system more ef?cient by increasing the use of electronic communication and online noti?cations.
Only 20% of it is interoperable and individual authorities, in- cluding for reasons of hanging on to power, claim dif?culties in pooling information.
ADI stresses the importance of investment in infrastructure aimed at improved access to faster network for the population.
It also stresses the need to ensure the safety and reliability of the infrastruc- ture through the establishment of more ef?cient networks which ensure high quality service and by building structures dedicated to their preservation and protection (see Box VIII).
According to ADI, the national cyber security strategy plans to act on the following areas:  • Educate citizens, business and industry: raising awareness of the serious risks related to the web (e.g.
the UK initiative Get Safe Online, a public-private online campaign to raise awareness);  • Enhance threats detection and contrast tools: develop tools (organizations, processes, legislation and applications) able to detect and contrast potential threats (e.g.
the National Cyber Security Centre of the Netherlands will adopt tools to enhance awareness and classi?cation of threats and vulnerabilities through public-private information sharing);  • Promote education: create education paths able to provide the necessary competences from early school years (e.g.
the United States has issued a draft plan, National Initiative for Cyber Security Education Strategic Plan, which outlines the educational steps, from primary school, for a career in cyber security);  • Strengthen public-private cooperation: create mechanisms of debate, sharing and coordination be- tween the public and private sectors, especially with regard to critical infrastructure protection (e.g.
Ger- many, in its strategy, envisaged a National Cyber Security Council where representatives of the private sectors are asked to participate as associated members);  • Strengthen mechanisms of international cooperation: involvement in international forums for the dis- cussion of standards, policy and international principles on cyber security (e.g.
the Czech republic’s strategy envisages an active participation in EU and NATO forums);  • Create and enhance mechanisms for incident response: it is necessary to enhance, through the estab- lishment of national CERTs and, in some cases, to create, specialized structures able to respond to cyber attacks and incidents within national boundaries and able to coordinate with the corresponding centers at international level.
• De?ne a standard for the management of digital identities as well as for guiding principles for the cre- ation of a federated system at national and international level, able to satisfy the daily needs of digital citizens, including improved security for Internet payment systems.
• Stimulate the growth of an Italian cyber security industry, concerning both technology/services, and skills and talents.
Box VIII: ADI line of action on Italian cyber security [23].
It is responsible for the implementation of the objectives of the Italian Digital Agenda, taking into account the European Digital Agenda and the guidelines developed by the Steering Committee (Cabina di regia, Article 47 of Decree-Law 9 February 2012, n. 5).
21  2012-2013 (Law 133/2012, DPCM 24 March 2013) Two other regulatory measures, adopted between 2012 and 2013, contribute to de?ning organization and strategy for national cyber security.
Law 133/2012 attributes new and more detailed responsibility in the ?eld of national cyber defense and security to the Italian intelligence system.
For instance this law gives the prime minister the power to issue directives to the Intelligence and Security Department (Dipartimento informazioni per la sicurezza - DIS)5, after prior consultation with the Inter Ministerial Committee for the Security of the Republic (CISR)6, and to the security intelligence services in order to strengthen security intelligence activities for the protection of critical infrastructure, with particular reference to national cyber defense and security.
Regarding DIS, it will coordinates intelligence activities directed at strengthening national cyber defense and security.
The DPCM 24 January 20137 de?nes the institutional architecture tasked with safeguarding national secu- rity in relation to critical infrastructure and intangible assets, with particular attention to the protection of cy- ber security and national security.
The decree responds to the need to de?ne a national strategic framework capable of protecting critical infrastructure from cyber attacks.
Crisis management (level 3).
More speci?cally,  A. the decree assigns the prime minister the responsibility for the adoption (on the basis of CISR’s proposal) of the national strategic framework and a national plan (deliberated by CISR) to ensure cyberspace security; the prime minister has also the power to issue directives (after prior consultation with the CISR) to the DIS and to the security intelligence agencies in order to strengthen security intelligence activities for the protection of critical infrastructure, with particular reference to national cyber defense and security.
B. the decree assigns to the CISR the responsibility of deliberating the following activities:  1. overseeing the implementation of the National Plan to Secure Cyberspace;  2. approving the guidelines to facilitate effective collaboration between institutional and private operators interested in cyber security, aimed at information sharing, best practices adoption and de?nition of measures directed to cyber security:  • the elaboration of general and fundamental objectives in the ?eld of cyber security to be pursued in the context of information policy for the security of the organizations involved in information security;  • promoting the adoption of the necessary steps to ensure, in a coordinated manner, the full par- ticipation of Italy at various international cooperation forums (both bilaterally and multilaterally, both the EU and NATO), for the de?nition and adoption of policies and prevention and response strategies;  • the elaboration of proposals for legislation and organization necessary to improve measures for  prevention and response to cyber threat, and for crisis handling.
5By Law n. 124/2007, DIS supports the President of the Council of Ministers to ensure a fully uni?ed approach in the Security Intelligence System’s planning of intelligence collection as well as in the Security Intelligence Services’ analyses and operational activities.
6Law n. 124/2007, CISR makes proposals and take decisions regarding the lines and general goals of security intelli- gence, also setting intelligence requirements.
The CISR consist of: the President of the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Economy and Finance, the Minister of Economic Development.
22  C. The decree reinforces the role ceded by DIS, which is in charge of coordinating intelligence agencies in  order to reinforce cyber security.
Its main tasks are:  • to prepare all meetings regarding cyber security;  • to grant all preliminary investigations regarding CISR’s decision and acts;  • to monitor the implementation of the national plan to ensure cyberspace security, guaranteeing the  effectiveness of all private and public organizations involved.
Interestingly the Collegial Co-ordinating Body has the task inter alia of identifying potential threats and vulnerabilities to national systems (both private and public) and de?ning the best practices with the help of a scienti?c committee which has been set-up at the Intelligence System Training School (Scuola di formazione del Sistema di Intelligence).
research, industry etc.)
On the basis of guidelines provided by CISR and information provided by all parties involved (PA, Intelligence Information system, Nu- cleus for Cyber Security, Scienti?c Committee) the Collegial Co-ordinating Body coordinates the formulation of the necessary indications in order to identify and recognize vulnerabilities in cyberspace; and to adopt best practices and security measures.
In addition to the above, it is worth mentioning the setting up of a so-called Nucleus for Cyber Security (Nucleo per la sicurezza cibernetica) within the Military Adviser’s Of?ce.
It is a permanent body responsible for maintaining links and coordination between the different components of the institutional architecture involved in various capacities in the ?eld of cyber security, in accordance with the powers conferred by law to each of them.
Members of National Intelligence, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Economic Development, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Civil Protection and the Digital Agency are part of the Nucleus for Cyber Security.
The nucleus, among other activities, will:  a) promote the planning of the response to crisis situations by both government and private stakeholders and the development of all necessary procedures for inter-ministerial coordination, ?tting in with the schedules of Civil Defense and Civil Protection;  b) assess and promote procedures for information sharing, including with private stakeholders, for the dis-  semination of alerts relating to cyber events and crisis handling;  c) promote and coordinate cyber security exercises, both Inter-Ministerial and at international level, involving  the simulation of events.
The inter ministerial body is chaired by the prime minister’s military advisor and will include representatives of all the institutions involved.
The decree establishes that private  operators8 (as required by this law or by prior special agreement) have to:  a) communicate to the Nucleus for Cyber Security - also via institutionally authorized assets as per Article 16- bis, paragraph 2, letter b) of Legislative Decree n. 259/2003 - of each and every security or integrity breach of their software systems, using protected broadcast channels;  b) use the best practices and cyber security measures de?ned in Article 16-bis, paragraph 1, letter a), of Leg-  islative Decree n. 259/2003 and Article 5, paragraph 3, letter d) of this decree;  c) supply information to security information bodies and grant access to their data bases for the purpose of  the respective cyber security, in the cases provided by Law n. 124/2007.
23  d) assist in managing cybernetic crises by helping to restore the working order of systems and networks that  they manage.
Private-public partnerships are crucial for mitigating cyber risks and fostering collaboration to improve cy- ber resilience.
These include information sharing initiatives which help government and businesses prevent, protect, deter and recover from cyber threats.
While partnerships have been established, several challenges still prevent stakeholders from reaping the full bene?ts of information sharing.
The need to build trust among parties and share actionable information is crucial.
Jurisdictional boundaries, the fear of being held liable, and the quality and quantity of information shared still represent major barriers to information sharing.
Im- portant progress has been made in using and promoting information sharing organizations.
However, some challenges still limit the information ?ow between the public and private sectors.
While many organizations recognize the importance of information-sharing, some observe that there are still gaps regarding the “how, what, when and to whom” [42].
Several factors, such as challenges related to the management and organiza- tion of the group, the risk of a damaged reputation, legal repercussions and the lack of clear agreements and expectations, may explain why the current environment is not fully effective [10].
2.2 Emergency response: focus on CERTs  A computer emergency response team (CERT) can be de?ned as an organization responsible for setting up a framework for responding to cyber security incidents.
It provides the necessary services for handling incidents and supports its constituents in their recovery from breaches of computer security.
In order to mitigate risks and to minimize the number of required responses, many CERTs also provide preventative and educational services for their constituents.
More recently the term CSIRT which stands for Computer Security Incident Response Team is starting to replace CERT.
It invokes a more holistic approach to security rather than relying only on reactive forces.
The reason for this is that government agencies are interested in protecting national security and universities by their very nature try to ?nd solutions to new problems.
After the Morris Worm paralyzed a good portion of the Internet in 1988, CERT/CC at Carnegie Mellon University was started under a US government contract.
The main goal of a na- tional CERT, from a cyber security perspective, is to protect national and economic security, the ongoing oper- ations of a government, and the ability of critical infrastructure to continue to function.
Therefore a national CERT typically monitors incidents at a national level, identi?es incidents that could affect critical infrastruc- ture, warns critical stakeholders about computer security threats, and helps to build organizational CERTs in the public and private sectors.
Typical tasks of national CERTs include:  • establishing a national point of reference within a country or region to coordinate security incident  management activities;  • analyzing and synthesizing information on incidents and vulnerabilities disseminated by other CERTs, vendors and technology experts to provide an assessment for their own constituents and communities;  • facilitating communications across a diverse area, in order to bring together multiple sectors (govern- ment and military, critical services and infrastructures, commercial, academic, banking and ?nance, transportation, etc) to share information and collaborate in addressing computer security problems, such as widespread computer security incidents, threats and vulnerabilities;  • developing protocols and mechanisms for trusted interaction with other relevant stakeholders such as  the intelligence community, law enforcement agencies, policymakers, etc.
24  Table 2.1: Taxonomy of private-public information sharing system  Levels of communication  Information type  information sharing lifecycle  Strategic: The exchange of cyber security risk information among organiza- tions enable companies and governments to develop a full plan to improve cyber resilience based on best practices and lessons learned from others, or to partner in the creation of a broader national plan.
Operational: The exchange of data needs to be integrated into the organi- zation’s on-going risk management practices and policies.
Operationally, the organization should also have routine points of contact with major partners, vendors, suppliers and customers to exchange information and receive re- ports about incidents or issues, preferably through a center of excellence for operational risk and security issues.
It is critical that com- panies have clear and trusted points of contact with whatever information sharing clearing house it may use (Information Sharing and Analysis Centers, Computer Emergency Response Teams, a national incident management ca- pability, a local law enforcement agency, etc.)
so that when a cyber incident begins, the organization can draw on known contacts and familiar processes until a normal operational state is achieved.
Threats: The exchange of comprehensive and timely alerts and information on attacks can help private and public organizations determine the nature of an attack, implement a mitigation strategy or advise others on how to re- spond to an imminent attack.
It enables an organization to gather the most up-to-date threat data, integrate it in their systems and processes, make real- time decisions and take defensive actions.
Vulnerabilities: Sharing information about vulnerabilities and new discov- eries helps organizations address weaknesses before they are exploited and shift from reactive to proactive security measures.
Sharing information on known and “?xable” issues can also be important, as a matter of good corpo- rate citizenship.
Preventive: A preventive approach enables an organization to assess the cur- rent threats and de?ne a set of capabilities that should be met when imple- menting its cyber risk management program.
Real time: To ensure such a response, an organization needs to establish a systematic approach to manage alerts, oversee the network attacks and monitor responses to incidents.
Some organizations are already using one or more real-time sources to react against cyber attacks.
Post event: Information sharing may also relate to a cyber incident that is no longer active.
It enables an organization to take advantage of lessons learned from other organizations and integrate these in its cyber risk management program.
As such, an organization is able to improve its response mecha- nisms and prevent future threats and attacks.
Source: based on World Economic Forum (June2012)9  25  The main regulatory intervention on emergency response strategy and crisis management is basically made up of the aforementioned decree of 24 January 2013.
The decree ?xes the role and responsibility of all bodies and organizations involved in national critical infrastructure security protection by de?ning:  • all tasks and responsibilities assigned to each member,  • procedures to be followed in order to reduce vulnerability, to improve risk prevention, to provide timely response to attacks and to allow for the immediate restoration of the functionality of systems in the event of a crisis.
The government’s intentions were those of providing the organizational-functional model for a full inte-  gration between the activities pertaining to:  • the Ministry of Economic Development and the Agency for Digital Italy,  • the structures the Ministry of Defense dedicated to the protection of their networks and systems,  • the structures of the Ministry of the Interior dedicated to the prevention and combating of cyber crime  and civil defense, and those of civil protection.
However, even after this further regulatory intervention, the national CERT is still far from a concrete implementation.
It is easy to assume that the national CERT should be developed according to public-private model, in order to bene?t from the exchange of good practices, from the sharing of information, and in order to implement a body which does not result in the need for further ?nancing.
In fact, for the effective imple- mentation of the actions outlined above, it plays central role in information sharing, as no person, though endowed with great resources, can build a security system in total autonomy.
The national CERT should, therefore, be based on a cooperative model between public and private, which is essential for rapidly building processes and services of information sharing and mutual support in case of accident management on a large scale[53].
Looking at the international experiences, the CERTs generally tend to bene?t enormously from the close connection with the academic world; CERTs in fact, can exploit academy’s capacity to produce the most innovative solutions in the ?eld of secure information and in educa- tion.
The E-government 2012 Information Security Plan foresees the stabilization and strengthening of the CERT of the Connectivity Public System (CERT del Sistema Pubblico di Connettività - CERT-SPC) within Dig- itPA.
The structure acts as a national contact point for the prevention, monitoring, coordination of information and analysis of security incidents within the Public Connectivity Services.
Proactive services, such as the organization and monitoring of information sources, the production of newsletters for the members (early warning) and the preparation of operational tools for information management;  2.
Operating activities, such as coordination and information support during the occurrence of cyber in-  cidents;  3.
From an operating point of view, the CERT-SPC acts as a central organ of the public administration struc- ture through the Local Security Unit (Unità Locali di Sicurezza - ULS).
The ULS are established in each domain related to SPC, in conjunction with the Security Operation Center (SOC), and provide access to a federated SPC network to oversee operational management and service continuity.
Such CERTs, however, seem in some cases  26  Table 2.2: List of private-public information sharing system as reported by ENISA web site (June 2013)  Name  Website  Date  TI Status  First Membership  Area  CERT-IT  GARR-CERT  http://www.galileo.it/ crypto/cert-it.htm www.cert.garr.it  S2OC*  CERT ENEL*  CERT-RAFVG  SICEI-CERT*  tele-  www.tuconti.
comitalia.it www.enel.it/attivita/ servizi_diversi?cati/ informatica/cert cert- rafvg.regione.fvg.it/ cert.chiesacattolica.it/  1Q 1994  Not listed  Not member  01/03/1999  Accredited  Not member  Not speci?ed  Not listed  Not member  Research and Educa- tion Research and Educa- tion ISP Customer Base  Not speci?ed  Not listed  Not member  Energy Sector  Not speci?ed  Not listed  Not member  Local Agencies  Not speci?ed  Not listed  Not member  Dioceses of Catholic church  inactive or there is a lack of information necessary for understanding the activity which is actually performed.
For example, no information was found on the existence of the CERTs listed in the table which are marked with an asterisk.
27  CHAPTER  3  Cyber Security Strategy in EU and Some Developed Countries  The maintenance of a good level of cyber security in the EU context involves disparate sectors with different jurisdictions and responsibilities, both at national and EU level.
Managing cyber security through centralized supervision at European level is not feasible.
National governments have the main responsibility for the main- tenance of a good level of security and must cooperate at EU level in case of risks and security breaches that extend beyond national boundaries.
The structures involved in the maintenance of cyber security are organized in three fundamental areas: Network and Information Security (NIS), law enforcement and defense.
At national level member states should have already, or as a result of the European cyber security strategy, national structures in each of the aforemen- tioned areas (see ?gure 3.1).
The European strategy invites member states to encourage information sharing between national struc- tures involved in cyber security and the private sector, so that they can have both a comprehensive vision of risks and security threats, and a better comprehension of cyber crime techniques so as to respond more rapidly and effectively.
Figure 3.1: EU cyber security strategy: Interacting organizations at national and EU level [16].
Several organizations are involved at EU level.
In the NIS area, the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), established in 2004, is responsible for improving network and information security.
ENISA will also be responsible for building expertise in se- curity of industrial control systems, transport and energy infrastructure.
A Computer Emergency Response Team at EU level (CERT-EU), responsible for the security of the IT systems of EU agencies and institutions, was established in 2012.
Furthermore, in March 2009, the European Commission established the European Public-Private Partner- ship for Resilience (EP3R) with the objective of encouraging sharing of NIS related information between inter- ested parties in the public and private sector at European level.
In the area of law enforcement, in 2013, the European Cyber Crime Centre (EC3) was formed within Europol to represent the European focal point of ?ght against cyber crime.
In particular, EC3 will provide analysis and intelligence, support investigations, provide high level forensics and facilitate cooperation and information sharing between the competent authorities of member states, the private sector and other stakeholders.
Europol/EC3 and Eurojust will cooperate closely to improve their capability in ?ghting cyber crime.
In the area of defense, the main responsibility for cyber defense at EU level is the European Defence Agency (EDA).
The European strategy for cyber security sup- ports cooperation and information sharing between these organizations, in particular ENISA, Europol/EC3 and EDA, and between these and their counterparts at national level.
Finally, at international level the European Commission and the member states engage in dialogue with international partners and organizations such as the Council of Europe, OECD, OSCE, NATO and UN.
A list of national cyber security strategies can be found here [19].
3.1 Germany  The German Federal Government provides a substantial contribution to cyber security, maintaining and pro- moting economic and social prosperity in Germany.
The latest German strategy, 2011, mainly focuses on civilian approaches and measures.
These are complemented by the measures undertaken by the armed forces (Bundeswehr) aimed at protecting its capabilities and measures based on mandates to include cyber security as part of the preventive security strategy.
The global nature of information and communication technologies raises the necessity for an international vision and coordination on security policy aspects with the aim of enhancing cyber security capabilities of the international community.
For this purpose, Germany cooperates with the United Nations, the European Union, the Council of Europe, Nato, G8, OCSE and other international organizations.
The German strategic plan is organized in 10 speci?c strategic areas:  1.
Protection of CII (Critical Information Infrastructure).
Thus, protecting such infras- tructures is the primary objective of cyber security.
In order to support CIIs protection the introduction of new technologies is taken into consideration by the plan.
Cooperation and information sharing be- tween public and private sectors is also a priority.
Security of IT systems.
Germany aims to support security of IT systems with an informative intervention, to provide citizens and small and medium-sized businesses with consistent information concerning risks related to the use of IT systems, and by promoting the use of fundamental security functions, such as electronic proof of identity and De-mail1, which are certi?ed by the state.
Furthermore, providers will have to make available to clients a basic collection of security products and services and might be subject to greater responsibilities.
Strengthening IT security in the public administration.
The German plan for strengthening IT security in the public administration includes the creation of a common, uniform and secure network infrastructure in the federal administration to serve as the basis for electronic audio and data communications.
Creation of a National Cyber Response Centre.
The National Cyber Response Centre aims to optimize cooperation between state authorities, thus im- proving response to IT incidents.
Information sharing on vulnerabilities, form of attacks and pro?les of  1De-mail is a German government communication service similar to the Italian certi?ed e-mail service (Posta Elet-  tronica Certi?cata - PEC).
30  attackers allow the National Cyber Response Centre to analyze IT incidents and provide recommenda- tions for action to be taken in response to incidents.
To favor readiness for IT incidents, the National Cyber Response Centre will submit recommendations to the National Cyber Security Council both reg- ularly and when speci?c incidents occur.
In case of cyber security incidents that reach the level of a crisis the National Cyber Response Centre will directly inform the crisis management staff headed by the State Secretary at the Federal Ministry of the Interior.
Creation of a National Cyber Security Council.
The National Cyber Security Council will coordinate preventive tools and the interdisciplinary cyber se- curity approaches of the public and private sector.
Effective crime control in cyberspace.
The German strategic plan envisages the strengthening of the capabilities in ?ghting cyber crime of law enforcement agencies, the Federal Of?ce for Information Security and the private sector.
To deal with global cyber crime Germany will make an effort to achieve global harmonization in criminal law based on the Council of Europe Cyber Crime Convention, and will also examine whether new conventions on cyber crime should be adopted at UN level.
Effective coordinated action to ensure cyber security in Europe and worldwide.
The German federal government recognizes the importance to conform to European and international standards related to cyber security.
At European Union level Germany adopts measures based on an extension and moderate enlargement of the mandate of ENISA.
Germany intends to shape its external cyber security policy so that German interests and ideas concerning cyber security will be pursued by international organizations, such as United Nations, OSCE, the Council of Europe, OECD and NATO.
Use of reliable and trustworthy information technology.
Given the importance of availability and reliability of IT systems, Germany intends to increase research into IT security and critical information infrastructure protection, in particular, by further developing its technologies in these areas.
Moreover, Germany approves diversity in technology, combining, when necessary, its own resources alongside those of its partners and allies, favoring the use of technologies certi?ed by international standards.
Personnel development in federal authorities.
One of the priorities of the Federal government is to examine whether authorities require additional staff to enhance cyber security.
In order to improve inter ministerial cooperation it will favor personnel exchange between federal authorities, providing appropriate staff training measures.
Tools to respond to cyber attacks.
In order to achieve an adequate preparedness against cyber attacks, the German Government recog- nizes the importance of the creation, in collaboration with the speci?c state authorities, of a collection of tools to effectively respond to cyber attacks.
The objective of the German government is the sustainable implementation of these strategic objectives to ensure freedom and prosperity in Germany.
Technologies used in the area of IT security have short innovation cycles.
Thus, the German Federal Government will periodically verify whether the objectives of the strategic plan have been achieved, under the control of the National Cyber Security Council, and will conform them, if necessary, to national and international requirements.
3.2 France  The French president ?rst presented the French strategy on defense and national security in June 2008 with the French White Paper on Defense and National Security.
Given the unexpected emergence of cyberspace in the ?eld of national security, in 2009 the government set up the French Network and Information Security Agency (Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information - ANSSI)2.
In 2010 the president decided to give the agency, in addition to its security role, the responsibility for the defense of information systems.
2009-834 of 7 July 2009 creating the French Network and Information Security Agency* (ANSSI).
31  • Becoming a cyber defense world power;  • Safeguarding France’s ability to make decisions through the protection of information related to its  sovereignty;  • Strengthening the cyber security of critical national infrastructures;  • Ensuring security in cyberspace.
Monitor the latest technology developments in order to understand and even anticipate the actions of public or private actors.
France is developing detection capability for attacks on information systems deployed within the ministry networks for enabling the personnel to be alerted, assess the nature of attacks and create countermeasures.
• Enhance and perpetuate French scienti?c, technical, industrial and human capabilities in order to maintain independence.
Driving forward research into cryptology, formal methods and other security- related areas, creating cyber defense research centers in collaboration with industrial partners.
Strategic investment funds will be provided by the state in order to promote the strengthening of industry.
• Protect the information systems of the nation and of the critical infrastructures to ensure better national resilience.
The French strategy on security products and components has been rede?ned in order to take account of France re-joining NATO integrated command.
Robust authentication systems will be integrated in the ministerial networks having a signi?cant impact on the level of security.
A public- private partnership will be set up in order to enhance the security of information systems of operators of critical infrastructures.
The operators will bene?t from the information gathered by the state on threat analysis and the State will be able to ensure the appropriate level of protection of the infrastructure that is crucial to keep the country running properly.
• Adapt French legislation to incorporate technological developments and new practices: new rules to protect information systems and alert government authorities in case of incidents regarding operators of electronic communications.
Enforcement of the General Security Framework in order to raise the protection level of the information systems of the public authorities.
• Develop international collaboration initiatives in the areas of information systems security, cyber de- fense and the ?ght against cyber crime in order to better protect national information systems: pro- mote the sharing of essential data (information on vulnerabilities, services, threats) by establishing a wide network of foreign partners.
• Communicate, inform and raise understanding by the French population of the extent of the challenges related to information systems security: ensure the awareness and motivation of individuals and orga- nizations; ANSSI will conduct appropriate communication campaigns targeting the general public and companies.
3.3 United Kingdom  The UK strategy builds on more than ten years of development.
The ?rst step was carried out in 2001 by the Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG).
This group recognized the increasing use of online services required the development of security measures to protect data and recommended the appointment of a central sponsor for information assurance of government data.
Therefore, the government published its ?rst national strategy in 2004, in which a network of Senior Information Risk Owners was established.
In 2009, the government recognized the risk of cyber threats and published its ?rst cyber security strategy.
In 2010 the government ranked cyber attacks as a key risk for national security and announced a fund of 650 million pounds for a four-year National Cyber Security Programme.
Since 2011 the Cabinet Of?ce has been responsible for cyber security.
The most recent strategy was published in 2011 and set out how the government planned to deliver the National Cyber Security Programme until 2015.
]:  32  • Tackling cyber crime and making the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business;  • Making the UK more resilient to cyber attack and better able to protect its interests in cyberspace;  • Helping shape an open, stable and vibrant cyberspace which the UK public can use safely and which  supports an open society;  • Building the UK’s cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all cyber security objectives.
Six central departments and nine government organizations are responsible for delivery: Home Of?ce, Serious Organized Crime Agency, Child Exploitation and Online Protection, Police Central e-crime Unit, Police force, National Fraud Authority, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Technology Strategy Board, UK Trade and Investment, the Cabinet Of?ce, the Intelligence and Security Agencies, Ministry of Defense, Department for Culture, Media and Sport, Foreign and Commonwealth Of?ce.
CPNI protects national security by providing protective security advice, in terms of personnel security, physical security and cyber security.
Policy considerations are one of the building blocks of the mechanism of protective security advice provided by CPNI.
In particular, several government policies in?uence CPNI’s work:  • National security strategy: Establishes the strategies aimed at reacting effectively and rapidly to secu- rity threats, such as: acts of terrorism, attacks on UK cyberspace, natural accidents and disasters and international military crises that involve the United Kingdom and its allies.
• Strategic defense and security review: Establishes how the objectives of the national security strategy  have to be pursued.
• Counter terrorism strategy: The UK’s counter terrorism strategy is developed in four main directions: prevent, pursue, protect and prepare.
CPNI’s work falls within the “protect” category which aims at reducing the vulnerability of the UK to terrorist attacks.
• Cyber security strategy (as described above).
• Resilience of infrastructure to natural hazards: In order to enhance critical infrastructure and essential services resilience to disruption due to natural hazard, the Civil Contingencies Secretariat within the Cabinet Of?ce developed the Critical Infrastructure Resilience Programme (CIRP).
In the public sector CPNI works closely with the National Technical Authority for Information Assurance (CESG) and, within the police, with the National Counter Terrorism Security Of?ce (NaCTSO) and with the Counter Terrorism Security Advisor (CTSA) network.
Government departments are responsible for taking appropriate actions to improve security in their respective sectors.
These departments are also responsible for the identi?cation of critical infrastruc- ture in their sectors in cooperation with CPNI and sector organizations.
The departments involved are:  • Department for Business, Innovation and Skills;  • Department of Health;  • Department for Communities and Local Government;  • Department for Transport;  • Home Of?ce;  • Department for Energy and Climate Change;  • HM Treasury;  • Department for the Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Food Standards Agency;  33  • Cabinet Of?ce.
Concerning cyber security, the U.K.’s Government established in 2010 the Cyber Security Operations Cen- tre (CSOC) and the Of?ce of Cyber Security & Information Assurance (OCSIA).
CPNI cooperates with CSOC, OCSIA and CESG in order to conduct the cyber security program for the UK government.
In the private sec- tor, CPNI interacts with the organizations that operate in the national infrastructure.
The relationships, es- tablished over the years, between CPNI’s security advisers and security managers in several sectors enable information sharing between trusted entities and, when appropriate, sharing of vulnerabilities and effective response measures in order to improve the protection of the national critical infrastructure and private orga- nizations.
Moreover, CPNI has established a partnership program, Risk Management Delivery Group, which aims to promote strong links between the principal UK consultancy partners.
3.4 USA  In May 2009, President Obama declared his intention to make cyber security a priority for his administration.
This brought about the publication of a document entitled “Cyber Security Policy Review” (CPR) [47].
Appointment of a cyber security policy of?cial responsible for coordinating the nation’s cyber security  policies and activities.
Preparation for the president’s approval of an updated national strategy to secure the information and  communications infrastructure.
Designation of cyber security as one of the president’s key management priorities and establishment of  performance metrics.
Designation of a privacy and civil liberties of?cial to the NSC cyber security directorate.
Conductng interagency-cleared legal analyses of priority cyber security related issues.
Initiating a national awareness and education campaign to promote cyber security.
Development of an international cyber security policy framework and the strengthening of interna-  tional partnerships.
Preparation of a cyber security incident response plan and initiation of a dialogue to enhance public-  private partnerships.
Development of a framework for research and development strategies which focuses on game-changing technologies that have the potential to enhance the security, reliability, resilience, and trustworthiness of digital infrastructure.
Building a cyber security based identity management vision and strategy, and leveraging privacy-enhancing  technologies for the nation.
The achievement of such objectives must respect the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) [48], launched by President George W. Bush in January 2008, which consists of a set of initiatives aimed at strengthening US cyber security.
President Obama established that CNCI had to be included and extended in the updated strategy of national cyber security, and that it would play a key role in the realization of the 10 objectives.
During the 14 months following the issue of CPR many of the objectives were achieved [46]:  • President Obama appointed a cyber security coordinator at the head of the Cyber Security Directorate created within the National Security Staff (NSS).
This coordinator works closely with the Of?ce of Man- agement and Budget and the Of?ce of Science and Technology Policy.
• The Cyber security Directorate started the development of an updated cyber security strategy that ex-  pands and implements the strategy envisaged by CPR and CNCI.
• A continuous and real-time monitoring of federal networks has been introduced, thus enabling faster  detection of vulnerabilities and more effective infrastructure protection.
34  • The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) has been released to improve the recruit- ment, training, and retention of cyber security professionals, to raise public awareness in cyber security, and to enhance cyber security education by expanding the education programme of CNCI.
• The United States is working to strengthen cooperation and dialogue with international partners.
In cooperation with allied countries, the United States has taken on a leading role in international organi- zations, such as the United Nations, to make cyber security an international priority.
• The National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP) has been developed to enable a coordinated na-  tional response to cyber incidents.
• The administration has developed a research and development strategy based on three main themes: moving targets (systems that change continuously to increase their complexity, thus limiting attackers and exposition to vulnerabilities), tailored trustworthy spaces (trusted environments that allows the de?nition of tailored requirements) and cyber economic incentives (incentives to adopt appropriate cyber security solutions for individuals and organizations).
• A draft “National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace” (NSTIC), aimed at reducing cyber secu-  rity vulnerabilities through the use of trusted digital identities, has been released.
With regard to the US roadmap, in February 2013, President Obama issued an executive order to further improve the management of critical infrastructure cyber security.
The aim of this executive order is to establish a new partnership with the critical infrastructure owners and operators in order to increase cyber security information sharing and collaboratively develop risk-based standards.
Information sharing on cyber security issues, such as suffered and foiled attacks, threats and vulnerabil- ities, between the public and private sector is the key factor in the improvement process envisaged by the executive order.
The US government is responsible for improving such exchange of information in terms of volume, timeliness and quality of information shared with the private sector, thus enabling entities of the pri- vate sector to better protect themselves against cyber threats.
As a result of the executive order the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Attorney General3 and the Director of National Intelligence will be responsible for ensuring the timely production of speci?c unclassi?ed reports of cyber threats to the US homeland.
The Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General, in coordination with the Director of National Intelligence, will be also re- sponsible for setting up a system to track the production, dissemination and disposition of the reports.
The aim is to maximize the utility of information sharing related to cyber threats and attacks.
Important roles in this context are covered by the Chief Privacy Of?cer and by the Of?cer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (of the Department of Homeland Security).
They are responsible for assessing the privacy and civil liberties risks of the functions performed by the Department of Homeland Security and for identifying and report ways to minimize such risks in a publicly available report to be released within one year from the issue of the executive order.
The executive order issued by President Obama also envisages the creation of a Cyber Security Framework aimed at reducing cyber risks to critical infrastructure.
The Secretary of Commerce will direct the Director of the National Institute of Standard and Technology in the development of the framework.
The Cyber Security Framework will include a collection of standards and procedures to align policy, business and technological approaches to better address cyber risks.
The framework will also include as much as possible industry best practices and will be available in ?nal version by February 2014.
The Secretary of Homeland Security will support the adoption of the framework by the owners and operators of the critical infrastructure and other interested entities.
35  CHAPTER  4  Analysis of the Italian Cyber Security Landscape  In order to conduct a deep analysis of the Italian cyber security situation, the Research Center of Cyber Intel- ligence and Information Security of Sapienza Università di Roma submitted an anonymous questionnaire to 68 organizations sensitive to cyber attacks according to the de?nition given in Section 1.3.
A successful attack on any of these organizations would produce an impact that goes beyond the same organizations boundaries and affects other organizations or society as a whole.
The organizations targeted by the study where then clustered in four groups on the basis of the organiza-  tion competences and the economic sectors they act within:  • Public Administrations (PA): public administrations are concerned with the implementation of govern- ment policies at national, regional and local levels.
This group includes local administrations (e.g., municipalities), central administrations (e.g., ministries) and government agencies;  • (Public) Utilities: any organization which provides services to the general public, although it may be  privately owned, participates to this group.
Utilities include electricity, gas, telephone and water;  • Financial: a ?nancial organization focuses on dealing with ?nancial transactions, such as investments, loans and deposits.
Conventionally, ?nancial organizations include banks, trust companies, insurance companies and investment dealers.
• Industrial: companies that consider their intellectual property, such as patents, data, speci?c non- public management processes, and other con?dential information, a critical asset to be protected against possible attacks.
In this study mainly large IT industries and large Italian manufacturing industries were considered.
The questionnaire was sent to organizations in July 2013, and the results were collected until Septem- ber 2013.
Details about each group are reported in Table 4.1 while Figure 4.1 depicts the category separation among the returned questionnaires.
Table 4.1 shows that the percentage of ?lled-in questionnaires was between 41% and 50% for all groups ex- cept the ?nancial one, which returned only 35% of them.
Some big companies (with more than 10.000 employees), in fact, have distinct areas with distinct systems and perhaps a distinct Coordinator of Information System Security (CISO), and were thus asked to ?ll-in more than one single questionnaire.
Organizations of different sizes were contacted in order to better cover the whole Italian landscape.
In particular, among those that returned the questionnaires, 20% of the organizations have up to 1000 employees; 36.7% between 1000 and 10000 employees; 30% between 10000 and 100000 and the remaining 13.3% have more then 100000 employees.
Among the contacted organizations, 50% of them operate only within the Italian territory while the remaining 50% operate outside of the frontier, at a European or worldwide level.
It can also be observed that at least 75% of the organizations have a central element responsible for security.
Taking into account the sample analyzed, the results presented in the following sections of this chapter are not meant to  37  Table 4.1: Sent/Received Questionnaires per group.
Target groups  Questionnaires  Questionnaires  sent  returned  Number of  organizations  % of returned questionnaires  PA  Utilities Financial Industrial  Total  31 8 17 12  68  13 4 6 5  28  26 7 17 12  62  41.9% 50% 35.3% 41.7%  Avg.
42.23%  18%   21%   47%   14%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Figure 4.1: Percentage of questionnaires returned per group.
have statistical signi?cance, especially in terms of groups representativeness.
Rather, their aim is to provide a snapshot of the degree of risk perception and cyber security measures currently implemented in Italy.
4.1 Organization recognition of being a critical infrastructure  It should be noted that only a fraction of the organizations that participated in the analysis consider themselves to be critical infrastructures.
This result was expected as this group is recognized as critical by the European Union Directive 2008/114/EC [20].
Half of the PAs recognize themselves critical infrastructure; however, we can further divide this result by grouping PAs in three subgroups, namely government agencies, central administrations and local adminis- trations and then analyzing the awareness at this ?ner level of detail.
As Figure 4.3 shows, a large fraction of government agencies and central administrations, consider themselves as critical infrastructure, while local administrations acknowledge that a failure of their services caused by cyber attacks would probably have a limited impact from a national standpoint.
The industrial group reported a mixed level of awareness; sub- dividing group results, it is possible to see that companies that responded af?rmatively to the question usually provide fundamental services to other organizations that manage the critical infrastructure.
Other companies were mainly targeted as they manage important intellectual assets that should be protected from cyber attacks; however, these organizations do not consider the protection of these assets as a national problem necessary for defending Italian economic interests.
Finally, it is important to underline the fact that almost none of the organizations pertaining to the ?nan- cial group recognized themselves as critical infrastructure.
This could be seen as a consequence of the fact  38  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  46%   100%   17%   60%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   No   Yes   Figure 4.2: Question #1.1.5 - Awareness of being critical infrastructure (per group).
Government   agencies   67%   Central   administrations   67%   Local   administrations   0%   Group   averages   46%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   Figure 4.3: Question #1.1.5 - Awareness of being critical infrastructure (breakdown for the PA group).
the Lehman Brothers crack or the Royal Bank of Scotland IT failure [50]) clearly show how se- vere failures of ?nancial organizations may easily have a broad impact at both the national and international level.
This latter aspect, in fact, has been recognized by two of the ?nancial organizations that participated in the survey.
The responses breakdown (shown in the left side of the ?gure) reports similar behavior with the exception of ?nancial players that use cloud services less than companies belonging to other group.
A sizable share of the  39  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   54%   46%   46%   75%   17%   60%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Figure 4.4: Question #1.2.1 - “Is your company using (or planning to use) cloud services?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
This percentage is fairly similar for all groups, except the ?nancial one where no organization brings critical services in the cloud.
PA   24%   38%   38%   Utilities   25%   75%   Financial   33%   66%   Industrial   20%   40%   40%   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   18%   39%   43%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   No answer   Figure 4.5: Question #1.2.2 - “Do cloud services support core business processes that are necessary to deliver critical services?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
Continuing the evaluation of external dependencies, the questionnaire included the following question, “Is it possible that an ICT service failure in one (or more) third-party company will have a signi?cant impact on your company?” Results are reported in Figure 4.6.
In this case a majority of the organizations answered af?rmatively, indicating that they depend on an external ICT system.
Another 11% does not know if a failure of a third-party ICT system could impact its organization.
The next question asked, “Do you know if your software providers are following a strategic approach to address application risks in each phase of the application development process?” In this way it was possible to evaluate if the strategy behind externalization of software development takes into account security aspects.
50% of respondents think that their providers probably implement some sort of security strategy during the development phases.
40  PA   92%   8%   Utilities   75%   25%   Financial   67%   17%   17%   78%   Industrial   60%   20%   20%   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   11%   11%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Can't say   Figure 4.6: Question #1.2.5 - “Is it possible that an ICT service failure in one (or more) third-party company, will have a signi?cant impact on your company?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
PA   23%   38%   23%   15%   14%   Utilities   75%   25%   Financial   17%   67%   17%   Industrial   40%   20%   40%   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   14%   22%   50%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   Probably yes   Probably no   No   Figure 4.7: Question #1.2.6 - “Do you know if your software providers are following a strategic approach to address application risks in each phase of the application development process?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
4.3 Anomalies and cyber attacks  Figure 4.8 reports the percentage of organizations, divided by group, which regularly register anomalies.
Anoma- lies refer to events that are not cyber attacks but that go beyond the normal behavior of the organization infras- tructure.
It was revealed that utilities are the organizations that record the maximum number of anomalies.
All the interviewed organizations belonging to this group acknowledged the presence of anomalies within their systems.
On the contrary, the ?nancial group seems to be the one that is least affected by such events (67%), followed by the public administration (77%) and then the industrial group (80%).
Figure 4.9 shows the percentage of interviewed organizations that have been subject to cyber attacks con- ducted by insiders.
cleaner, caterer, security guard) who has authorized access to the organization premises.
The utility group is clearly a common target for these kind of attacks.
Indeed, 50% of the interviewed organizations con?rmed that they have been targeted by an insider at least once.
However, it is worth noticing that this group is also the one that best responded to these threats.
On the contrary, ?nancial and public administration have been hit by successful internal attacks.
In particular, in the ?nancial group, half of the tentative internal attacks were successful, while one attack in four against the public administration achieved its target.
Interviewed companies in the industrial group did not declare any attack conducted by insiders.
41  Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   77%   100%   67%   80%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Figure 4.8: Question #1.3.10: Companies regularly registering anomalies per group.
100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  50%   33%   17%   23%   8%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Attacked  companies   Succesfully  attacked   Figure 4.9: Question #1.1.5 - Companies that have been attacked by an insider (per group).
Figure 4.10 reports the percentage of organizations that have been the target of an external cyber attack per group.
By analyzing the data, it can be seen that all ?nancial organizations have been attacked and attacks have been successful in 17% of cases.
The public administration group is the one exhibiting the highest number of successful attacks 62%.
Probably, this is an indicator of poor security policies.
Conversely, the industrial group is the least attacked.
From the chart, it is clear that ?nancial organizations are attacked in order to subtract data, impair the availability of their services and to tamper with data.
Surprisingly, utilities do not declare attacks aimed at impairing service availability while industrial group does not suffer protest attacks.
4.4 Defensive measures  Defense from insider threats  A set of questions was designed to asses the measures organizations implement in order to avoid possible misuse of organization data or attacks from internal employees.
Each respondent had the possibility of se-  42  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   100%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  77%   75%   62%   40%   25%   17%   20%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Attacked  companies   Succesfully  attacked   Figure 4.10: Question #1.3.5 - Companies experiencing external cyber attacks (per group).
PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Protest   Impair  Availability  To tamper data   Subtract Data   Other   0%   25%   50%   75%   Figure 4.11: Question #1.3.7 - Aim of external attacks (per group).
lecting none, one or more countermeasures to ?ght internal misuse.
The two most common measures implemented are employee training and information classi?cation/access control policies (both more than 30%).
Restrictions on the use of personal emails and/or cloud services from the inside of the organization’s network and restricted use of personal equipment are both 15%.
The adoption rate of each reported measure was also computed.
Adoption rates were additionally com- puted per group.
For example, 100% adoption of a measure m (e.g.
employee training) in a group means that all organizations belonging to that group implement m. Figure 4.13 shows adoption rate for each countermea- sure and for each group.
Results show that the PA group focuses on classi?cation and employee training, al- most neglecting other measures.
The ?nancial and industrial groups are more willing to adopt other measures such as restricting the access of personal mail or cloud services and forbidding the use of personal equipment at work.
Utilities consider training of employees as the main measure and there is a high percentage of them that restrict use of email/cloud.
Finally it should be pointed out that one of the primary measures for counter- acting internal misuse, employee training, is also perceived by the respondents as one of the things that they can/would like to improve in order to better protect their organization (See Section 4.7).
43  15%   34%   15%   33%   3%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Forbid the use of personal  electronic equipment   Training of employees   Classi?cation   Restrict the use of emails/ cloud  Other   Figure 4.12: Question #1.4.8 - “Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from misuse by employees does your company implement?” Overall internal misuse countermeasures adoption.
PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   0%   25%   50%   Forbidding the use of personal electronic equipment   Training of employees  Classi?cation  Restrict the use of emails/cloud  Other   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Figure 4.13: Question #1.4.8 - “Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from misuse by employees does your company implement?” Adoption rate for each of the countermeasures per group.
44  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   15%   75%   33%   20%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   29%   71%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes - APT   Yes - Basic   No   Figure 4.14: Question #1.4.5 - “Do you have the infrastructure to detect active attacks?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
Responses: “Yes basic" We have an infrastructure to detect attacks that are based upon standard malware or basic techniques (sql-injection, known computer worms, phishing ecc), “Yes-APT" We have an infrastructure to detect sophisticated attacks carried out by an advanced adversary that uses 0-day vectors (Advanced Persistent Threats).
Defense from external threats  One section of the questionnaire was designed to assess the security measures implemented.
Speci?cally, if the organization has measures to detect active attacks (see Figure 4.14).
71% of the organizations declare they own an IT infrastructure which is able to detect simple attacks.
The remaining 29% of the organizations declare they own an IT infrastructure that is capable of detecting Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs1).
This percentage of basic setups is 85% for the PA and 80% for the industrial group.
75% of the organizations belonging to the utilities group declares they own an IT infrastructure able to detect APTs.
100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   50%   50%   38%   75%   67%   40%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Figure 4.15: Distribution of response to question, “Are your web applications tested using standard method- ologies for security assessment of webapps?” Left chart is divided by group.
Given the widespread adoption of web applications, all respondents claimed to use web applications to support their business, the survey asked about their security assessment.
Roughly half of the respondents do not test their web application for security, at least not using standard and well established methodologies.
The situation is common to all groups with slightly better results for ?nancial and utilities groups.
Testing of web applications is a key point for the security of a company, since such applications have been proven as a high risk target for attacks.
1Advanced Persistent Threat https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_persistent_threat  45  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   50%   31%   40%   21%   32%   83%   47%   31%   50%   17%   40%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes, internal   Yes, external   No   Figure 4.16: Distribution of response to the question, “Does your company actively audit (penetration testing) the security of your ICT systems?” The chart on the left is divided by group, that on the right is the overall picture.
Overall, 80% of the participants actively test their systems and 47% of the respondents rely on an external company to assess the security of their infrastructure.
Examining the individual groups, it can be seen that the PA group is the one which executes the least active testing with roughly 35% of respondents admitting to not running any form of penetration testing.
The ?nancial group is characterized by 83% of the penetration tests being executed by external companies while utilities reach a balance of 50% between internal and external penetration test activities.
All organizations in both groups declare to execute such activity.
100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   4%   47%   47%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  2%   IDS   Data Diode   Network segmentation   Other   Figure 4.17: Questions #1.4.13, #1.4.14 - “Do you have measures that prevent the spread of an attack if your systems are penetrated?
If so, what kind of measures?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
Figure 4.17 shows measures that can be used to block the spread of an attack.
It is clear that the majority of participants (in all groups) have some form of protection to prevent an attack spreading.
In detail, the sum of network segmentation and IDs constitutes 94% of the adopted measures, a ratio that is maintained group by group, while different measures are adopted by just 5% of the participants.
As a ?nal point, the capabilities of an organization to mitigate the effect of an attack was investigated.
(Question #1.5.1 “Do you have processes and resources to respond to cyber security incidents?”).
The PA group was the only one to admit that some of them, 25%, do not have the capabilities to respond to a cyber security incident.
The utilities group claims to be autonomous with 100% of the interviewed believing that they can cope with a cyber security incident.
The ?nancial group responds to cyber security incidents mainly with internal resources (67%) while the opposite is true for industrial group where 60% of resources are external.
46  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   33%   23%   28%   60%   11%   61%   54%   100%   67%   40%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes, internal   Yes, external   No   Figure 4.18: Question #1.5.1 - “Do you have processes and resources to respond to cyber security incidents ?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
4.5 Recovery capabilities  A set of questions to assess the capacity of an organization to recover from a signi?cant cyber security incident was designed into the questionnaire (Figure 4.19).
The majority of respondents in the PA group are quite con- ?dent about the possibility to recover from a cyber attack.
Financial and utilities groups also share a very high percentage of positive answers.
This con?dence decreases for other groups arriving at a minimum for the in- dustrial group, in which 40% of the respondents admit to not having the capabilities to autonomously recover from a signi?cant attack.
This is probably due to the fact that PA recovery is (most of the times) operationally simpler than in other groups where recovering a service could take much more time due to potentially longer supply chains.
100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   85%   75%   83%   40%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   25%   75%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Figure 4.19: Question #1.5.2 - “Do you have processes and resources to recover from a signi?cant cyber security incident ?” Left chart shows answer distribution by groups.
Figure 4.20 refers to the adoption of a disaster recovery plan per group.
It can be noticed that the ?nan- cial and utilities groups seem to be those that most perceived the necessity of such a plan.
Indeed, all the companies in these groups already have a disaster recovery plan, or are going to implement one.
Not all the public administration group, instead, has a disaster recovery plan or the intention to implement one in the near future, regardless of the legislative constraints they are subject to.
Surprisingly, 25% of the interviewed companies in the industrial group seem not to be interested in disaster recovery.
Figure 4.21 reports the distribution of the seven tiers of disaster recovery [35] among the companies that currently implement it.
It can be noticed that more than 50% of the companies implement a Tier 4 disaster recovery plan, that assures a fast recovery time.
More than 17% implement the highest available tier, which allows little or no data loss.
47  PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   Yes   Planned for the future   No   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Figure 4.20: Question #1.2.4 - “Do you have a disaster recovery plan that allows your company to operate in case of a partial or complete failure of your ICT infrastructure?"
17%   6%   6%   12%   6%   53%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Tier 1   Tier 2   Tier 3   Tier 4   Tier 5   Tier 6   Tier 7   Figure 4.21: Question #1.2.4 - Disaster Recovery Tiers.
They were asked about the adoption of speci?c policies (ISO/IEC 27001, ISO/IEC 27005:2008, ISACA Risk it) for security and risk management, and about the adoption of an Information Security Management System (ISMS).
Roughly half of the respondents implement some form of ISMS (see Figure 4.22).
The same result is evident for the single groups.
Public administration and industrial groups show the lowest adoption of ISMS.
The utility and ?nan- cial groups are the ones with the widest adoption (above 75%).
For the ISO/IESC 27001 standard, adoption is greater in the industrial and ?nancial ?elds and less in the utilities and PA groups.
The scenario changes when asked about the adoption of an Operator Security Plan, a measure that is requested by the European Council Directive 2008/114/EC.
This standard is largely adopted by organizations belonging to the utilities group (50%).
For the other groups, the standard is adopted by a number of organizations that is always less than or equal to 20% (see Figure 4.24).
Finally respondents were asked if they keep their Operator Security Plan updated.
48  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   46%   54%   38%   75%   83%   40%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Figure 4.22: Question #1.4.1 - “Is your company using an Information Security Management System (ISMS) ?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   46%   54%   46%   50%   67%   60%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   Figure 4.23: Question #1.4.2 - “Has your company adopted the ISO/IEC 27001 ?”Left chart shows answer dis- tribution by group.
PA   8%   92%   Utilities   50%   25%   25%   Financial   17%   67%   17%   Industrial   20%   80%   0%   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   75%   7%   18%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   No answer   Figure 4.24: Question #1.4.6 - “Do you use an Operator Security Plan or an equivalent measure, as de?ned in the European Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December, 2008 ?” Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
49  PA   8%   31%   62%   Utilities   50%   25%   25%   Financial   17%   17%   67%   61%   18%   21%   Industrial   20%   80%   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Yes   No   No answer   Figure 4.25: Question #1.4.7 - “If yes, is the Operator Security Plan regularly updated?” Left chart shows answer distribution by groups.
4.7 How organizations would like to improve their security  The questionnaire contained a few questions aimed at assessing security measures organizations feel they should adopt in order to improve their cyber security.
Figure 4.26 shows how the highest percentage of the respondents (31%) ask for better policies or a strict implementation of the existing policies; this is followed by the request for improved security tools and a basic security training for employees.
Nevertheless, Figure 4.26 points out there is no large gap among measures that could improve organization security.
PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   0%   25%   50%   75%   100%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Security training of employees   Improved security tools   More security experts   Better security policies   Security Auditing   31%   18%   10%   19%   22%   Figure 4.26: Question #1.5.4.
- “Do you think that the security of your company could be improved with: (i) Better security policies, or strict implementation of the existents, (ii) More ICT security experts / security expert with expertise conformity externally tested, (iii) Improved security tools, (iv) Security focused training of all the employees with regard to their duties, (v) Security audit periodically executed by an external certi?ed organization”.
Left chart shows answer distribution by group.
The utilities group seems to have a high sensibility for policies adoption and implementation (75% of re- spondents ask for this) and for the request of better security tools (75% of respondents); these two demands are followed by better security training for employees and the presence of more security experts; for the ?nan- cial group, the request for employees’ training is comparable to the request for security experts, and it is worth noticing that 100% of the respondents belonging to this group asked for better policies; security auditing is seen as something that can improve security by the industrial group.
Respondents of utilities and ?nancial group does not even mention this measure.
The PA group thinks auditing, security experts and tools could improve the security of their organizations, furthermore policies are seen by the widest majority of the group  50  as something that could enhance security.
Last but not least, note that all groups strongly believe in better policies as a way to improve their security.
4.8 A cyber security readiness index  Analyzing the questionnaire answers, various aspects related to the cyber security habits of the organizations were assessed.
The cyber security readiness index is a composite measure of the capacity and willingness of an organi- zation to face cyber threats.
A nice cyber security habit for an organization is considered to be the one which is able to cover the largest area on a radar chart taking into account the four indexes.
Thus the cyber security readiness index re?ects the dimension of this area.
The complete structure of the score system that computes the cyber security readiness index based on the four indexes is reported in Appendix B.
Awareness index - Assesses the situational awareness related to cyber risks of the organization and it is in?u- enced by the majority of the questions in the survey (see appendix B); as an example positive responses to questions like, “Does your company regularly register anomalies?
For anomalies we mean an event that is not a cyber-attack but is outside the normal behavior of the company infrastructure” (Question #1.3.10) and, “If so, the average number of these anomalies during last year is: [...]” (Question #1.3.11) in?uence negatively the awareness score since the presence of a frequent anomalous event in an orga- nization network should be carefully analyzed in order to exclude the presence of sophisticated attacks.
On the contrary, the awareness score is in?uenced positively when responses to questions show behav- ior which is cyber security aware; one example is the question, “Do you know if your software providers are following a strategic approach to address application risks in each phase of the application develop- ment process?” (Question #1.2.6); a positive response to this question shows a careful consideration of the risks that could derive from bad software design processes.
Defense index - Assesses the capacity of an organization to protect itself from a cyber attack.
This consid- ered the evaluation of the defense mechanisms and tools employed by an organization.
An example of a question that in?uences positively this index is, “Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from misuse by employees does your company implement?” (Question #1.4.8); no answer to this question in?uences negatively both the awareness and defense index; on the contrary, a response like, “Restrict the use of personal emails and cloud services" has a slightly positive score on the defense index; the response, “Forbid the use of personal electronic equipment (laptop, smartphone, tablet)" has a signi?cant positive impact on the defense score.
This correlation is well-grounded since the implementation of strong defense mechanisms shows cyber security awareness.
Policy index - Assesses the implementation of security related policies.
A high score in this index shows com- pliance to several security policies and their constant update.
As an example Question # 1.4.7 asks, “Do you use an Operator Security Plan or an equivalent measure, as de?ned in the Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008?
As for the defense index there is a strong correlation of the policy index with the awareness index since the adoption of updated security policies show an increased awareness.
External independency index - Assesses the correlation between internal systems and external providers.
A low score on this index shows the correlation of the organization mechanism to external providers since the fault of an external cloud provider could impact on its possibility to deliver the core product of its business.
A high score on this index shows an organization that relies minimally on external services that could impact on its security.
Note that such high scores imply larger operational costs as the organization has to insource software services without the involvement of third parties.
51  External   independency   Awareness   70%   60%   50%   40%   30%   20%   10%   0%   Policy   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  Defence   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Figure 4.27: Cyber security readiness index: Awareness, Defense, Policy and External Dependencies indexes per group.
Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  100%   75%   50%   25%   0%   54%   75%   67%   80%   PA   Utilities   Financial   Industrial   Figure 4.28: Question #1.5.3 - “Do you have situational awareness on the state of cyber threats to your organi- zation?
"(per group)  A radar chart is depicted in Figure 4.27 showing the results of the cyber security readiness index per group.
As expected, the utility group covers the largest area in the ranking.
It scores better than other groups along two axes, namely defense and policy.
Nevertheless, it suffers from a low external independence; this problem is shared by all the other groups, with the exception of the ?nancial group that seems still reluctant to heavily rely on external service providers.
The ?nancial group also exhibits a large covered area in the radar chart by showing high values for external independency, defense and awareness indexes.
However, keep in mind that some of the questions that in?uence the policy index (e.g., question # 1.4.7) are related to the speci?c policy imposed by the EU directive 2008/114/EC on European Critical Infrastructure that ?nancial organizations are not obliged to comply with.
The industrial group is the third one in the ranking, showing a high level of awareness and a good defense index while lagging behind in policy adoption.
The PA group shows a low degree of cyber security readiness with respect to the other groups; indeed, the area covered by the radar plot is the smallest among all the groups.
It is interesting to compare the awareness index with the answers to question #1.5.3, that is, “Do you have  52  Awareness  60%   Cyber Intelligence  and Information  Security Center  50%   40%   30%   20%   10%   0%   External   independency   Defence   Government agencies  Central administrations  Local administrations  Sector averages   Policy   Figure 4.29: Cyber security readiness index for PA group.
situational awareness on the state of the cyber threat to your organization?"
It can be pointed out that the greatest value of the awareness index (see awareness axis in Figure 4.27) is scored by the industry, ?nancial and utility groups.
However, the perception that organizations belonging to these three groups have is quite different: the awareness declared by respondents from industry is very high while that declared by ?nancial is 13% smaller.
A similar argument can be used for the PA group.
While the PA group seems to be quite well aware of the cyber security landscape (54% of the answers were positive in Figure 4.28), its awareness index is much smaller than the ones sported by the other groups.
The utility group, instead, declares good situational awareness and its awareness index con?rms this.
As last interesting note the PA group was disaggregated into government agencies, central administrations and local administrations and the cyber security readiness index for each sub group was computed.
Results are shown in Figure 4.29 where the dotted line represents the group average.
This can be due to the fact that they have small information systems compared to central and local administrations, thus allowing for a more in- house approach.
53  CHAPTER  5  Recommendations for a National Cyber Security Strategy  The aim of a national cyber security strategy is to increase the global resilience and security of national ICT assets that support critical functions of the state or of the society as a whole [17].
In order to manage risk in a proper way, it is necessary to design an effective risk management process by identifying what could go wrong (iden- ti?cation of risk), evaluating which risks should be dealt with (risk analysis and evaluation), and implementing strategies to deal with those risks, preventing or detecting all situations of risk, and implementing the adequate response.
The UK is an example of a country which followed a risk management approach to implement a na- tional strategy [49].
In the following, a risk management process (see Figure 5.1) is used as a useful paradigm to frame some recommendations for setting an effective national cyber security strategy for Italy.
These recommendations do not aspire to be a complete set of rules to be followed, but rather they represent a set of points that we believe the national strategy on cyber security should take into account.
The target of these recommenda- tions are in general all companies and PAs that manage or control critical infrastructures, security profession- als working in economic sectors sensitive to cyber attacks and all government agencies and bodies involved in the de?nition and implementation of the Italian cyber security strategy.
Figure 5.1: Risk management process  55  Risk AssessmentIdenti?cationAnalysisEvaluationRisk TreatmentPreventionDetectionResponseRecovery5.1 Recommendations for risk assessment  One of the key elements of a national cyber security strategy is the risk assessment process.
Risk assessment can provide valuable information for developing, executing and evaluating a strategy.
By carrying out a nationwide risk assessment process and by aligning the objectives of the strategy with national security needs, it is possible to focus on the most important challenges with regard to cyber security.
In order to develop correct risk identi?cation at national level it is important to clearly de?ne and identify: critical economic sectors, cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
Understanding the dimension of cyber threats  Most of the events that can harm a critical economic sector sensitive to cyber threats are due to failures or human mistakes happening both in the physical and the cyber world that then propagate and escalate through the cyber world.
Therefore, attackers exploiting vulnerabilities of an information system for damaging, for example, a national critical infrastructure are just one side of the coin.
Failures and cyber attacks have to be studied and analyzed in the same framework (e.g.
Identify priorities within critical economic sectors  A key aspect in have a compelling security strategy is to clearly identify priorities in the protection of critical economic sectors (including national critical infrastructure).
Therefore, it is important to give higher priority to those systems which have a greater impact on national security.
At the same time, all economic sectors should be protected with at least a minimum level of security.
Understanding attackers’ habits  To establish a national cyber security priority for defending services of critical economic sectors that underpin our society and economy, there is the need to understand the habit of attackers, their targets, their strategies and their methodologies.
Thus a risk framework must re?ect such factors, that is to say the key assets or func- tions of economic sectors that could be targeted by criminals, hacktivists, and state-sponsored organizations and potential avenues for attack or exploitation.
This process involves understanding what motivates cyber threat actors, and the classi?cation of cyber threats.
The priorities and security baselines should consider of paramount importance the dependency relations among critical infrastructures and assign appropriate priorities according to their level of dependency, e.g.
Ranking of threats in the national strategy has to be addressed taking into account the implications for critical economic sectors, including the theft of sen- sitive data, damage to business or operational systems, disruption of services, and other scenarios that could result in substantial ?nancial loss and compromise public safety or national security.
56  Cooperative assessment of threats and vulnerabilities  Cyber threats have to be faced keeping in mind a global and unifying perspective.
This is necessary since threats nowadays range from low-level attacks of small complexity executed by unskilled adversaries to so- phisticated attacks executed from sparse geographical locations by groups of skilled adversaries with a huge number of resources.
Service providers working in similar sectors (e.g.
similar security policies).
As an example, the US Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) could be a good starting point (http://www.isaccouncil.org/).
Nationwide methodology for threat classi?cation  In order to effectively enforce an active cooperative scenario there is the need to develop a national method- ology for classifying threats and decide at which level threats must be faced: at the single organization level, at the sector level, at the regional level, at the national level.
Note that millions of threats against an infrastructure could be deployed in cyberspace in a few seconds; overestimation could thus hamper the whole process by disrupting the trustworthiness of the security strategy as a whole.
Clear guidelines governing how risks are accepted and documented  Risk evaluation is used to decide the signi?cance of risks to organizations and whether each speci?c risk should be accepted or treated.
Since it is impossible to mitigate all risks, frameworks for national risk developed under the parameters of the national strategy should include clear guidelines governing how risks are accepted and documented.
Guidelines should also specify when an economic sector is so vital that a higher standard of protection is needed.
5.2 Recommendations for risk treatment  As shown in Figure 5.1, risk treatment includes the following:  Risk prevention - All categories of management and of technical and operational activities that en- able the decision of appropriate outcome-based actions to ensure adequate protection against threats.
When adequate preventive protection mechanisms are in place, implemented via physical or logical protection, it is possible to identify and activate the detection mechanisms.
Risk detection - All activities identifying (through ongoing monitoring or other means of observation) the presence of cyber threats, and the processes to assess the potential impact of those threats.
They generally include (i) stopping an ongoing incident, (ii) identifying the scope and scale of incident, (iii) limiting damage, (iv) taking measures in order to investigate the course of events and (v) preventing the incident from recurring.
Moreover, CERT’s operative role within the national cyber security strategy is still not clear.
Having an operative national CERT with a clear mission and role is the basic building block of any national cyber security strategy.
To work properly, a CERT needs the participation of numerous public and private sector actors, with clear terms of participation.
Following the example of many other countries (including the USA), the Italian CERT should be deeply connected with the academic world, which can provide the most innovative solutions in the ?eld of secure information, and that is institutionally committed to research and training activities.
This is a priority given the number of players, bodies and boards that have a role within the Italian cyber security landscape as designated by the DPCM of 24 March 2013 (see the last paragraph of Section 2.1).
The national CERT should also have the role of coordinating with other CERTs operating in Italy and being the Italian interface for EU and international CERTs.
This list also included some inactive CERTs and other CERTs which do not show any information on activities they actually perform.
Set clear de?nitions and procedures for incident response  The national CERT will have to provide detailed, timely and accurate information about potential threats that may damage the national critical infrastructure and sensitive economic sectors.
This will be possible only by de?ning clear procedures and plans that have to be followed by all the private and public organizations that will collaborate with the national CERT.
In particular, high-level goals, objectives, and priorities have to be established and shared with all the organizations involved.
Furthermore, it is important to address all the problems related to the information sharing of attacks and discovered vulnerabilities.
In this process, organizations need to be guaranteed that only the essential information about security incidents are disclosed to third parties.
vulnerability, malware, etc) is discovered in the information systems of an organi- zation, an early dissemination of this information to all interested national actors is mandatory in order to properly protect their own organization infrastructure.
The dissemination has to be done within a legislative scenario which ensures the organization disseminating the threat is not legally liable.
Thus the institution of an Italian actor that is in charge of managing a National Vulnerability Database is of national interest for improving the protection of national assets and, therefore, is strongly encouraged.
Furthermore, an international standard such as Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) framework should be adopted in order to push towards a simple interaction with international partners.
No national strategy for cyber security can be imple- mented without a plan for dissemination activities such as newspaper articles and debates in the mass media to increase awareness of ordinary people not necessarily involved in the protection of critical resources.
In addition to raising the level of awareness of ordinary people, there is the need to develop specialized skills in, and knowledge of, cyber security in universities and  58  research centers.
This will lead to the creation of a new class of cyber security experts needed by private and public organizations and research.
5.3 Further recommendations  Research, development and technology investments  Due to the strategic nature of cyber security for a nation, we cannot outsource these competences to other countries but it is imperative to consolidate and possibly increase domestic competence in creating and de- ploying security technologies.
Cyber security can be considered as a giant economic opportunity for Italy.
The presence in Italy of key sector players, high-tech SMEs and highly reputed research centers makes Italy a breed- ing grounds for cyber security initiatives that could be a source of employment and wealth for the current and next generations.
Thus, it is important for a nation to have a research and technology agenda to promote ad- vances in research and high-tech development.
Additionally, appropriate investment is nec- essary for keeping the best researchers in this ?eld in Italy, so contributing to ensure national independence from information technology related risks.
International engagements  Efforts made in improving the protection of national critical economic sectors cannot be made in isolation with respect to the rest of the world because cyber threats intrinsically cross borders.
Thus a defense cannot be only on the perimeter, but there is the need of international collab- orations and networking.
Another important point is to set up a clear and agreed worldwide governance of Internet that will be able to make cyberspace a more regulated place.
Critical economic sector organizations should adopt solid risk management processes  Risk management processes helps organizations determine what assets need protection, the threats they re- quire protection against and the controls.
The process helps organizations to ensure that efforts and investments on security yield cost effective bene?ts.
Good risk management processes recognize that organizations have different business requirements, structures and operational environments.
The process de?nes broad requirements allowing organizations to decide the most cost effective and ef?cient risk man- agement approaches (ISO/IEC 2008).
Effective risk management requires a reporting and review structure to ensure that risks are effectively identi?ed and assessed and that necessary countermeasures and responses are put in place.
Making sure that a critical economic sector equips itself with an adequate risk governance process allows to delegate part of the controlling activities to infrastructure owners and operators.
Last but not least, audit activities of critical economic sector infrastructure by external entities is good practice and has to be encouraged.
As an example, Figure 4.16 shows that 47% of the interviewed actively au- dits security levels using external companies.
However, organizations still need internal audits or a coordinator of information system security.
Cyber security needs clear roles and responsibilities: experts with appropriate skills, authority, and resources to develop security baselines and to satisfy security regulation requirements.
This is recommended for all sectors, from government owned organizations to privately owned ones.
Reducing the supply chain risk  This can be done by (i) studying all the supply chain of vendors of products and services employed within the economy, (ii) improving the visibility of the supply chain and building relationships of trust between ven- dors of products and services and infrastructure providers, (iii) improving the compliance with international standards and having laboratories where such compliance is tested.
59  A national agency for cyber security  Ensuring cyber security for a nation is a duty that cannot disregard good technology skills and competences.
Any government organization that is involved in the national cyber security strategy thus needs to have such skills in-house and its governance needs to be aware of and able to assess cyber and information technology risks.
The latter point is critical because if an organization’s governance does not have appropriate technology competences, it will either overestimate or underestimate a threat or simply not understanding what is going on.
This is why many countries, including France, Israel, Germany, Holland, to cite just a few, decided to con- verge all activities related to cyber security inside a single organization which most of the time is within the Presidency of the Council of Ministers of its own country (e.g.
National Cyber Bureaux in Israel, Federal Of- ?ce for Information Security in Germany, Network and Information Security Agency in France, National Cyber Security Centre in the Netherlands etc.).
We cannot indeed expect that the necessary skills and competences also at governance level can be found in many government organizations and agencies.
All of this calls for a national agency for cyber security that empowers procedures, pro- cesses and coordination activities actually being the main agent for implementing the national cyber security strategy to make the national cyberspace a safe place.
60  Bibliography  [1]  [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  Andoh-Badoo F.K., Osei-Bryson K.M., “Exploiting the characteristics of internet security breaches that impact the market value of breached ?rms”, Expert system with Applications, 32, 2007, pp.
and Lodi G., “An event-based platform for collaborative threats de- tection and monitoring", Information Systems, 39, p175-195, 2014.
Baldoni R., Bonomi S., Di Luna G.A., Montanari L., Sorella M.: “Understanding (Mis)Information Spread- ing for Improving Corporate Network Trustworthiness”, p165-172.
and Song A., “Managing risk in mobile commerce", International Journal Elec- tronic Business, Vol.
Brunner M. and Suter E. M., “International CIIP Handbook 2008/2009”, Center for Security Studies, ETH Zurich, 2008.
and Lowe J.,“The Myths and Facts behind Cyber Security Risks for Industrial Control Systems”, VDE 2004 Congress, VDE, Berlin, October 2004.
[9] Dos Santos B.L., Peffers K., Mauer D.C., “The impact of information technology investment announce-  ments on the market value of the ?rm”, Information Systems Research, 4, pp.
[10] ENISA (European Network and Information Security Agency), “Incentives and Challenges for Informa-  tion Sharing in the Context of Network and Information Security", 2010.
[15] European Proposal for a “Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council", Concerning the  European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), EC,COM(2010) 521.
61  [16] European Union, “Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cy-  berspace", JOIN/2013/0001.
[17] European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA), “National Cyber Security Strat-  egy.
Practical Guidebook”, p8, December 2012.
[18] European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA), Glossary, http://www.enisa.
[19] European  Union  Agency  for Strategy  Network List,  Cyber  tional Resilience-and-CIIP/national-cyber-security-strategies-ncsss/ national-cyber-security-strategies-in-the-world.
Security  and  Information  Na- http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/  (ENISA),  Security  [20] European Union Directive 2008/114/EC.
[22] Gordon L.A., Loeb M.and Sohail T., “A Framework for using insurance for cyber-risk management”, Com-  munications of the ACM, 44, pp.
[27]  Italian Information and Security Department, “Report on information policy for security in the year 2010”, Presidency of the Council of Ministers, pp.
[29]  Italian national security of?cial website, http://www.sicurezzanazionale.gov.it.
[36] Microsoft, “Microsoft Security Intelligence Report", Regional Threat Assessment: Italy”, Volume 14, July  through December, 2012.
[39] Rinaldi S.M., Peerenboom, J.P. and Kelly T.K., “Identifying, Understanding and Analyzing Critical Infras-  tructure Interdependencies”, IEEE Control Systems Magazine, Vol.
62  [40] Shackelford S.J.,  “In search of cyber peace" Stanford Law Review.
[41] Symantec, “Internet Security Threat Report 2013", Volume 18, 2013.
[42] US Information Technology Industry Council, “Steps to Facilitate More Effective Information Sharing to  Improve Cybersecurity”, October 2011, www.itic.org.
[44] US Presidential Policy Directive 21 (February 12, 2013), “Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience”.
[45] US Public law 107-56 (October 26, 2001) “Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate  Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act”.
[49] UK Cabinet Of?ce, “The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world",  Cabinet Of?ce, United Kingdom, London, 2011.
[51] United Nation, “Overview of cybersecurity”, ITU Recommendation ITU-T X.1205", ITU-T, p.2, Geneva  2008.
[53] Vulpiani D., “La cyber threat alle infrastrutture critiche: punto di situazione ed azione di contrasto", Italian Intelligence Culture and Strategic Analysis (ICSA) Convegno, “La protezione delle Infrastrutture Critiche in Italia”, Rome, May 2010.
[54] Westby J. R., “Governance of Enterprise Security: CyLab 2012 Report”, Carnegie Mellon University CyLab,  2012, https://www.cylab.cmu.edu/outreach/governance.html.
63  Appendix A: Questionnaire  In order to conduct a deep analysis of the Italian cyber security situation, the Research Center of Cyber Intel- ligence and Information Security of Sapienza Università di Roma submitted an anonymous questionnaire to 68 organizations sensitive to cyber attacks according to the de?nition given in Section 1.3.
A successful attack on any of these organizations would produce an impact that goes beyond the same organizations boundaries and affects other organizations or society as a whole.
•  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  Food  Water  Research facilities  Health  Nuclear industry  Space  CT  Energy  Transport  Financial  Chemical Industry  Other  1.1.2.
Does your company manage an Italian Critical Infrastructure?
Does your company manage an European Critical Infrastructure?
Is it possible for employees to access your company infrastructure and critical data from outside (i.e.,  using ssh, VPN or similar)?
•  •  •  Yes, we implemented a Tier (select 1 to 7): 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  We do not have a disaster recovery plan.
Do you know if your software providers are following a strategic approach to address application risks  into each phase of the application development process?
Had your company been a target of internal cyber-attacks?
Had your company been a target of successful internal cyber-attacks?
How many internal cyber attacks did your company detected during last year?
How many external cyber attacks did your company detected during last year?
What is the procedure that your company have followed/will follow in case of cyber-attack detection:  •  •  •  Contact law enforcements  Contact the CERT  Run an internal investigation  • Other:  1.3.10.
What was the ?nancial loss caused from cyber crime attacks?
Which was the loss caused by the following different types of cyber crime attacks?
• Online Fraud:  • Identity Theft:  • Intellectual Property Theft:  • Espionage:  • Customer Data Theft:  • Extortion:  • Fiscal Fraud:  • Denial of Service:  • Other:  5  70  1.4 Certi?cations, Policies and Security Measures  1.4.1.
Is your company using an Information Security Management System (ISMS)?
Is your company following a Risk Management standard such as ISO/IEC 27005:2008 or ISACA  RISK IT?
Risk Assessment is certi?ed by an independent external organization?
Do you use an Operator Security Plan or an equivalent measure, as de?ned in the Council Directive  2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008?
Which of the following measures to protect data and critical systems from misuse by employees your  company implement?
•  •  •  •  •  None  Training of employees  Classi?cation of information regarding to their content and relative access control policy  Restrict the use of personal emails and cloud services  Forbid the use of personal electronic equipment (laptop, smartphone, tablet)  6  71  • Other:  1.4.9.
Does your company have security training campaign for the employees?
Does you company require non-disclosure agreements with employees and partners that handle sen-  sitive data?
Do you have a central responsible security element?
Chief information Security Of?cer (CISO)  with an organization)  •  •  Yes  No  1.4.13.
Do you have measures that prevent the spread of an attack if your systems are penetrated (e.g.
network  segmentation)  •  •  Yes  No  1.4.14.
If so, what kind of measures do you have?
•  •  •  Network segmentation  Data diode  Intrusion Detection  • Other:  1.4.15.
•  •  We have an infrastructure to detect attacks that are based upon standard malware or basic  techniques (sql-injection, known computer worms, phishing ecc)  We have an infrastructure to detect sophisticated attacks carried out by an advanced adver-  sary that uses 0-day vectors (Advanced Persistent Threats)  7  72  •  No  1.4.16.
Does you company audits actively (penetration testing) the security of your ICT systems?
•  •  •  Yes, using internal resources  Yes, using an external company  No  1.4.17.
Is there one (or more) external company that audits actively the security of the ICT systems?
Are the security tests separately carried out on your organization SCADA systems (if any)?
If so, are web applications periodically tested using standard methodologies like OWASP Testing  Project?
Do you have processes and resources to respond to cybersecurity incidents?
•  •  •  We have internal resources to respond to incidents  We relay on external resources to respond to incidents  No  1.5.2.
Do you have processes and resources to recover from a signi?cant cybersecurity incident  •  •  Yes  No  1.5.3.
Do you have situational awareness on the state of the cyberthreat to your organization?
Do you think that the security of your company could be improved with:  8  73  •  •  •  •  •  Better security policies, or strict implementation of the existents.
More ICT security experts / security expert with expertise conformity externally tested.
Improved security tools.
Security focused training of all the employees with regard to their duties.
Security Audit periodically executed by an external certi?ed organization.
Position of the person in the organization that ?lled out the Questionaire  Answer:  9  74  Appendix B: Score Structure of the Cyber Security Readiness Index  Question  1.2.1  1.2.2  1.2.4  1.2.5  1.2.6  1.3.10  1.3.11 1.4.1  1.4.2  1.4.3  1.4.4  1.4.5  1.4.6  1.4.7  1.4.8.1 1.4.8.2 1.4.8.3 1.4.8.4 1.4.8.5 1.4.10  1.4.11  1.4.12  1.4.13  1.4.15  1.4.17  1.4.20  Answer  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes No Yes No Yes  Others  Yes  Other  Any Response  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others Checked Checked Checked Checked Checked  No  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Yes  Others  Detect ATP Normal IDS  Yes  Others  Yes no  Awareness  Defense  Policy  External independency  Positive  Negative  Positive  Negative  Positive  Negative  Positive  Negative  - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  - - - - -  Yes  -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - -  - - - - -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Yes  -  Yes  - - -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - .
- -  Yes  -  Yes  - -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  - - - -  Yes Yes Yes Yes  - -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes Yes Yes  -  Yes  -  - - - - -  Yes  - - -  Yes  - -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - -  - - -  Yes  - - - -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - - - -  Yes  - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Yes  - - - - -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes  - - - -  Yes Yes Yes Yes  - - - -  Yes  -  Yes  -  Yes Yes Yes  -  Yes  -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  75  Acronyms  ADI  Italian Digital Agenda (Agenda Digitale Italiana)  AIIC Association of Italian Experts in Critical Infrastructure (Associazione esperti Italiani di infrastrutture critiche)  AISE External Security and Intelligence Agency (Agenzia informazioni e sicurezza esterna)  AISI  Internal Security and Intelligence Agency (Agenzia informazioni e sicurezza interna)  APT Advanced Persistent Threats  CBRN Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Risk  CCM Computer Cleaned per Mille  CERT-EU Computer Emergency Response Team of European Union  CERT-SPC Computer Emergency Response Team of the Italian Connectivity Public System (CERT Sistema pubblico di connettività)  CERT Computer Emergency Response Team  CESG Communications-Electronics Security Group  CI Critical Infrastructure  CII Critical Information Infrastructure  CIIP Critical Information Infrastructure Protection  CIP Critical Infrastructure Protection  CIRP Critical Infrastructure Resilience Programme  CISO Coordinator of Information System Security  CISR Inter-ministers Committee for the Security of the Republic (Comitato interministeriale per la sicurezza della Repubblica)  CITDC Technical Inter-ministers Commission of Civil Defense (Commissione Interministeriale Tecnica della Difesa Civile)  CIWIN Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network  CMU Carnegie Mellon University  CNAIPIC National Cybercrime Center for the Protection of Critical Infrastructure (Centro Nazionale Anticrimine Informatico per la  Protezione delle Infrastrutture Critiche)  CNCI Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative  COPASIR Parliamentary Committee for the Security of the Republic (Comitato parlamentare per la sicurezza della Repubblica)  CoPS Political Strategic Committee (Comitato politico strategico)  CPNI Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure  CPR Cyber Security Policy Review  CSDP Common Security and Defense Policy  CSIRT Computer Security Incident Response Team  CSOC Cyber Security Operations Centre  CTSA Counter Terrorism Security Advisor  DAC Digital Administration Code (Codice dell’Amministrazione Digitale)  77  DDOS Distributed Denial of Service  DigitPA Italian Agency for Public Administration Digitization (Ente nazionale per la digitalizzazione della Pubblica Amministrazione)  DIS Italian Security Intelligence Department (Dipartimento informazioni per la sicurezza della Repubblica)  DL Ialian Law Decree  DM Italian Ministerial Decree  DPCM Italian President of Council of Ministries’ Decree - decreto del presidente del consiglio dei ministri  EC3 European Cybercrime Centre  ECI European Critical Infrastructure  EDA European Defence Agency  EFMS European Forum of Member States  EISAS European Information Sharing and Alert System  ENISA European Network and Information Security Agency  EP3R European Public-Private Partnership for Resilience  EPCIP European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection  FMI Financial Market Infrastructure  G-20 Group of Twenty  ICT Information and Communication Technology  ISMS Information Security Management System  MISE Italian Ministry of Economic Development (Ministero delle Infrastrutture e dello Sviluppo Economico)  MSRT Microsoft Malicious Software Removal Tool  NaCTSO National Counter Terrorism Security Of?ce  NCIRP The National Cyber Incident Response Plan  NGN Next Generation Networks  NICE National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education  NIS Network and Information Security  NISP Interministry Unit for and Planning (Nucleo interministeriale situazione e piani?cazione)  NSF National Strategic Framework  NSS National Security Staff  NSTIC National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace  OCSIA Of?ce of Cyber Security & Information Assurance  OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  OMB Of?ce of Management and Budget  PEC Certi?ed E-mail Service (Posta Elettronica Certi?cata)  PSO Operator Security Plan  SCIIC Inter-Ministers Coordination Secretariat for Critical Infrastructure Protection (Segreteria di Coordinamento Interministeriale per  la Infrastrutture)  SIC Secretariat for Critical Infrastructure(Segretaria Infrastrutture Critiche)  SPC Connectivity Public System (Sistema pubblico di connettività)  UACI Cybercrime Analysis Unit (Unità d’analisi del crimine informatico)  ULS Local Security Unit (Unità Locali di Sicurezza)  78