                        10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   Best Practices to Reduce Exploitable      Weaknesses and Attacks      June 2015                                               Developed in partnership with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Industrial Control Systems  Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT), the FBI, and the Information Technology ISAC.
WaterISAC also acknowledges the Multi-State ISAC for its contributions to this document.
© WaterISAC 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   i   About WaterISAC   The Water Information Sharing and Analysis Center, established in 2002 by the water and wastewater  industry, is the designated communications and operations arm of the United States water and wastewater  sector.
With an all-hazards focus, WaterISAC provides its members with threat alerts and analysis as well as  best practices and training on reducing risk, mitigating vulnerabilities, improving resiliency, and recovering  from natural and manmade emergencies.
WaterISAC members are in the U.S., Canada, and Australia.
They include water and wastewater utilities;  federal, state, and local government agencies involved in security, law enforcement, intelligence analysis,  emergency response, and public health; and engineering and consulting firms.
WaterISAC members have access to the world’s largest and richest source of information and tools for  strengthening water and wastewater utility security, resilience, and emergency management.
For more information about WaterISAC, visit https://www.waterisac.org or email service@waterisac.org.
If your organization has experienced a cybersecurity breach or suspects a breach has occurred, please contact  WaterISAC and ICS-CERT:   WaterISAC  Email: analyst@waterisac.org  Call: 866-H20-ISAC  Online Incident Report form: https://www.waterisac.org/report-incident   ICS-CERT  Email: ics-cert@hq.dhs.gov   Call: 877-776-7585                           WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   ii   Introduction   In partnership with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Industrial Control Systems Cyber  Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT), the FBI, and the Information Technology ISAC, WaterISAC has  developed a list of 10 basic cybersecurity recommendations water and wastewater utilities can use to  reduce exploitable weaknesses and defend against avoidable data breaches and cyber attacks.
This document is an  updated version of the 10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures to Reduce Exploitable Weaknesses and Attacks  guide that WaterISAC published in August 2012.
In reviewing its incident reports for 2014, ICS-CERT noted that implementation of the first three  recommendations likely would have detected the issues, prevented the vulnerabilities, and averted the  resulting impacts related to those incidents.
Although risks remain and threat actors will continue to  change their capabilities and methods, ICS-CERT advises that the first three recommendations be  implemented as soon as practical.
For further measures to reduce cyber risks, consult the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure  Cybersecurity by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the American Water  Works Association’s (AWWA’s) Cybersecurity Guidance and Tool.
The NIST Cybersecurity Framework is  a set of voluntary practices, standards, and guidelines created to help critical infrastructure owners and  operators manage cyber risks.
The AWWA Guidance and Tool is a sector-specific approach for adopting  the NIST Cybersecurity Framework.
Also, download WaterISAC’s Cybersecurity Resource Guide for more information on key resources to  help water and wastewater utilities and the government agencies that support them mitigate risks and  resolve vulnerabilities.
WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   1   1)  Maintain an Accurate Inventory of Control System Devices and Eliminate Any Exposure of   this Equipment to External Networks   Never allow any machine on the control network to talk directly to a machine on the business  network or on the Internet.
Although some organizations’ industrial control systems may not  directly face the Internet, a connection still exists if those systems are connected to a part of the  network – such as the corporate side – that has a communications channel to external (non- trusted) resources (i.e., to the Internet).
Organizations may not realize this connection exists, but a persistent cyber threat actor can find  such pathways and use them to access and exploit industrial control systems to attempt to create a  physical consequence.
Therefore, organizations are encouraged to conduct thorough assessments  of their systems, including the corporate enterprise segments, to determine where pathways exist.
Any channels between devices on the control system and equipment on other networks should be  eliminated to reduce network vulnerabilities.
ICS-ALERT-12-046-01A Increasing Threat to Industrial Control Systems (ICS-CERT)  ICS-ALERT-11-343-01A Control System Internet Accessibility (ICS-CERT)   ?
Targeted Cyber Intrusion Detection and Mitigation Strategies (ICS-CERT)      2)  Implement Network Segmentation and Apply Firewalls   Network segmentation entails classifying and categorizing IT assets, data, and personnel into  specific groups, and then restricting access to these groups.
By placing resources into different  areas of a network, a compromise of one device or sector cannot translate into the exploitation of  the entire system.
Otherwise, cyber threat actors would be able to exploit any vulnerability within  an organization’s system – the “weakest chain in the link” – to gain entry and move laterally  throughout a network and access sensitive equipment and data.
Given the rise of the “Internet of  Things” – whereby many previously non-Internet connected devices, such as video cameras, are  now linked to systems and the web – the importance of segmenting networks is greater than ever.
Access to network areas can be restricted by isolating them entirely from one another, which is  optimal in the case of industrial control systems (as described in recommendation #1 above), or by  implementing firewalls.
A firewall is a software program or hardware device that filters the inbound  and outbound traffic between different parts of a network or between a network and the Internet.
For connections that face the Internet, a firewall can be set up to filter incoming and outgoing  information.
By reducing the number of pathways into and within your networks and by implementing  security protocols on the pathways that do exist, it is much more difficult for a threat to enter your  system and gain access to other areas.
Creating network boundaries and segments empowers an organization to enforce both detective and  protective controls within its infrastructure.
The capability to monitor, restrict, and govern  communication flows yields to a practical capability to baseline network traffic (especially traffic  traversing a network boundary), and identify anomalous or suspicious communication flows.
WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   2   These boundaries also provide a means to practically detect potential lateral movement, network  footprinting and enumeration, and device communications attempting to traverse from one zone to  another.
Improving Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity with Defense-In-Depth Strategies (ICS- CERT)   ?
Why You Need to Segment Your Network for Security (CSO)  ?
Firewall Deployment for SCADA and Process Control Networks (UK Centre for the   Protection of National Infrastructure via ICS-CERT)   ?
Guide to Industrial Control Systems Security – Special Publication 800-82 (NIST)      3)  Use Secure Remote Access Methods   The ability to remotely connect to a network has added a great deal of convenience for end users,  but a secure access method, such as a Virtual Private Network (VPN), should be used if remote  access is required.
A VPN is an encrypted data channel for securely sending and receiving data via  public IT infrastructure (such as the Internet).
Through a VPN, users are able to remotely access  internal resources like files, printers, databases, or websites as if directly connected to the network.
This remote access can further be hardened by reducing the number of Internet Protocol (IP)  addresses that can access it by utilizing network devices and/or firewalls to specific IP addresses  and/or ranges and from within the U.S.
Note that a VPN is only as secure as the devices connected  to it.
A laptop computer infected with malware can introduce those vulnerabilities into the network,  leading to additional infections and negating the security of the VPN.
Configuring and Managing Remote Access for Industrial Control Systems (ICS-CERT)  ?
Virtual Private Networking: An Overview (Microsoft)      4)  Establish Role-Based Access Controls and Implement System Logging   Role-based access control grants or denies access to network resources based on job functions.
This  limits the ability of individual users – or attackers – to reach files or parts of the system they  shouldn’t access.
For example, SCADA system operators likely do not need access to the billing  department or certain administrative files.
Therefore, define the permissions based on the level of  access each job function needs to perform its duties, and work with human resources to implement  standard operating  procedures to remove network access of former employees and contractors.
In  addition, limiting employee permissions through role-based access controls can facilitate tracking  network intrusions or suspicious activities during an audit.
Implementing a logging capability allows for the monitoring of system activity.
This enables  organizations to conduct thorough root cause analyses to find the sources of issues in the system,  which may have been the activities of an employee or an outsider.
Monitoring network traffic also  allows organizations to determine if a user is making unauthorized actions or if an outsider is in the  system, which provides an opportunity to intervene before problems are manifested.
WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   3   ?
An Introduction to Role Based Access Control (NIST)  ?
Extending Role Based Access Control (SANS Institute)  ?
Targeted Cyber Intrusion Detection and Mitigation Strategies (ICS-CERT)      5)  Use Only Strong Passwords, Change Default Passwords, and Consider Other Access   Controls   Use strong passwords to keep your systems and information secure, and have different passwords  for different  accounts.
Also, include uppercase and lowercase letters, numerals, and special  characters.
Change all default passwords upon installation of new software, particularly for  administrator accounts and control system devices, and regularly thereafter.
Implement other  password security features, such as an account lock-out that activates when too many incorrect  passwords have been entered.
Organizations may also consider requiring multi-factor  authentication, which entails users verifying their identities – via codes sent to devices they  previously registered – whenever they attempt to sign-in.
(Microsoft)      6)  Maintain Awareness of Vulnerabilities and Implement Necessary Patches and Updates   Most vendors work diligently to develop patches for identified vulnerabilities.
But even after patches  and updates have been released, many systems remain vulnerable because organizations are either  unaware of or choose to not implement these fixes.
Moreover, Cisco’s 2015 Annual Security Report points out that 40% of CISOs  interviewed in a survey indicated they did not have system patching programs in place.
These  unpatched vulnerabilities amount to a “low-hanging fruit” that cyber criminals can easily take  advantage of.
To protect one’s organization from these opportunistic attacks, a system of monitoring for and  applying system patches and updates should be implemented.
WaterISAC regularly posts  information on vulnerabilities and patches, which it receives from its partners at the U.S.  Department of Homeland Security’s ICS-CERT and United States Computer Emergency Readiness  Team (US-CERT), other ISACs, and cybersecurity firms, among others.
Where possible, organizations  should also consider setting systems and software to auto-update to avoid missing critical updates.
These updates are designed to fix known vulnerabilities and are encouraged for any Internet- connected device.
Recommended Practice for Patch Management of Control Systems (ICS-CERT)   WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   4   ?
Software Update Management Guidelines (Microsoft)  ?
Index of Advisories by Vendor (ICS-CERT)     7)  Develop and Enforce Policies on Mobile Devices   The proliferation of laptops, tablets, smartphones, and other mobile devices in the workplace  presents significant security challenges.
The mobile nature of these devices means they are  potentially exposed to external, compromised applications and networks and malicious actors.
Further contributing to this challenge is the increasing trend of organizations allowing employees  to use their personal electronic devices for work purposes, known as the “Bring Your Own Device  (BYOD)” phenomenon.
Therefore, it’s important to develop policies on the reasonable limits of mobile devices in your  office and on your networks.
These measures should be strictly enforced for all employees, as well  as for contractors.
Devices should also be password protected to ensure only authorized users can  log-in.
Otherwise, an unauthorized user can gain access to restricted networks and files using an  authorized user’s device.
Similarly, employees should avoid or be cautious about using devices that  do not belong to them as they cannot be sure these are properly protected or comply with  established policy.
Such devices may actually be infected, and using them could put the information  and networks you access at risk.
Cybersecurity for Electronic Devices (US-CERT)  ?
Guidelines on Cell Phone and PDA Security (NIST)  ?
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) Design Considerations Guide (Microsoft)      8)  Implement an Employee Cybersecurity Training Program   Cybersecurity for critical infrastructure sectors that operate industrial control systems, such as the  water and wastewater sector, is extremely important given that these systems are increasingly  being targeted.
The 2015 Dell Security Annual Threat Report reports a doubling of the number of  attacks against SCADA systems in 2014 as compared to 2013.
Like any security enterprise,  cybersecurity requires teamwork with all members of an organization playing a part in identifying  potential threats and vulnerabilities and bringing them to the attention of others.
When employees  aren’t involved in cybersecurity, not only can vulnerabilities and threats go unnoticed but the  employees themselves can become conduits through which attacks are executed.
Therefore,  employees should receive initial and periodic cybersecurity training, helping to maintain the security  of the organization as a whole.
While cybersecurity is an expansive field, there are certain topics that should be emphasized for  general awareness.
One such topic is social engineering, which continues to be a popular means for  cyber criminals to prey upon unsuspecting employees.
These methods involve emails (“phishing”),  phone calls, or other types of personal interactions in which malicious actors attempt to entice  employees into providing  sensitive personal or corporate information, such as account passwords  or details about information technology infrastructure.
Alternatively, these actors might attempt to  make employees perform specific actions, such as pay for alleged services, download infected   WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   5   attachments, or visit malicious websites.
Training should also incorporate the importance of smart Internet browsing practices.
Cyber attackers employ a variation of this type of tactic, a “watering-hole” attack, to target the  employees of a company they know will visit the website.
Securing Your Web Browser (US-CERT)  ?
Incident Handling: Preparing for Incident Response (ICS-CERT)     9)  Involve Executives in Cybersecurity   Despite the continued proliferation of cyber threats and the far-reaching effects cyber attacks can  have, researchers have found that organizational leaders are often unaware of cybersecurity threats  and needs.
In a study of cyber incident response by the Ponemon Institute, researchers found that  only 20% of IT security professionals surveyed regularly communicated with management about  threats.
Additionally, just 14% of these individuals reported that executive management participated  in the incident management process.
The study authors note that a deficit of involvement and  awareness by organization executives may make it difficult to secure funding for cybersecurity  measures and to get the support of leadership for company-wide efforts.
While organizations are increasingly elevating cybersecurity to the executive level by adding the role  of Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), a recent report from ThreatTrack Security found that  this position has yet to achieve a sufficient level of respect and acceptance.
Specifically, it found that  44% of executives believe CISOs should be accountable for any organizational data breaches, but  54% believe CISOs should not be responsible for cybersecurity purchasing decisions.
The report  concludes that organizations must do a better job of understanding and utilizing this position.
Additionally, involving executives in cybersecurity now will help them to address cybersecurity in  their interactions with external stakeholders, such as if they are questioned following an incident.
In  its report, M-Trends 2015: A View from the Front Lines, Mandiant discusses how the press,  partners, investors, and consumers now demand more details about cyber breaches, including the  type of malware used and how attackers gained access.
Mandiant notes that victim organizations  realized “how crucial strong, consistent communication is in the wake of major breaches” given the  calls for timely information and the speculation that will arise when it is not provided.
Cybersecurity Questions for CEOs (US-CERT)          WaterISAC     June 2015   10 Basic Cybersecurity Measures   6   10)  Implement Measures for Detecting Compromises and Develop a Cybersecurity Incident   Response Plan   Despite the many preventative measures organizations implement, many still experience  compromises.
Indeed, many cybersecurity experts have noted that experiencing a compromise is  not really a question of “if,” but more of a question of “when.” When a compromise occurs, the  organizations that fare the best will be those that quickly detect the issue and have a plan in place to  respond.
Implementing such measures as intrusion detection systems (IDSs) and intrusion prevention systems  (IPSs), anti-virus software, and logs (previously described in recommendation #4) can help to detect  compromises in their earliest stages.
Most IDSs and IPSs use signatures to detect port scans,  malware, and other abnormal network communications.
An effective cybersecurity response plan will limit damage, increase the confidence of  partners and customers, and reduce recovery time and costs.
Plans should include measures for  reacting to destructive malware in an ICS environment.
In such situations, organizations should be  prepared to “island” their ICS environments by disconnecting from non-ICS networks.
They should also  be capable of going to “manual operations” if network conditions impact visibility from the SCADA  system, or if malware potentially renders control devices inoperable via an automated means.
Rather than being developed by a single entity, the plan should be a product of collaboration between  all departments that would be stakeholders in a cybersecurity incident.
This will ensure a cooperative  and unified response that leverages all of an organization’s resources to the greatest extent possible.
For enhanced responsive capability in the event of a cybersecurity incident, organizations should  consider forming a Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT).
This task is not complete once the plan has been developed; it needs to be operationalized as well.
Furthermore, to truly understand their cybersecurity incident response  plan, organizations must practice them through regular exercises.
This will ensure that all stakeholders  understand the procedures that would be implemented in the event of a significant cyber disruption  or breach, enabling a more effective and efficient response.
Developing an ICS Cybersecurity Incident Response Capability (ICS-CERT)  ?
Best Practices for Continuity of Operations (ICS-CERT)        Cyber Security Standards  Karen Scarfone, Dan Benigni and Tim Grance  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, Maryland    Abstract: The goal of cyber security standards is to improve the security of information technology (IT) systems,  networks, and critical infrastructures.
A cyber security standard defines both functional and assurance requirements  within a product, system, process, or technology environment.
Well-developed cyber security standards enable  consistency among product developers and serve as a reliable metric for purchasing security products.
Cyber security standards cover a broad range of granularity, from the mathematical definition of a cryptographic  algorithm to the specification of security features in a web browser, and are typically implementation independent.
A standard must address user needs, but must also be practical since cost and technological limitations must be  considered in building products to meet the standard.
Additionally, a standard’s requirements must be verifiable;  otherwise, users cannot assess security even when products are tested against the standard.
Keywords: cyber security; information technology; standards; standardization    The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines a standard as “a document, established by  consensus and approved by a recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines, or  characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given  context” [1].
Numerous standards have been developed for cyber security to help organizations better manage  security risk, implement security controls that meet legal and regulatory requirements, and achieve performance and  cost benefits.
This article provides an overview of cyber security standards in general and highlights some of the  major ongoing international, regional, national, industry, and government standards efforts.
It also discusses the  advantages of having standards and explains how organizations can participate in standards research and  development.
1 Cyber Security Standards Overview  Cyber security standards are proliferating.
Governments and businesses increasingly mandate their implementation.
In addition, a  growing number of organizations are becoming involved in standards development.
Cyber security standards are  being embraced because they are useful.
They provide tangible benefits that justify the time and financial resources  required to produce and apply them.
Security technology has not kept pace with the rapid development of IT, leaving systems, data, and users vulnerable  to both conventional and innovative security threats.
Politically motivated adversaries, financially motivated  criminals, mischievous attackers, and malicious or careless authorized users are among the threats to systems and  technology that have the potential to jeopardize cyber security, US economic security, consumer identities and  privacy, and US public health and safety.
While it is impossible to eliminate all threats, improvements in cyber  security can help manage security risks by making it harder for attacks to succeed and by reducing the effect of  attacks that do occur.
Cyber security standards enhance security and contribute to risk management in several important ways.
Standards  help establish common security requirements and the capabilities needed for secure solutions.
For example, Federal  Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, establishes  standard requirements for all cryptographic-based security systems used by federal organizations to protect sensitive  or valuable data [2].
Conformance testing can then be performed against the standard to provide assurance to users  that cryptographic modules are built to requirements.
Security standards facilitate sharing of knowledge and best practices by helping to ensure common understanding of  concepts, terms, and definitions, which prevents errors.
For example, the Information and Communications  Technology (ICT) Security Standards Roadmap [3] includes references to several security glossaries, including the  ISO/IEC JTC1/SC27 IT Security Terminology publication [4].
Other helpful resources include the Internet Security  Glossary from the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Request for Comments (RFC) 4949 [5] and a  compendium of the International Telecommunications Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T)   approved security definitions [6].
Using common definitions for security terminology saves time in the development  of new standards and supports the interoperability of standards.
Cyber security standards also provide other benefits.
Because standards generally incorporate best practices and  conformance requirements, their use typically results in improvements in quality.
Standards reduce the number of  technical variations and allow consumers easy access to interchangeable technology.
Standards compliance  programs offer a way to measure products and services against objective criteria and provide a basis for comparing  products, such as confirming that they offer certain sets of security features.
Consumers often benefit from cost  savings that result from the development, manufacture, sales, and delivery of standards-based, interoperable  products and services.
Another benefit of cyber security standards is that the standards development process, with its  typical practices of involving a wide range of subject-matter experts, prototyping, and incorporating conformity  assessment criteria and methodologies, helps ensure that standards are implementable and reflect recommended  practices.
Products or services that have been demonstrated to conform to IT security standards can then be expected  to offer more assurance than nonstandard products.
When security standards are not available for a technology, several problems often occur.
Organizations that adopt  the technology may not be aware of its inherent security weaknesses and the implications of implementing the  technology for the organization’s security posture.
Organizations also may not have reliable information on how to  take advantage of the technology’s security capabilities or on what additional security controls may be needed to  compensate for weaknesses in those capabilities.
This tends to lead to insecure implementations and insufficient  security maintenance, making systems more likely to be exploited and the organization more vulnerable to harm.
1.1 Cyber Security Standards Characteristics  Standards can be defined as widely used rules or specifications for activities or their results.
Nevertheless, there are  often significant differences in how individual standards are developed and applied.
These differences can help  determine how quickly and easily a new standard is embraced and thereby influence the continued use or demise of  alternatives.
As a result, standards are often described by the specific characteristics of their development and  intended application, including the development process used to produce the standard, the way in which the standard  is regulated, the applicability of the standard to different audiences, the availability of the standard to the public, and  the measurability of the standard.
Standards come into being in different ways.
Proprietary or company standards are developed by companies with  little or no participation by external parties.
De facto standards are created through the informal adoption of  prevailing practices or norms.
The majority are voluntary standards developed through some form of voluntary  consensus process, in which stakeholders participate and agree.
Some voluntary standards development efforts are  open to all interested parties, while others are restricted to specific groups or individuals, such as members of a  particular alliance or consortium.
Standards differ in the ways that they are regulated.
Compliance with standards may be optional, or a governing or  regulatory organization may make compliance a requirement.
Voluntary standards are generally called voluntary,  not only because they are created through volunteers’ efforts but also because they are intended for optional use,  although a regulating agency could adopt or mandate their use.
Mandatory standards are standards whose use is  prescribed by a regulatory agency or implementing organization.
Mandatory standards typically implement laws and  regulations.
The audience to whom a standard applies depends upon the entity that develops or adopts it.
An international  standard is one that is adopted by an international standards development organization (SDO) and made available to  the public, such as ISO International Standards.
A regional standard is a standard adopted by several nations in a  particular geographic region, for example, European Committee for Standardization (CEN) standards.
A national  standard is a standard developed for use in a particular country either by a government entity or a national SDO.
A  national standard can also be an international standard that is adopted for use by an individual country.
Examples  include FIPS and American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards in the United States and British Standards  Institution (BSI) Standards in the United Kingdom.
An industry standard is one that has been adopted by a  particular industry for common use, for example, Security Industry Association (SIA) standards.
Finally, a company  standard, also known as a proprietary standard, is a standard developed and owned by a commercial entity that  specifies practices or conventions unique to that entity.
Standards may or may not be freely accessible by everyone.
By definition, open standards are publicly available,  but their developer may charge for copies.
Examples of open standards that are available to the public for a fee are  ISO standards and standards developed by ANSI-accredited organizations.
A vendor who develops and owns a  proprietary standard may choose to make it available to promote interoperability and broaden the market, or choose  not to share it.
A growing number of standards require a demonstration of conformance.
A performance standard states  requirements in terms of required results with criteria for verifying conformance, but without stating the methods for  achieving required results.
Examples of performance standards are the Federal Information Security Management  Act (FISMA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
A prescriptive standard  specifies design requirements, how a requirement is to be achieved, or how an item is to be constructed, but without  criteria for measuring the conformity of the results with specified requirements.
An example of a prescriptive  standard is ISO/IEC 7810 on identification card physical construction.
The development and use of performance  standards are encouraged since they are less likely than prescriptive specifications to stand in the way of innovation.
Still, prescriptive standards are sometimes more appropriate, particularly for describing test methods or procedures  or for defining standards to achieve interoperability.
1.2 Cyber Security Standards Interaction  A standard is rarely applied in isolation.
When technologies, processes, and management practices are combined to  solve a business problem, multiple standards normally come into play.
When components are integrated, each may  entail one or more technical or management standards.
For example, a given business solution is likely to involve a  variety of IT security configuration standards, such as networking, communications, and security management  standards.
Each standard imposes requirements that may or may not conflict with the requirements of other  standards.
Standards can interact in several ways.
Some standards are complementary, which means that one standard supports  or reinforces the requirements of another.
For example, ISO frequently publishes multipart standards that can be  considered complementary, where each part is a separately developed volume covering a different aspect of a central  issue.
Some standards may conflict with each other, which means that there are inconsistencies or contradictions  between standards, resulting in issues such as technological incompatibility or legal noncompliance.
Other standards  are discrete, which means that they have no direct effect on one another.
There are also standards gaps, where there  is no formal standard developed for a particular area of security, although a guideline may exist.
Standards gaps  typically occur when a technology is evolving so rapidly that standards development cannot keep pace.
In other  cases, a gap exists because consensus has not been reached on either the technology or the standard.
1.3 Standards and Guidelines  Standards can be contrasted with another category of documents, generally referred to as guidelines.
Both standards  and guidelines provide guidance aimed at enhancing cyber security, but guidelines usually lack the level of  consensus and formality associated with standards.
Some standards, such as ANSI Standards and FIPS Publications,  are easily recognized because they include the term standard in their titles.
For  example, standards issued by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), an international standards  developer, are designated as Recommendations.
A standard issued by the IETF starts out as an RFC and retains that  designation even after being adopted as a standard.
In other cases, documents that are not standards in the strict  sense of the word may be treated as such by an organization if it suits the organization’s needs.
For example, many  US and international organizations and businesses have adopted National Institute of Standards and Technology  (NIST) Special Publications as standards, even though those documents are published as guidelines for use by US  Federal agencies.
Some organizations develop both standards and guidelines.
For example, in addition to international standards,  ISO/IEC issues several types of guidelines, including technical specifications, publicly available specifications  (PAS), and technical reports, according to the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1, Section 3 [7].
A technical specification  may be published when the immediate release of an international standard is not feasible, such as when the subject  in question is still under development.
A PAS may be an intermediate specification published prior to the  development of a full international standard, or in International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) it may be a  “dual logo” publication published in collaboration with an external organization.
A PAS does not fulfill the   requirements for a standard.
A technical report is an informative document generally intended to educate the reader,  not to specify an international standard.
2 Cyber Security Standards Developers  International, regional, national, industry, and government groups are involved in the development of cyber security  standards.
An SDO is an organization whose primary mission is the development of voluntary consensus standards  on an international, regional, or on a national basis.
Most SDOs cover a wide variety of technical areas, not just  cyber security.
Consortia, industry alliances, and associations are all groups of organizations or individuals with  similar interests that promote standards development.
A consortium is typically formed for a limited time to achieve  a specific goal, such as the development of standards.
Industry alliances and associations tend to be more loosely  formed to foster common interests.
Consortia and industry alliances comprise companies, and associations are made  up of individuals.
Finally, the US government and other national governments develop standards specifically  intended for government audiences.
Examples of organizations in each of these categories are provided below, along  with brief discussions of some of the organizations’ cyber security standards work.
2.1 International Standards Development Organizations  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association (IEEE-SA) develops standards in many  areas, including information technology, telecommunications, and power generation.
An example of IEEE-SA’s  security work is its 802 Local Area Network (LAN)/Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) Standards Committee.
Various working groups within the committee develop widely used standards for many types of networking  technologies, such as Ethernet, wireless LANs, Bluetooth, and Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access  (WiMAX).
These standards include the security features built into the wireless networking protocols.
The IETF is concerned with the evolution of the Internet architecture and the operation of the Internet.
The IETF has  dozens of working groups that each focus on a different element of the Internet, including several groups working on  Internet security.
Topics addressed by these working groups include Domain Name System (DNS) security,  authentication protocols, routing protocol security, Internet Protocol (IP) version 6, public key infrastructure, e-mail  security, event logging, and network traffic encryption.
ISO, whose membership consists of the national standards institutes of more than 150 countries, addresses all  standards except those for electrical and electronic engineering, which are the responsibility of the IEC.
ISO and  IEC formed the Joint Technical Committee 1 (JTC1) for IT standards development, including standards for the  security of systems and information.
JTC1 has a number of subcommittees (SC) and working groups that address  specific technologies.
For example, the SC17 group addresses identification cards and personal identification, the  SC27 group focuses on IT security techniques, the SC31 group works on automatic identification and data capture  (AIDC) techniques, and the SC37 group develops biometric standards.
The ITU-T produces standards, called Recommendations, for telecommunication networks.
ITU-T’s standards are  developed by study groups (SG) such as SG17, which covers security, languages, and telecommunications software.
SG17 led the development of the ICT Security Standards Roadmap, which provides information on previous and  current security standards work from several major standards developers, including ISO, IEC, IETF, Organization  for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  (IEEE), and telecommunications-specific organizations.
It also lists current security standards gaps and provides  pointers to security glossaries.
SG17 developed the ICT Security Standards Roadmap in collaboration with the  European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) and the Network and Information Security Steering  Group (NISSG).
2.2 Regional Standards Development Organizations  The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) produces telecommunications standards within  Europe.
ETSI’s cyber security standards activities include work on electronic signatures, smart cards, lawful  interception, and 3GPP.
The CEN, whose members are the national standards organizations of 30 European countries, develops cyber  security standards on its own and in conjunction with other international, national, and government standards  developers.
2.3 National Standards Development Organizations  In the narrowest sense of the term, ANSI is not an SDO, since it does not develop standards; rather, it administers  and coordinates the activities of the US private sector voluntary standardization system.
ANSI sponsors cyber  security-related working groups, such as a Homeland Security Standards Panel and a Healthcare Information  Technology Standards Panel.
The InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS) is an ANSI-accredited organization,  which develops US standards for information and communications technologies.
INCITS comprise technical  committees (TCs) that create standards for different technology areas.
Examples of cyber security-focused TCs are  B10 (identification cards and related devices), CS1 (cyber security), M1 (biometrics), and T6 (radio frequency  identification (RFID) technology).
2.4 Consortia, Industry Alliances, and Associations  The Association for Automatic Identification and Mobility (AIM) is a trade association for entities that are  interested in AIDC technologies.
AIM performs the development of cyber security standards in areas such as  barcodes, card technologies, electronic article surveillance, RFID, real-time locating systems (RTLS), and other  AIDC-related technologies.
The British Security Industry Association (BSIA) is the professional trade association for the security industry in the  United Kingdom.
The BSIA develops codes of practice and technical documents and submits some of them for  consideration as British Standards.
Security areas addressed by the BSIA include access control, information  destruction, physical security equipment, and security systems.
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) is an organization for information assurance,  governance, security, and audit professionals.
It is best known for its information system auditing and control  standards and related initiatives.
For example, ISACA has developed Control Objectives for Information and related  Technology (COBIT), which is a control framework that encompasses several aspects of IT governance, including  risk assessment.
COBIT is based on various international standards and can be used to identify appropriate standards  references during audits.
The Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society (ISA) is a professional association that develops standards  for automation technologies.
For example, its SP99 working group develops security standards for manufacturing  and control systems, such as supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems and distributed control  systems (DCS).
Some of ISA’s reports on this topic have become ANSI standards.
The OASIS develops standards for security and e-business, and is well known for its web services standards work.
OASIS has several working groups focused on security topics such as biometrics, digital signature services,  enterprise key management infrastructures, public key infrastructure adoption, and web services security.
The SIA is an ANSI-accredited SDO that develops systems integration and equipment performance standards.
Several SIA working groups develop physical security standards on topics such as biometrics, mobile security  devices, credential readers, security communications, and security control panels.
2.5 US Government Standards Developers  NIST develops security standards for US Federal information systems.
Examples of FIPS include FIPS 200, which specifies minimum security requirements for federal  information systems; FIPS 199, which provides standards for security categorization of federal systems; and FIPS  197, which defines the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
NIST also hosts the National Center for Standards  and Certification Information (NCSCI), which provides information on US standards and technical regulations, as  well as other national, regional, and international standards.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) assists the President of the United States in the development of  budget, management, and regulatory policies.
OMB’s products include OMB Circulars and OMB Memoranda,  which are instructions or information issued to federal agencies.
Some of these documents mandate the use of  particular security standards or require federal agencies to meet other security requirements.
For example,   OMB Circular A-130 pertains to the management of federal information resources, and OMB Memorandum M-07- 16 mandates security controls to protect the confidentiality of personally identifiable information.
3 Getting Involved in Standards Development  In addition to those mentioned above, there are many other cyber security standards developers already working on  creating new standards.
The ICT Security Standards Roadmap provides information on a number of ongoing  standards activities.
Organizations interested in cyber security standards development can join existing standards  efforts so that they can ensure that standards are developed in a way that is favorable to, or at least compatible with,  their critical interests.
In addition to influencing the direction that a standard takes, actively participating in the standards development  process offers other advantages.
An organization gains a better understanding of the standards under development,  their underlying designs, the trade-offs and compromises made during their development, and the operating  conditions and environments they are intended to serve.
Organizations make contacts and build relationships with  technical experts involved in the development effort, as well as improving their own technical knowledge.
Participation in standards development also benefits the security community by sharing the effort across many  organizations.
Most organizations do not participate in standards development activities.
Nevertheless, participation can be  critical to realizing the benefits of standards.
Also, organizations that choose not to get involved can find themselves  faced with new standards with which they are not prepared to comply.
There are a number of ways to participate in the standards development process, each with its own level of resource  commitment.
Organizations can choose how fully to participate, depending upon the importance of the standard to  the organization and the resources they have available to commit to the effort.
Trackers follow the development of a  standard at a high level, for example, by reading summaries and implementation timelines on the developer’s public  website.
Tracking the progress of a new standard gives organizations the ability to anticipate its effects, even if they  choose not to become more actively involved in its development.
Public reviewers review drafts of the standard and  submit comments, which can influence the content and impact of a standard under development.
For particularly  important standards, organizations should consider becoming members of the entity developing the standards.
The role of driver may be appropriate when the organization’s stake in a new standard is critical.
It may be that  producing the standard is part of the organization’s charter or mission; driving the development of a standard may  require significant resources.
In addition to contributing to the development of new standards, organizations should also consider participating in  the maintenance of existing standards.
Most standards undergo periodic review and revision.
SDOs typically have  established formal maintenance programs to help ensure that their standards do not become dated due to  technological evolution, changes to related standards, or other causes.
References  1. International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission (2004).
ISO/IEC Directives Part  2:2004 (Rules for the Structure and Drafting of international Standards), 5th ed.,  http://publicaa.ansi.org/sites/apdl/Documents/Standards%20Activities/International%20Standardization/ISO/ISOIECDirectivesP art2pdfformat.pdf.
National Institute for Standards and Technology (2001).
FIPS PUB 140-2: Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules,  May.
ITU-T, European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), Network and Information Security Steering Group  (NISSG) (2007).
ICT Security Standards Roadmap, version 2.2, September 2007. http://www.itu.int/ITU- T/studygroups/com17/ict/index.html.
Standing Document 6 (SD6): Glossary of IT Security Terminology, 2008-03-19.  http://www.jtc1sc27.din.de/sce/SD6.
Internet Engineering Task Force (2007).
Internet Security Glossary, August 2007. http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4949.txt.
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (2008).
Security Compendium, Part 2—Approved ITU-T Security Definitions,  http://www.itu.int/dmspub/itu-t/oth/0A/0D/T0A0D00000A0001MSWE.doc.
ISO/IEC Directives Part 1:2008 (Procedures for the Technical Work), 6th ed.,  http://isotc.iso.org/livelink/livelink/fetch/2000/2122/3146825/4229629/4230450/4230455/ISO IEC Directives Part 1 Procedures  for the technical work—2008 6th ed.—PDF format?nodeid=4230504&vernum=0.
Further Reading  American National Standards Institute (ANSI) (2008).
ANSI Standards Activities,  http://www.ansi.org/standardsactivities/overview/overview.aspx?menuid=3.
Association for Automatic Identification and Mobility (AIM) AIM Global Standards, http://www.aimglobal.org/standards/.
British Security Industry Association (BSIA) http://www.bsia.co.uk/index.php.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) http://www.dhs.gov/index.shtm.
European Committee for Standardization (CEN) http://www.cen.eu/cenorm/homepage.htm.
European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) http://www.enisa.europa.eu/index.htm.
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) ETSI Standards,  http://www.etsi.org/WebSite/Standards/Standard.aspx.
IEEE, IEEE Standards Association (IEEE SA) http://standards.ieee.org/.
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) http://www.isaca.org/Template.
ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 001 “Information Technology”.
InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS) http://www.ncits.org/.
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) http://www.iec.ch/.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) http://www.ietf.org/.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) http://www.iso.org/iso/home.htm.
International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/.
Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation Society (ISA), ISA Standards  http://www.isa.org/Template.cfm?Section=Standards2&Template=/customsource/isa/Standards/AutomationStandards.cfm.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) http://csrc.nist.gov/.
NIST National Center for Standards and Certification Information (NCSI) http://ts.nist.gov/Standards/Information/index.cfm.
Information & Communications Technologies (ICT) Standards Board Network and Information Security Steering Group  (NISSG).
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/.
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) http://www.oasis-open.org/.
Process Control Systems Forum (PCSF) https://www.pcsforum.org/.
Security Industry Association (SIA), SIA Standards.
United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), Control Systems Security Program (CSSP) http://www.us- cert.gov/control systems/index.html.
Cross-References  Regulations and Standards  Authentication, Authorization, Access Control, and Privilege Management  Cryptography  Protocol Security  Wireless Security