Proceedings of the American Society for Engineering Management 2017 International Annual Conference  E-H. Ng, B. Nepal, and E. Schott eds.
BENCHMARKING ESTONIA’S CYBER SECURITY: AN ON-RAMPING  METHODOLOGY FOR RAPID ADOPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION      Ernest Y. Wong*, Nan Porter, McKinnon Hokanson, Bing Bing Xie      United States Military Academy      ernest.wong@usma.edu   ____________________________________________________________________________________________    Abstract   In  April  of  2007,  Estonia  fell  victim  to  a  series  of  distributed  denial  of  service  (DDoS)  attacks  that  crippled  its  government websites, email servers, media outlets, and banking system for nearly a month.
Due to the devastating  effects  of  these  cyber  attacks,  Estonia  took  great  efforts  to  strengthen  its  cyber  security  protocols.
This  research  analyzes the reforms that Estonia has implemented in its domestic and foreign policies and attempts to determine if  any of it systemic improvements can help to also bolster cyber security in the United States (US).
The findings from  this research are that Estonia’s policy reforms in cyber security have been the most significant in areas that the US  currently lacks.
Domestically, Estonia has a cyber education program that significantly highlights awareness of the  risks to its critical cyber infrastructure.
Estonia has also promoted public and private partnerships to jointly analyze,  assess, and defend itself against future  cyber attacks..
In foreign affairs, Estonia has bolstered  its relationship  with  allied nations in new  ways  and has synchronized its foreign policies to  improve  stakeholder engagement on cyber  defense.
The  critical  changes  that  Estonia  has  adopted  and  implemented  throughout  the  past  decade  are  what  this  research  endeavors  to  recommend  for  the  US  to  consider  into  its  defense  of  the  cyber  domain.
Furthermore,  this  research proposes an on-ramping methodology that helps to frame how an organization can more easiliy integrate new  processes, practices, and procedures that have worked well for others.
Keywords  Cyber defense and security, cyber resiliency, on-ramping adoption and implementation framework    Introduction  After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Republic of Estonia’s technological capabilities were virtually non- existent.
Soon afterwards, Internet access was considered a critical enabling infrastructure, and  free Wi-Fi spread throughout the country and became the national standard.
Today, Estonia is a world leader in technology and is considered one of  the most wired countries in Europe (Davis, 2007).
On April 30th 2007, pro-Russian hacktivists showcased the devastating impact that cyber effects can have  on the world.
Never before had an entire nation become rendered completely impotent due to a cyber attack.
As a  result of this unprecedented attack, cyber warfare was quickly added into the military lexicon.
No longer were cyber  attacks merely a nuisance that only banks and e-commerce sites had to contend with; the 2007 Russian cyber attacks  on  Estonia  showed  to  the  world  just  how  dangerous  and  deadly  a  cyber  adversary  can  be  and  exposed  just  how  vulnerable nations are to attacks in the cyber domain (Herzog, 2011).
In spite of the calamity it suffered, Estonia has  demonstrated  considerable  resiliency  after  this  attack,  and  the  nation  has  helped  to  spur  a  substantial  amount  of  significant improvements in cyber defense.
In fact, within the span of just one decade Estonia has transitioned into  becoming one of the most advanced nations in cyber security and  cyber defense.
As cyber attacks directed against  American citizens, campanies, and the government increase, it will prove advantageous to examine the measures that  Estonia  has  taken  following  Russia’s  cyber  attack  towards  advancing  the  cyber  security  posture  of  the  US.
By  analyzing and benchmarking the Estonian cyber security strategy after its 2007 cyber attack, this research identifies  key  lessons  learned  that  can  be  applied  to  improve  the  overall  cyber  security  posture  for  all  nations.
Finally,  this  research proposes an on-ramping methodology that will help to better frame how any organization looking to adopt  and implement processes, practices, and procedures that have worked well for others can do so more efficiently and  effectively.
Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017   Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
Background  As a result of a massive and sustained cyber attack on its information infrastructure by Russian hackers  and in the  aftermath of the very first cyber attack directly targeting the national security of a country, Estonia became one of the  first countries in the world to adopt a national cyber security strategy (Czosseck, Ottis, & Taliharm, 2011).
The 2007  cyber attack directed at computers in the Estonian government, schools, and national media left the country without a  number  of  essential  services  for  nearly  a  month.
Although  some  of  the  attacks  on  its  system  merely  consisted  of  vandalism on government websites, the most serious attacks resulted in a series of distributed denial of service (DDoS)  that left the country without access to the Internet, telephones, bank accounts, and credit cards (Czosseck, Ottis, &  Taliharm, 2011).
However, in the aftermath of this cyber attack,  Estonia  has implemented a number of significant  structural changes that make it a paragon for cyber security.
Accordingly, this research  shows how the US government  can benefit greatly from by examining the creation of Estonia’s cyber defense strategy and considering the adoption  of key parts of this strategy for US cyber security.
Republic of Estonia’s Cyber Security Policy  Estonia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2014-2017 currently guides Estonia’s cyber security program and is an integral part  of the nation’s broader security strategy (Estonia, 2014).
The document helps to highlight key developments, assesses  cyber threats to the nation, and provides measures to manage these threats as part of a whole-of-government effort.
This cyber security strategy is similar to the original plan that Estonia put in place immediately after the attacks in  2007,  and  it  continues  to  promote  efforts  that  enhance  the  nation’s  cyber  security.
The  primary  objective  of  this  updated strategy is to increase cyber security capabilities and raise the population’s awareness of cyber threats, thereby  ensuring continued confidence in cyberspace for its citizens.
To do so effectively, this strategy outlines several sub- goals which include ensuring protection of information systems underlying important services, enhancing the fight  against cyber crime, developing national cyber defense capabilities, managing cyber security threats, and promoting  and synchronizing international cyber security policy (Estonia, 2014).
This cyber strategy also dedicates considerable resources on increasing its people’s understanding of cyber  vulnerabilities.
Estonia’s Police and Border Guard Board  has been tasked with elevating the nation’s awareness of  cyber threats, and as a result, has created web-constables that educate its citizens on the security of the Internet and  help  protect  its  children  and  young  people  with  their  online  presence  (Estonia,  2014).
In  addition,  this  strategy  encourages  greater  integration  between  the  private,  public  and  third-party  sectors  in  order  to  promote  a  more  comprehensive cyber security posture.
This has resulted in the creation of the Estonian Defense League’s Cyber Unit  which is composed of cybersecurity and industry professionals who volunteer their expertise to improve the security  of Estonian state agencies’ information systems through coordinated exercises and testing of cyber defense solutions  (Estonia, 2014).
With Estonia’s view towards enhancing relationships with allies and promoting international cyber  security policy, partnerships have extended beyond traditional regional entities, such as NATO, the European Union,  and the Baltic States; Estonia has created new forms of cyber cooperation such as the Freedom Online Coalition, the  United Nations Group of Governmental Experts, and the Friends of the Presidency of the European Union in order to  grow and synchronize mutually beneficial security policies that Estonia wants to promote (Estonia, 2014).
Linkages to the Cyber Security Goals of the US Department of Defense  In 2015, the US Department of Defense (DoD) published its updated cyber security strategy and placed cyber threats  as the nation’s number one strategic threat (US DoD, 2015).
In this document, the US DoD outlines its three three  primary cyber missions: 1) to defend its own networks, systems, and information; 2) to be prepared to defend the US  and its interests against cyber attacks of significant consequence; and 3) if directed by the President or the Secretary  of Defense, it  must be able to provide integrated cyber capabilities to support military operations and contingency  plans (US DoD, 2015).
The US DoD document also includes a number of strategic goals which include: 1) build and  maintain ready forces and capabilities to conduct cyberspace operations; 2) defend the DoD information network and  data as well as mitigate risks to DoD missions; 3) be prepared to defend the US homeland and US vital interests from  disruptive or destructive cyber attacks; 4) build and maintain viable cyber options and plan to use those options to  control  conflict  escalation  and  to  shape  the  conflict  environment  at  all  stages;  and  5)  build  and  maintain  robust  international alliances and partnerships to deter shared threats and increase international  security and stability (US  DoD, 2015).
As with in the Estonian strategy, the US DoD cyber strategy places considerable emphasis on international  alliances and partnerships in order to bolster global cyber security against potential threats and states: “All three of  DoD’s  cyber  missions  require  close  collaboration  with  foreign  allies  and  partners.
and  [the  US]  seeks  to  build  partnership capacity in cybersecurity and cyber defense, and to deepen operational partnerships where appropriate”   Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017   2      Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
And based on the many other similarities and overlapping goals among these two cyber strategies,  it appears evident that the US DoD has placed meaningful stock in learning from Estonia’s experiences and is putting  in place defensive measures that will help to prevent a cyber attack as devastating as the one inflicted upon Estonia  from happening again.
Methodology  While Estonia endured being  without a number of critical  services  for  over 22 days after the 2007 cyber attack, a  number of security experts question whether the US, whose dependence on the cyber domain is arguably greater than  Estonia’s from a decade earlier, can withstand such a calamitous shock (Kaplan, 2016).
“The network connectivity  that the United States has used to tremendous advantage, economically and militarily, over the past 20 years has made  the country more vulnerable than ever to cyber attacks,” concluded the DoD Defense Science Board Task Force on  Resilient  Military  Systems  (US  Defense  Science  Board,  2013).
With  cyber  adversaries  becoming  more  and  more  capable of conducting such attacks and with a computer network infrastructure that was built on inherently insecure  architectures,  the  US  has  begun  to  realize  that  it  must  quickly  ramp  up  and  seriously  improve  its  cyber  defense  capabilities.
Studying, learning from, and emulating Estonia’s cyber resiliency efforts can help to also reduce the US  transition period in becoming prepared for a major cyber attack.
This research begins first with structuring a functional  hierarchy that helps define Estonia’s cyber policies,  then progresses to determining the relative values of  Estonia’s  key cyber security improvement benchmarks, transitions next to a quantitative modeling process that helps to rank  order  cyber  policies  that  have  the  most  impact,  and  finally  concludes  with  the  introduction  of  an  on-ramping  framework that helps expedite organizational adoption and implementation.
A Functional Hierachy for Systematically Benchmarking Effective Cyber Policies  In  order  to  benchmark  the  most  critical  and  applicable  portions  of  the  2014-2017  Estonian  Cyber  Strategy,  this  research  begins  with  a  functional  analysis  to  identify  those  system  functions  and  system  interfaces  that  have  the  greatest potential to improve the US cyber security posture (Parnell, Driscoll, & Henderson,  2011).
The functional  hierarchy  depicted  in  Exhibit  1  highlights  those  areas  and  functions  that  this  research  conjectures  would  be  most  helpful in rapidly maturing the the US cyber strategy through emulating and learning from what Estonia has already     .
A Functional Hierachy for Analyzing Estonia’s Post-2007 Cyber Policies      Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017      3   Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
initiated for its cyber strategy.
This functional  hierarchy also provides this research with a clear plan of action  and  road map for analyzing the study’s fundamental goal: how to increase US cyber security by evaluating the post-2007  Estonian cyber policies.
This overarching goal, in turn, breaks down into two distinct  functions—how Estonia  has  approached its domestic cyber policies and how it has navigated its foreign policies.
Doing this permits the researchers  to more easily compartmentalize the various interactions that define Estonia’s cyber plan.
Assigning the Relative Importance of the Sub-Functions and Objectives into a Swing Weight Matrix  Recognizing that not all value measures have equal importance, the researchers employ the swing weight methodology  to quantify the tradeoffs between multiple objectives (Parnell, Driscoll, & Henderson, 2011).
The top side of the matrix defines the value measure importance and the left side defines the  impact  of  changing  the  value  measure  range  on  the  decision.
Accordingly,  this  study  arbitrarily  scores  100  to  the  objective of Education and Awareness, located at the top left quadrant of the matrix, as the most important  measure  because it has the highest mission criticality and changes the most across its range of values, thereby providing the  highest degree of variation.
What this  matrix reveals is that this research  has the  Education  and  Awareness  objective  (with  a  score  of  100)  being  weighted  twice  as  much  as  the  International  Cooperation objective (with a score of 50) and being weighted five times as much as the Public and Private Sector  Cooperation objective (with a  score of 20).
A Swing Weight Matrix for Quantifying Relative Importance of the 6 Sub-Functions and Objectives        Value Models to Quantify Each of the Sub-Functions and Objectives  In the next step of this study, the researchers construct value models for each of the sub-function and objective’s value  measurements.
The equations provided for each of the value models in Exhibit 3  represent the best-fitting line for  each of the 6 value measurements.
Exhibit 4 concisely summarizes the key information about the quantitative value  model from both the swing weight matrix as well as the 6 value models for each of the sub-functions and objectives.
Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017   4   Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
Key Information on the Swing Weight Matrix and Quantitative Value Models   Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017      5                 Sub-Function & ObjectiveMeasure TypeValue ShapeSwing WeightGlobal WeightBest Fitting Equation1.1  Cyber Security Ed.
and Aware.ProxyConvex1000.274y = 1.3393x3 - 3.8929x + 2.85711.2  Security of Private SectorProxyConcave700.192y = -2.6607x2 + 31.95x + 4.14291.3  Coop.
SectorsProxyS-Shape200.055y = -0.1505x3 + 2.5694x2 - 0.7275x + 0.39681.4  Legal ChangesProxyConcave900.247y = -1.942x2 + 27.848x - 3.03572.1  Detecting Cyber AttacksProxyLinear350.096y = 10x2.2  International CooperationProxyS-Shape500.137y = 0.013x4 - 0.5845x3 + 5.7465x2 - 2.5926x + 0.2778Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
Comparing US Cyber Security to Estonian Cyber Security and Recommending an On-Ramp Framework  In the final step of this study, the researchers approximate the raw input data values to calculate how the overall US  cyber policy weighted score compares against Estonia’s score.
While there may be concern that the US score falls below 50% of  the Ideal Score, the researchers believe the overarching goal of this analysis is not to debate where the US falls in  relation  to  other  nations,  but  rather,  to  identify  those  key  areas  where  the  US  can  focus  additional  emphasis  and  resources to quickly improve its cyber security posture.
Comparison of Approximated US and Estonia Cyber Scores   Exhibit 6.
Radar/Web Diagram Showing 2 Key Sub-Functions to Improve US Cyber Defense the Most           assessment beyond the calculated overall weighted scores.
In order to move US policy towards the ideal perimeter, it  ought to focus on improving in two key sub-functions and objectives: Cyber Security Education and Awareness and  Cooperation Between Private and Public Sectors.
In  order  to  help  the  US  more  rapidly  adopt  and  implement  policies  and  activities  that  address  these  two  objective  shortcomings,  this  research  proposes  that  the  US  ought  to  adopt  a  “fast-lane”  on-ramping  methodology.
Because the US has already adopted and implemented a number of cyber polices  that Estonia recommends, indicating that it has studied and is learning from Estonia’s 2007 cyber attack, the US ought  to  have  the  capacity  and  capability  to  more  readily  implement  additional  measures  to  address  its  cyber  defense  shortcomings.
The US has already implemented policies that target the low-hanging fruit most often seen in the slow- lane; instead it now needs to go after the harder policies that drive cultural shifts and organizational paradigm changes.
Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017   6      Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
Increasing  Education  and  Awareness  as  well  as  the  promoting  Public  and  Private  Partnerships  are  difficult  undertakings that will require a whole-of-nation strategy.
But to ensure the nation is ready for a cyber event along the  scale of Estonia’s 2007 attack requires difficult and drastic change.
The hope is that this research helps spur US policy- makers to think of a “fast-lane” on-ramp strategy as a viable option for the cyber resiliency of the entire US.
On-Ramping for Rapid Adoption and Implementation--Fast Lane vs Slow Lane On-Ramps           Conclusion  What makes Estonia supremely qualified to serve as an excellent benchmark for comparing cyber policies is that in  April  of  2007,  it  actually  experienced  a  cyber-9/11  attack  that  fundamentally  changed  the  way  the  entire  nation  approaches  cyber  security.
This  research  acknowledges  and  affirms  that  the  US  has  already  adopted  a  number  of  domestic and foreign cyber security objectives that Estonia has proposed in its Cyber Security Strategy 2014-2017.
However, this research concludes the US is deficient in two key objectives and recommends the US adopt a “fast- lane” on-ramping strategy that addresses how to better educate its citizens on cyber threats and promote the public  and private partnerships that are critically necessary to ensure a cyber resilient nation.
Although increasing awareness  throughout  the  US  will  be  difficult,  this  is  a  challenge  that  deserves  consideration  if  the  nation  does  truly  wish  to  improve its overall cybersecurity posture and reduce the attack vectors available to cyber adversaries.
Additionally,  with the US private sector outpacing the public sector in developing new and novel ways for defending and operating  in cyberspace, it is critically important that the US Government leverage as much technical and operational expertise  from its own technology industries and companies.
By focusing efforts on these two key areas, perhaps then the US      Copyright, American Society for Engineering Management, 2017   7   Wong, Porter, Hokanson, et al.
and its people will be more fully prepared to deal with cyber attacks as a normal part of being connected to the global  economy rather than simply reacting to the consequences of a critical cyber event that takes the nation by surprise.
The Systems Engineering Cadet Research Team  (Team Estonia) is extremely grateful for their insights and guidance, and for taking the time to introduce our team to  learning about cyber security at the global level.
Estonia after the 2007 cyber attacks: legal, strategic and   organisational changes in cyber security.
International Journal of Cyber Warfare and Terrorism, 1(1), 24- 34.
Revisiting the Estonian cyber attacks: digital threats and multinational responses.
Journal of   Strategic Security, 4(2), 49–60.
Dark Territory: The Secret History of Cyber War.
Decision Making in Systems Engineering and   Management, 2nd Edition.
2014-2017 Cyber   Security Strategy.
The DoD Cyber Strategy.
Task Force Report: Resilient Military Systems and the Advanced Cyber Threat.
Retrieved  from from http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA569975     About the Authors  Ernest Y. Wong is a Military Intelligence Officer in the US Army who is serving as the Chief of Staff at the Army  Cyber Institute and an Assistant Professor with the Department of Systems Engineering at West Point.
in management science and  engineering from Stanford University, a M.A.
He had the opportunity to  work as a NASA Summer Faculty Fellow and has served in overseas deployments to Iraq, Kuwait, and the Republic  of Korea.
His research interests include disruptive innovations, cyber resiliency, and the application of systems  engineering tools for resolving complex real-world problems.
Together their capstone team researched how the US could  best benchmark the cyber advancements that have taken place in Estonia for Lieutenant Wong’s Applied Systems  Design and Decision Making course.
National Cyber Security Strategies  Practical Guide on Development and Execution       December 2012   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution    National Cyber Security Strategies      About ENISA   I    The  European  Network  and  Information  Security Agency (ENISA)  is  a  centre  of  network  and  information security expertise for the EU, its Member States, the private sector and Europe’s  citizens.
ENISA  works  with  these  groups  to  develop  advice  and  recommendations  on  good  practice  in  information  security.
It  assists  EU  Member  States  in  implementing  relevant  EU  legislation and works to improve the resilience of Europe’s critical information infrastructure  and networks.
ENISA seeks to enhance existing expertise in EU Member States by supporting  the  development  of  cross-border  communities  committed  to  improving  network  and  information security throughout the EU.
More information about ENISA and its work can be  found at www.enisa.europa.eu   Follow us on Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Youtube and RSS feeds      ENISA project team   Nicole FALESSI, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA  Razvan GAVRILA, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA  Maj Ritter KLEJNSTRUP, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA  Konstantinos MOULINOS, Resilience and CIIP Unit, ENISA     Contact details   For  questions  related  to  this  report  or  any  other  general  inquiries  about  the  resilience  programme please use the following contact address: resilience [at] enisa.europa.eu      Legal notice   Please note that this publication represents the views and interpretations of the authors and  editors, unless stated otherwise.
ENISA is not responsible for the content of the  external sources including external websites referenced in this publication.
This publication is intended for information purposes only.
It must be accessible free of charge.
Neither ENISA nor any person acting on its behalf is responsible for the use that might be made  of the information contained in this publication.
© European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 2012      II   National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution      Contents   Executive summary ....................................................................................................................... 1   1   Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 2   1.1   1.2   1.3   The European policy context .......................................................................................... 2   Scope .............................................................................................................................. 5   Target audience .............................................................................................................. 6   1.4  Methodology .................................................................................................................. 6   1.5  How to use this guide ..................................................................................................... 6   2  National cyber security strategy lifecycle ............................................................................. 7   3   Develop and execute the national cyber-security strategy .................................................. 8   3.1   3.2   3.3   Set the vision, scope, objectives and priorities .............................................................. 8   Follow a national risk assessment approach ................................................................ 10   Take stock of existing policies, regulations and capabilities ........................................ 11   3.4  Develop a clear governance structure ......................................................................... 11   3.5   3.6   Identify and engage stakeholders ................................................................................ 13   Establish trusted information-sharing mechanisms .................................................... 15   3.7  Develop national cyber contingency plans .................................................................. 16   3.8  Organise cyber security exercises ................................................................................ 17   3.9   Establish baseline security requirements .................................................................... 19   3.10   3.11   3.12   3.13   3.14   3.15   3.16   3.17   3.18   Establish incident reporting mechanisms ................................................................. 20   User awareness ......................................................................................................... 21   Foster R&D ................................................................................................................ 22   Strengthen training and educational programmes .................................................. 23   Establish an incident response capability ................................................................. 24   Address cyber crime ................................................................................................. 25   Engage in international cooperation ........................................................................ 26   Establish a public–private partnership ..................................................................... 27   Balance security with privacy ................................................................................... 29   4   Evaluate and adjust the national cyber-security strategy .................................................. 30   4.1   Evaluation approach ..................................................................................................... 30   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution    National Cyber Security Strategies      III    4.2   Key performance indicators ......................................................................................... 31   5   Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 34   Annex I – Glossary of Terms ........................................................................................................ 35   Annex II – References .................................................................................................................. 38      National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      Executive summary   1    In order to respond to cyber threats in a constantly changing environment, EU Member States  need  to  have  flexible  and  dynamic  cyber-security  strategies.
The  cross-border  nature  of  threats makes it essential to focus on strong international cooperation.
Comprehensive national cyber security strategies are the first step in this direction.
At  a  European  and  International  level,  a  harmonised  definition  of  cyber  security  is  lacking.1  The understanding of cyber security and other key terms varies from country to country.
The  lack of common understanding and approaches between countries may hamper international  cooperation, the need for which is acknowledged by all.
ENISA  has  developed  this  guidebook  aiming  to  identify  the  most  common  and  recurrent  elements  and  practices  of  national  cyber  security  strategies  (NCSSs),  in  the  EU  and  non-EU  countries.
ENISA  has  studied  existing  NCSS,  in  terms  of  structure  and  content,  in  order  to  determine the relevance of the proposed measures for improving security and resilience.
Based  on  this  analysis,  ENISA  has  developed  a  guide  that  is  aimed  at  Member  State  policy  makers interested in managing the relevant cyber security processes within their country.
Within this context, ENISA has identified a set of concrete actions, which if implemented will  lead to a coherent and holistic national cyber-security strategy.
This guide also proposes a national cyber-security strategy lifecycle, with a special emphasis  on  the  development  and  execution  phase.
Senior  policy  makers  will  find  practical  recommendations  on  how  to  control  the  overall  development  and  improvement  process  and  how  to  follow  up  on  the  status  of  national  cyber-security  affairs  within  their  country.
In early 2012, ENISA published a white paper on national cyber security strategies.
The paper  includes a short analysis of the status of cyber security strategies within the European Union  and elsewhere.
It also identifies common themes and differences, and concludes with a series  of observations and recommendations.3                                                            1  H.  Luiijf,  K.  Besseling,  M.  Spoelstra,  P.  de  Graaf,  Ten  National  Cyber  Security  Strategies:  a  comparison,  CRITIS  2011  –6th  International Conference on Critical information infrastructures Security, September 2011.
2 The definition of cyber space, cyber-attacks and cyber security policies also varies from country to country.
3ENISA, National Cyber Security Strategies, http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/national-cyber security- strategies-ncsss/cyber security-strategies-paper    2      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   1   Introduction   During the last few decades new technologies, e-services and interconnected networks have  become increasingly embedded in our daily life.
Businesses, society, government and national  defence depend on the functioning of information technology (IT) and the operation of critical  information  infrastructures  (CIIs).
Transportation,  communication,  e-commerce,  financial  services, emergency services and utilities rely on the availability, integrity and confidentiality  of information flowing through these infrastructures.
As  such,  securing  cyberspace  has  become  one  of  the  most important challenges of the 21st century.
Thus, cyber security is increasingly regarded as  a horizontal and strategic national issue affecting all levels of society.
A national cyber security strategy (hereafter 'strategy') is a tool to improve the security and  resilience  of  national  information  infrastructures  and  services.
It  is  a  high-level,  top-down  approach to cyber security that establishes a range of national objectives and priorities that  should  be  achieved  in  a  specific  timeframe.
As such,  it provides  a  strategic  framework  for  a  nation’s approach to cyber security.
In light of this, and to assist the EU Member States, the European Network and  Information Security Agency (ENISA)4 has developed this guide, which presents good practices  and recommendations on how to develop, implement and maintain a cyber-security strategy.
Developing a comprehensive strategy can pose many challenges.
A document that ticks all the  right  boxes  for  what  should  be  included  can  be  easily  made.
However,  this  is  unlikely  to  achieve any real impact in terms of improving the cyber security and resilience of a country.
To develop a strategy it is necessary to achieve cooperation and agreement from a wide range  of  stakeholders  on  a  common  course  of  action  –  this  will  not  be  an  easy  task.
It  should  be  realised  that  the  process  of  developing  the  strategy  is  probably  as  important  as  the  final  document.
The Strategy for a Secure Information Society                                                          4 https://www.enisa.europa.eu   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      3    The purpose of this Communication was to revitalise the European Commission strategy set  out in 2001 in the Communication Network and Information Security: proposal for a European  Policy approach.5    The Council Resolution of December 2009   The  Council  Resolution  on  a  collaborative  European  approach  on  Network  and  Information  Security  of  18  December  2009  provides  political  direction  on  how  the  Member  States,  the  European  Commission, ENISA  and  stakeholders can  play  their  part  in  enhancing  the  level  of  network and information security in Europe.6   The Council conclusions on CIIP of May 2011   The  Council  Conclusions  take  stock  of  the  results  achieved  since  the  adoption  of  the  CIIP  action  plan  in  2009,  launched  to  strengthen  the  security  and  resilience  of  vital  information  and communication technology infrastructures.7   The Electronic Communications Regulatory Framework   The review of the EU electronic communications regulatory framework and, in particular, the  new provisions of Articles 13a and 13b of the Framework Directive and the amended Article 4  of  the  e-Privacy  Directive  aim  at  strengthening  obligations  for  operators  to  ensure  security  and integrity of their networks and services, and to notify breaches of security, integrity and  personal data to competent national authorities.8    The CIIP Action Plan   The  Commission  Communication  Protecting  Europe  from  large-scale  cyber-attacks  and  disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience calls upon ENISA to support the  Commission  and  Member  States  in  implementing  the  CIIP  Action  Plan  to  strengthen  the  security and resilience of CIIs.9   The  Commission  Communication  on  Critical  'Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber security' adopted on 31 March 2011   Infrastructure  Protection   Information   This Communication takes stock of the results achieved since the adoption of the CIIP action  plan  in  2009  launched  to  strengthen  the  security  and  resilience  of  vital  information  and                                                          5 European Commission, A Strategy for a Secure Information Society – ‘Dialogue, partnership and empowerment’, COM(2006)  251  6  Council  of  the  European  Union,  Council  resolution  of  18  December,  2009  on  a  collaborative  approach  to  network  and  information security, (2009/C 321 01)   7 Council Conclusion on CIIP of May 2011 ( http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/11/st10/st10299.en11.pdf )  8 Telecommunications Regulatory Package (article 13a.
amended Directive 2002/21/EC Framework Directive)   9 European Commission, Commission Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection, Protecting Europe from  large-scale cyber-attacks and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience, COM(2009)149.
4      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   communication technology infrastructures.
The next steps the Commission proposes for each  action at both European and international level are also described.10   Review of the Data Protection Legal Framework   On  25/01/2012,  the  European  Commission  published  its  proposal  for  a  regulation  on  data  protection.
This regulation will replace the existing Data Protection Directive.11   The Single Market Act   In April 2011, the European Commission adopted a Communication, the Single Market Act, a  series of measures to boost the European economy and create jobs.
This notably includes the  key action entitled 'Legislation ensuring the mutual recognition of electronic identification and  authentication across the EU and review of the Directive on Electronic Signatures'.12   The Digital Agenda   The  Digital  Agenda  for  Europe  is  one  of  the  seven  flagship  initiatives  of  the  Europe  2020  Strategy,  and  provides  an  action  plan  for  making  the  best  use  of  information  and  communications technology (ICT) to speed up economic recovery and lay the foundations of a  sustainable digital future.13   The Internal Security Strategy for the European Union   The  Internal  Security  Strategy  lays  out  a  European  security  model,  which  integrates  among  other  things  action  on  law  enforcement  and  judicial  cooperation,  border  management  and  civil protection, with due respect for shared European values, such as fundamental rights.
This  document includes a number of suggested actions for ENISA.14   The  Telecom  Ministerial  Conference  on  CIIP  organised  by  the  Presidency  in  Balatonfüred,  Hungary   This  conference  took  place  on  14-15  April  2011.
On  this  occasion,  the  Vice  President  of  the  European  Commission  and  Commissioner  for  the  Digital  Agenda,  Ms  Neelie  Kroes,  acknowledged  the  progress  made  by  Member  States  but  also  called  for  further  actions  and  stressed  the  importance  of  international  cooperation.
In  particular,  as  a  follow-up  to  the  Conference,  Ms  Kroes  called  on  ENISA  to  intensify  its  activity  of  promoting  existing  good                                                          10 Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber security, adopted on 31 March 2011 and the Council Conclusion on CIIP  of May 2011 ( http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/11/st10/st10299.en11.pdf)   11  European  Commission,  Proposal  for  a  regulation  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the  protection  of  individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such  data (General Data Protection  Regulation),  http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data- protection/document/review2012/com_2012_11_en.pdf    COM(2012)   available   11   final,   at   25   January   2012,   12 European Commission, Single Market Act – Twelve levers to boost growth and strengthen confidence – 'Working Together  To Create New Growth', COM(2011)467 Final   13 European Commission, A Digital Agenda for Europe, COM(2010)245, May, 2010.
14 Council of the European Union, An EU Internal Security Strategy, (6870/10),  http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/jha/113055.pdf    National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      5    practice  by involving  all  Member  States  in  a  peer-learning  and  mutual  support  process  with  the aim to promote faster progress and bring all Member  States on par.
European Strategy for Cyber Security   At  the  time  of  writing,  the  European  Strategy  for  Cyber  Security  is  still  under  development.
The  goal  of  the  initiative  is  to  propose  a  comprehensive  cyber-security  strategy  for  Europe.15   EC proposal for a Regulation on electronic identification and trusted services for electronic  transactions in the internal market   The  aim  of  the  European  Directive  1999/93/EC  on  a  community  framework  for  electronic  signatures was the legal recognition of electronic signatures.16 Assessing the need for secure  and  seamless  electronic  transactions  as  well  as  the  shortcomings  of  the  Directive,  the  European  Commission  adopted  on  4  June  2012  a  proposal  for  a  Regulation  on  electronic  identification and trusted services for electronic transactions in the internal market.17   1.2  Scope   This  guide  aims  to  provide  useful  and  practical  recommendations  to  relevant  public  and  private  stakeholders  on  the  development,  implementation  and  maintenance  of  a  cyber- security strategy.
help  EU  Member  States  to  develop,  manage,  evaluate  and  upgrade  their  national   cyber security strategy;   ?
contribute  to  the  Commission’s  efforts  towards  an  integrated  pan-European  cyber   security strategy.
a  simplified  lifecycle  model  for  developing,  evaluating  and  maintaining  a  national   cyber-security strategy;   ?
good practices, recommendations and policies for each step.
15 Update on European Strategy for Cyber Security,  http://www.europarl.europa.eu/document/activities/cont/201207/20120712ATT48826/20120712ATT48826EN.pdf   16 http://eur- lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&numdoc=31999L0093&model=guichett   17 http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/esignature/eu_legislation/regulation/index_en.htm    6      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   1.3  Target audience   The  target  audience  of  this  guide  is  public  officials  and  policy  makers:  that  is,  those  who  usually  lead  the  process  of  developing  a  national  cyber-security  strategy.
The  guide  also  provides useful insights for the stakeholders involved in the lifecycle of the  strategy, such as  private,  civil  and  industry  stakeholders.
Typical  examples  include  policy  makers,  regulators,  telecommunication  providers  and  internet  service  providers  (ISPs),  online  banks,  utility  companies, computer emergency response team (CERT) experts and others.
1.4  Methodology   This  guide  was  prepared  by  surveying  and  interviewing  public  authorities,  chief  information  security  officers,  chief  information  officers,  security  architects  and  other  IT/cyber  security  experts  their  experiences,  expertise,  and  recommendations  for  effective  practices  in  developing,  implementing,  evaluating  and  maintaining strategies.
sectors  about   from  various   industry   A questionnaire was prepared and distributed to representatives of the public sectors of EU  Member  States  and  of  countries  outside  the  EU.
A validation workshop was organised to assess the ENISA initial findings in September 2012.18  Inputs  and  comments  gathered  during  the  workshop  were  elaborated  and  included  in  this  guide.
as a practical, step-by-step guide for creating a brand new cyber-security strategy;  ?
as  an  incentive  for  enhancing  or  complementing  parts  of  an  existing  national  cyber-  security strategy;   ?
as  a  benchmark  for  checking  the  effectiveness  of  actions  in  existing  national  cyber-  security strategies;    ?
18  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/workshops-1/2012/ncss-workshop    ENISA’s  Workshop   Strategies,   National   on   Cyber   Security   Brussels,   September   2012,   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      2  National cyber security strategy lifecycle   7    In this guide, there are two key phases in governing a national cyber security strategy:    ?
developing and executing the strategy:  ?
a  linear  approach:  the  strategy  will  be  developed,  implemented,  evaluated  and   eventually terminated (or replaced);   ?
Based  on  insights  from  the  surveys  and  interviews,  we  have  adopted  a  lifecycle  approach  since  it  better  fits  the  needs  and  nature  of  the  requirements  of  a  national  cyber-security  strategy.
This report is an overview and the accent is on the development and execution phase of the  lifecycle.
19 It is also commonly used for structuring information security management systems, ISO/IEC 27001:2005   8      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   3  Develop and execute the national cyber-security strategy   This chapter will aim at providing guidance to the steering and editorial teams of the strategy  on the main components and actions that should be considered during the development and  execution phases.
Each sub-chapter will focus on specific objectives that require attention and  a  non-exhaustive  list  of tasks  required to  meet these  objectives.
In this sense,  these phases  will outline the core of the overall ‘national philosophy’ on cyber security.
3.1  Set the vision, scope, objectives and priorities   The Oxford Dictionary defines a strategy as a plan of actions designed to achieve a long-term  or overall aim.20 The aim of a  cyber security strategy is to increase the global resilience and  security of national ICT assets, which support critical functions of the state or of the society as  a  whole.
Define  a  roadmap  for  the  implementation  of  the  strategy,  which  may  involve  the   following steps.
o  Develop  a  governance  framework  for  the  implementation,  evaluation  and   maintenance of the strategy.
o  Develop a master plan for the implementation of the strategy.
o  Develop concrete action plans for each activity.
An example: The vision, principles and objectives of the UK strategy   The  vision  for  the  UK  in  2015  is  'to  derive  huge  economic  and  social  value  from  a  vibrant,  resilient  and  secure  cyberspace,  where  our  actions,  guided  by  our  core  values  of  liberty,                                                          20 Oxford English Dictionary, OUP, Oxford; 7th edition, 2012.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      9    fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, national security and a strong  society.'
The UK strategy includes the following objectives:    •  •   •   •   tackling cyber crime and making cyberspace secure in order to do business;  being more resilient to cyber attacks and be able to better protect the interests of the  UK in cyberspace;  helping to shape an open, stable and vibrant  cyberspace that the public can use safely  and that supports open societies;  having  the  cross-cutting  knowledge,  skills  and  the  capabilities  to  underpin  all  cyber  security objectives of the UK.
The UK strategy includes the following principles:   •  •  •   a risk-based approach;  working in partnerships;  balancing security with freedom and privacy.
Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world,  Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011.
Because  of  the  rapid  spread  in  IT  use,  increased  IT  dependence  in  the  critical  infrastructure  sectors  and  increased interdependence between critical infrastructures, a new action plan was formulated  based  on  the  document  'Basic  Concept  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical  Infrastructures' in September 2005.
In  December  2005  the  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical  Infrastructures  was  adopted.
In  February  2009  the  Second  Action  Plan  on  Information Security Measures for Critical Infrastructures was adopted.
Source:  (1)  Special  Action  Plan  on  Countermeasures  to  Cyber-terrorism  for  Critical  Infrastructures,  Cabinet  Secretariat,  Japan,  2000;  (2)  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures for Critical Infrastructures, The Information Security Policy Council, Japan, 2005; (3)  The  Second  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical  Infrastructures,  The  Information Security Policy Council, Japan, 2009.
10      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   3.2  Follow a national risk assessment approach   One  of  the  key  elements  of  a  cyber-security  strategy  is  the  national  risk  assessment,  with  a  specific  focus  on  critical  information  infrastructures.
Risk  assessment  is  a  scientific  and  technologically  based  process  consisting  of  three  steps:  risk  identification,  risk  analysis  and  risk  evaluation.21  The  scope  of  the  assessment  is  to  coordinate  the  use  of  resources  and  to  monitor,  control,  and  minimise  the  probability  and/or  impact  of  unfortunate  events  that  might put at risk the objectives of the vision.
Risk assessments can provide valuable information for developing, executing and evaluating a  strategy.
By carrying out a national risk assessment and aligning the objectives of the strategy  with  national  security  needs,  it  is  possible  to  focus  on  the  most  important  challenges  with  regard to cyber security.
incorporating all kinds of cyber  threats such as cyber crime, hacktivism, technical failures or breakdowns) when assessing the  risks at national level.
Activities in this   task might include the following.
o  Develop a national risk registry to store the identified risks.
An example: A risk-based approach as a principle in the UK strategy   The UK strategy includes a risk-based approach as one of its three underlying principles.
The  strategy  states  that:  'In  a  globalized  world  where  all  networked  systems  are  potentially  vulnerable  and  where  cyber-attacks  are  difficult  to  detect,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as                                                          21ENISA, Glossary, http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-management/current-risk/risk-management-inventory/glossary    22Various metrics can be used for the impact assessment e.g.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      11    absolute security.
Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world,  Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011.
Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following.
Take stock of existing policies developed over the years in the area of cyber security  (i.e  electronic  communications,  data  protection,  information  security);  bear  in  mind  that cyber security is/should be part of an overall national security policy framework.
Identify all regulatory measures applied in different sectors and their impact, so far, in  in  the  electronic   incident  reporting   improving  cyber  security  (e.g.
Take stock of existing capabilities developed for addressing operational cyber security   challenges (e.g.
Analyse the roles and responsibilities of existing public agencies mandated to deal with  cyber  security  policies,  regulations  and  operations  (i.e  energy  regulators,  electronic  communications’  regulators,  data  protection  authorities,  national  cyber  crime  centres); identify overlaps and gaps.
An example: An essential principle in the Strategy of the Czech Republic   It is highly desirable to support all initiatives, be they of the state (civilian, police, military) or of  commercial or academic sectors, which have already accomplished  a lot in the field of cyber  security.
Such joint efforts have led to improved  cyber security and in many cases  prevented  dispersion of resources and unnecessary duplication.
Mutual trust and sharing of  information  are  essential  conditions  of  successful  cooperation  between  the  private  and  the  public sectors.
Source:  Cyber  Security  Strategy  of  the  Czech  Republic  for  the  2011–2015  period,  Czech  Republic, 2011   3.4  Develop a clear governance structure   The  cyber  security  strategy  will  succeed  only  if  a  clear  governance  framework  is  in  place.
A  governance  framework  defines  the  roles,  responsibilities  and  accountability  of  all  relevant   12      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   stakeholders.
A  public  body  or  an  interagency/interministerial  working  group  should  be  defined  as  the  coordinator of the strategy.
Define  who  is  the  ultimate  responsible  for  the  management  and  evaluation  of  the  strategy;  usually it  is a  cyber  security coordinator  –  or the  nation’s  chief  information  (systems) officer (CIO/CISO) – who is appointed by the prime minister/president and is  ultimately responsible for managing the cyber-security strategy.
Define the management structure i.e an advisory body that advises the cyber security  coordinator of the strategy.
Usually this is done through a national cyber security council, which has  members  from  both  public  and  private  sectors.
it  manages  the  national  risk  management,  assesses  and  prioritises  emerging  threats,  responds  to  critical  situations,  manages  the  progress  of  the strategy, engages relevant stakeholders, fosters international cooperation etc).
Define or confirm the mandate and tasks of the entities responsible for initiating and  developing  cyber-security  policy  and  regulation;  explain  how  these  interact  with  and/or contribute to the advisory body.
Define  the  mandate  and  tasks  of  the  entities  responsible  for  collecting  threats  and  vulnerabilities,  responding  to  cyber  attacks,  strengthening  crisis  management  and  others; explain how these interact with and/or contribute to the advisory body.
Typical  examples  include  a  national  cyber  security  centre  (NCSC)  which  is  tasked  with  protecting the national (critical) information infrastructures.
Properly analyse and define the role of existing, , national cyber security and incident  response teams (CERT) in both public and private sectors.
The national/governmental  CERT may be tasked with monitoring activities, trusted information sharing, providing  news  on  emerging  threats  and  other  critical  information  infrastructure  protection  activities.
The  CERT  may  play  a  key  role  in  cooperating and  sharing  information  with  other similar organizations at national and international level.
An example: A governance framework in practice in The Netherlands    In  order  to  be  able  to  adequately  respond  to  various  threats  and  to  be  able  to  return  to  a  stable situation in the event of a disruption of attack, various response activities are necessary.
The relevant organisation will in the first instance itself deal with ICT incidents which lead to a   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      13    information  breach  of  the  availability,  infrastructure.
integrity  or  availability  of  the  network  and   In the strategy of the Netherlands a public-private partnership has been created for the ICT  Response  Board  which  gives  advice  on  measures  to  counteract  major  ICT  disruptions  to  decision-making  organisations.
The  Board  began  its  activities  in  2011  under  the  auspices  of  the National Cyber Security Centre.
Source: The National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) – Strength through cooperation, Ministry  of Security and Justice, The Netherlands, The Hague, 2011.
An example: Responsibility for UK cyber security   The Office of Cyber Security was formed in 2009 and became the Office of Cyber Security and  Information Assurance (OCSIA) in 2010.
OCSIA is located in the Cabinet Office and coordinates  cyber security programmes run by the UK government including location of the National Cyber  Security Programme funding.
The Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC) was formed in 2009.
CSOC is housed with GCHQ  and  is  responsible  for  providing  analysis  and  overarching  situational  awareness  of  cyber  threats.
The Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI) provides guidance to national  infrastructure organisations and businesses on protective security measures, including cyber.
CESG  is  the  National  Technical  Authority  for  Information  Assurance  and  is  situated  within  GCHQ.
CESG  provides  information  security  advice  and  a  variety  of  information  assurance  services to government, defence and key infrastructure clients.
GovCERTUK is responsible for all government networks,  while CSIRTUK, CPNI’s  CERT, responds to reported incidents concerning private sector networks in the critical national  infrastructure.
Source: Cyber Security in the UK, Postnote No 389, September 2011.
3.5  Identify and engage stakeholders   A successful cyber-security strategy requires proper co-operation between public and private  stakeholders.
They  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the  nation’s  critical  infrastructures  and  services.
Selected  private entities should be part of the development process due to the fact that they are likely  the owners of most of the critical information infrastructures and services.
14      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following.
Typical examples include   energy, transport, finance, telecommunications, etc.
Identify  public  stakeholders  responsible  for  initiating  and  developing  cyber  security  policy  and  regulation  e.g.
private  stakeholders  protect  their  infrastructures  and  there is a joint responsibility with regard to protecting national security).
Involve  the  right  stakeholders  at  the  right  time  in  the  process  of  developing  the  strategy.
The government can facilitate activities  on  a  national  level,  such  as  information-sharing,  (international)  cooperation  and  risk  management.
By allocating responsibilities to individual companies, these can be held  responsible and/or even accountable for not taking proper security measures.
Include civil society (end users, civilians) in executing the strategy from an awareness  point of view.
By raising awareness at a national level, citizens will better understand  cyber-security risks and this will enable them to proactively take measures to lessen or  mitigate risks.
Involve  ministries  with  responsibility  for  security,  safety,  crisis  management,  such  as  defence,  interior,  foreign  affairs,  justice,  national  telecommunication  regulator,  data  protection authority, and cyber crime unit in developing the strategy.
Involve  national  interest  groups  in  order  to  incorporate  the  interest  of  different   stakeholder groups.
An example: Development of the Estonian strategy based on input from state agencies and  working groups   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      15    The Implementation Plan of Estonia’s strategy was developed on the basis of proposals from  different state agencies and working  groups which have been set up for development of the  strategy.
Implementation  plans  have  been  developed  for  two periods: 2008–2010 and 2011–2013.
Source:  Cyber  Security  Strategy,  Cyber  Security  Strategy  Committee,  Ministry  of  Defence,  Estonia, Tallinn, 2008.
Owners  of  critical  infrastructures  could  potentially  share  with  public  authorities  their  input  on  mitigating  emerging  risks,  threats, and vulnerabilities while public stakeholders could provide on a 'need to know basis'  information on aspects related to the status of national security, including findings based on  information collected by intelligence and cyber-crime units.
These are the typical objectives of an information sharing scheme.
security  breaches,  network  failures,  service   interruptions).
Identify,  analyse,  and  adopt   in  co-ordinated  manner  appropriate,  sector-wide   minimum security measures to manage the threats associated with the incidents.
Set  up  internal  and  joint  procedures  to  continuously  review  the  implementation  of   adopted measures.
Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following.
Follow  a  sector  approach  to  information  sharing  (e.g.
Make sure that there is enough information flow  among the different information-sharing schemes.
Provide  the  appropriate  incentives  for  stakeholders  (mostly  for  private  ones)  to  participate and share sensitive information (sharing with the community the results of  the analysis).
Normally  participants  are  high-level  security  experts  (e.g.
CISOs)  able  to  share  information at corporate level.
16      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   ?
Organise  regular  (face-to-face)  meetings  to  share  sensitive  information.
The  initiative  could  be  chaired both by the public sector and industry to symbolise the joint responsibility of  the two stakeholders’ categories.
international  trusted   ?
Update  the  national  risk  registry  and  distribute  the  collected  information,  in  an   anonymous way, to appropriate targeted users through the early-warning systems.
An example: The German Strategy    Quick  and  close  information  sharing  on  weaknesses  of  IT  products,  vulnerabilities,  forms  of  attacks and profiles of perpetrators enables the National Cyber Response Centre to analyse IT  incidents  and  give  consolidated  recommendations  for  action.
Every  stakeholder  takes  the  necessary  measures  in  its  remit  on  the  basis  of  the  jointly  developed  national  cyber  security  assessment  and  coordinates  them  with  the  competent  authorities  as  well as partners from industry and academia.
Source: Cyber Security Strategy of Germany, Federal Ministry of the Interior, 2011      3.7  Develop national cyber contingency plans   National  cyber  contingency  plans  (NCPs)  are  the  interim  structures  and  measures  for  responding  to,  and  recovering  services  following,  major  incidents  that  involve  critical  information infrastructures (CIIs).23 A national cyber security contingency plan should be part  of an overall national contingency plan.
It is also an integral part of the cyber security strategy.
23 ENISA, Good Practice Guide on National Contingency Plans for CIIs, 2012, available on request.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      17    An NCP should be developed within a lifecycle.
In essence, the lifecycle is a quality assurance  and management cycle for such plans.
Following that, the main steps for developing the NCP  are the following.
Develop the standard operating procedures (SOPs) for use by all relevant stakeholders   during different crises.
Develop  the  necessary  cooperation  and  response  framework  to  be  used  e.g.
Test, evaluate and adjust procedures, capabilities and mechanisms; one proven way of   doing this is through cyber exercises.
Organise  and  execute  exercises  that  will  evaluate  the  existing  standard  operating   procedures, roles and responsibilities and communication mechanisms.
Review the contingency plan taking also into consideration lessons learnt from cyber   exercises.
For  more  information  on  this  topic,  please  check  ENISA’s  webpage  Good  Practice  Guide  on  National Contingency Plans.24   3.8  Organise cyber security exercises   Exercises  enable  competent  authorities  to  test  existing  emergency  plans,  target  specific  weaknesses,  increase  cooperation  between  different  sectors,  identify  interdependencies,  stimulate improvements in continuity planning, and generate a culture of cooperative effort  to  boost  resilience.
Cyber  exercises  are  important  tools  to  assess  preparedness  of  a  community against natural disasters, technology failures, cyber-attacks and emergencies.
set up a national cyber exercise planning team, with a clear mandate;  ?
integrate cyber exercises within the lifecycle of the national cyber security strategy or   the national cyber contingency plan.
Typical tasks to consider in this step include the following.
Develop a mid-term vision with concrete objectives to be achieved.
24 http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/national-contingency-plans    18      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   ?
For each cyber exercise do the following.
o  Define the manager(s) of the exercise.
o  Agree on international cooperation and the observers program.
o  o  Develop a training program that will familiarise the players with all aspects of   Identify and engage the players of the exercise.
o  Follow  up  the  lessons  learned  and  the  key  recommendations  and  make  sure   the targeted stakeholders implement them.
Assess  the  impact  of  one  or  the  series  of  cyber  exercises  and  update  your  vision  to   better meet the needs of the cyber security strategy.
For more information on this topic, please check ENISA’s publication Good Practice Guide  on National Exercises.26                                                            25 ‘Held immediately following an exercise, a hot wash is a facilitated discussion among exercise players from each functional  area.
It is designed to capture feedback about any issues, concerns, or proposed improvements.’ Source: Information  Assurance Challenges in an International Environment, IATAC, available online at  http://iac.dtic.mil/csiac/download/Vol12_No4.pdf   26 ENISA, Good Practice Guide on National Exercises –Enhancing the Resilience of Public Communication Networks, 2009.  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/exercises/national-exercise-good- practice-guide    National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      3.9  Establish baseline security requirements   19    infrastructure  from  threats,  risks  and  vulnerabilities   All relevant public and private organisations should take necessary measures to protect their  information  identified  after  the  completion of the national risk assessment.
Baseline security requirements for a given sector  define  the  minimum  security  level  that  all  organisations  in  that  sector  should  comply  with.
Such  requirements  could  be  based  on  existing  security  standards  or  frameworks  and  good  practices widely recognised by the industry.
Defining  a  minimum  set  of  security  measures  is  a  complex  exercise  that  should  take  into  account  the  following  aspects:  the  different  level  of  maturity  among  the  stakeholders,  the  differences  in  terms  of  the  operational  capacity  of  each  organization  and  the  different  standards existing in each critical sector under consideration.
harmonise the different practices followed by the organizations both in public and the   private sector;   ?
share information about the cyber-security good practices in every different industry   sector;   ?
help the stakeholders to prioritise their investments on security.
Typical tasks to consider include the following.
Review and then update the existing set of measures.
o   o   o   Identify the security measures that already described in the existing regulatory  documents.
Identify  the  information  security  threats  and  then  map  these  threats  to  the  existing measures.
Identify  the  gaps  and  derive  mitigation  measures  from  the  existing  technical  standards  (like  ISO27001,  ISO27002,  ISO27004,  COBIT,  ITIL).
Where  gaps  are  found, enhance the list of measures by taking into account the opinion of the  experts and the relevant standards.
o  Update the relevant regulatory texts with the new measures.
Create  security  maturity  self-assessment  tools  and  encourage  the  stakeholder  to  use   them.
Mandate information security audits to competent authorities based on the list of the   minimum measures.
Update the baseline requirements based on reported incidents of significant impact.
20      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   3.10 Establish incident reporting mechanisms   Reporting security incidents plays an important role in enhancing national cyber security.
Incident  reporting  and  analysis  helps  in  adjusting  and  tailoring  the  security  measures list, referred to in the previous section, to the changing threat landscape.
Typical tasks of this activity include the following.
Identify the need for incident reporting by:   o  deciding  whether  there  are  incident  reporting  schemes  within  the  already  existing  national,  European  and  international  cyber  security  landscapes,  and  identifying  gaps  and  needs  that  are  presently  not  addressed  and  that  a  new  scheme will have to cover or satisfy;  identifying the  types  of incidents  to  be  reported  and  the purpose  of the  new  scheme;   o   o  outlining the reporting requirements, especially the scheme’s constituency (the  potential reporting parties), the reporting obligation and the thresholds beyond  which incidents should be reported.
Set the reporting procedures by:   o  setting reporting requirements;  o  defining the prioritisation of incidents;  o  establishing follow-up procedures;  o  developing media policies.
Manage  the  scheme:  when  the  reporting  procedures  are  set  and  running,  the  responsible authorities will need to pay attention to scheme management.
The tasks in  this stage fall into three groups:   o  analysing and following up on individual incidents;  o  conducting statistical analysis of a series of incidents;  o  examining feedback to improve and evolve the scheme.
Communicate  the  results  of  the  analysis  to  the  competent  authority  or  authorities   responsible for updating the set of minimum security measures.
The  participants  include  between  five   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      21    and  seven  large  telecommunications  operators  and  the  members  of  the  Swedish  Urban  Network Association.
Source: Good Practices on Reporting Security Incidents, ENISA, 2009.
Awareness  activities  occur on an ongoing basis and use a variety of delivery methods to reach broad audiences.27    Security  awareness  activities  may  be  triggered  by  different  events  or  factors,  which  may  be  internal or  external  to  an  organisation.
Major external  factors  could  include:  recent  security  breaches, threats and incidents, new risks, updates of security policy and/or strategy.
Among  the internal factors are new laws, new governments etc.28   Principles  to  follow  in  order  to  support  an  awareness-raising  programme  include  the  following.29   ?
Develop mechanisms for reaching out to these communities.
Create  the  national  information  security unique  identity:  choose  specific  information  security  topics  that  support  the  strategy  objectives  and  then  organise  and  advertise,  not  only  in  Europe  but  also  internationally,  local  events  by  using  appropriate  communication channels.
Enhance the content of well-known governmental web sites with information security   related material e.g.
ENISA,   The  new  user’s   guide:  How                                                          27  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/security-month/deliverables/2010/new-users-guide   28 See, for instance, the proposal for a regulation ‘on electronic identification and trusted services for electronic transactions in  the internal market’ http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/esignature/eu_legislation/regulation/index_en.htm    awareness,  November  2010,   information   to   raise   security   29 ENISA, Raising awareness on information security across public and private organisations, 2008.
30  For  further  information  on  how  to  organise  an  information  security  month,  see  European  Month  of  Network  and  Information  Security  for  All  –  A  feasibility  study,  ENISA,  2011,  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/security- month/deliverables/2011/europeansecuritymonth    22   National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution         ?
Support  and  brand  European  or  international  information  security  initiatives  like  the   Safer Internet.
Participate in relevant European initiatives and campaigns like the Safer Internet Day,   International Youth Day, ENISA’s security month etc.
An example: The Finnish Strategy    National Information Security Strategy is to integrate information security firmly into the basic  structures  of  the  information  society.
This  requires  improvements  in  general  information  security awareness and skills, and better consideration of information security aspects in the  purchase  of  systems  and  the  procedures  for  making  agreements.
Increasing  information  security  awareness  and  competence:  the  National  Information  Security  Day  project  will  be  developed; awareness of information security will be improved, the level of awareness will be  monitored  and  information  security  skills  will  be  developed;  a  proactive  plan  for  communications will be drawn up.
Source: Cyber Security Strategy of Finland      3.12 Foster R&D   Our  lives  depend  on  new  IT  tools  and  services.
Before  such  tools  and  services  become  commercially  widespread,  it  is  important  that  research  activities  cover  the  cyber  security  requirements.
A cyber security strategy should emphasise the importance of including – in the  research  and  development  lifecycle  –  concepts  such  as  secure  by  design  and  privacy  by  design.
Typical objectives of this phase include the following.
Bring together the needs of industry and the findings of research, thus facilitating the   transition from theory to practice.
Find  ways  not  only  to  maintain  but  also  to  increase  the  level  of  the  public’s  trust  in   existing cyber infrastructure.
Create a forum for industry and request R&D topics for consideration.
Create  an  R&D  agenda  with  topics  that  support  the  objectives  of  the  cyber  security  strategy with a midterm horizon, of between four and seven years.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      23    ?
Seek  cooperation  with  similar  European  and  international  relevant  activities  i.e.
Develop  effective   incentives  to  make  cyber-security  research  ubiquitous.
An example: The Estonian Strategy   It  is  important  to  stress  that  when  it  comes  to  cyber  security,  research  and  development  cannot be separated from defence-related activities.
Scientific research is important primarily  because  the  implementation  of  protective  measures  for  information  systems  is  a  rapidly  advancing  high-technology  field.
The  priority  areas  for  development  include  intelligent  protection  software  and  the  simulation  of  cyber-attacks  to  ensure cyber security and provide training.
This line of research is also supported by the NATO  Centre of Excellence of Cooperative Cyber Defence, based in Estonia.
Source: Cyber Security Strategy, Ministry of Defence, Estonia.
Cyber  security is usually  not  a  separate  academic  topic  but  part  of  the  computer  science  curriculum.
Cyber  security  is  also  a  continuously changing topic that requires constant training and education.
enhance the operational capabilities of the existing information security workforce;  ?
promote  and  encourage  the  relations  between  environments and the information security industry.
information  security  academic   Typical tasks in this step include the following.
Launch national information security training and educational programmes.
Support the security accreditation and certification of skilled personnel in key working   posts in every industrial sector.
Create  a  catalogue  of  roles,  and  the  relevant  educational  background  needed,  with   information security responsibly.
Add information security courses to university curricula – not only to the ones related  with  computer  science  but  also  to  any  other  professional  speciality  tailored  to  the  needs of that profession.
24   National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution         An example: United Kingdom   The  UK  strategy  states  that  'As  for  business,  some  firms  recognize  the  growing  scale  and  impact  of  the  risks.
However,  some  sectors  of  the  economy,  particularly  small  and  medium  sized businesses, do not have access to the skills and knowledge to protect themselves online.
We need to improve our understanding of the threat across the board and manage it more  effectively.
Source: The UK Cyber Security Strategy – Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world,  Cabinet Office, United Kingdom, London, 2011.
3.14 Establish an incident response capability   National/governmental CERTs play a key role in coordinating incident management with the  relevant  stakeholders  at  national  level.
Service portfolio – this covers the services that a team provides to its constituency or is   using for its own internal functioning.
Operational capabilities – these concern the technical and operational requirements a   team must comply with.
Cooperation  capabilities  –  these  encompass  requirements  regarding  information- sharing  with  other  teams  that  are  not  covered  by  the  previous  three  categories  e.g.
policymakers,  military,  regulators,  (critical  information  infrastructure)  operators,  law  enforcement authorities.
Define  procedures  and  best  practices  that  require  CERTs  staff  to  handle  data  in  compliance  with  EU  rules  and  their  Member  State's  laws.
Establish working groups at international or regional meetings at which CERTs discuss   best practices and the potential of instituting common data handling protocols.
31 ENISA’s web page on baseline capabilities for national / governmental CERTs:  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/support/baseline-capabilities    National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      25    ?
Establish  thematic  working  groups  on  data  protection  to   interested  stakeholders,  such  as  the  banking  industry,  and  improve  the  overall  information  exchange.
Consider hiring or engaging a legal expert specialising in IT security issues in order to   avoid uncertainty regarding handling of personal data.
Such  systems  require the cooperation of a wide range of stakeholders, both private and public, and  could potentially be the central capability for handling creeping, slow-burn and sudden  crises.
Create  a  vulnerability  disclosure  framework  that  deals  with  patch  and  vulnerability  management  (period,  early  warning,  deployment  requirements,  etc.).
An example: The Finnish Strategy    Securing cyberspace largely relies on the exchange of information which, at the international  level, is best achieved through co-operation networks.
Such networks bolster the ability to take  immediate actions in ensuring cyber security and combating cyber crime.
The professional co- operation networks of the public and private sectors allow for the exchange of information on  innovative IT solutions, best practice and other expert information.
The exchange of expert  information on cyber security requires close co-operation between the networks which deal  with international data security, cyber defence and law enforcement.
The most significant of  these include the international network of national CERTs, the network of government CERTs  (GovCERT), Interpol and Europol for co-operation in law enforcement, and organisations  dealing with Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of Finland     3.15 Address cyber crime   The fight against cyber crime requires the collaboration of many actors and communities to  be  successful.
In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to address  and  counter the  rise  of  cyber  crime  and to prepare a concerted and coordinated response with relevant stakeholders.
Typical tasks that should be considered include the following:   ?
Adapt the required legislation and ratify existing international treaties.
Create  specialised  national  cyber  crime  units  (law  enforcement  and   judicial   authorities).
26      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   ?
Develop  knowledge  and  expertise  on  emerging  cyber  crime-related  threats  and  vulnerabilities  but  also  attack  methods  through  information  sharing  at  national  and  international level.
Encourage direct action by industry against computer-related crime.
Establish  cooperation  between  public  and  private  sector  stakeholders  to  quickly   identify and respond to cyber crime related issues.
For  more  on  this  topic,  please  check  the  websites  of  both  ENISA32  and  the  European  Commission33 on cyber crime.
An example: The Czech Republic     The Czech Republic will improve legislative and procedural steps so that the cyber security field  ultimately comprises prevention, detection, reaction and measures designed to identify and  combat cyber crime.
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic     3.16 Engage in international cooperation   Cyber security threats and vulnerabilities are international in nature.
Engaging in cooperation  and information sharing with partners abroad is important to better understand and respond  to a constantly changing threat environment.
The following points should be followed during the development of the strategy.
Use  the  strategy  as  an  instrument  for  fostering  international  cooperation.
A  strategy   can indicate the Member State’s stance towards international cooperation.
cyber crime, operational) with  each one.
32 http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/cert/support/supporting-fight-against-cyber crime  33 http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/fight_against_organised_crime/l33193b_en.htm   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution   27    ?
Assign to a national entity the task of promoting international cooperation.
Assigning  this  task  on  a  national  level  to  a  single  organisation  provides  the  benefit  that  all  national efforts to cooperate internationally are consolidated.
Promote   international  cooperation  through   instance  benchmarking,  technological  knowledge,  and  basic  threat  assessments),  intelligence  sharing,  top  level  public–private  partnerships  (PPPs)  (multinational),  and  potentially  information sharing and analysis centres (ISACs).
Join bilateral, multilateral or international treaties and conventions (e.g.
International  Code  of  Conduct  for  Information  Security,  Convention  on  Cyber  crime)  related  to  information  security  if  they  are  compatible  with  the  national  regulatory  framework  and if this does not run counter to the interests of national security.
Contribute  to  international  efforts  towards  drafting  standard  operating  procedures  (SOPs)  to  be  used  for  information  sharing  and  response  to  real,  major  cross-country  crises.
Encourage participation in regional, European and international exercises as a means   of supporting cooperation with strategic partners.
An example: The German Strategy    Given the global nature of information and communications technology, international  coordination and appropriate networks focusing on foreign and security policy aspects are  indispensable.
This includes cooperation not only in the United Nations, but also in the EU, the  Council of Europe, NATO, the G8, the OSCE and other multinational organizations.
The aim is  to ensure the coherence and capabilities of the international community to protect  cyberspace.
Source: The Cyber Security Strategy of Germany     3.17 Establish a public–private partnership   A  public–private  partnership  (PPP)  establishes  a  common  scope  and  objectives  and  uses  defined roles and work methodology to achieve shared goals.34 PPPs may focus on different  aspects of security and resilience; these can be defined as the following:    ?
protecting (uses research into new security threats);  ?
34 Cooperative Models for Effective Public Private Partnership - Good Practice Guide- ENISA, October 2011.
28      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   PPPs addressing security and resilience have evolved in many countries as an efficient means  of  protecting  their  critical  infrastructure.
Building  up  a  successful  PPP  requires  taking  into  consideration  different  elements  as  well  as  the  challenges  and  barriers  such  structures  may  face.
Typical elements to consider in setting up a successful PPP include the following.
Plan how to link the PPP with other organisations to share information and expertise   and to avoid duplication.
Adopt  information  distribution  policies  such  as  the  Traffic  Light  Protocol  to  give  the   source confidence that the information will be used only as agreed.
Make  sure  that  all  members  of  the  partnership  actively  contribute  in  providing   information, services and support that are of relevant value to the membership.
Look  for  opportunities  to  create  international  links  with  other  PPPs  for  cross-border   sharing and collaboration.
Mutual trust is essential for cooperation and sharing information with each other.
Government and business communities must work together as equal partners.
Source: Cyber Security Strategy of the Netherlands     National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      3.18 Balance security with privacy   29    Counter-terrorism  measures  and  tools  that  tackle  cyber  crime  often  invade  privacy  in  the  most brutal ways and, at the same time, lack of personal online security leads to breaches of  that same privacy.
Finally, the reader should bear  in  mind  that  privacy  is  a  horizontal  issue  that  cuts  across  most  of  the  activities  relevant  to  cyber strategy.
Typical tasks to consider include the following.
Take into account national legal requirements for data protection when drafting cyber-  security-relevant regulatory texts.
Take  the  advice  of  the  data  protection  authority(ies)  on  regulatory  texts  related  to   cyber security.
Consider  data  protection  law  compliance  measures  when  consulting  the  minimum   security measures.
Make  data  protection  supervisory  authority(ies)  part  of   information  security   compliance audits to the most critical stakeholders.
Involve national data protection authority(ies) in national cyber exercises.
An example: The Czech Republic    In the Czech Republic strategy it is stated that an appropriate legislative framework for the  purpose  of  ensuring  cyber  security  will  be  defined.
This  framework  will  not  impose  any  restrictions  on  rights  to  freedom  of  speech,  will  grant  access  to  information  for  all  information  population  segments,  and  protect  the  privacy  and  confidentiality  of  guaranteed  by  the  national  Constitution,  taking  international  commitments of the Czech Republic, in particular to EU and NATO.
into  account  the   Also,  the  Czech  Republic  aims  to  actively  participate  in  the  drafting  of  legal  acts  and  standards, and other forms of cooperation in the field of cyber security in the framework  of the EU and other international organisations.
Source: Cyber Security Strategy of the Czech Republic For The 2011  – 2015 period, Czech  Republic, 2011.
30      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   4  Evaluate and adjust the national cyber-security strategy   Once  the  strategy  has  been  developed  and  is  being  executed,  the  extent  to  which  the  objectives are achieved should be assessed.
By assessing the achieved results of the activities  it is possible to take any required corrective and preventative actions in order to align with or  change the objectives of the strategy.
This chapter will cover the explicit requirements needed to evaluate and adjust the strategy.
In this chapter, we will not propose  a  specific  one  but  rather  focus  on  specific,  practical  actions  necessary  to  perform  an  evaluation.
This process should end with a report on the status of affairs and a list of actions  that the national cyber-security strategy owner(s) should implement.
Implement  the  ‘Segregation  of  duties’  principle:  assign  to  an  independent  entity,  a  supervisor  or  a  trusted  third  party  (other  than  the  national  cyber  council)  the  task  of  evaluating the effectiveness of a national cyber-security strategy and its activities (e.g.
a  national cyber security council).
Effectiveness  of  the  strategy  should  be  measured  at  all  levels.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution   31       ?
Identify lessons, good practices and bad practices from the internal and external impact  assessment as well as the evaluation of each activity.
4.2  Key performance indicators   Both qualitative and quantitative measurements can be used to define KPIs.
This is needed to cope with changes in the operational environment, making  sure that the strategy and action plan are realistic and focused, and making sure that  the  strategy  includes  the  right  prioritised  objectives.
Typical KPIs include:   o  the number of tasks that have been completed on time according to the action   plan;   o  the  level  of  public  trust  in  the  usage  and  security  of  services  targeted  by  the  strategy  (e.g.
e-banking,  e-government);  this  can  be  gauged  by  performing  national surveys;   o  the  existence  of  a  well-established  and  functioning  national  cyber  security   community (working groups, PPPs, a national cyber security council, etc.
);   o  reports from industry on improved resilience levels.
Follow a national risk assessment approach: Each Member State should monitor the  most  significant  emergencies  as  regards  the  cyber  security  its  citizens  could  face  through  the  national  risk  assessment.
Typical  KPIs  for this phase include the following.
o  The  success  of  a  national  risk  assessment  programme  is  measured  by  the number of incidents that occurred in a specific period and could not  be addressed by the minimum security measures prepared.
This  KPI  is  the  ratio of  the incidents that have not been mitigated using existing measures and  the total number of known incidents.
32      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   o  Another  metric  might  be  the  comparison  between  the  calculated  and  the  actual  impact  of  the  identified  incidents  using  different  evaluation  units e.g.
Take  stock  of  existing  policies,  regulations  and  capabilities:  The  process  of  taking  stock  of  existing  policies,  regulations  and  capabilities  is  usually  a  tricky  exercise  that  reveals areas for improvement in the governance model of cyber security.
Typical  KPIs could include:   o  the level of complexity (i.e.
number of overlaps, gaps, conflicting statements) of   policy documents and internal procedures;  the  number  of  inventories  and  directories  of  all  national  cyber  response  capabilities (public and private);   o  the number of policy documents adopted after the deployment of the strategy.
Develop a clear governance structure: In order to evaluate the governance structure,  the policy makers should organise national cyber exercises to test the command and  control and the communications of the existing strategy governance structure.
Typical  KPIs include:   o  the  number  of  tasks  executed  and  status  of  actions  taken  by  designated   entities within the strategy;   o  the  number  of  gaps  (i.e.
tasks/responsibilities/conflicts  unassigned  to  specific   roles) of the existing governance model;   o  response time and coherency of the chain of command;  o  the  number  of  cooperation  mechanisms,  procedures  and  communication   channels that did not work.
Identify and engage stakeholders: A critical mass of stakeholders involved is vital for   the successful implementation of the strategy.
Typical KPIs include:   o  the  number  of  stakeholders  involved;  sectoral  indexes  have  to  be  developed   for both the private and the public sector and for each industry field;   o  the number of entries in a national cyber-security directory;  o  the number of existing working groups.
Establish trusted information sharing mechanisms: At the end of the year, a network  information security exchange (NSIE) is expected to publish a confidential report with  minutes and results of its annual work.
Typical KPIs include:   o  a measure of the utilisation of information sharing platforms;  o  the number of measures and actions taken as a result of the analysis done on   the data collected;   o  the number of parties involved;  o  the number of new vulnerabilities, threats and incidents discussed;   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution   33          ?
Develop  cyber-security  contingency  plans:  An  NCP  aims  to  develop  a  national  response  capability  and  promote  overall  coordination  among  the  hierarchy  of  emergency  response  organizations  and  response  or  contingency  plans.
Typical  KPIs  include:   o  the  number  of  activities  of  a  national  cyber  contingency  plan  that  have  been   completed on time;   o  the  number  of  sectors  and  stakeholders  involved  in  the  development  of  the   plan;   o  the number of national cyber exercises to test the plan;  o  the  number  of  sectors  and  stakeholders  involved  in  the  development  of  the   plan;   o  the  level  of  preparedness  to  respond  to  a  cyber  crisis  based  on  different   scenarios (potential causes and different levels of impact);   o  the existence of crisis management facilities and situation rooms.
Organise  cyber  security  exercises:  Exercises  are  an  important  tool  to  assess  the  preparedness  of  a  community  for  natural  disasters,  technology  failures  and  emergencies.
For this reason, it is important to develop specific metrics to gauge the  success of the exercises.
Typical KPIs include:   o  the number of cyber security exercises conducted;  o  the status of actions implemented based on the findings/evaluation reports;  o  the number of sectors involved;  o  the number of people involved;   o  the level of involvement of the private sector;  o  the number of plans and procedures that have been tested.
Establish baseline security requirements: Baseline security measures are the result of  a  consultation  process  among  the  national  cyber-security  partners.
Moreover,  it  is  expected  that  competent  authorities  will  monitor  on  a  regular  basis  the  implementation of these measures.
Typical KPIs include:   o  the number of incidents; individual indexes of this kind might be:    ?
the number of incidents that failed to be addressed by the measures;  the number of incidents that are addressed by the measures.
o  the  number  of  non-compliant  organisations  identified  within a  specific  period   of time;   National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   34      5  Conclusions   The  development  of  a  national  cyber-security  strategy  is  a  challenging  effort  that  needs  coordination  among  different  national  stakeholders  of  the  public  and  the  private  sector.
Although there are many – and considerably different - definitions, a cyber security strategy  has  proven  to  be  an  instrument  that  helps  governments  manage  the  efforts  of  all  involved  parties in order to tackle risks related to cyber at a national level.
Develop a clear governance structure.
Develop cyber-security contingency plans.
Establish baseline security requirements.
Address cyber crime.
Engage in international cooperation.
Balance security with privacy.
Adjust the national cyber security strategy.
The structure of this guide was based on the Deming ‘Plan-Do-Check-Act’ (PDCA) model used  to control and continuously improve strategies, policies, processes and products.
Four phases,  each  corresponding  to  the  model  steps,  have  been  described  for  the  strategy  lifecycle:  development, execution, evaluation and adjustment.
Thus, EU Member States will have a complete overview of  the National Cyber Security Strategy development lifecycle.
National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution      Annex I – Glossary of Terms   35    Term   Action plan   Civil society   Computer  emergency  response team  (CERT)   Definition   The  action  plan  outlines  the  activities  for  delivering  the  priorities  and  objectives as defined in the strategy.
refers   end   users   to   the   of   (information)   Organisation  formed  to  study  internet  security  vulnerabilities,  and  to  provide  assistance  to  online  sites  that  become  victims  of  cracker  or  hacker  attacks.
Commonly,  it  offers  a  24-hour  emergency  response  service, shares information for improving cyber security, and coordinates  responses to cyber-security threats.
Critical  (information)  infrastructure (CII)   The systems, services, networks and infrastructures that form a vital part  of  a  nation's  economy  and  society,  providing  essential  goods  and  services.
Cyber security /  information  security   There  is no universally  accepted nor  straightforward  definition of  cyber  security.
When  comparing  it  to  'information  security'  some  people  regard  it  as  overlapping,  being  the  same  thing.
Or  they  may  view  information security as focused on protecting specific individual systems  and the information within organisations, while cyber security is seen as  being focused on protecting the infrastructure and networks of CIIs.
Developing a  national cyber  security strategy   Developing  the  national  cyber  security  strategy  means  specifying  the  scope,  determining  priorities  and  defining  the  principles  and  objectives  of cyber security on a national level.
Evaluating a  national cyber  security strategy   Evaluating  the  national  cyber-security  strategy  means  assessing  the  results of the activities using a set of objective performance metrics.
Executing a  national cyber  security strategy   Executing  the  national  cyber-security  strategy  means  specifying  the  action  plan(s)  and  putting  the  strategy  into  practice  through  executing  the activities.
Governance  framework   Information  sharing and  analysis centre   The  governance  framework  defines  the  roles,  responsibilities  and  accountability of all stakeholders and provides a framework for dialogue  and  coordination  of  various  activities  undertaken  in  the  lifecycle  of  the  strategy.
Within  this  structure  the  circulation  of  relevant  information  can  be   36      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   (ISAC)   shared within a trustworthy environment.
Key performance  indicator or metric   (KPI)   is  a   indicator   A  key  performance  type  of  performance  measurement.
KPIs  are metrics used to measure important business activities and processes  of  a  strategic  nature.
A  metric  is  typically  used  to  mean  just  about  any  sort  of  measurement  applied  to  gauge  a  particular business process or activity.
Legal framework   A  legal  framework  formally  assigns  tasks,  roles/responsibilities  and  accountability to the different parties by enforcing legal requirements.
In  this  way,  expectations  are  managed  and  the  division  of  tasks  is  formulated in the strategy.
Maintaining a  national cyber  security strategy   Maintaining the national cyber-security strategy means taking corrective  and  preventive  actions  based  on  the  evaluation  results  in  order  to  achieve the objectives of the strategy.
National cyber  security centre  (NCSC)   National cyber  security council   National cyber  security strategy   Network operating  centers (NOC)   A national cyber security centre is commonly tasked with protecting the  national  (critical)  information  infrastructures.
The  NCSC  may  have  responsibilities  concentrating  on,  for  example,  developing  and  offering  expertise and advice, supporting and implementing responses to threats  or incidents, and strengthening crisis management.
A national cyber security council commonly consists of representatives of  the public and private sector.
A council can advise both government and  private  parties  on  relevant  developments  in  the  area  of  cyber  security,  prioritise specific (emerging) IT threats, and ensure that basic values are  incorporated in the execution of the strategy.
A national cyber security strategy is a strategic framework for a nation’s  approach  to  cyber  security.
It  is  a  tool  to  improve  the  security  and  resilience of national infrastructures and services.
It is a high-level, top- down  approach  to  cyber  security  that  establishes  a  range  of  national  objectives and priorities that should be achieved in a specific timeframe.
A  network  operations  centre  (NOC)  commonly  serves  as  a  hub  for  coordinating the operational management of domestic incidents, as well  as situational awareness.
An NOC  commonly  information-sharing  and  operational coordination among (international) public and private sector   facilitates  national   security   National Cyber Security Strategies   Practical Guide on Development and Execution   37             Ownership   PDCA-model   Public–private  partnership (PPP)   RACI   Risk and crisis  management   Risk-based  approach   partners.
The  Deming  ‘Plan-Do-Check-Act’  (PDCA)-model  is  commonly  used  to  structure information security management systems.
However,  it  can  be  defined  as  an  organised  relationship  between  the  public  and  private sector, which establishes common goals and objectives and uses  defined roles and work methodology to achieve shared goals.
Risk  management  is the  identification,  assessment,  and  prioritisation  of  risks  (the  uncertainty  on  objectives,  whether  positive  or  negative)  followed  by  coordinated  and  economic  application  of  resources  to  minimise,  monitor,  and  control  the  probability  and/or  impact  of  unfortunate events or to maximise the realisation of opportunities.
Crisis  management commonly represents a failure of risk management since it  will never be possible to totally mitigate the chances of security breaches  occurring.
Security baseline   A security baseline describes the measures that should be implemented  to reach a specific minimum security level.
Security standard  A  security  standard  is  a  set  of  security  features  to  be  provided  by  a  system  before  it  can  be  deemed  to  be  suitable  for  use  in  a  particular  security  processing  mode,  or  in  accordance  with  a  generalized  security  policy.
Self-regulation   Self-regulation  is  the  process  whereby  an  organisation  is  asked,  or  volunteers,  to  monitor  its  own  adherence  to  legal,  ethical,  or  safety  standards,  rather  than  have  an  outside,  independent  agency  such  as  a  governmental entity monitor and enforce those standards.
38      National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution   Annex II – References   National cyber security strategies   Czech Republic  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/CZ_Cyber_Security_Strategy_20112015.PDF     Estonia  http://www.kmin.ee/files/kmin/img/files/Kuberjulgeoleku_strateegia_2008-2013_ENG.pdf      Finland  http://www.lvm.fi/c/document_library/get_file?folderId=57092&name=DLFE- 5405.pdf&title=Valtioneuvoston%20periaatep%C3%A4%C3%A4t%C3%B6s%20kansalliseksi%20tietotur vastrategiaksi%20%28su/ru/eng%20LVM62/2008%29     France   http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/french-cyber security-strategy-2011     Germany   http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/german-cyber security-strategy-2011-1     Lithuania   http://www.ird.lt/doc/teises_aktai_en/EIS(KS)PP_796_2011-06-29_EN_PATAIS.pdf     Luxembourg  http://www.gouvernement.lu/salle_presse/actualite/2011/11-novembre/23-biltgen/dossier.pdf     Netherlands  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/dutch-cyber security-strategy-2011     Slovakia  Not available online     United Kingdom  http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm76/7642/7642.pdf    2   National Cyber Security Strategies    Practical Guide on Development and Execution                                              Copyright © 2016 Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT)    All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any  form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,  without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,  except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial  uses  permitted  by  copyright  law.
For  permission  requests,  please  send  to  the  Ministry  of  Communications and Information Technology, attention to the Chief Executive Officer, at the address  below.
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,  Private Bag,  Level 6,   Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Efi Building,   Apia,  SAMOA.
Telephone: (685) 26117  Facsimile:  (685) 24671  Email: www.mcit.gov.ws                  Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        1   Minister’s Foreword    Samoans are embracing the many advantages cyberspace offers and our  economy and quality of life are the better for it.
The  increasing  use  of  Information  Communications  Technology  (ICT)  has  raised  issues  of  security  and  privacy.
The  exploitation  of  computers  and  telecommunications  technology  for  criminal  activities  has  increased.
Incident  of  hacking,  virus  attacks,  access  and  dissemination  of  pornographic  materials  misuse  of  information  and  network  security  can  no  longer  be  ignored.
Cyber  security has become a  critical issue especially now with the rise of cyber-terrorism and its  impact on national and global security.
The  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  outlines  the  Government‘s  intention  of  harnessing  resources to protect the public and private sectors.
The goals set out in the strategy aims to  strengthen existing cyber systems and critical infrastructure sectors, support economic growth  and protect the public in terms of connectivity to each other and to the rest of the world.
Cyber Security is a shared responsibility and this Strategy calls upon all Internet users, to be  vigilant and informed about online threats, and how their own actions can be the first line of  defence.
_________________________________________________  Honorable Afamasaga Lepuia‘i Rico Tupa’i  MINISTER OF COMMUNCATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY                    Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        2   Contents    Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 4  Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 5  Vision ......................................................................................................................................... 6  Goals ........................................................................................................................................... 7  GOAL 1: Organizational Structures ....................................................................................... 7  GOAL 2: Standardization and Services .................................................................................. 8  GOAL 3: Strengthening the Legal framework ....................................................................... 9  GOAL 4: Capacity Building ................................................................................................. 10  GOAL 5: Cooperation.
.................................................................................................... 11-12  Strategic Priorities ............................................................................................................... 12-13                                                                      Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        3   Executive Summary    The National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016-2021 (the strategy) sets out areas for development  in Samoa’s cybersecurity.
The Ministry anticipates within the next five (5) years:   •   Individuals become aware of cybersecurity threats and are empowered to exist safely  in this digital era;   •  Businesses  become  responsive  to  cybersecurity  issue  and  establish  a  working  relationship with Government, trade associations and other business partners to tackle  cyber  threats  so  the  world  will  see  that  Samoa  is  a  safe  place  to  do  business  in  cyberspace;   •  Government has:   ?
Sharpened law enforcement response to cyber crime;   ?
Secure fundings to provide cyber security services;   ?
Encouraged business to operate securely in cyberspace;   ?
Bolstered defences in our critical national infrastructure against cyber attack;   ?
Established  and  strengthened  working  relationships  with  other  countries,  business and organisations around the world to help positively shape an open  and vibrant cyberspace that supports strong and better societies here and across  the globe.
Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        4   Introduction    “As  Samoa  enters  into  the  new  paradigm  of  globalized  Information  and  Communications  Technology (ICT) services and telecommunications convergence, attention is needed towards  developing an enhanced cyber or Internet security framework.”1    Samoa’s connectivity through Internet, access to mobile phones, and broadcast technologies  continues to increase, warranting the need to promote and establish Cybersecurity measures to  ensure  that  the  economic,  social,  environmental  and  infrastructure  sectors  are  secure  and  equipped to address challenges and cyber threats including but not limited to infrastructure  impairment and criminal activities; to ensure continuity of operations, development and the  well being of digital citizens.
It is expected that the implementation of this Strategy will ensure a secure cyberspace; Ensure  a secure cyberspace; that will contribute to improving Samoa’s socio-economic development.
1 Samoa National Broadband Policy 2012 Pg 13                 Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        5   Vision  For all citizens of Samoa, tourists, businesses and Government to enjoy the full benefits  of a secure and resilient cyber space   To achieve this vision, five (5) goals are identified:     i.
Develop  necessary  organizational  structures  with  a  focus  on  utilizing  existing   structures in Samoa as well as in the region;      ii.
Establish  relevant  technical  measures  (Entities  and  Standards)  to  eliminate  Cyber   Threats and Attacks, enhance Cybersecurity and promote Cyber Safety.
Strengthen  the  legal  framework  to  meet  the  highest  regional  and  international  standards with regard to protection of fundamental rights as well as criminalization,  investigation,  electronic  evidence  and  international  cooperation  relative  to  computer  and electronic crimes;    (Capacity Building) – Build digital citizens capacity, raising awareness and attaining  resources to enhance Cybersecurity, combat Cybercrime activities and promote Cyber  Safety to the highest levels; and       6   v.   Strengthen and establish cooperation to respond to the Global nature of Cyber.
Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021     Goals    GOAL 1: Develop necessary organizational structures with a focus on utilizing existing  structures in Samoa as well as in the region.
Strategy Statement:   Organisational and Procedural Measures are necessary for the proper implementation of any  type of national initiative to combat Cybercrime and strengthen Cybersecurity.
Strengthen and redefine the National ICT Steering Committee (“NICT”) and its members  and prioritize Cybersecurity in its mandate.
The NICT is to lead the coordination and the  implementation  of  the  Cybersecurity  strategy  and  the  process  of  carrying  out  the  necessary tasks.
Establish a Roadmap for Governance of Cybersecurity in Samoa;   2.1.
Identify key stakeholders to develop a culture for Cybersecurity;  2.2.
Identify needs of national critical information infrastructure protection;  2.3.
Foster  information  sharing  within  the  public  sector  and  between  the  public  private   sector;   2.4.
Establish  process  for  addressing  ICT  security  breaches  and  incident  handling   (reporting, information sharing, alert management, justice and police collaboration);   2.5.
Ensure effective of the implementation of the national Policy;  2.6.
Ensure Cybersecurity program control, evaluation validation and optimization     3.
Implementation of National Benchmarking scheme to;   3.1.
Ensure Cybersecurity is continuously developed in accordance within internationally   accepted standards;      3.2.
Analyse the effect of Cybersecurity breaches on citizen businesses and Government     4.
The  Office  of  the  Attorney  General  (“OAG”),  Samoa  Law  Reform  Commission  (“SLRC”);  National  Prosecution  Office  (“NPO”),  Judiciary  and  other  law  enforcement  agencies must develop a National Crime Prevention Strategy related to Cybercrime; this  initiative is to be coordinated by NICT to ensure that measures discussed are in line with  measures to the implemented.
Development of Child Online Protection (“COP”) or Strategy to promote the use of ICT  and  to  implementation  precaution  and  protection  of  children  users;  in  addition  Child  Sexual Abuse Material (“CSAM”) Filtering Policy.
Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        7   GOAL  2:  Establish  relevant  Technical  Measure  (Entities  and  Standards)  to  eliminate  Cyber Threats and Attacks, enhance Cybersecurity and promote Cybersecurity.
Strategy Statement: Defining and controlling technical measures to ensure security standards  are implemented with the required expertise and in accordance with international trends.
Establishment  of  a  National  Computer  Incident  Response  Team  (“CIRT”)  that  is  capable of dealing with relevant Cybersecurity Threats and Attack on citizens, tourist,  businesses and government in Samoa.
The CIRT must have the capability to identify  combat,  respond  and  manage  Cyberspace  Threats  or  Attacks;  as  well  as  enhance  Cyberspace  security  in  Samoa.
Furthermore  CIRT  must  be  responsible  for  the  computer  forensic  component  of  criminal  investigations  relative  to  computer  technology or electronic evidence.
Development  of  a  unit  within  Police  Services  (Ministry  of  Police)  that  serves  as  a  single  point  of  contact for  Cybercrime  with  the  ancillary  purpose  of  data  collection  and increasing available information.
Establishment of a Child Online Protection Working Group (“COPWG”) consisting of  but  not  limited  to  the  Ministry  of  Police,  (“MOP”);  OAG;  Ministry  of  Education  Sports  and  Culture  (“MESC”),  Ministry  of  Women,  Community  and  Social  Development (“MWCSD”), Ministry of Justice and Courts Administrations (MJCA),  Ministry  of  Communications  and  Information  Technology  (MCIT),  Office  of  the  Regulator  (OOTR),  Social  Welfare  Services  such  as  Samoa  Victim  Support  Group  (SVSG), and other child protection NGOs; Internet Service Providers (ISP), Electronic  Service Providers (ESP); Telecommunications Mobile and Fixed Network Providers;  other Hi-Tech Companies; Owners of Internet Cafes and other public access providers  e.g.
Develop  or  Identify  Standards  to  be  implemented  to  ensure  that  the  rest  of  the   Cybersecurity related attacks are minimised.
NICT must carry out assessment and identify the critical processes, standards for the  introduction of the different security levels.
Furthermore the CIRT and other relevant  stakeholders must be responsible for the implementation and control of the developed  standards.
Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        8   6.
MCIT, OOTR, Samoa Qualification Authority (SQA), shall develop a framework for  the certification and accreditation of national agencies and public sector professions  by internationally recognized Cybersecurity Standards.
GOAL  3:  Strengthen  the  legal  framework  to  meet  highest  regional  and  international  standards  with  regard  to  protection  of  fundamental  rights  as  well  as  criminalization,  investigation, electronic evidence and international cooperation;      Strategy Statement: In order to promote openness and a safe cyberspace environment.
Samoa  should have a reliable legal framework that reflects its uniqueness as well as international  best practices.
The MCIT and OOTR will coordinate a diagnostic of Convention and other International   Instruments appropriate for Government endorsement, ratification and accession.
MCIT  and  the  OOTR  will  coordinate  a  legislative  compliance  review  in  collaboration   with Cybersecurity stakeholder to determine all necessary powers exist including:            2.1. enabling  law  enforcement  and  other  relevant  agencies  to  protection  digital  citizens   material and intellectual aspects as well vital infrastructure;      2.2. establish or improving definitions, penal legislation, investigation instruments of law  enforcement,  admissibility  of  electronic  evidence,  liability  of  Internet  Service  Providers (ISPs), and specific provision children online and international cooperation.
The review shall include that identification of existing provision that could be utilise  in  relation  to  Cybersecurity,  a  comparison  with  international  best  practices,  a  gap  analysis  suggestion  for  amendments  and  the  related  drafting  instructions.
This  activity  shall  be  carried  out  in  close  collaboration  with  the  OAG  and  built  upon  existing work carried out in the region (e.g.
Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        9   GOAL  4:  Build  digital  citizens  capacity,  raising  awarenes  and  attaining  resources  to  enhance Cybersecurity, combat Cybercrime activities and promote Cyber safety to the  highest levels.
Strategy  Statement:  Ensuring  that  all  relevant  stakeholders  including  citizens,  students,  businesses, judiciary, and law enforcement receive sustainable trainings.
The Ministry and NICT to inform all stakeholders involved of the functions and roles of   NICT and other proposed working groups.
Identify Cybersecurity stakeholder to coordinate training and awareness on Cyber related   issues, it may include;  2.1. the  establishment  and  fostering  of  links  with  village  council  about  recent  ICT   developments;   2.2. the  distribution  of  Cybersecurity  information  to  community  through  the  MWCSD   through the usage of Feso’ota’i Centre Outlets;   2.3. use of Government media outlet to publicize Cybersecurity information;  2.4. creation of Internet Safety Messages and material which reflect cultural norms and   law for postage online and to air on Television;   2.5. development of Tertiary level Computer Science Curriculum to include Cybersecurity         measures;   2.6. development of School Curriculums concerning Computer Studies in the primary and   secondary levels; which include a model on Cybersecurity and Cyber safety.
Development  of  sustainable  training  program  for  law  enforcement  officers  (police,   customs), Finance, Prosecutors, Service Providers; OOTR and Judiciary.
Development  of  sustainable  training  programs  for  Communication  and  IT  engineers  to   support and assist managing Cybersecurity programs.
MCIT  and  OOTR  shall  provide  a  list  of  capacity  building  programs  related  to  Cybersecurity that Samoa should benefit from to avoid an overlapping both entities shall  develop a roadmap that list the difference capacity activities that Samoa requires.
MCIT,  OOTR,  SQA  shall  develop  for  the  certification  and  accreditation  of  national  agencies  and  public  sector  professions  by  internationally  recognise  Cybersecurity  standards                  Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        10   GOAL 5: Cooperation; Responding to the global nature of Cybersecurity threats  and  attacks  through  a  multi-stakeholders  approach  and  strengthing  local  and  global  partnerships.
Strategy Statement: To be part of the transnational dimension of cybersecurity incidents and  benefit from the support of different organizations for developing countries by utilizing means  of local and international cooperation and support.
MCIT to coordinate data collection on Intra-State Cooperation and recommend further   required partnership stakeholders2      2.
MCIT  and  OOTR  will  make  recommendations  with  regard  to  a  potential  access  to  international  or  regional  agreements,  current  processes  of  developing  binding  standards where Samoa should participate, as well as 24/7 networks (such as the G8 or  Interpol Network).
National  Cybersecurity  Stakeholders  are  encouraged  to  enter  into  partnerships  and  programs  for  sharing  Cybersecurity  assets  (people,  process,  tools)  within  the  public  sector  (i.e.
official  partnerships  for  the  cooperation  or  exchange  of  information,  expertise technology and/or resources between departments ministries and agencies)3     Public and Private Partnerships  4.
Promote Public and Private Partnership to share Cybersecurity assets (people, process,  tools)  between  the  public  sectors  (i.e.
official  partnerships  for  the  cooperation  or  exchange of information, expertise, technology and resources)4     5.
Furthermore  identify  cooperation  partners  (such  as  Matai  and  Fa’afeagaiga)  in rural  areas that can support the capacity building initiatives by providing information about  security  within  their  daily  work  and  provide  them  with  necessary  background  information and training materials for the community.
2 Intra-State Cooperation refers to any officially recognised national or sector-specific partnership for sharing  cybersecurity assets across borders with other nation state (i.e.
signed bi-lateral or multi-lateral partnership for  the cooperation or exchange of information, expertise, technology and/or resources)  http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Document/GCI_conceptual_Framework .pdf.
3 Ibid........................................................................................................   4 Ibid........................................................................................................                 Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021     11        International Cooperation  6.
MCIT and OOTR to conduct appraisal and make recommendation with regards to   potential International or Regional Agreements, current process of developing binding  standards where Samoa should participates, as well as 24/7 networks (such as the G8  or Interpol Network).
Strategic Priorities     Activity      NICT redefined roles and   responsibilities      Establishment of Roadmap for  Governance of Cybersecurity in   Samoa   National Benchmarking scheme      National Crime Prevention   Strategy   Development of Child Online  Protection Policy or Strategy   Establishment of CIRT      Development of Cybersecurity  Unit with a Law Enforcement  Establishment of COPWG      Assessment for standards      Development of standards      Framework for certification and   accreditation of National  Agencies and Public Sector  Professions by Internationally   Recognized Cybersecurity   Standards   Lead Agency   MCIT   MCIT   MCIT/OOTR   MOP   Proposed  Timeframe  2016 - 2019   2016 - 2019   2017 - 2019   2017 - 2020   MCIT/OOTR/MWCSD/MOP   2018 - 2020   MCIT   MCIT/MOP   2016 - 2019   2017 – 2020   MCIT/MESC/MWCSD   2016 - 2019   MCIT/OOTR   MCIT/OOTR   2016 - 2019   2016 - 2019   MCIT/SQA/OOTR   2017 - 2020   Convention and International   Instruments Diagnostic   Legislative Compliance Review   MCIT/OOTR   2018 - 2020   OAG/MCIT/OOTR   2018 - 2020                  Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        12   Inform Stakeholders involved in  the policy or functions and roles   of NICT and other proposed   working groups   Coordination of trainings and   awareness   Development of tertiary level   Computer Science Curriculum to  include Cybersecurity measures  Development of a sustainable   training program for law   enforcement officers (Police,  Customs), Finance, Prosecutors,  Service Providers; Office of the   Regulator and the Judiciary.
Development sustainable   training programs for   communication and IT engineers  to support and assist in managing   Cybersecurity programs.
MCIT   2019 - 2020   MCIT/MESC/OOTR/   MWCSD/MOP   Ongoing   MCIT/OOTR/MESC/SQA   Ongoing   MCIT/OOTR/MOP/OAG   Ongoing   MCIT   Ongoing   MCIT   MCIT   Ongoing      Ongoing   Data Collection and Intra-State  Cooperation and Partnerships   Recommendations   Mobilisation/Strengthening of   National Cybersecurity   Stakeholders (Government   Ministries, Authorities, Offices)   partnerships   Mobilisation/Strengthening of  Public and Private Partnerships   Identify contact point at the  community level/village level  Identification and Establishment  of International Relationships   MCIT   `MWCSD   2020   2017 - 2019   MCIT/OOTR/OAG   Ongoing                           Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021        13                                                        Samoa National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 - 2021       REPORT BY THE  COMPTROLLER AND  AUDITOR GENERAL HC 890  SESSION 2012-13 12 FEBRUARY 2013  Cross-government  The UK cyber   security strategy:  Landscape review  Our vision is to help the nation spend wisely.
Our recommendations and reports on  good practice help government improve public services, and our work led to  audited savings of more than £1 billion in 2011.
Cross-government  The UK cyber   security strategy:  Landscape review  Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General  Ordered by the House of Commons  to be printed on 11 February 2013  This report has been prepared under Section 6 of the  National Audit Act 1983 for presentation to the House of  Commons in accordance with Section 9 of the Act  Amyas Morse  Comptroller and Auditor General  National Audit Office  5 February 2013  HC 890  London: The Stationery Office  £16.00  This landscape review describes government’s evolving  approach to cyber security and describes the programme  of work it has under way.
Printed in the UK for the Stationery Office  Limited on behalf of the Controller of Her  Majesty’s Stationery Office  2540545  02/13  PRCS  Contents  Key facts  4 Introduction  5 Part One The UK cyber security strategy  10  Part Two Challenges for government  24  Annex Assessing the value for money  of cyber security  32  Appendix One Our audit approach  36  Appendix Two Our evidence base  38  Endnotes  40  The National Audit Office study team  consisted of:  Veronica Marshall, Linda Mills,  Jeremy Weingard and James Young,  under the direction of Sally Howes  This report can be found on the   National Audit Office website at   www.nao.org.uk/cyber-security-2013  For further information about the  National Audit Office please contact:  National Audit Office  Press Office  157–197 Buckingham Palace Road  Victoria  London  SW1W 9SP  Tel: 020 7798 7400  Enquiries: www.nao.org.uk/contactus  Website: www.nao.org.uk  Twitter: @NAOorguk  4  Key facts  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Key facts  Opportunities  3bn  people will be using the internet worldwide by 2016  8% proportion of UK GDP  accounted for by  UK internet economy,  a greater share than for any other G20 country  £121bn value of the UK’s  internet-based  economy in 2010   No.1 UK ranked against other G20 countries based on its ability to  withstand cyber attacks  and develop strong  digital economy  Threats   44m cyber attacks  in 2011 in the UK  £18bn–£27bn estimated annual cost  to UK of cybercrime  80% of cyber attacks could  be prevented through  simple computer and  network ‘hygiene’  Cyber attacks  ranked as one  of top four UK  national risks in 2010   The UK cyber security strategy and programme   Additional funding of £650 million to protect and promote  2011-12  2012-13  £105 million  November 2011 –  The Cabinet Office  publishes UK cyber  security strategy:  Protecting and  promoting the UK  in a digital world  £155 million  December 2012 –  The Cabinet Office  reports progress after  one year of the UK  cyber security strategy,  sets out plans and  commits to report back  on progress in 2013  2013-14  £180 million   2014-15  £210 million   Fifteen government organisations working together on four objectives   1  To tackle cybercrime  and make the UK one  of the most secure  places in the world  to do business  2  To make the UK  more resilient to cyber  attack and be better able  to protect its interests  in cyberspace  3  To help shape an  open, stable and vibrant  cyberspace that the UK public can use safely  and that supports  open societies  4  To build the UK’s  cross-cutting knowledge,  skills and capability to  underpin all cyber  security objectives  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  5  Introduction  1  The growth of the internet, or cyberspace, has impacted profoundly on everyday  life and the global economy.
By enabling people to exchange knowledge and ideas all  over the world, the internet has contributed to a more open society and greater freedom  of speech.
The internet is also making governments more accountable and transparent and is  changing the way they deliver public services.
2  If the internet were a national economy in its own right, it would be the fifth largest  in the world.1 The internet has evolved from initial experiments to link computer systems  in the US in the 1960s, to the global interconnected network of systems and information  that it is today.
International governments have intervened little.
Nobody controls the internet,  centrally or globally.
Although no one person owns it, 80 per cent of the internet lies in  the private sector.
It is impossible to predict how people will use the internet in the future.
With digital information growing, combined with new technologies, government, industry  and citizens are likely to depend increasingly on the internet.
Approximately three billion  people will be using the internet by 2016.2 However, the internet was not designed with  security in mind.
An open internet  An open internet that is safe for everyone to use and that supports economic   3  growth is central to the government’s vision:   “... for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a vibrant,  resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core values  for liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity,  national security and a strong society.”3   The UK currently has one of the world’s largest internet-based economies, valued   4  at £121 billion in 2010.
This is equivalent to 8 per cent of the UK’s GDP, which is a greater  share than for any other G20 country.4 A secure internet is therefore vital for the UK’s  economic prosperity and to support government plans to make all public services digital.
6  Introduction  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Threats to the internet  Although providing opportunities, the internet also poses new and growing threats.
5  As the internet is borderless and nobody polices it, legitimate users of the internet are  vulnerable to attack.
One report estimated that the UK suffered around 44 million cyber  attacks in 2011, compared with one billion attacks across the world, although we must  treat data on such events with caution.5   The government has recognised the existing and evolving threats to the internet   6  and is focusing on:  •	  •	  •	  serious organised crime using the internet to steal personal or financial data to  commit fraud, steal corporate intellectual property, or launder money;  political activists hacking and using the internet to steal information or damage  computer systems to serve political agendas; and  state supported espionage and attacks on critical national infrastructure.
Effective cyber security protected the Games against these threats and  ensured services were not disrupted.7   Cyber attacks are easy and cheap to perpetrate compared with traditional crime,   8  and attackers can easily evade prosecution by being in countries that will not arrest  them.
Consequently, tackling crime using the internet is a major challenge.
9  Serious organised crime has developed an internet-based black market for  criminals, which sells stolen identity information and software products to launch  cyber attacks as well as technical support for cybercrime.
10  The threat to cyber security is persistent and constantly evolving.
Cybercrime currently costs the UK somewhere between  £18 billion and £27 billion a year.8,9 Consequently, business, government and the public  must be aware of it and be able to resist the threat of cyber attack.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  7  Government’s response to cyber threats  11  In line with its vision for an open and trusted internet, the government raised  cyber security as one of the four top risks for UK national security in 2010.
In the 2010  Comprehensive Spending Review, announced in October 2010, it therefore committed  an additional £650 million of funding from 2011-12 to 2014-15 to a cross-government  cyber security programme.
The government already spends significant amounts on  cyber security through the Single Intelligence Vote and in departments to secure their  information, networks and systems.
The purpose of the additional £650 million was to enable different parts  of government to work together to boost UK cyber defences and to promote the UK’s  strong international position.
In launching the government’s 2011 UK cyber security strategy, the    12  Prime Minister said:   “While the internet is undoubtedly a force for social and political good, as well  as crucial to the growth of our economy, we need to protect against the threats  to our security.
This strategy not only deals with the threat from terrorists to our  national security, but also with the criminals who threaten our prosperity as well  as blight the lives of many ordinary people through cybercrime.
Cyber security is  a top priority for government and we will continue to work closely with the police,  security services, international partners and the private sector to ensure that the  UK remains one of the most secure places in the world to do business.”10   13  The strategy sets out what is at stake as follows:   “Cyberspace has now grown to become a domain where strategic advantage –  industrial or military – can be won or lost.
The growing use of cyberspace means  that its disruption can affect nations’ ability to function effectively in a crisis.”11   14  The strategy addresses not only the technical aspects of cyber security (protecting  systems, networks and information) but as importantly, it seeks to change the attitudes  and behaviours of business, government and the public so that everyone uses the  internet safely.
8  Introduction  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Parliament’s increasing interest in cyber security  15  Parliament has shown an increasing interest in cyber security.
In 2010, the  House of Lords EU Committee reported that the UK was reasonably well-placed to  deal with cyber attacks and was ‘a leader in the EU, with developed practices that set  benchmarks for others to adopt’.12   16   In 2012 and 2013, the following committees reported:  •	  •	  •	  •	  The Science and Technology Committee called for government to do more to  help the public understand how to stay safe online;13   The Defence Select Committee published a report on cyber security in relation  to the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces;14   The Intelligence and Security Committee praised work on the defence and  security of computer networks, but were concerned that delays in developing  national capabilities will give the UK’s enemies an advantage, given the rapid rise  in cyber threats;15 and   The Home Affairs Select Committee held an inquiry into cybercrime.
17  The Committee of Public Accounts has not examined cyber security specifically,  although it did point to a lack of detail on cyber security plans in the government’s 2011  ICT strategy, given the government’s aim to move more services online.16 In March 2012,  it also raised concerns about cyber security in the government’s plans for smart electric  and gas meters, which will enable suppliers to collect meter readings over the internet.17   Purpose of this landscape report  18  An effective UK response to cyber threats is essential for future economic prosperity,  making public services digital by default, and maintaining the values and freedom of an  open society.
This landscape review describes government’s evolving approach to cyber  security and describes the programme of work it has under way.
It does not conclude on the  value for money of the government’s cyber security strategy at this early stage.
•	 Part One describes the cyber security strategy published in 2011 by the Cabinet   Office.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Introduction  9  Our approach  19  This report draws on our work as auditors of central government, past government  publications, research from think tanks and data from the Cabinet Office.
We interviewed  lead officials, industry representatives, academics and citizens’ groups during July to  October 2012 and held a round table with leading cyber academics.
10  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy  In this part of our report, we describe the background to the 2011 UK cyber   1.1  security strategy and its scope.
Evolution of the UK cyber security strategy  1.2  The government’s 2011 strategy builds on ten-years’ experience of seeking to  protect government information, systems and networks (Figure 1 on pages 12 and 13).
In 2001, the Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG) (within GCHQ) first  recognised the importance of protecting the security of data.
The group recommended  the appointment of a central sponsor to determine policy on managing and securing  government data.
1.3  By 2004, the government had published a national strategy for information  assurance and established a network of Senior Information Risk Owners.
They aimed  to lead and foster a culture that valued and protected information.
1.4  Two serious losses of data in HM Revenue & Customs in 2007, and the  Ministry of Defence in 2008, damaged the reputation of the government and demonstrated  the importance of managing information risk.
Reviews of these incidents found that  information security had not been a management priority.
1.5  In 2009, the government recognised the emerging and significant risks of cyber  threats and published its first cyber security strategy.
The aim was to broaden its role  beyond that of protecting government information and systems.
It also wanted to work  with industry and citizens to protect the wider UK economy and society from cyber  threats.
As part of its strategy, the government set up the Office of Cyber Security in the  Cabinet Office.
In 2009, the government ranked cyber attacks on the UK below climate   1.6  change, terrorism, failed states and the banking crisis as key risks to UK national  security.
By 2010, it had raised cyber attacks to one of the four top national risks,  alongside international military crises, terrorism, and major incidents such as natural  disasters or influenza pandemics.19 In response to the rising risks of cyber attacks,  in November 2010, the government announced an additional £650 million of funding  for a four-year National Cyber Security Programme.20 The Home Office transferred  responsibility for cyber security in government to the Cabinet Office in 2011.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  11  In November 2011, the government published a new cyber security strategy.21   1.7  This set out how the government planned to deliver the National Cyber Security  Programme through to 2015.
For example, the strategy places greater  emphasis on the role and responsibilities of the public and industry in helping secure the  UK against attacks.
It also recognises that existing legislation and education at all levels  should incorporate cyber security within mainstream activities.
Six central departments and nine other  government organisations (including those in the Intelligence and Security Agencies)  are responsible for delivery as shown in Figure 2 on page 14.
It has a growing international market in cyber security products and services.
•	 •	 Businesses operate securely in cyberspace.
•	 •	 •	 •	 •	 •	 Skills and capability, research and development and all levels of education   Its capabilities to detect and defeat attacks in cyberspace are stronger.
Its critical national infrastructure is protected against cyber attack.
effectively support cyber security.
•	 Working relationships with other countries, business and organisations around   the world are strong and well established.
Governance   1.11  The strategy sets out how the government will deliver the 2010 National Cyber  Security Programme.
The Office of Cyber Security and Information Assurance (OCSIA),  among other responsibilities, manages and coordinates the programme which the  Minister for the Cabinet Office oversees as shown in Figure 3 on page 15.
Six Cyber  Delivery Capability Groups manage activities at a working level and the Cyber Delivery  Management Group, representing all 15 delivery partners, meets quarterly to review the  programme and address cross-cutting issues.
The programme is included within the  governance arrangements for the government’s Major Projects Portfolio and participates  in annual Gateway reviews by the Efficiency and Reform Group to ensure that it follows  best practice.
12  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  13  Figure 1 Information assurance and cyber security reports, events and key changes in strategic direction  The government’s approach to cyber security has developed since 2001  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011     The Communications- Electronics Security  Group (CESG) Review  recommending  Central Sponsor for  Information Assurance  Increasing use of  online services  requires development  of security measures.
Outcome of CESG’s  review was to  recommend a  central sponsor for  Information Assurance  Report  Event  Key changes  in strategic  direction  E-envoy appointed as  Central Sponsor for  Information Assurance  (CSIA)   Central Sponsor for  Information Assurance  (CSIA) secretariat  established  This new role provides  focus for Information  Assurance activity  and development of a  National Information  Assurance strategy  Information Assurance  National Information  Assurance Strategy  Updated  National Information  Assurance Strategy   A network of Senior  Information Risk  Owner’s (SIROs)  across government  established  This is the first  framework for  departments and  public bodies, to help  them understand  ICT risks.
It sets  out government’s  approach to dealing  with risks facing  information systems  HMRC loses disc  containing Child  Benefit data of  25 million people  Ministry of Defence  loses  personal  records of around  600,000 people   Single Information  Assurance framework  for the whole of the  UK extended beyond  confidentiality of  information to cover  availability, integrity,  non-repudiation  and authentication  Cyber Security  The National Security  Strategy: A Strong  Britain in an Age of  Uncertainty  This outlines  reappraisal of Britain’s  role in the world, the  risks to our security  and their implication  for the UK  The Strategic Defence  and Security Review  UK cyber  security strategy This sets out the  objectives and tasks to  be undertaken as part  of the National Cyber  Security Programme  Ministerial  responsibility for cyber  security moved from  the Home Office to the  Cabinet Office  Cyber security  elevated to one of the  four key risks to UK  national security  Strategic Defence  and Security Review  announce £650 million  of additional funding  for National Cyber  Security Programme  Cyber security  strategy now includes  how the UK will tackle  cyber threats to  promote economic  growth and to protect  national security and  the UK’s way of life  First cyber  security strategy  Coleman Report:  Protecting government  information  Data Handling  Procedures in  Government:  Final Report and  Poynter Review of  information security  at HM Revenue &  Customs  The Office of Cyber  Security formed in the  Cabinet Office  Government responds  to increasing risks  of cyber threats by  broadening its role  beyond Information  Assurance to  cyber security  Protection of  government  systems and critical  infrastructure part  of the strategy.
Also  recognition that cyber  protection requires  a multi-stakeholder  approach and action  at many levels   Sources: 1–6, 9–11 The Cabinet Of?
National Information Assurance Strategy, 2003; 2.
Protecting our information system, 2004; 3.
A National Information  Assurance Strategy (revision), 2007; 4.
Protecting Government Information; The Coleman Report, 2008; 5.
Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, 2009; 7.
Securing Britain in an  Age of Uncertainty: The Strategic Defence and Security Review, The Ministry of Defence, 2010; 9.
Protecting government information, 2010; 10.
The National  Security Strategy “A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty”, 2010; 11.The UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, 2011  14  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Figure 2 Strategic objectives and responsibilities for the National Cyber Security Programme  Objective 1  To tackle cybercrime and make  the UK one of the most secure  places in the world to do business  Organisations Home Office, Serious Organised  Crime Agency, Child Exploitation  and Online Protection, Police  Central e-crime Unit, police forces,  National Fraud Authority  Responsibilities  Tackling cybercrime: •	 Reducing online vulnerability •	 Restricting criminal activity online •	 Promoting effective partnerships  Department for Business,  Innovation and Skills, Technology  Strategy Board, UK Trade and  Investment  2  To make the UK more resilient to  cyber attack and be better able to  protect its interests in cyberspace  The Cabinet Office and the  Intelligence and Security Agencies  Ministry of Defence  3  To help shape an open, stable  and vibrant cyberspace which the  UK public can use safely and that  supports open societies  Department for Culture, Media  and Sport  Foreign and Commonwealth Office  4  To build the UK’s cross-cutting  knowledge, skills and capability  to underpin all cyber security  objectives  Department for Business,  Innovation and Skills  Department for Business,  Innovation and Skills  The Cabinet Office  Making it safer to do business in cyberspace: •	 Increasing awareness and visibility of threats •	 Improving incident response •	 Protecting information and services •	 Fostering a culture that manages the risks •	 Promoting confidence in cyberspace  Defending national infrastructure: •	 Strengthening defences in cyberspace •	 Improving resilience and diminishing the impact   of cyber attacks  •	 Countering terrorist use of the internet  Ensuring that the UK has the capability to protect  UK interests in cyberspace: •	 Improving our ability to detect threats in cyberspace •	 Expanding our capability to deter and disrupt attacks   on the UK  Helping to shape the development of cyberspace: •	 Promoting an open and interoperable cyberspace •	 Promoting our fundamental freedoms and rights   Protecting our way of life: •	 Ensuring our security without compromising our values  Extending knowledge: •	 Building a coherent research agenda •	 Understanding threats, vulnerabilities and risks  Enhancing skills: •	 Building a culture that understands the risks  •	 Improving skills at all levels  Expanding capability: •	 Building technical capabilities •	 Increasing ability to respond to incidents  Source: UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, Cabinet Of?
ce, 2011  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  15  Figure 3 Governance of the National Cyber Security Programme   The National Cyber Security Programme  (2010-11 to 2014-15)  The programme and strategic implementation  board: chaired by Minister for the Cabinet Office  Cyber delivery management group (CDMG):  all delivery partners represented  Theme-based cyber delivery capability groups   Office for Cyber Security and Information  Assurance manages the overall programme  Government’s major projects portfolio  Efficiency and  Reform Group  Annual  gateway  review  Source: National Audit Of?
ce  Funding   1.12  In 2010, the Office of Cyber Security allocated additional funding of £650 million  to the National Cyber Security Programme.
Only a portion of future spend has been committed, to allow flexibility to  respond to developments in what is a fast-moving area.
1.13  In addition to the £650 million of funding shown in Figure 4, departments and  agencies are allocating funding from their operational budgets to cyber security.
The figure  of £650 million does therefore not include spending in support of cyber objectives that the  National Cyber Security Programme does not fund.
16  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Figure 4 Breakdown of £650 million funding for the National Cyber Security Programme (2011-12 to 2014-15)  Funding has been allocated to six areas over the four years   2011-12  £105m   2012-13  £155m   2013-14  £180m   2014-15 £210m  £650 million       (£m)  450  400  350  300  250  200  150  100  50  0  Security and intelligence agencies  Ministry of Defence  Government  ICT  £ million   Percentage   384   59%   90   14%   65   10%   Home Of?ce  65   10%   Cabinet Of?ce  33   5%   Department  for Business,  Innovation  and Skills  13  2%  NOTES 1  Nominal values.
Source: UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world, Cabinet Of?ce, November 2011  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  17  Progress   1.14  The government reported progress after one year in December 2012.22,23  Figure 5 on pages 18 to 21 describes the government’s progress against its strategic  objectives and details of the government’s plans.
This was  part of an international operation with the FBI and US Department of Justice.
According to the SOCA this operation prevented international fraud estimated  to be over £500 million; and  in the past year, Action Fraud, managed by the National Fraud Authority, has  received over 46,000 reports of cybercrime from the public.
Spending to date  1.15  We show outturn and forecast spending during the first two years of the National  Cyber Security Programme in Figure 6 on page 22.
Spending has  supported a broad range of cyber activities shown in Figure 5.
However, developing this capability supports activity across all strands of the programme.
18  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  19  Figure 5 Figure 5 The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012) The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)  Progress  Progress   Objective 1: To tackle cybercrime and make the UK one of the most secure places in the world to do business  Tackling cybercrime  Action Fraud (managed by the National Fraud Authority) became  the UK’s national reporting centre for fraud and financially motivated  cybercrime.
National Fraud Authority and industry partners delivered ‘The Devil’s  in Your Details’ cyber security awareness campaign that it claims  reached over four million people.
The Police Central e-crime Unit has trebled in size and developed a  framework for cyber specials (volunteer police officers with specialist  cyber skills).
The Home Office issued strategic policing requirements, which  included major cyber incidents.
The Serious Organised Crime Agency increased its cyber  capability to support international liaison and mainstreaming cyber  investigations across the agency.
The Police Central e-crime Unit, with other international agencies,  suspended over 15,000 websites engaged in fraud.
The Serious Organised Crime Agency and The Police Central  e-crime Unit started joint operations as part of the transition to the  new National Cyber Crime Unit.
The Serious Organised Crime Agency worked with international  partners such as the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and  Numbers (ICANN) and the Commonwealth cybercrime initiative on  internet security.
Making the UK one of the most secure places in the  world to do business  The Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), Centre  for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI), the Department  for Business, Innovation and Skills, and OCSIA produced Cyber  Security Guidance for Business (the Ten Steps)1 aimed at providing  advice to chief executives and board members.
CPNI expanded its scope to include companies not traditionally part  of the critical national infrastructure.
The Serious Organised Crime Agency repatriated over 2.3 million  items of compromised card payment details back to the financial  sector in the UK, and internationally, since 2011, preventing potential  economic loss of over £500 million.
The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills produced a  report identifying growth potential of the UK cyber security sector.
A pilot joint public-private sector cyber threat information-sharing  scheme, led by GCHQ completed.
For government to continue to enable law enforcement and industry  to cooperate and share information.
The UK Cyber Information  Sharing Partnership is an example of this.
For government to continue to build relationships with international  law enforcement agencies to undertake more joint operations.
To launch a new Cybercrime Reduction Partnership between  government, law enforcement, industry and academia.
For government to continue to engage with institutional investors,  professional and representational institutions and auditors to help  company boards see cyber security as a significant business risk  requiring action.
For an annual information security breaches survey to be  introduced between 2013 and 2015 to enable organisations and  sectors to benchmark performance against peers to drive up  industry standards.
For the government to support development of industry-led cyber  security standards and kitemarks for products and services.
This will  help clarify what good cyber security practice looks like and enable  companies to differentiate themselves in the marketplace.
Making the UK one of the most secure places in  the world to do business  For the government to use its procurement frameworks to share  information securely across supply chains.
For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to work with  businesses and their representatives to communicate messages  from Cyber Security Guidance for Business (the Ten Steps).1   GCHQ will promote and extend its commercial product assurance  scheme, which gives institutions confidence that the security features  of the products they buy to manage their cyber risks are effective.
For CPNI to expand its cyber risk management advice to business.
The Department  for Business, Innovation and Skills to provide targeted information  and advice for small and medium-sized enterprises using existing  channels such as ‘Get Safe Online’ and ‘Business in You’.
For government to mainstream cyber security messages across the  breadth of its communication with business.
For defence and security procurements to embed cyber security  best practice requirements in future contracts.
For CPNI to publish research with Oxford University to help reduce  risk of cyber attacks by company insiders.
To launch a ‘Cyber Growth Partnership’ in conjunction with Intellect  UK (which represents the UK technology industry and has over  850 members) to identify how to support the growth of the UK cyber  security industry.
The government will increase the number of cyber security contracts  going to small and medium-sized businesses.
To encourage smaller firms to innovate through initiatives such as  the ‘Finding the Threat’, a call to small and medium-sized businesses  requesting innovative ideas to address a set of security and  intelligence challenges.
Objective 2: To make the UK more resilient to cyber attack and be better able to protect its interests in cyberspace  Objective 2: continued  GCHQ has invested in new capabilities to identify and analyse hostile  cyber attacks on UK networks.
This includes hosting the new Joint  Cyber Unit in partnership with the Ministry of Defence to help counter  cyber threats to the UK.
The Security Services developed additional capability to investigate  cyber threats from foreign intelligence agencies and terrorists.
GCHQ and CPNI launched the cyber incident response pilot  scheme to provide links to organisations certified to deal with  cyber security attacks.
CPNI commissioned a major research programme with Oxford  University to provide advice, guidance and products to reduce risk  of cyber insider acts.
CPNI commissioned cyber security research to help enhance the  advice it provides to industry on effective cyber protection.
The government developed a new security model to protect the  Public Services Network.
The Cabinet Office and the security and intelligence agencies  developed new ways of working to engage with business to protect  the 2012 Olympic Games from cyber threats.
For the government to increase security of its computer networks  with the next phase of the Public Sector Network.
For a government pilot information scheme, the Cyber Information  Sharing Partnership, to be launched in 2013.
For lessons learned from the Olympics to be used to review and  strengthen protection and resilience of the UK to cyber attack.
For the government to establish a UK national computer emergency  response team in conjunction with industry.
This will improve national  coordination to respond to incidents and enable international sharing  of technical information on cyber security.
For the government to continue to work closely with key allies and  like-minded partner countries on developing cyber security policy  sharing information and coordinating responses.
20  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  21  Figure 5 continued Figure 5 continued The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012) The government’s progress and plans for cyber security (as at December 2012)  Progress  Progress   Objective 3: To help shape an open, stable and vibrant cyberspace which the UK public can use safely and that supports open societies  The Foreign and Commonwealth Office organised 2011 and 2012  London Conferences on Cyberspace attended by 60 countries  and worked with Hungary to deliver the Budapest Conference in  October 2012.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office funded the new international  Cyber Security Capacity Building Centre to tackle global cybercrime.
The Cabinet Office and its industry partners delivered a ‘Get  Safe Online’ week as part of the global ‘Cyber Security Month’ in  October each year.
The government worked with NATO and the EU to develop their  emerging cyber strategies.
Government departments and law enforcement agencies worked  with international partners to encourage countries to sign up to the  Budapest Convention on Cyber Crime.2  Government departments played a prominent role in working with  the UN Government Group of Experts and the Organisation for  Security and Cooperation in Europe to improve cyber security.
Plans Plans  Objective 3: continued  For government to continue to expand and strengthen the UK’s  bilateral and multilateral networks, and to collaborate internationally  through the work of the EU, NATO and other bodies.
The government will continue to work with other international  organisations and countries to develop the ‘rules of the road’  for cyberspace.
The government will continue to work for trans-border law  enforcement cooperation on cybercrime.
For government to extend its advice and guidance to other countries  to help them build capacity to tackle cyber threats and deny safe  havens for cybercriminals through the new international Cyber  Security Capacity Building Centre.
Objective 4: To build the UK’s cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all cyber security objectives  Objective 4: continued  GCHQ launched a scheme to certify information assurance and  cyber security professionals in the UK.
GCHQ, in partnership with the Research Councils’ global  uncertainties programme and the Department for Business,  Innovation and Skills awarded ‘academic centre of excellence in  cyber security research’ status to eight UK universities and launched  a research institute for the science of cyber security.
GCHQ launched a programme to develop cyber security talent in  schools and universities.
The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills commissioned  e-skills to produce cyber security learning materials as part of the  ‘Behind the Screen Pilot’.
Joint public and private sector initiative ‘Cyber Security Challenge  UK’ launched a new framework to enable people to move into  cyber security mid-career.
The government delivered ‘Protecting Information’ levels 1 to 3  and ‘Fraud and Corruption’ e-learning packages for the wider  public sector.
Cyber security training for the civil service, law enforcement and the  military rolled out.
NOTES NOTES 1  Cyber Security Guidance for Business.
September 2011 available at: www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/ 1  Cyber Security Guidance for Business.
ce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012; Cabinet Of?
ce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012; Cabinet Of?
ce,  The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on Progress – December 2012: Forward Plans The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on Progress – December 2012: Forward Plans  For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to continue  to work with institutions to ensure undergraduates taking technical  degree courses receive adequate training in cyber security.
For the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to launch  two centres of doctoral training to fund 48 PhDs on multidisciplinary  cyber topics.
For government to continue to identify and develop cyber security  talent in school and university and support innovation through  initiatives such as the ‘Cyber Security Challenge UK’.
For the Ministry of Defence to launch a ‘Cyber Reservists’  programme to recruit cyber security experts.
For GCHQ, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council  (EPSRC) and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills  to extend the Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security  Research Programme to other universities.
This will benefit  the UK by enhancing the UK’s cyber knowledge base through  original research; providing top quality graduates in the field of  cyber security; supporting GCHQ’s cyber defence mission; and  increasing innovation.
For a new multidisciplinary academic cyber journal to be launched in  2013 to publish a broad range of cyber security research from both  UK and international universities.
For GCHQ to put in place a scheme to certify cyber security training  courses to develop and certify professionalism in cyber security.
For the government to mainstream cyber security messages across  the breadth of communications with citizens.
For the government to roll-out a programme of public awareness  drives in 2013, building on ‘Get Safe Online’ and the work of the  National Fraud Authority.
22  Part One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Figure 6 Spending on the National Cyber Security Programme – includes actual  spend in 2011-12 and forecast spend in 2012-13 (£ million)   4 2  9  12  17  28  31  157  National sovereign capability to detect and defeat high end threats –  Security and Intelligence Agencies  Mainstreaming cyber throughout defence – Ministry of Defence  Enforcing laws and combating cybercrime – Home Of?ce  Engaging with the private sector – Department for Business, Innovation and Skills  Improving the resilience of the Public Sector Network – The Cabinet Of?ce  Coordinating programme, analysing trends and managing and  responding to incidents – The Cabinet Of?ce  Education, skills and awareness – The Cabinet Of?ce  International engagement and capacity building –  Foreign and Commonwealth Of?ce  Source: Cabinet Of?ce, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security Strategy – December 2012   International comparison  1.16  Many countries have developed cyber security strategies reflecting their national  policy priorities, an assessment of cyber risks and their economic position.
1.17  We reviewed the cyber security strategies of nine countries to compare with the  UK’s strategic objectives.
We found the UK’s strategy to be unique in terms of the weight  given by the UK government to promoting and securing commercial opportunity for  UK business in the growing international cyber security market.
What the UK shares with  other countries is shown in Figure 7:  •	  •	  four countries’ strategies share the UK’s focus on tackling cybercrime as  an objective;  all countries have stated objectives of working towards improving resilience to  cyber attacks and protecting national security;  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part One  23  •	  •	  only one other country, the USA, shares the UK’s objective of helping to shape an  open vibrant cyberspace to support open societies; and  all countries aim to build cross-cutting knowledge and skills and capability in  cyber security.
1.18  The UK therefore has one of the most wide-ranging cyber security strategies.
Research by Booz Allen Hamilton and the Economist Intelligence Unit also shows that  the UK leads other G20 countries in its ability to withstand cyber attacks and to develop  a strong digital economy.24 This is based on assessing each country’s legal and regulatory  frameworks, economic and social issues, technology infrastructure, and industry.
Figure 7 The number of countries of the nine reviewed that share the  UK’s cyber security objectives  Two of the UK’s cyber security strategic objectives are common to the strategies of  all nine of the countries we reviewed  Key objectives of the UK’s cyber security strategy  Tackling cybercrime  4  Improving resilience to cyber attack and protecting interests in cyberspace  Helping shape an open,  vibrant and stable cyberspace  1  Building cyber security knowledge,  skills and capability  9  9  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  Number of countries currently working in policy area  NOTE 1  We reviewed the cyber security strategies of Australia, China, Estonia, France, Germany, India, Japan,   Russia, and the USA.
Source: National Audit Of?ce 2012  24  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  Challenges for government  In this part, we describe six key challenges the government faces in implementing   2.1  its cyber security strategy:  •	 •	 •	 •	 •	 •	  influencing industry to protect and promote itself and UK plc;  addressing the UK’s current and future ICT and cyber security skills gap;  increasing awareness so that people are not the weakest link;  tackling cybercrime and enforcing the law at home and abroad;  getting government to become more agile and joined-up; and  demonstrating value for money.
Influencing industry   Forming effective partnerships with industry to reach a common understanding of  risks and share the costs of protecting UK plc   2.2  The UK has one of the world’s largest internet-based economies, valued at  £121 billion in 2010.
The cost of  cybercrime is also significant and estimated to cost the UK, mainly industry, between  £18 billion to £27 billion a year.25,26,27  2.3  At risk of cyber attack is the UK’s economy including the nation’s critical national  infrastructure.
This infrastructure includes the networks, computer systems and electronic  data that underpin government, emergency services, communications, utilities, financial  services, food, health, and transportation.
These services are essential to daily life, owned  mostly by the private sector and their protection from cyber attacks is crucial.
2.4  The government has recognised that it needs to work in partnership with industry.
It considers, for example, that cyber security is not well understood at board level and  executives have difficulty assessing the impact of cyber security risks.28 For this reason,  GCHQ, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, CPNI and the Cabinet Office  published advice for boards in September 2012 on the risks of cyber security and how  to mitigate them.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  25  2.5  Identifying how much investment the UK needs can be difficult as information  on cyber threats is often unreliable.
Reporting cyber attacks is not mandatory for public  or private sector organisations.
2.6  To advise industry and counter the lack of accurate threat information, the  government has launched a number of new initiatives.
For example, CPNI and the  Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG) inform industry on cyber threats  and advise on cyber security.
In November 2012, the government launched the Cyber  Security Incident Response Service, which provides access to quality assured industry  and government expertise for organisations after a cyber attack.
2.7  The government has recognised the need to develop cyber security standards  to help it, industry and citizens make informed choices about security products and  services.
It is working with the British Standards Institute to encourage the development  of industry-led standards, kitemarks and best practice advice on cyber security.
This  covers products, processes and principles for cyber security.
The government is also  considering incorporating cyber security standards in its procurement frameworks to  help secure its supply chain.29   2.8  The government considers that developing industry-led standards would help  promote the UK as a safe place for internet trade and commerce and assist UK businesses  to promote their products or services within both domestic and overseas markets.
2.9   Those we interviewed from government, academia and industry were generally  positive about how government is working with industry and providing help and  guidance.
The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills will include messages on cyber  as part of its mainstream communications with small and medium-sized businesses.
2.10  Most interviewees thought that the introduction of industry-led cyber security  standards to be beneficial, especially to the citizen and small and medium-sized  businesses, but many considered that progress on standards was too slow.
The  government agrees and to encourage faster progress, ministers announced in  December 2012, that the government will develop and make public in early 2013  a ‘meta-standard’, characterising what it believes a robust organisational standard  should include.
The government has said it will look to endorse and support the first  standard coming to market that meets these criteria.
26  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  2.11  Interviewees also highlighted the risk supply chains posed and suggested that  government and large companies make sure that their suppliers implement minimum  standards for managing cyber risks.
The Ministry of Defence has been working with its  suppliers to develop such requirements for companies bidding for defence contracts.
The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is working with  the Confederation of British Industry and others to encourage this.
Addressing the UK’s current and future ICT and   cyber security skills gap  Ensuring the UK has enough skilled people and the right research and development  to plug the immediate skills gap and address longer-term needs in the public and  private sector   2.12 According to the government, the number of ICT and cyber security professionals  in the UK has not increased in line with the growth of the internet.30 This shortage of ICT  skills hampers the UK’s ability to protect itself in cyberspace and promote the use of the  internet both now and in the future.
The skills the UK needs to design and implement  cyber security policy are not only technical, there is also a need for psychologists; law  enforcers; corporate strategists and risk managers.
Other professionals such as lawyers  and accountants also need to understand cyber security in order to assess, manage  and mitigate the business risk of cyber threats.
2.13 In April 2012, the Minister for Business, Innovation and Skills referred to  ‘a decade long’ decline in ICT and computer science in schools and universities.31  The government’s special representative to business for cyber security also commented  on the lack of younger people working in the area of cyber security.
In 2011, the  Committee of Public Accounts raised concerns about cyber security skills in government  and recommended that the government needed to employ more people with these  skills.
In 2012, the Intelligence and  Security Committee highlighted GCHQ’s inability to retain internet specialists in the face  of competition from the private sector.32   2.14 In 2012, the government established a Research Institute in the Science of  Cyber Security and awarded ‘Academic Centre of Excellence in Cyber Security  Research’ status to eight UK universities to boost research and to expand the UK’s  cyber skills base.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  27  2.15  Interviews with government, academia and business representatives confirmed that  the UK lacks technical skills and that the current pipeline of graduates and practitioners  would not meet demand.
A number of government departments commented that the  UK depended on a small number of highly skilled people to participate in developing  international technical standards.
2.16 Interviewees were concerned about a lack of promotion of science and technology  subjects at school resulting in the reported lower uptake of computer science and  technology courses by UK students.
The government is working to address this and has said that it intends to overhaul ICT  teaching in schools to make it genuinely about computer science rather than office  skills.
It expects cyber security to be a strong strand of the future GCSE computer  science syllabus.
Increasing awareness so that people are not the weakest link  Raising awareness of online risks and individual responsibilities right across the  UK so that people are not the weakest link for the security of their families or  their employers   2.17  Cyber attacks exploit vulnerabilities in human behaviour and lack of awareness  of risk.
2.18 In 2011, 77 per cent of UK households, 19 million in total, had internet access  compared to 73 per cent in 2010.33 Twenty-one per cent of UK internet users,  however, do not think they have sufficient skills to protect their personal data.34  GCHQ estimates that 80 per cent of cyber attacks could be prevented through simple  computer and network ‘hygiene’, such as using ‘strong’ passwords,35 but in 2012, the  top three passwords were password, 123456 and 12345678.36 In 2011, the Science  and Technology Committee reported that the most common form of cyber threat  experienced by people was malicious software (malware) followed by online credit card  fraud and social network profile hacking.37   2.19 The increased use of social media and unsupervised child access to the internet  is also leading to greater child exploitation according to the Child Exploitation and  Online Protection Agency.
It has reported receiving 1,300 reports of child exploitation  on average each month, 263 per cent more than two years ago.38                28  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  2.20  As more public and private sector services move online, the government has  recognised the risk of a lack of public awareness and the need for behavioural change.
It has already allocated £6 million to public education, including the public-private sector  initiative ‘Get Safe Online’.
The government launched this initiative in 2005 to provide advice  to small and medium-sized businesses and the public on internet security ranging from  prevention of email frauds to how to protect networks.
The government intends to  roll-out from spring 2013, a significantly expanded programme of public awareness drives,  building on the work of ‘Get Safe Online’ and the National Fraud Authority.
2.21 Many of our interviewees highlighted the need for better targeting of public  awareness campaigns to address the needs of different users, particularly those from  lower socio-economic groups and those less competent with ICT.
On behalf of the  National Cyber Security Programme, the National Fraud Authority has carried out a  market segmentation exercise to ensure that the next stage of public awareness work  is properly grounded in an understanding of what works for different groups.
Tackling cybercrime and enforcing the law at home and abroad   Enabling the police and encouraging the judiciary to make greater use of  existing laws in the UK to deal with cybercrime and continuing to influence the  international community for increased cooperation   2.22 Criminals use the internet for a variety of crimes including fraud, identity theft,  theft of financial information and corporate intellectual property and child exploitation.
Many criminals view the internet as a profitable and low-risk channel for committing  crime and because it is borderless they can base themselves in countries that are  unlikely to prosecute them.
2.23 In the UK, the government is working to ensure that law enforcement agencies and  the judiciary use existing legislation to tackle cybercrime and protect the public.
Such laws  include Conspiracy to Defraud, the Data Protection Act 1998 and the Computer Misuse  Act 1990.
Courts are also able to monitor or restrict the computer use of cyber criminals.
2.24 Figure 5 sets out other actions government is taking which includes implementing  a new national cybercrime capability.
This will bring together work of the e-crime unit in  the Serious Organised Crime Agency and the Police Central e-crime Unit.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  29  2.25 The internet is borderless so many cyber attacks on the UK come from overseas.
The government is working to tackle this.
For example, it is seeking to influence the  international community through its involvement in cyber security conferences, including  in London and Budapest in 2011 and 2012, and by providing cyber security advice  to other countries.
It is also working with other countries to cooperate more on law  enforcement to catch cybercriminals and with internet governing bodies and internet  service providers to improve internet security.
However, we found that this work relies  on a small number of highly skilled people.
The government told us they were working  to broaden and make efficient use of the available pool of talent, for example through  apprenticeship schemes and the use of special police officers and reservists (Figure 5).
2.26 Most of our interviewees from government, academia and industry said that  existing legislation was adequate to tackle cybercrime, although government needs to  ensure that current legislation remains applicable in the face of increasing technology  change and rapidly evolving cyber threats.
The Draft Communications Bill divided  opinion: some interviewees doubted it would have much impact on serious organised  crime, while others said it was essential for fighting cyber criminals and protecting  the UK.
However, they also stressed the need for government to do more to increase public  awareness of safe behaviour on the internet.
The aim is to  increase cyber confidence and measurably improve the online safety of consumers  and small and medium-sized enterprises.
There were different views on the role of  the internet service providers: some considered that they should be responsible for  providing greater protection for their customers while others said it should be left for  customers to decide.
Getting government to become more agile and joined-up   Keeping pace with the evolving threats facing the UK and being able to respond  in a fully joined-up and agile way – especially when resources are stretched and  skills are in short supply   2.28 Successfully implementing this strategy with such broad aims, requires many  government organisations to work together effectively, many for the first time.
Given the increasing threat from cyberspace, these organisations need to develop  roles and relationships among themselves and with industry quickly.
30  Part Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  2.29 Cyber threats are continuously evolving and the pace of technology change is  rapid, so the government needs to be agile to adapt to this dynamic environment.
This will mean a culture change for many departments and being more open, sharing  information, working with others and communicating in different ways, including on  related cross-government strategies such as those on digital, transparency and ICT.
2.30 Those we interviewed from academia and industry were positive about government  efforts to work with industry on cyber security as it demonstrated a more joined-up  approach.
Many acknowledged the progress government had made during 2012 in  working together across departmental and agency boundaries to coordinate activities  and messages about cyber security.
For example,  several people spoke about the need to for all government websites to provide links to  the ‘Get Safe Online’ website as the single source of cyber advice and information.
2.31 Interviewees also stated that the government needed to demonstrate the progress  it was making in applying the cyber advice and guidance, it gives to business, to  improving the protection of its own systems and data.
Assessing value for money   Having strong management and decision-making in place to demonstrate  success and provide accountability across many different organisations  delivering a broad range of activities  2.32 For the government to protect and promote the UK in cyberspace, it needs to be  able to measure and demonstrate the success of its strategy.
However, demonstrating  the optimal use of resources on cyber security may not be easy in terms of measuring  outcomes when the desired result is for nothing to happen.
In addition, if cyber  attacks do not occur, it does not necessarily follow that it was because of programme  investment or activity.
2.33 Although it is difficult, the government has demonstrated it is possible to  measure value for money from similar activities to cyber security delivered by different  organisations such as those related to counterterrorism.
For example, in this case the  government has stated that it intends to assess the progress of its counterterrorism  strategy, known as CONTEST, against a set of performance indicators, complemented  by evaluating specific programmes.40   The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Part Two  31  2.34 OCSIA has identified the benefits of the National Cyber Security Strategy and  has work under way to measure them.
The approach taken is to develop a logical  relationship between strategic objective and strategic benefit, activities under way,  deliverables committed and measurable benefits.
Measurable benefits are being designed to meet four criteria:  accurate, reliable, credible and readily available from public or government sources, at  low cost.
A pragmatic process is also being agreed for benefit owners to forecast and  report on benefits realisation through the established governance structure (Figure 3) so  that the Cyber Delivery Management Group can focus on red or amber rated benefits.
2.35 To support government efforts in demonstrating its success, we set out our  thinking on an approach assessing the value for money of the cyber security strategy  in the Annex.
32  Annex  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Annex  Assessing the value for money of cyber security  This annex sets out roles and responsibilities in relation to measuring and   1  demonstrating value for money.
We set out the key steps the government should  consider in seeking to achieve this; discuss some of the particular challenges in  assessing the value for money of the government’s cyber security strategy; and  make some observations on government’s progress to date.
Value for money and the role of government and the NAO   The HM Treasury publication, Managing Public Money, states “government   2  departments are responsible for efficiency, economy, effectiveness and prudence  in the administration of public resources, to deliver value for money.
This means  departments ensuring that procurement, projects and processes are systematically  evaluated and assessed to provide confidence about suitability, effectiveness,  prudence, quality, good value and avoidance of error and other waste.”41   3  Managing Public Money also explains that the C&AG’s role is to examine and  report to Parliament on the delivery of value for money by government through assessing  the economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which government deploys public money  in selected areas of public business.42 We, in common with the Treasury, define good  value for money as “the optimal use of resources to achieve the intended outcomes”.
Although  the definition of value for money above refers to the ‘optimal’ use of resources,  in practice this will be interpreted differently in light of the particular circumstances.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Annex  33  •	  Identify and collect the data and evidence required, including on resources.
This requires clarity on the ‘logic chain’ of the intervention or strategy – how the  inputs, activities and outputs will link together to deliver the desired outcomes.
It is particularly important to agree a robust process for collecting reliable  and timely information on expenditure, both for project management and  accountability purposes.
The first  step above will have established the ‘internal’ benchmark for assessing success.
But progress and success can also be assessed relative to:  baseline performance before the intervention or strategy;  •	 •	 what is happening in other (similar) countries; and •	  counterfactual scenarios that try to establish what would have happened  without the intervention of strategy, perhaps by modelling.44   Assessing the value for money of cyber security  5  We recognise that there are some challenges in establishing the value for money  of cross-government strategies such as the cyber security strategy, where success  depends on many disparate players and factors outside the control of the government.
If cyber attacks do not occur, it will be difficult to establish  the extent to which that was due to the success of the strategy and its implementation  rather than because of other factors.
7  On the cost side, the challenges are more practical than conceptual.
Third, to the extent that existing financial and management reporting systems do not  generate the required information on expenditure, effective reporting arrangements will  have to be put in place.
34  Annex  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Some observations  To establish the value for money of the cyber security strategy, there are   8  precedents and similar examples, which can be drawn upon, as well as government  guidance such as the Magenta Book.
We would highlight two instances, related to  counterterrorism and preventing drug use:  •	 On counterterrorism, the government has stated that it intends to assess the   progress of CONTEST, its counterterrorism strategy against a set of performance  indicators, complemented by evaluating specific programmes.45   •	 On the drugs strategy, the Committee of Public Accounts recommended that the   Home Office should publish annual reports on progress against the strategy’s  action plan, setting out expenditure on each measure, the outputs and outcomes  delivered, and progress towards targets.46 Estimating the crime reduction benefits  of drug treatment and recovery, was published by the National Treatment Agency in  May 2012 to address the Committee’s recommendation.47   9  Our own work on regulation in the UK also provides examples of measuring  performance in a similar area.
In our report on Ofcom we developed a ‘sphere-of-influence’  model to recognise that Ofcom has more direct control over some areas (for example,  its own management and use of resources) than others (such as complaints from  consumers).48 In the case of cyber security, government similarly has different levels of  influence.
For example it has more control over UK law enforcement than the activity of  the private sector or other countries.
In terms of the three key steps outlined in paragraph 4, we have noted some   10  progress already made by the cyber strategy, and some areas, which require  further attention.
For example, it has defined high-level outcomes such as individuals knowing  how to protect themselves from crime online; businesses operating securely in  cyberspace; and the UK having a growing international market in cyber security  products and services.
The next step will be to identify potential comparative  measures of good performance against which to judge whether these success  factors have been met.
As noted in paragraph 2.34, the government has this  work in hand.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Annex  35  •	  Identify and collect the data and evidence required, including on  resources.
In December 2012, the government reported on progress against the objectives  of the strategy including work completed and spend to date.
It also reported  on its forward plans for implementing the strategy.
Given the cross-government  nature of the strategy, it will also be important for the government to provide an  assessment of the success of joined-up working.
The government has   articulated its ‘internal’ comparator, in terms of intended outcomes, outputs  and activities.
The Department for Culture, Media and Sport has also developed  an evaluation approach for the Olympics, which will integrate a number of  separate evaluations of different aspects of the overall programme.49   36  Appendix One  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix One  Our audit approach  This landscape report examined the government’s implementation of the UK cyber   1  security strategy, which it published in November 2011.
This was an early review of the  strategy as the government will not implement it in full until 2015.
We examined:  •	  •	  •	  the rationale for the government developing an approach to cyber security given  the current opportunities and threats;  the details of the strategy and the progress that the government is making in  implementing the strategy; and  the challenges the government faces in delivering the strategy.
2  We have also set out in an annex guidance for government on measuring the value  for money of its cyber security programme.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix One  37  Figure 8 Our audit approach  The objective  of government  How this will  be achieved  Our review  Our evaluative  criteria (or key  questions if a  landscape report)  Our evidence (see Appendix Two  for details)  The government’s strategic vision is “for the UK in 2015 to derive huge economic and social value from a vibrant,  resilient and secure cyberspace, where our actions, guided by our core values for liberty, fairness, transparency  and the rule of law, enhance prosperity, national security and a strong society”.1   Through implementing the National Cyber Security Programme, which comprises a broad range of activities from  tackling e-crime through to promoting the UK as a safe place to do business.
Six departments are implementing  the programme.
This landscape review introduces the cyber security strategy published in 2011 by the Cabinet Office and identifies  the challenges that the government faces in implementing its strategy.
What opportunities and threats  does the internet present to  the UK?
What is government’s approach  to cyber security?
What challenges does  government face in delivering its  cyber security strategy?
We identified the challenges the  government faces by: •	 holding a round table of   academics; and  •	 interviewing representatives   from industry.
We examined the government’s  approach by: •	 reviewing key government   documents;   •	 interviewing senior staff   in departments;   •	 drawing on evidence from   select committees; and  •	 reviewing other countries’  cyber security strategies.
ce, UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the UK in a digital world.
38  Appendix Two  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix Two  Our evidence base  1  Our review of the UK’s Cyber Security Strategy was completed following our  analysis of evidence collected between July and October 2012.
We then developed this report based on the evidence  we collected.
4  We examined why cyber security is important to the UK.
•	 We monitored the media on a daily basis to keep up to date with cyber-related   incidents such as attacks on organisations and individuals; and also  announcements from government on the progress in delivering the strategy,  including for example its launch of new initiatives to address cyber security.
•	 We conducted desk research of both UK and international reports from   government and private sector on the digital economy, the growth of the internet  and on cyber attacks, to identify the opportunities and threats the internet presents  to the UK.
5  We examined the government’s approach to cyber security and in particular the details  of the UK Cyber Security Strategy published in November 2011 and progress to date.
•	 We reviewed key government documents including the National UK Cyber   Security Strategies in 2009 and 2011.
•	 We drew on evidence from select committees, which had previously examined  elements of the government’s approach to cyber security, including the Intelligence  and Security Committee; the Defence Select Committee; and the Committee of  Public Accounts.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Appendix Two  39  •	 We reviewed the cyber security strategies of other countries including USA,  and Australia as well as the reviews from the Supreme Audit Institutions in each  of those countries to identify lessons on delivering similar strategies.
6  We identified the challenges government faces in implementing the strategy:  •	 We held a round table of academics from eight universities, who are experts   in cyber security.
•	 We interviewed six representatives from industry including from the banking,   defence and security, and ICT sectors.
40  Endnotes  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Endnotes  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   Boston Consulting Group, The $4.2 Trillion Opportunity, March 2012.
Boston Consulting Group, The Connected World, January 2012.
UK Cyber Security Strategy: Protecting and promoting the  UK in a digital world.
Kaspersky Security Bulletin, Statistics 2011.
Lord Mayor’s annual defence and security lecture, The Olympics and Beyond,  June 2012, available at: www.mi5.gov.uk  Foreign Secretary speech, Budapest Conference on Cyberspace, October 2012,  available at: ukingermany.fco.gov.uk  Detica and the Cabinet Office, The Cost of Cyber Crime, February 2011.
Cambridge University, Measuring the Cost of Cyber Crime, June 2012.
13  House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, Malware and   cybercrime, Twelfth Report of Session 2010–2012, HC 1537, 2 February 2012.
15   Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 2011-12, July 2012.
16  HC Committee of Public Accounts, Information and Communications Technology   in government, Fortieth report of Session 2010–2012, HC 1050, June 2011.
18  Cabinet Office, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security   Strategy, December 2012.
The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  Endnotes  41  19  HM Government, A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The National Security   Strategy, Cm 7593, October 2010.
20  HM Government, Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: Strategic Defence   and Security Review, Cm 7948, October 2010.
22  Cabinet Office, Progress against the Objectives of the National Cyber Security   Strategy, December 2012, available at: www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk  23  Cabinet Office, The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on progress –  December 2012.
Forward Plans, available at: www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk  24  Booz Allen Hamilton and the Economist Intelligence Unit, The Cyber Power   Index 2012, January 2012, available at: www.cyberhub.com  25  See endnote 9.
28  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills Press Release, The UK’s most   senior business leaders are getting new advice on how to better tackle the  growing cyber threats to their companies, 5 September 2012, available at:   news.bis.gov.uk  29  Cabinet Office, Government ICT Strategy, March 2011.
30  Speech by Minister Chloe Smith at the Cyber Security Summit on 6 November 2012.
31  Business Technology, Getting serious about security, 8 April 2012.
33  ONS, Internet Access – Households and Individuals, 2011, August 2011.
42  Endnotes  The UK cyber security strategy: Landscape review  40  HM Government, CONTEST: The United Kingdom’s Strategy for Countering   Terrorism, Cm 8123, July 2011.
41  HM Treasury, Managing Public Money, May 2012.
49  The Department for Culture, Media and Sport, London 2012 meta-evaluation,    available at: www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/research_and_statistics/7605.aspx  Design and Production by  NAO Communications  DP Ref: 10057-001  This report has been printed on Evolution  Digital Satin and contains material sourced  from responsibly managed and sustainable  forests certified in accordance with the FSC  (Forest Stewardship Council).
Our printers also have full ISO 14001  environmental accreditation, which ensures  that they have effective procedures in place to  manage waste and practices that may affect  the environment.
Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:  Online   www.tsoshop.co.uk  Mail, telephone, fax and email  TSO  PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN  Telephone orders/general enquiries: 0870 600 5522  Order through the Parliamentary Hotline   Lo-Call 0845 7 023474  Fax orders: 0870 600 5533  Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk  Textphone: 0870 240 3701  The Houses of Parliament Shop  12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square,   London SW1A 2JX  Telephone orders/general enquiries: 020 7219 3890  Fax orders: 020 7219 3866  Email: shop@parliament.uk  Internet: http://www.shop.parliament.uk