This guide is not a substitute for consulting trained cyber security professionals.Cyber SecurityPlanning GuidePrivacy and Data Security  Scams and Fraud  Network Security  Website Security  Email  Mobile Devices  Employees  Facility Security  Operational Security  Payment Cards  Incident Response and Reporting  Policy Development, Management  Cyber Security Glossary  Cyber Security Links  PDS-1 - PDS-2  SF-1 - SF-3  NS-1 - NS-2  WS-1 - WS-4  E-1 - E-2  MD-1 - MD-3  EMP-1 - EMP-3  FS-1 - FS-2  OS-1 - OS-3  PC-1 - PC-2  IRR-1 - IRR-2  PDM-1 - PDM-2  CSG-1 - CSG-10  CSL-1 - CSL-3  TC-1Table of Contents SectionPage#sThank you forusing the FCC’s Small Biz Cyber Planner,a toolforsmall businesses to create customized cybersecurity planning guides.
Aslarger companies take steps to secure their systems, less secure small businesses are easier targets for cyber criminals.Thisplanningguide isdesigned to meet the specificneedsof your company,using the FCC’s customizable Small BizCyber Plannertool.
The toolis designedforbusinesses that lack the resources tohirededicated staff to protect theirbusiness, information and customers from cyber threats.Even a businesswithone computeror one credit card terminal canbenefit from this important tool.
Wegenerally recommend that businesses using more sophisticatednetworkswithdozens of computers consulta cyber security expert in addition tousing the cyberplanner.
TheFCCprovidesnowarranties with respect to theguidance provided by this tool and is not responsible for anyharm thatmight occur as a result ofor in spiteof itsuse.Theguidancewasdeveloped by the FCCwith inputfrom public and private sectorpartners, including the Departmentof Homeland Security, the National Cybersecurity Alliance and The Chamber of Commerce.
PDM-1 All companies should develop and maintain clear and robust policies for safeguarding critical business data and sensitive information, protecting their reputation and discouraging inappropriate behavior by employees.
Many of these types of policies already exist for “real world” situations, but may need to be tailored to your organization and updated to reflect the increasing impact of cyberspace on everyday transactions, both professional and personal.
As with any other business document, cyber security policies should follow good design and governance practices -- not so long that they become unusable, not so vague that they become meaningless, and reviewed on a regular basis to ensure that they stay pertinent as your business needs change.
Please note that this document does not address all policy requirements for businesses that fall under legislative acts or directives, such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Sarbanes-Oxley Act or other federal, state or local statutes.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Establish security roles and responsibilities  One of the most effective and least expensive means of preventing serious cyber security incidents is to establish a policy that clearly defines the separation of roles and responsibilities with regard to systems and the information they contain.
Many systems are designed to provide for strong Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), but this tool is of little use without well-defined procedures and policies to govern the assignment of roles and their associated constraints.
Such policies need to clearly state, at a minimum:  • Clearly identify company data ownership and employee roles for security oversight and their inherit privileges, including: o Necessary roles, and the privileges and constraints accorded to those roles.
o How long an employee may hold a role before access rights must be reviewed.
For example, a business that handles large volumes of personally identifiable information (PII) from its customers may benefit from identifying a chief steward for customers’ privacy information.
Establish an employee Internet usage policy   The limits on employee Internet usage in the workplace vary widely from business to business.
Your guidelines should allow employees the maximum degree of freedom they require to be productive (short breaks to surf the web or perform personal tasks online have been shown to increase productivity).
Businesses may want to include a splash warning upon network sign-on that advises the employees of the businesses’ Internet usage policies so that all employees are on notice.
Policy Development and Management  FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   PDM-2 3.
Establish a social media policy  Social networking applications present a number of risks that are difficult to address using technical or procedural solutions.
A strong social media policy is crucial for any business that seeks to use social networking to promote its activities and communicate with its customers.
At a minimum, a social media policy should clearly include the following:  • Specific guidance on when to disclose company activities using social media, and what kinds of details can be discussed in a public forum.
• Additional rules of behavior for employees using personal social networking accounts to make clear what kinds of discussion topics or posts could cause risk for the company.
• Guidance on selecting long and strong passwords for social networking accounts, since very few social media sites enforce strong authentication policies for users.
Lastly, all users of social media need to be aware of the risks associated with social networking tools and the types of data that can be automatically disclosed online when using social media.
Taking the time to educate your employees on the potential pitfalls of social media use, especially in tandem with geo-location services, may be the most beneficial social networking security practice of all.
Identify potential reputation risks  All organizations should take the time to identify potential risks to their reputation and develop a strategy to mitigate those risks via policies or other measures as available.
Specific types of reputation risks include:  • Being impersonated online by a criminal organization (e.g., an illegitimate website spoofing your business name and copying your site design, then attempting to defraud potential customers via phishing scams or other method).
• Having sensitive company or customer information leaked to the public via the web.
All businesses should set a policy for managing these types of risks and plans to address such incidents if and when they occur.
Such a policy should cover a regular process for identifying potential risks to the company’s reputation in cyberspace, practical measures to prevent those risks from materializing and reference plans to respond and recover from potential incidents as soon as they occur.
Helpful links  • US-CERT’s Protect Your Workplace Posters & Brochure: http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/distributable.html • Socializing Securely: Using Social Networking Services: http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/safe_social_networking.pdf • Governing for Enterprise Security: http://www.cert.org/governance/ • FFIEC Handbook Definition of Reputation Risk: http://ithandbook.ffiec.gov/it-booklets/retail-payment-systems/retail-payment-systems-risk-management/reputation-risk.aspx • What Businesses can do to help with cyber security: http://www.staysafeonline.org/sites/default/files/resource_documents/What%20Businesses%20Can%20Do%202011%20Final_0.pdf     SF-1 New telecommunication technologies may offer countless opportunities for small businesses, but they also offer cyber criminals many new ways to victimize your business, scam your customers and hurt your reputation.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Train employees to recognize social engineering  Social engineering, also known as "pretexting," is used by many criminals, both online and off, to trick unsuspecting people into giving away their personal information and/or installing malicious software onto their computers, devices or networks.
Social engineering is successful because the bad guys are doing their best to make their work look and sound legitimate, sometimes even helpful, which makes it easier to deceive users.
Information gathered from social networks or posted on websites can be enough to create a convincing ruse to trick your employees.
Teaching people the risks involved in sharing personal or business details on the Internet can help you partner with your staff to prevent both personal and organizational losses.
Many criminals use social engineering tactics to get individuals to voluntarily install malicious computer software such as fake antivirus, thinking they are doing something that will help make them more secure.
Users who are tricked into loading malicious programs on their computers may be providing remote control capabilities to an attacker, unwittingly installing software that can steal financial information or simply try to sell them fake security software.
Protect against online fraud  Online fraud takes on many guises that can impact everyone, including small businesses and their employees.
Be sure to never request personal information or account details through email, social networking or other online messages.
Let your customers know you will never request this kind of information through such channels and instruct them to contact you directly should they have any concerns.
Businesses should ensure that their online communications never ask their customers to submit sensitive information via email.
Make a clear statement in your communications reinforcing that you will never ask for personal information via email so that if someone targets your customers, they may realize the request is a scam.
Employee awareness is your best defense against your users being tricked into handing over their usernames and passwords to cyber criminals.
Explain to everyone that they should never respond to incoming messages requesting private information.
Employees needing to access a website link sent from a questionable source should open an Internet browser window and manually type in the site’s web address to make sure the emailed link is not maliciously redirecting to a dangerous site.
Scams and Fraud   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   SF-2 This advice is especially critical for protecting online banking accounts belonging to your organization.
Don’t fall for fake antivirus offers  Fake antivirus, "scareware" and other rogue online security scams have been behind some of the most successful online frauds in recent times.
Make sure your organization has a policy in place explaining what the procedure is if an employee's computer becomes infected by a virus.
If possible, configure your computers to not allow regular users to have administrative access.
This will minimize the risk of them installing malicious software and condition users that adding unauthorized software to work computers is against policy.
Keeping security software up to date and patching your computers regularly will make it more difficult for this type of malware to infiltrate your network.
Develop a layered approach to guard against malicious software  Despite progress in creating more awareness of security threats on the Internet, malware authors are not giving up.
Effective protection against viruses, Trojans and other malicious software requires a layered approach to your defenses.
These media could have malicious software pre-installed that can infect your computer, so make sure you trust the source of the removable media devices before you use them.
Combining the use of web filtering, antivirus signature protection, proactive malware protection, firewalls, strong security policies and employee training significantly lowers the risk of infection.
Verify the identify of telephone information seekers  Most offline social engineering occurs over the telephone.
Information gathered through social networks and information posted on websites can be enough to create a convincing ruse to trick your employees.
Ensure that you train employees to never disclose customer information, usernames, passwords or other sensitive details to incoming callers.
When someone requests information, always contact the person back using a known phone number or email account to verify the identity and validity of the individual and their request.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   SF-3Helpful links  • Find the most updated patches for your computer and software applications: http://www.softwarepatch.com/ • Free computer security scan tools for your PC or network: http://www.staysafeonline.org/tools-resources/free-security-check-ups  • Stay on top of the latest scams, frauds and security threats as they happen: http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/  • Additional tops to prevent against phishing: http://www.fraud.org/tips/internet/phishing.htm • Learn how to resist phishing techniques with this interactive game: http://cups.cs.cmu.edu/antiphishing_phil/                          NS-1 Securing your company’s network consists of: (1) identifying all devices and connections on the network; (2) setting boundaries between your company’s systems and others; and (3) enforcing controls to ensure that unauthorized access, misuse, or denial-of-service events can be thwarted or rapidly contained and recovered from if they do occur.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Secure internal network and cloud services  Your company’s network should be separated from the public Internet by strong user authentication mechanisms and policy enforcement systems such as firewalls and web filtering proxies.
Additional monitoring and security solutions, such as anti-virus software and intrusion detection systems, should also be employed to identify and stop malicious code or unauthorized access attempts.
Internal network  After identifying the boundary points on your company’s network, each boundary should be evaluated to determine what types of security controls are necessary and how they can be best deployed.
Border routers should be configured to only route traffic to and from your company’s public IP addresses, firewalls should be deployed to restrict traffic only to and from the minimum set of necessary services, and intrusion prevention systems should be configured to monitor for suspicious activity crossing your network perimeter.
In order to prevent bottlenecks, all security systems you deploy to your company’s network perimeter should be capable of handling the bandwidth that your carrier provides.
Cloud based services  Carefully consult your terms of service with all cloud service providers to ensure that your company’s information and activities are protected with the same degree of security you would intend to provide on your own.
Request security and auditing from your cloud service providers as applicable to your company’s needs and concerns.
These services may include backup-and-restore services and encryption services, which may be very attractive to small businesses.
Develop strong password policies  Generally speaking, two-factor authentication methods, which require two types of evidence that you are who you claim to be, are safer than using just static passwords for authentication.
One common example is a personal security token that displays changing passcodes to be used in conjunction with an established password.
However, two-factor systems may not always be possible or practical for your company.
Secure and encrypt your company’s Wi-Fi  Wireless access control  Your company may choose to operate a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) for the use of customers, guests and visitors.
If so, it is important that such a WLAN be kept separate from the main company network so that traffic from the public network cannot traverse the company’s internal systems at any point.
Network Security   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   NS-2 Internal, non-public WLAN access should be restricted to specific devices and specific users to the greatest extent possible while meeting your company’s business needs.
Where the internal WLAN has less stringent access controls than your company’s wired network, dual connections  -- where a device is able to connect to both the wireless and wired networks simultaneously -- should be prohibited by technical controls on each such capable device (e.g., BIOS-level LAN/WLAN switch settings).
All users should be given unique credentials with preset expiration dates to use when accessing the internal WLAN.
Wireless encryption  Due to demonstrable security flaws known to exist in older forms of wireless encryption, your company’s internal WLAN should only employ Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) encryption.
Encrypt sensitive company data  Encryption should be employed to protect any data that your company considers sensitive, in addition to meeting applicable regulatory requirements on information safeguarding.
However, applications that comply with the OpenPGP standard, such as PGP and GnuPG, provide a wide range of options for securing data on disk as well as in transit.
If you choose to offer secure transactions via your company’s website, consult with your service provider about available options for an SSL certificate for your site.
Regularly update all applications  All systems and software, including networking equipment, should be updated in a timely fashion as patches and firmware upgrades become available.
Use automatic updating services whenever possible, especially for security systems such as anti-malware applications, web filtering tools and intrusion prevention systems.
Set safe web browsing rules   Your company’s internal network should only be able to access those services and resources on the Internet that are essential to the business and the needs of your employees.
Use the safe browsing features included with modern web browsing software and a web proxy to ensure that malicious or unauthorized sites cannot be accessed from your internal network.
If remote access is enabled, make sure it is secure  If your company needs to provide remote access to your company’s internal network over the Internet, one popular and secure option is to employ a secure Virtual Private Network (VPN) system accompanied by strong two-factor authentication, using either hardware or software tokens.
Helpful links  • Microsoft Password Strength Checker: https://www.microsoft.com/security/pc-security/password-checker.aspx • Philip Zimmerman, Where to Get PGP:  http://philzimmermann.com/EN/findpgp/ • US-CERT Security Publications:  http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/ • NIST Special Publication 800-153, Draft Guidelines for Securing Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs):  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-153/Draft-SP800-153.pdf   WS-1 Website security is more important than ever.
Web servers, which host the data and other content available to your customers on the Internet, are often the most targeted and attacked components of a company’s network.
Cyber criminals are constantly looking for improperly secured websites to attack, while many customers say website security is a top consideration when they choose to shop online.
As a result, it is essential to secure servers and the network infrastructure that supports them.
The consequences of a security breach are great: loss of revenues, damage to credibility, legal liability and loss of customer trust.
The following are examples of specific security threats to web servers:  • Cyber criminals may exploit software bugs in the web server, underlying operating system, or active content to gain unauthorized access to the web server.
Examples of unauthorized access include gaining access to files or folders that were not meant to be publicly accessible and being able to execute commands and/or install malicious software on the web server.
• Denial-of-service attacks may be directed at the web server or its supporting network infrastructure to prevent or hinder your website users from making use of its services.
• Sensitive information on the web server may be read or modified without authorization.
• Sensitive information on backend databases that are used to support interactive elements of a web application may be compromised through the injection of unauthorized software commands.
Examples include Structured Query Language (SQL) injection, Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) injection and cross-site scripting (XSS).
• Sensitive unencrypted information transmitted between the web server and the browser may be intercepted.
• Information on the web server may be changed for malicious purposes.
• Cyber criminals may gain unauthorized access to resources elsewhere in the organization’s network via a successful attack on the web server.
• Cyber criminals may also attack external entities after compromising a web server.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Carefully plan and address the security aspects of the deployment of a      public web server.
Because it is much more difficult to address security once deployment and implementation have occurred, security should be considered from the initial planning stage.
Businesses are more likely to make decisions about configuring computers appropriately and consistently when they develop and use a detailed, well-designed deployment plan.
Developing such a plan will support web server administrators in making the inevitable tradeoff decisions between usability, performance and risk.
Businesses also need to consider the human resource requirements for the deployment and continued operation of the web server and supporting infrastructure.
The following points in a deployment plan:   • Types of personnel required -- for example, system and web server administrators, webmasters, network administrators and information systems security personnel.
• Skills and training required by assigned personnel.
• Individual (i.e., the level of effort required of specific personnel types) and collective staffing (i.e., overall level of effort) requirements.
Website Security  FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   WS-2 2.
Implement appropriate security management practices and controls when      maintaining and operating a secure web server.
Appropriate management practices are essential to operating and maintaining a secure web server.
Security practices include the identification of your company’s information system assets and the development, documentation and implementation of policies, and guidelines to help ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information system resources.
The following practices and controls are recommended:   • A business-wide information system security policy.
• Server configuration and change control and management.
• Risk assessment and management.
• Standardized software configurations that satisfy the information system security policy.
• Security awareness and training.
Ensure that web server operating systems meet your organization’s      security requirements.
The first step in securing a web server is securing the underlying operating system.
Many security issues can be avoided if the operating systems underlying web servers are configured appropriately.
Default hardware and software configurations are typically set by manufacturers to emphasize features, functions and ease of use at the expense of security.
Because manufacturers are not aware of each organization’s security needs, each web server administrator must configure new servers to reflect their business’ security requirements and reconfigure them as those requirements change.
Using security configuration guides or checklists can assist administrators in securing systems consistently and efficiently.
Initially securing an operating system initially generally includes the following steps:   • Patch and upgrade the operating system.
• Configure resource controls.
• Install and configure additional security controls.
• Perform security testing of the operating system.
Ensure the web server application meets your organization’s security      requirements.
In many respects, the secure installation and configuration of the web server application will mirror the operating system process discussed above.
The overarching principle is to install the minimal amount of web server services required and eliminate any known vulnerabilities through patches or upgrades.
Securing the web server application generally includes the following steps:   • Patch and upgrade the web server application.
• Configure web server user authentication and access controls.
• Configure web server resource controls.
• Test the security of the web server application and web content.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   WS-3 5.
Company websites are often one of the first places cyber criminals search for valuable information.
Still, many businesses lack a web publishing process or policy that determines what type of information to publish openly, what information to publish with restricted access and what information should not be published to any publicly accessible repository.
Some generally accepted examples of what should not be published or at least should be carefully examined and reviewed before being published on a public website include:   • Classified or proprietary business information.
• Sensitive information relating to your business’ security.
• A business’ detailed physical and information security safeguards.
• Details about a business’ network and information system infrastructure -- for example, address ranges, naming conventions and access numbers.
• Information that specifies or implies physical security vulnerabilities.
• Any sensitive information about individuals that might be subject to federal, state or, in some instances, international privacy laws.
Ensure appropriate steps are taken to protect web content from      unauthorized access or modification.
Although information available on public websites is intended to be public (assuming a credible review process and policy is in place), it is still important to ensure that information cannot be modified without authorization.
Users of such information rely on its integrity even if the information is not confidential.
Content on publicly accessible web servers is inherently more vulnerable than information that is inaccessible from the Internet, and this vulnerability means businesses need to protect public web content through the appropriate configuration of web server resource controls.
Examples of resource control practices include:   • Install or enable only necessary services.
• Define a complete web content access matrix identifying which folders and files in the web server document directory are restricted, which are accessible, and by whom.
Static information resided on the servers of most early websites, typically in the form of text-based documents.
They typically involve dynamically executing code using a large number of inputs, from web page URL parameters to hypertext transfer   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   WS-4protocol (HTTP) content and, more recently, extensible markup language (XML) content.
Different active content technologies pose different related vulnerabilities, and their risks should be weighed against their benefits.
Use authentication and cryptographic technologies as appropriate to        protect certain types of sensitive data.
Public web servers often support technologies for identifying and authenticating users with differing privileges for accessing information.
Some of these technologies are based on cryptographic functions that can provide a secure channel between a web browser client and a web server that supports encryption.
Web servers may be configured to use different cryptographic algorithms, providing varying levels of security and performance.
Without proper user authentication in place, businesses cannot selectively restrict access to specific information.
All information that resides on a public web server is then accessible by anyone with access to the server.
In addition, without some process to authenticate the server, users of the public web server will not be able to determine whether the server is the “authentic” web server or a counterfeit version operated by a cyber criminal.
Even with an encrypted channel and an authentication mechanism, it is possible that attackers may attempt to access the site by brute force.
Improper authentication techniques can allow attackers to gather valid usernames or potentially gain access to the website.
An appropriate level of authentication should be implemented based on the sensitivity of the web server’s users and content.
Employ network infrastructure to help protect public web servers.
The network infrastructure (e.g., firewalls, routers, intrusion detection systems) that supports the web server plays a critical security role.
In most configurations, the network infrastructure will be the first line of defense between a public web server and the Internet.
Network design alone, though, cannot protect a web server.
The frequency, sophistication and variety of web server attacks perpetrated today support the idea that web server security must be implemented through layered and diverse protection mechanisms, an approach sometimes referred to as “defense-in-depth.”  10.
Commit to an ongoing process of maintaining web server security.
Maintaining a secure web server requires constant effort, resources and vigilance.
Securely administering a web server on a daily basis is essential.
Maintaining the security of a web server will usually involve the following steps:   • Configuring, protecting and analyzing log files.
• Backing up critical information frequently.
• Maintaining a protected authoritative copy of your organization’s web content.
• Testing security periodically.
E-1 Email has become a critical part of our everyday business, from internal management to direct customer support.
However, businesses must be mindful that a successful email platform starts with basic principles of email security to ensure the privacy and protection of customer and business information.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Train your employees in responsible email usage  The last line of defense for all of your cyber risk efforts lies with the employees who use tools such as email and their responsible and appropriate use and management of the information under their control.
Technology alone cannot make a business secure.
Employees must be trained to identify risks associated with email use, how and when to use email appropriate to their work, and when to seek assistance of professionals.
Employee awareness training is available in many forms, including printed media, videos and online training.
Consider requiring security awareness training for all new employees and refresher courses every year.
Simple efforts such as monthly newsletters, urgent bulletins when new viruses are detected, and even posters in common areas to remind your employees of key security and privacy to-do’s create a work environment that is educated in protecting your business.
Protect sensitive information sent via email  With its proliferation as a primary tool to communicate internally and externally, business email often includes sensitive information.
Whether it is company information that could harm your business or regulated data such as personal health information (PHI) or personally identifiable information (PII), it is important to ensure that such information is only sent and accessed by those who are entitled to see it.
Since email in its native form is not designed to be secure, incidents of misaddressing or other common accidental forwarding can lead to data leakage.
Businesses that handle this type of information should consider whether such information should be sent via email, or at least consider using email encryption.
Only individuals or organizations with access to the encryption key can read the information.
Other cloud services offer “Secure Web Enabled Drop Boxes” that enable secure data transfer for sensitive information, which is often a better approach to transmitting between companies or customers.
Set a sensible email retention policy   Another important consideration is the management of email that resides on company messaging systems and your users’ computers.
From the cost of storage and backup to legal and regulatory requirements, companies should document how they will handle email retention and implement basic controls to help them attain those standards.
Many industries have specific rules that dictate how long emails can or should be retained, but the basic rule of Email  FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   E-2thumb is only as long as it supports your business efforts.
Many companies implement a 60-90 day retention standard if not compelled by law to another retention period.
In addition, organizations should discourage the use of personal folders on employee computers (most often configurable from the e-mail system level), as this will make it more difficult to manage company standards.
Develop an email usage policy   Policies are important for setting expectations with your employees or users, and for developing standards to ensure adherence to your published polices.
Key areas to address include what the company email system should and should not be used for, and what data are allowed to be transmitted.
MD-1 If your company uses mobile devices to conduct company business, such as accessing company email or sensitive data, pay close attention to mobile security and the potential threats that can expose and compromise your overall business networks.
This section describes the mobile threat environment and the practices that small businesses can use to help secure devices such as smartphones, tablets and Wi-Fi enabled laptops.
Many organizations are finding that employees are most productive when using mobile devices, and the benefits are too great to ignore.
But while mobility can increase workplace productivity, allowing employees to bring their own mobile devices into the enterprise can create significant security and management challenges.
Data loss and data breaches caused by lost or stolen phones create big challenges, as mobile devices are now used to store confidential business information and access the corporate network.
According to a December 2010 Symantec mobile security survey, 68 percent of respondents ranked loss or theft as their top mobile-device security concern, while 56 percent said mobile malware is their number two concern.
It is important to remember that while the individual employee may be liable for a device, the company is still liable for the data.
Top threats targeting mobile devices    • Data Loss – An employee or hacker accesses sensitive information from device or network.
This can be unintentional or malicious, and is considered the biggest threat to mobile devices  • Social Engineering Attacks – A cyber criminal attempts to trick users to disclose sensitive information or install malware.
Methods include phishing and targeted attacks.
• Malware – Malicious software that includes traditional computer viruses, computer worms and Trojan horse programs.
Specific examples include the Ikee worm, targeting iOS-based devices; and Pjapps malware that can enroll infected Android devices in a collection of hacker-controlled “zombie” devices known as a “botnet.”  • Data Integrity Threats – Attempts to corrupt or modify data in order to disrupt operations of a business for financial gain.
• Resource Abuse – Attempts to misuse network, device or identity resources.
Examples include sending spam from compromised devices or denial of service attacks using computing resources of compromised devices.
• Web and Network-based Attacks – Launched by malicious websites or compromised legitimate sites, these target a device’s browser and attempt to install malware or steal confidential data that flows through it.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  A few simple steps can to help ensure company information is protected.
These include requiring all mobile devices that connect to the business network be equipped with security software and password protection; and providing general security training to make employees aware of the importance of security practices for mobile devices.
More specific practices are detailed below.
Use security software on all smartphones  Security software specifically designed for smartphones can stop hackers and prevent cyber criminals from stealing your information or spying on you when you use public networks.
Mobile Devices   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   MD-22.
Make sure all software is up to date  Mobile devices must be treated like personal computers in that all software on the devices should be kept current, especially the security software.
This will protect devices from new variants of malware and viruses that threaten your company’s critical information.
Encrypt the data on mobile devices   Business and personal information stored on mobile devices is often sensitive.
If a device is lost and the SIM card stolen, the thief will not be able to access the data if the proper encryption technology is loaded on the device.
Have users password protect access to mobile devices   In addition to encryption and security updates, it is important to use strong passwords to protect data stored on mobile devices.
This will go a long way toward keeping a thief from accessing sensitive data if the device is lost or hacked.
Employ these strategies for email, texting and social networking   Avoid opening unexpected text messages from unknown senders – As with email, attackers can use text messages to spread malware, phishing scams and other threats among mobile device users.
Don’t be lured in by spammers and phishers – To shield business networks from cyber criminals, small businesses should deploy appropriate email security solutions, including spam prevention, which protect a company’s reputation and manage risks.
Click with caution – Just like on stationary PCs, social networking on mobile devices and laptops should be conducted with care and caution.
It doesn’t take much for a user to be tricked into compromising a device and the information on it.
Set reporting procedures for lost or stolen equipment   In the case of a loss or theft, employees and management should all know what to do next.
Processes to deactivate the device and protect its information from intrusion should be in place.
Ensure all devices are wiped clean prior to disposal   Most mobile devices have a reset function that allows all data to be wiped.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   MD-3Helpful links  • Teach your employees about mobile apps:  http://onguardonline.gov/articles/0018-understanding-mobile-apps • Keep your laptops secure: http://onguardonline.gov/articles/0015-laptop-security     EMP-1 Businesses must establish formal recruitment and employment processes to control and preserve the quality of their employees.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Develop a hiring process that properly vets candidates  The hiring process should be a collaborative effort among different groups of your organization, including recruitment, human resources, security, legal and management teams.
The standard background screening should include the following checks:   • Employment verification • Education verification • Criminal records • Drug testing • The U.S.  Treasury Office of Foreign Affairs and Control • Sex offender registries • Social Security traces and validation  Depending on the type of your business, other screening criteria may consist of credit check, civil checks and federal criminal checks.
Conducting post-hire checks for all employees every two to three years, depending on your industry, is also recommended.
For more information about employer obligations under the FCRA, visit http://business.ftc.gov/documents/bus08-using-consumer-reports-what-employers-need-know.
Take care in dealing with third parties  Employers should properly vet partner companies through which your organization hires third-party consultants.
To ensure consistent screening criteria are enforced for third-party consultants, you need to explicitly set the credentialing requirements in your service agreement.
State in the agreement that the company’s credentialing requirements must be followed.
Employees   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   EMP-24.
Set appropriate access controls for employees  Both client data and internal company data are considered confidential and need particular care when viewed, stored, used, transmitted or disposed.
It is important to analyze the role of each employee and set data access control based upon the role.
If a role does not require the employee to ever use sensitive data, the employee’s access to the data should be strictly prohibited.
However, if the role requires the employee to work with sensitive data, the level of access must be analyzed thoroughly and be assigned in a controlled and tiered manner following “least-privilege” principles, which allow the employee to only access data that is necessary to perform his or her job.
If the organization does not have a system in place to control data access, the following precautions are strongly recommended.
Every employee should:  • Never access or view client data without a valid business reason.
Access should be on a need-to-know basis.
• Never use client data for development, testing, training presentations or any purpose other than providing production service, client-specific testing or production diagnostics.
Only properly sanitized data that cannot be traced to a client, client employee, customer or your organization’s employee should be used for such purposes.
• Always use secure transmission methods such as secure email, secure file transfer (from application to application) and encrypted electronic media (e.g., CDs, USB drives or tapes).
• Follow a “clean desk” policy, keeping workspaces uncluttered and securing sensitive documents so that confidential information does not get into the wrong hands.
• Always use only approved document disposal services or shred all hardcopy documents containing confidential information when finished using them.
Provide security training for employees  Security awareness training teaches employees to understand system vulnerabilities and threats to business operations that are present when using a computer on a business network.
A strong IT security program must include training IT users on security policy, procedures and techniques, as well as the various management, operational and technical controls necessary and available to keep IT resources secure.
In addition, IT infrastructure managers must have the skills necessary to carry out their assigned duties effectively.
Failure to give attention to the area of security training puts an enterprise at great risk because security of business resources is as much a human issue as it is a technology issue.
Technology users are the largest audience in any organization and are the single most important group of people who can help to reduce unintentional errors and IT vulnerabilities.
Users may include employees, contractors, foreign or domestic guest researchers, other personnel, visitors, guests and other collaborators or associates requiring access.
Users must:   • Understand and comply with security policies and procedures.
• Be appropriately trained in the rules of behavior for the systems and applications to which they have access.
• Work with management to meet training needs.
• Keep software and applications updated with security patches.
• Be aware of actions they can take to better protect company information.
These actions include: proper password usage, data backup, proper antivirus protection, reporting any suspected incidents or violations of   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   EMP-3security policy, and following rules established to avoid social engineering attacks and deter the spread of spam or viruses and worms.
Typically, the following data are considered sensitive information that should be handled with precaution:  • Government issued identification numbers (e.g., Social Security numbers, driver’s license numbers) • Financial account information (bank account numbers, credit card numbers) • Medical records • Health insurance information • Salary information • Passwords  The training should cover security policies for all means of access and transmission methods, including secure databases, email, file transfer, encrypted electronic media and hard copies.
Employers should constantly emphasize the critical nature of data security.
Regularly scheduled refresher training courses should be established in order to instill the data security culture of your organization.
Additionally, distribute data privacy and security related news articles in your training, and send organization-wide communication on notable data privacy related news as reminders to your employees.
Helpful links  • Internet Safety at Work PowerPoint Presentation: http://go.microsoft.com/?linkid=9745638 • Tip Cards: Top Tips for Internet Safety at Work: http://go.microsoft.com/?linkid=9745642 • Video: "Stay Sharp on Internet Safety at Work": http://go.microsoft.com/?linkid=9745640    FS-1 Protecting employees and members of the public who visit your facility is a complex and challenging responsibility.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Recognize the importance of securing your company facilities  The physical security of a facility depends on a number of security decisions that can be identified through a comprehensive risk-management process.
The objective of risk management is to identify an achievable level of protection for your company that corresponds as closely as possible to the level of risk without exceeding the risk.
It is easy to think about physical security of your company’s facility as merely an exercise in maintaining control of access points and ensuring there is complete visibility in areas that are determined to be of high-risk – either because of the threat of easy public access or because of the value of information located nearby.
However, maintaining security of your company’s facility also includes the physical environment of public spaces.
For instance:  • Employees whose computers have access to sensitive information should not have their computer monitors oriented toward publicly accessible spaces such as reception areas, check-in desks and waiting rooms.
• Easy-to-grab equipment that could contain sensitive or personally identifiable information – such as laptops, electronic tablets and cell phones – should be located away from public areas.
If you have an environment where employees are working in a waiting room or reception area, train them to not leave these types of devices out on their desks unsecured.
• Consider implementing a badge identification system for all employees, and train employees to stop and question anyone in the operational business area without a badge or who appears to be an unescorted visitor.
Minimize and safeguard printed materials with sensitive information  Probably the most effective way to minimize the risk of losing control of sensitive information from printed materials is to minimize the amount of printed materials that contain sensitive information.
Management procedures should limit how many instances and copies of printed reports memoranda and other material containing personally identifiable information exist.
Safeguard copies of material containing sensitive information by providing employees with locking file cabinets or safes.
Make it a standard operating procedure to lock up important information.
Ensure mail security  Your mail center can introduce a wide range of potential threats to your business.
Your company should ensure that mail managers understand the range of screening procedures and evaluate them in terms of your specific operational requirements.
Facility Security    FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   FS-24.
Dispose of trash securely  Too often, sensitive information – including customers’ personally identifiable information, business financial and other data, and company system access information – is available for anyone to find in the trash.
Develop standard procedures and employee training programs to ensure that everyone in your company is aware of what types of information need to be shredded.
Dispose electronic equipment securely  Be aware that emptying the recycle bin on your desktop or deleting documents from folders on your computer or other electronic device may not delete information forever.
Those with advanced computer skills can still access your information even after you think you’ve destroyed it.
Disposing of electronic equipment requires skilled specialists in order to ensure the security of sensitive information contained within that equipment.
If outside help, such as an experienced electronic equipment recycler and data security vendor, is not available or too expensive, you should at a minimum remove computer hard drives and have them shredded.
Also, be mindful of risks with other types of equipment associated with computer equipment, including CDs and thumb drives.
Train your employees in facility security procedures  A security breach of customer information or a breach of internal company information can result in a public loss of confidence in your company and can be as devastating for your business as a natural disaster.
In order to address such risks, you must devote your time, attention and resources (including employee training time) to the potential vulnerabilities in your business environment and the procedures and practices that must be a standard part of each employee’s workday.
And while formal training is important to maintaining security, the daily procedures you establish in both the normal conduct of business and in the way you model good security behaviors and practices are equally important.
In short, security training should be stressed as critical and reinforced via daily procedures and leadership modeling.
OS-1 While operational security, or OPSEC, has its origins in securing information important to military operations, it has applications across the business community today.
In a commercial context, OPSEC is the process of denying hackers access to any information about the capabilities or intentions of a business by identifying, controlling and protecting evidence of the planning and execution of activities that are essential the success of operations.
OPSEC is a continuous process that consists of five distinct actions:   • Identify information that is critical to your business.
• Analyze the threat to that critical information.
• Analyze the vulnerabilities to your business that would allow a cyber criminal to access critical information.
By educating oneself on OPSEC risks and methodologies, protecting sensitive information that is critical to the success of your business becomes second nature.
An understanding of the following terms is required before the process can be explained:  • Critical information – Specific data about your business strategies and operations that are needed by cyber criminals to hamper or harm your business from successfully operating.
• OPSEC indicators – Business operations and publicly available information that can be interpreted or pieced together by a cyber criminal to derive critical information.
• OPSEC vulnerability – A condition in which business operations provide OPSEC indicators that may be obtained and accurately evaluated by a cyber criminal to provide a basis for hampering or harming successful business operations.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Identity of critical information   The identification of critical information is important in that it focuses the remainder of the OPSEC process on protecting vital information rather than attempting to protect all information relevant to business operations.
Given that any business has limited time, personnel and money for developing secure business practices, it is essential to focus those limited resources on protecting information that is most critical to successful business operations.
Examples of critical information include, but should not be limited to, the following:  • Customer lists and contact information  • Contracts • Patents and intellectual property • Leases and deeds • Policy manuals • Articles of incorporation • Corporate papers • Laboratory notebooks • Audio tapes • Video tapes Operational Security   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   OS-2• Photographs and slides • Strategic plans and board meeting minutes  Importantly, what is critical information for one business may not be critical for another business.
Analyze threats   This action involves research and analysis to identify likely cyber criminals who may attempt to obtain critical information regarding your company’s operations.
OPSEC planners in your business should answer the following critical information questions:  • Who might be a cyber criminal (e.g.
• What are cyber criminal’s goals?
• What actions might the cyber criminal take?
• What critical information does the cyber criminal already have on your company’s operations?
Analyze vulnerabilities   The purpose of this action is to identify the vulnerabilities of your business in protecting critical information.
It requires examining each aspect of security that seeks to protect your critical information and then comparing those indicators with the threats identified in the previous step.
Common vulnerabilities for small businesses include the following:  • Poorly secured mobile devices that have access to critical information.
• Lack of policy on what information and networked equipment can be taken home from work or taken abroad on travel.
• Storage of critical information on personal email accounts or other non-company networks.
• Lack of policy on what business information can be posted to or accessed by social network sites.
First, OPSEC managers must analyze the vulnerabilities identified in the previous action and identify possible OPSEC measures to mitigate each one.
Second, specific OPSEC measures must be selected for execution based upon a risk assessment done by your company’s senior leadership.
Risk assessment requires comparing the estimated cost associated with implementing each possible OPSEC measure to the potential harmful effects on business operations resulting from the exploitation of a particular vulnerability.
OPSEC measures may entail some cost in time, resources, personnel or interference with normal operations.
If the cost to achieve OPSEC protection exceeds the cost of the harm that an intruder could inflict, then the application of the measure is inappropriate.
Because the decision not to implement a particular OPSEC measure entails risks, this step requires your company’s leadership approval.
Apply appropriate OPSEC measures   In this action, your company’s leadership reviews and implements the OPSEC measures selected in the assessment of risk action.
Before OPSEC measures can be selected, security objectives and critical information must be known, indicators identified and vulnerabilities assessed.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   OS-3Helpful links  These resources provide additional information on the origins, purpose and implementation of operational security.
• National Security Agency/Central Security Service, PURPLE DRAGON: The Origin and Development of the United States OPSEC Program (1993): http://www.nsa.gov/public_info/_files/cryptologic_quarterly/purple_dragon.pdf • Joint Publication 3-13.3, Operations Security (29 June 2006): Available through Joint Doctrine Education and Training Electronic Information System (JDEIS): http://www.iad.gov/ioss/media/documents/Joint_Pub_3-13-3.pdf  • National OPSEC Program: https://www.iad.gov/ioss/ • OPSEC Professionals Society: http://opsecsociety.org/ • Operations Security Professional’s Association: http://www.opsecprofessionals.org/    PC-1 If your business accepts payment by credit or debit cards, it is important to have security steps in place to ensure your customer information is safe.
You also may have security obligations pursuant to agreements with your bank or payment services processor.
In addition, free resources and general security tips are available to learn how to keep sensitive information – beyond payment information – safe.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Understand and catalog customer and card data you keep  • Make a list of the type of customer and card information you collect and keep – names, addresses, identification information, payment card numbers, magnetic stripe data, bank account details and Social Security numbers.
It’s not only card numbers criminals want; they’re looking for all types of personal information, especially if it helps them commit identity fraud; • Understand where you keep such information and how it is protected.
• Determine who has access to this data and if they need to have access.
Evaluate whether you need to keep all the data you store  • Once you know what information you collect and store, evaluate whether you really need to keep it.
Tokenization, for example, is technology that masks card numbers and replaces it with an alternate number that can’t be used for fraud.
Use secure tools and services  • The payments industry maintains lists of hardware, software and service providers who have been validated against industry security requirements; • Small businesses that use integrated payment systems,  in which the card terminal is connected to a larger computer system, can check the list of validated payment applications to make sure any software they employ has been tested; • Have a conversation about security with your provider if the products or services you are currently using are not on the lists.
Control access to payment systems  • Whether you use a more complicated payment system or a simple standalone terminal, make sure you carefully control access.
• Isolate payment systems from other, less secure programs, especially those connected to the Internet.
For example, don’t use the same computer to process payments and surf the Internet.
• Control or limit access to payment systems to only employees who need access.
• Make sure you use a secure system for remote access or eliminate remote access if you don’t need it so that criminals cannot infiltrate your system from the Internet.
Use security tools and resources  Work with your bank or processor and ask about the anti-fraud measures, tools and services you can use to ensure criminals cannot use stolen card information at your business.
Payment Cards   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   PC-2 • For e-commerce retailers:  - The CVV2 code is the three-digit number on the signature panel that can help verify that the customer has physical possession of the card and not just the account number.
- Ensure your payment terminal is secure and safe from tampering.
Remember the security basics  • Use strong, unique passwords and change them frequently.
• Use up-to-date firewall and anti-virus technologies.
Helpful links  You don’t have to tackle security on your own.
Work with your bank or processor to make sure you’re getting the support and expertise you need.
• Visa offers a data security guide for small business as part of its Cardholder Information Security Program: http://usa.visa.com/merchants/risk_management/data_security_demo/popup.html • Information about industry security standards is available from the PCI Security Standards Council: https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org   • The Paysimple.com blog offers a helpful post on credit card security: http://paysimple.com/blog/2011/09/01/5-tips-for-proper-handling-of-customer-credit-card-account-information/  • American Express provides data security advice for merchants: https://www260.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/dsw/FrontServlet?request_type=dsw&pg_nm=merchinfo&ln=en&frm=US • MasterCard offers resources for on safeguarding customer information: http://www.mastercard.com/us/business/en/smallbiz/resources/industry/e-commerce/articles/0802CustomerData.html     IRR-1 Even well-implemented cyber security structures and plans may not prevent all breaches of your business’ data defenses, so be sure to have procedures in place to respond to security breaches when they occur.
Types of breaches  Physical breaches include real-world crimes such as burglaries and equipment theft, as well as any event when your company’s equipment is misplaced or lost in transit.
Unauthorized devices may be installed on a system or network, permitting further compromises of data confidentiality and integrity.
Physical breaches can also result from reselling, donating or recycling old equipment that has not been properly cleansed of potentially sensitive information.
Network and system security breaches include events when computers become infected with malicious code, are accessed by unauthorized individuals remotely or are used by authorized individuals to perform malicious activity.
This can also include breaches to network routers and firewalls, both within and outside your organization’s boundary and control.
Data breaches, meaning the leakage or spillage of sensitive information into insecure channels, can result from any of the types of events described above.
Data breaches can also occur if sensitive information is left improperly exposed by mistake.
Cyber Plan Action Items, if Breach Occurs:  1.
Notify law enforcement if necessary  Depending on the type of breach and type of business, your company may be required to notify local law enforcement or other government authorities upon discovery of a data breach.
In the event of exposure of customer information, you should notify the customer(s) of the incident, record the data that was lost or exposed and record the measures taken to ensure against future exposure.
Work cohesively across technical and leadership teams to limit the damage  Once your company becomes aware that a breach has occurred, technical personnel and business decision makers should work together to decide on the most practical and effective containment plan.
Containment plans will vary from one set of circumstances to the next, and they may quickly become intensive in terms of time and resources from both the technological and business impact perspectives.
Other issues affecting the selection and execution of a containment plan include your company’s reputation-risk management strategy and the decision on whether to request outside assistance – either from local or federal law enforcement, a private consulting firm or a computer incident response organization such as US-CERT.
In the case of network and system security breaches, eradication usually means removing all instances of unauthorized software from the network and disabling all access privileges associated with users who have committed malicious activity.
Cleaning a network or system of all traces of malicious code can often entail having to completely wipe all storage media and perform a “clean install.” Therefore, recovery from such a breach may be resource intensive and require Incident Response and Reporting   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE    IRR-2careful restoration of data from backups.
Bear in mind that backups may also contain malicious code and should be carefully checked for compromise; otherwise, the security breach will be perpetuated after the recovery phase.
Small businesses should map out disaster preparedness plans ahead of time, including the identification of key systems, data and other resources that are critical to running the business.
• Protect information completely – To reduce the risk of losing critical business information, small businesses must implement the appropriate security and backup solutions to archive important files, such as customer records and financial information for the long term.
Natural disasters, theft and cyber attacks can all result in data and financial loss, so small businesses need to make sure important files are saved not only on an external hard drive and/or company network, but in a safe, off-site location.
They should be educated on computer security best practices and what to do if information is accidentally deleted or cannot easily be found in their files.
Since small businesses often have limited resources, all employees should know how to retrieve the businesses’ information in times of disaster.
• Be prepared – It is always better and less costly to invest in adequate security up-front rather than going through a costly incident response which could result in rebuilding your entire network infrastructure.
PDM-1 All companies should develop and maintain clear and robust policies for safeguarding critical business data and sensitive information, protecting their reputation and discouraging inappropriate behavior by employees.
Many of these types of policies already exist for “real world” situations, but may need to be tailored to your organization and updated to reflect the increasing impact of cyberspace on everyday transactions, both professional and personal.
As with any other business document, cyber security policies should follow good design and governance practices -- not so long that they become unusable, not so vague that they become meaningless, and reviewed on a regular basis to ensure that they stay pertinent as your business needs change.
Please note that this document does not address all policy requirements for businesses that fall under legislative acts or directives, such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Sarbanes-Oxley Act or other federal, state or local statutes.
Cyber Plan Action Items:  1.
Establish security roles and responsibilities  One of the most effective and least expensive means of preventing serious cyber security incidents is to establish a policy that clearly defines the separation of roles and responsibilities with regard to systems and the information they contain.
Many systems are designed to provide for strong Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), but this tool is of little use without well-defined procedures and policies to govern the assignment of roles and their associated constraints.
Such policies need to clearly state, at a minimum:  • Clearly identify company data ownership and employee roles for security oversight and their inherit privileges, including: o Necessary roles, and the privileges and constraints accorded to those roles.
o How long an employee may hold a role before access rights must be reviewed.
For example, a business that handles large volumes of personally identifiable information (PII) from its customers may benefit from identifying a chief steward for customers’ privacy information.
Establish an employee Internet usage policy   The limits on employee Internet usage in the workplace vary widely from business to business.
Your guidelines should allow employees the maximum degree of freedom they require to be productive (short breaks to surf the web or perform personal tasks online have been shown to increase productivity).
Businesses may want to include a splash warning upon network sign-on that advises the employees of the businesses’ Internet usage policies so that all employees are on notice.
Policy Development and Management  FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   PDM-2 3.
Establish a social media policy  Social networking applications present a number of risks that are difficult to address using technical or procedural solutions.
A strong social media policy is crucial for any business that seeks to use social networking to promote its activities and communicate with its customers.
At a minimum, a social media policy should clearly include the following:  • Specific guidance on when to disclose company activities using social media, and what kinds of details can be discussed in a public forum.
• Additional rules of behavior for employees using personal social networking accounts to make clear what kinds of discussion topics or posts could cause risk for the company.
• Guidance on selecting long and strong passwords for social networking accounts, since very few social media sites enforce strong authentication policies for users.
Lastly, all users of social media need to be aware of the risks associated with social networking tools and the types of data that can be automatically disclosed online when using social media.
Taking the time to educate your employees on the potential pitfalls of social media use, especially in tandem with geo-location services, may be the most beneficial social networking security practice of all.
Identify potential reputation risks  All organizations should take the time to identify potential risks to their reputation and develop a strategy to mitigate those risks via policies or other measures as available.
Specific types of reputation risks include:  • Being impersonated online by a criminal organization (e.g., an illegitimate website spoofing your business name and copying your site design, then attempting to defraud potential customers via phishing scams or other method).
• Having sensitive company or customer information leaked to the public via the web.
All businesses should set a policy for managing these types of risks and plans to address such incidents if and when they occur.
Such a policy should cover a regular process for identifying potential risks to the company’s reputation in cyberspace, practical measures to prevent those risks from materializing and reference plans to respond and recover from potential incidents as soon as they occur.
Helpful links  • US-CERT’s Protect Your Workplace Posters & Brochure: http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/distributable.html • Socializing Securely: Using Social Networking Services: http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/safe_social_networking.pdf • Governing for Enterprise Security: http://www.cert.org/governance/ • FFIEC Handbook Definition of Reputation Risk: http://ithandbook.ffiec.gov/it-booklets/retail-payment-systems/retail-payment-systems-risk-management/reputation-risk.aspx • What Businesses can do to help with cyber security: http://www.staysafeonline.org/sites/default/files/resource_documents/What%20Businesses%20Can%20Do%202011%20Final_0.pdf     CSG-1  Adware Any software application that displays advertising banners while the program is running.
Adware often includes code that tracks a user’s personal information and passes it on to third parties without the user’s authorization or knowledge.
Over time, performance can be so degraded that you may have trouble working productively.
Backdoor Hidden software or hardware mechanism used to circumvent security controls.
Saving methods include high-capacity tape, separate disk sub-systems or on the Internet.
Cyber Security Glossary  FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-2 Bandwidth The capacity of a communication channel to pass data such as text, images, video or sound through the channel in a given amount of time.
This method of filtering allows for more full use of the Internet, but is less efficient at preventing access to any harmful material that is not on the list.
Blended Threat A computer network attack that seeks to maximize the severity of damage and speed of contagion by combining methods—for example, using characteristics of both viruses and worms.
Broadband General term used to refer to high-speed network connections such as cable modem and Digital Subscriber Line (DSL).
These types of “always on” Internet connections are actually more susceptible to some security threats than computers that access the Web via dial-up service.
Browser A client software program that can retrieve and display information from servers on the World Wide Web.
Often known as a “Web browser” or “Internet browser,” Examples include Microsoft’s Internet Explorer, Google’s Chrome, Apple’s Safari, and Mozilla’s Firefox.
Clear Desk Policy A policy that directs all personnel to clear their desks at the end of each working day, and file everything appropriately.
Desks should be cleared of all documents and papers, including the contents of the “in” and “out” trays —not simply for cleanliness, but also to ensure that sensitive papers and documents are not exposed to unauthorized persons outside of working hours.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-3 Clear Screen Policy A policy that directs all computer users to ensure that the contents of the screen are protected from prying eyes and opportunistic breaches of confidentially.
Cookie A small file that is downloaded by some websites to store a packet of information on your browser.
Companies and organizations use cookies to remember your login or registration identification, site preferences, pages viewed and online “shopping-cart” so that the next time you visit a site, your stored information can automatically be pulled up for you.
A cookie is obviously convenient but also presents potential security issues.
Cyberbullying Sending or posting harmful, cruel, rude or threatening messages, or slanderous information, text or images using the Internet or other digital communication devices.
Denial of Service Attack The prevention of authorized access to a system resource or the delaying of system operations and functions.
Often this involves a cyber criminal generating a large volume of data requests.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-4 Digital Certificate The electronic equivalent of an ID card that establishes your credentials when doing business or other transactions on the Web.
Domain Hijacking An attack in which an attacker takes over a domain by first blocking access to the domain’s DNS server and then putting his own server up in its place.
Domain Name System (DNS) The DNS is the way that Internet domain names are located.
A website’s domain name is easier to remember than its IP (Internet Protocol) address.
This information can then be used to commit identity theft.
In addition to the traditional viruses, other common types include worms and Trojan horses.
They sometimes work in tandem to do maximum damage.
Encryption A data security technique used to protect information from unauthorized inspection or alteration.
Information is encoded so that it appears as a meaningless string of letters and symbols during delivery or transmission.
Upon receipt, the information is decoded using an encryption key.
End User License Agreement (EULA) A contract between you and your software’s vendor or developer.
Evil Twins A fake wireless Internet hot spot that looks like a legitimate service.
When victims connect to the wireless network, a hacker can launch a spying attack on their transactions on the Internet, or just ask for credit card information in the standard pay-for-access deal.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-5 File-Sharing Programs Sometimes called peer-to-peer (P2P) programs, these allow many different users to access the same file at the same time.
Examples include Napster, Grokster, Kazaa, iMesh, Ares and Limewire.
Firewall A hardware or software link in a network that inspects all data packets coming and going from a computer, permitting only those that are authorized to reach the other side.
Flooding An attack that attempts to cause a failure in the security of a computer by providing more input, such as a large volume of data requests, than it can properly process.
Grooming Using the Internet to manipulate and gain trust of a minor as a first step towards the future sexual abuse, production or exposure of that minor.
Sometimes involves developing the child’s sexual awareness and may take days, weeks, months or in some cases years to manipulate the minor.
HTTPS When used in the first part of a URL (e.g., http://), this term specifies the use of hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP) enhanced by a security mechanism such as Secure Socket Layer (SSL).
IP (Internet Protocol) Address A computer’s inter-network address, written as a series of four 8-bit numbers separated by periods, such as 123.45.678.990.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-6 Internet Service Provider (ISP) A company that provides internet access to customers.
Man-In-the-Middle Attack Posing as an online bank or merchant, a cyber criminal allows a victim to sign in over a Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) connection.
The attacker then logs onto the real server using the client’s information and steals credit card numbers.
Network Two or more computer systems that are grouped together to share information, software and hardware.
Operating System (OS) Programs that manage all the basic functions and programs on a computer, such as allocating system resources, providing access and security controls, maintaining file systems and managing communications between end users and hardware devices.
Examples include Microsoft’s Windows, Apple’s Macintosh and Red Hat’s Linux.
Password Cracking Password cracking is the process of attempting to guess passwords, given the password file information.
Password Sniffing Passive wiretapping, usually on a local area network, to gain knowledge of passwords.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-7 Patch A patch is a small security update released by a software manufacturer to fix bugs in existing programs.
Phishing Soliciting private information from customers or members of a business, bank or other organization in an attempt to fool them into divulging confidential personal and financial information.
People are lured into sharing user names, passwords, account information or credit card numbers, usually by an official-looking message in an email or a pop-up advertisement that urges them to act immediately, usually by clicking on a link provided.
A user enters what is believed to be a valid Web address and is unknowingly redirected to an illegitimate site that steals the user's personal information.
On the spoofed site, criminals may mimic real transactions and harvest private information unknowingly shared by users.
With this, the attacker can then access the real website and conduct transactions using the credentials of a valid user.
Router A hardware device that connects two or more networks and routes incoming data packets to the appropriate network.
Many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) provide these devices to their customers, and they often contain firewall protections.
Shoulder Surfing Looking over a person’s shoulder to get confidential information.
It is an effective way to get information in crowded places because it’s relatively easy to stand next to someone and watch as they fill out a form, enter a PIN number at an ATM machine or type a password.
Can also be done long-distance with the aid of binoculars or other vision-enhancing devices.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-8 Skimming A high-tech method by which thieves capture your personal or account information from your credit card, driver’s license or even passport using an electronic device called a “skimmer.” Such devices can be purchased online for under $50.
Your card is swiped through the skimmer and the information contained in the magnetic strip on the card is then read into and stored on the device or an attached computer.
Social Engineering A euphemism for non-technical or low-technology means—such as lies, impersonation, tricks, bribes, blackmail and threats—used to attack information systems.
Social Networking Websites Sites specifically focused on the building and verifying of social networks for whatever purpose.
Many social networking services are also blog hosting services.
There are more than 300 known social networking websites, including Facebook, MySpace, Friendster, Xanga and Blogspot.
Such sites enable users to create online profiles and post pictures and share personal data such as their contact information, hobbies, activities and interests.
Often sent in an attempt to sell you something or get you to reveal personal information.
Often sent in an attempt to sell you something or get you to reveal personal information.
A technique used by hackers as a means of gaining access to a computer system.
Spyware Software that uses your Internet connection to send personally identifiable information about you to a collecting device on the Internet.
SSL (Secure Socket Layer) An encryption system that protects the privacy of data exchanged by a website and the individual user.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-9 Trojan Horse A computer program that appears to be beneficial or innocuous, but also has a hidden and potentially malicious function that evades security mechanisms.
URL Abbreviation for “Uniform (or Universal) Resource Locator.” A way of specifying the location of publicly available information on the Internet.
They use a slight misspelling or other subtle difference in the URL, such as “monneybank.com” instead of “moneybank.com” to redirect users to share their personal information unknowingly.
A virus cannot run by itself; it requires that its host program be run to make the virus active.
Vishing Soliciting private information from customers or members of a business, bank or other organization in an attempt to fool them into divulging confidential personal and financial information.
People are lured into sharing user names, passwords, account information or credit card numbers, usually by an official-looking message in an email or a pop-up advertisement that urges them to act immediately—but in a vishing scam, they are urged to call the phone number provided rather than clicking on a link.
This method is extremely safe, but allows for only extremely limited use of the Internet.
FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE   CSG-10Worm Originally an acronym for “Write once, read many times,” a type of electronic infection that can run independently, can propagate a complete working version of itself onto other hosts on a network, and may consume computer resources destructively.
Once this malicious software is on a computer, it scans the network for another machine with a specific security vulnerability.
Zombie Computer A remote-access Trojan horse installs hidden code that allows your computer to be controlled remotely.
Digital thieves then use robot networks of thousands of zombie computers to carry out attacks on other people and cover up their tracks.
Sources:  National Institute of Standards and Technology: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7298-rev1/nistir-7298-revision1.pdf  Whoiswatchingcharlottesville.org:  http://www.whoswatchingcharlottesville.org/glossary.html  CSL-1 Cyber Security and Privacy Protection  • Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute’s CERT Coordination Center: www.cert.org/other_sources    • Center for Internet Security (CIS): www.cisecurity.org  • Free online security check ups: http://www.staysafeonline.org/tools-resources/free-security-check-ups   • National Cyber Security Alliance for Small Business Home Users: http://www.staysafeonline.info/   • OnGuard Online: www.OnGuardOnline.gov    • SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute’s Most Critical Internet Security Vulnerabilities: www.sans.org/top20    • Security Tips from Securing our eCity: http://securingourecity.org/  • Small Business Solutions form StopBadware: http://stopbadware.org/  • The Open Web Application Security Project: www.owasp.org     Cyber Security Threat Centers  • McAfee Cybersafety Resource Portal http://www.mcafee.com/cru   • McAfee Security Solutions for Small Business: http://shop.mcafee.com/Default.aspx?site=us&pid=HOME&CID=MFE-MHP001    • Symantec Security Solutions for Small Business: http://store.symantec.com/?om_sem_cid=hho_sem_nam_us_Google_SMB_Store_Home&inid=hho_sem_sy:us:ggl:en:e%7Ckw0000006084%7CSMB  Cyber Security Links   FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE    CSL-2 Training and Exercises  • Free training materials, security configuration guides from Internet Security Alliance: http://www.isalliance.org/   • NIH Free Online User Training: http://iase.disa.mil/eta/issv4/index.htm   • NIH Free Online User Training (non DOD version): http://irtsectraining.nih.gov/publicUser.aspx   Government Resources  • Department of Homeland Security (DHS)’s National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace: www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/National_Cyberspace_Strategy.pdf   • DHS testimony before the House on Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technologies: http://www.dhs.gov/ynews/testimony/testimony_1300283858976.shtm  • FCC Cyber Security Encyclopedia Page http://www.fcc.gov/cyberforsmallbiz  • FCC Public Safety and Homeland Secuirity Bureau Clearinghouse: http://publicsafety.fcc.gov/pshs/clearinghouse/index.htm  • FCC Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau Guidelines for Emergency Planning: http://transition.fcc.gov/pshs/emergency-information/guidelines/   • FCC Ten Cybersecurity Tips for Small Businesses http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-306595A1.pdf  • Federal Trade Commission Guide for Business http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/infosecurity/  • Federal Trade Commission – Identity Theft Information: http://www.onguardonline.gov/topics/computer-security.aspx   • Federal Trade Commission’s Interactive Tutorial: www.ftc.gov/infosecurity    • National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)’s Computer Security Resource Center: www.csrc.nist.gov    • NIST briefing on Cybersecurity for Small Businesses: http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/sbc/documents/smb-presentation.pdf     FCC SMALL BIZ CYBER PLANNING GUIDE    CSL-3Government Resources (cont’d)  • NIST Guide to Selecting Information Technology Security Products: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-36/NIST-SP800-36.pdf   • NIST’s Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems: www.csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30/sp800-30.pdf     • NIST Small Business Corner - A link to the NIST-SBA-FBI Small Business Information Security outreach pages : http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/sbc/index.html     • NIST Small Business Information Security: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7621/nistir-7621.pdf   • SBA, NIST and FBI partnership on Cybersecurity for small businesses: http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/sbc/overview.html  • United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT): www.us-cert.gov    • U.S. Department of Homeland Security Cyber Security Resources: http://www.dhs.gov/cyber   Publications  • 2011 Awards for best computer security tools, SC Magazine: http://www.scmagazineus.com/2011-sc-awards-us-finalists/section/1908/    • Cloud Security Alliance https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/csaguide.pdf  • Computer Security Resource Center, National Instiitute of Standards and Technology: http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/sbc/library.html  • Microsoft Small Business Guide: http://www.microsoft.com/smallbusiness/support/security-toolkit-pdf.mspx   • Protecting Your Small Business, Entrepreneur Magazine: http://www.entrepreneur.com/magazine/entrepreneur/2010/june/206656.html   • Small business Information Security: The Fundamentals, National Institute of Standards and Technology: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7621/nistir-7621.pdf   CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING    AT A TURNING POINT         Analysing a new generation of    national cybersecurity strategies for   the Internet economy   Also includes contributions from non-governmental stakeholders              Cybersecurity Policy Making at a Turning Point:   Analysing a New Generation of National  Cybersecurity Strategies for the Internet   Economy   and         Non-governmental Perspectives on a New   Generation of National Cybersecurity Strategies:   Contributions from   BIAC, CSISAC and ITAC                                        ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND   DEVELOPMENT   The  OECD  is  a  unique  forum  where  governments  work  together  to  address  the  economic, social and environmental challenges of globalisation.
The OECD is also  at the forefront of efforts to understand and to help governments respond to new  developments  and  concerns,  such  as  corporate  governance,  the  information  economy and the challenges of an ageing population.
The Organisation provides  a  setting  where  governments  can  compare  policy  experiences,  seek  answers  to  common problems, identify good practice and work to co-ordinate domestic and  international policies.
The  European Union takes part in the work of the OECD.
Cover image : © germanskydive110 - Fotolia.com                           © OECD 2012   Applications to reproduce or translate all or part of this work should be made to  rights@oecd.org.
3   Foreword   A comparative analysis by the OECD of a new generation of national  cybersecurity  strategies  reveals  that  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  at  a  turning  point.
They  approach  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner,  encompassing  economic,  social,  educational,  law-enforcement,  technical, diplomatic, military and intelligence-related aspects.
legal,   This  booklet  includes  the  OECD  report  as  well  as  the  full  text  of  the  contributions  to  this  work  by  non-governmental  stakeholders  from  the  Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC), Civil Society Internet  Society  Advisory  Council  (CSISAC)  and  the  Internet  Technical  Advisory  Committee (ITAC).
The OECD focuses on security in cyberspace as a driver for economic  prosperity and social development.
The findings of this work will inform the  review of the 2002 Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and  Networks  which  provide  a  set  of  high  level  principles  for  addressing  security in an open and interconnected digital environment through a risk- based approach.
For more information: http://oe.cd/security.
© OECD 2012         5   Table of contents       CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT: ANALYSING  A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES FOR  THE INTERNET ECONOMY .......................................................................................... 7  Main points .................................................................................................................... 9  Synthesis ...................................................................................................................... 11  Cybersecurity has become a national policy priority ............................................... 11  Some concepts are shared by all strategies............................................................... 13  Other concepts may reveal emerging trends ............................................................ 14  Actions plans are reinforced and broadened ............................................................ 16  Considerations expressed by non-governmental stakeholders ................................. 17  The review of the Security Guidelines ..................................................................... 19  Conclusion ................................................................................................................ 21  Detailed comparative analysis ...................................................................................... 24  Rationale and scope .................................................................................................. 24  Key concepts ............................................................................................................ 31  Management structures and action plans .................................................................. 36  Considerations highlighted by non-governmental stakeholders ............................... 47  Other considerations ................................................................................................. 51  Annex I. Intergovernmental organisations and initiatives ............................................ 53  Annex II.
Cybersecurity policy in the European Union ............................................... 59  Annex III.
Key objectives and concepts in cybersecurity strategies ............................ 68  Annex V. Questionnaire circulated to volunteer countries .......................................... 71  Annex VI.
Questionnaire circulated to non-governmental stakeholders ...................... 73  Notes ............................................................................................................................ 74  References .................................................................................................................... 79        © OECD 2012      6       NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF  NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM  BIAC, CSISAC AND ITAC ............................................................................................ 85  About the OECD ICCP non-governmental stakeholder representation ....................... 86  1) What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for the economy  and the society?
............................................................................................................ 88  2) What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to public policy  for cybersecurity?
..................................................................................................................... 96  3) How should governments implement cybersecurity policy at national and at  international levels and how does this compare with current new strategies?
........... 100  4) What is the role and responsibility of business and industry/civil society/  Internet technical community with respect to cybersecurity public policy?
............................................................... 103  5) What is - or what will be - the impact of recent cybersecurity strategies on business  and industry/civil society/the Internet technical community?
.................................... 107  6) How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be evaluated?
What  metrics should be applied to measure their efficiency?
............................................. 111  Notes .......................................................................................................................... 114      CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 7   CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT    A TURNING POINT   Analysing a New Generation of National Cybersecurity   Strategies for the Internet Economy                            © OECD 2012   8 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT             Foreword   This  report  analyses  the  latest  generation  of  “national  cybersecurity  strategies”  in  ten  volunteer  countries  and  identifies  commonalities  and  differences.
Representatives  of  business, civil society and the Internet technical community participated actively  in the work, in particular by responding to a questionnaire.
The report was discussed by the Working Party on Information Security and  Privacy (WPISP) and declassified by the Committee for Information, Computer  and Communications Policy (ICCP) at its 64th session on 24 October 2012.
The  findings  of  the  work  will  inform  the  upcoming  review  of  the  OECD  2002  Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a  Culture of Security.
The report was prepared under the direction of a group of delegates led by  Geoff Smith (United  Kingdom) and Manuel Pedrosa de Barros (Portugal) by  Laurent  Bernat  (OECD  Secretariat)  with  Peter  Ford  and  Nick  Mansfield,  consultants to the OECD.
OECD work on cybersecurity can be found at http://oe.cd/security.
CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 9   Main points   The comparative analysis of a new generation of national cybersecurity  strategies in ten OECD countries reveals that cybersecurity policy making is at  a turning point.
A single definition of cybersecurity cannot  be derived from these strategies.
They  approach  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner, encompassing economic, social, educational, legal, law-enforcement,  technical, diplomatic, military and intelligence-related aspects.
The  new  generation  of  national  cybersecurity  strategies  aims  to  drive  economic and social prosperity and protect cyberspace-reliant societies against  cyber-threats.
This has been a traditional area of interest for the OECD, going  back  to  the  1992  Guidelines  for  the  security  of  information  systems.
A  key  challenge of cybersecurity policy making today is to pursue these two objectives  while preserving the openness of the Internet as a platform for innovation and  new sources of growth.
Cybersecurity  strategies  recognise  that  the  economy,  society  and  governments now rely on the Internet for  many essential functions and that  cyber threats have been increasing and evolving at a fast pace.
They  emphasise  the  need  to  respect  fundamental  values  such  as  privacy, freedom of speech, and the free flow of information.
They also call  for  improved  international  co-operation.
Some  strategies  also  support  more  flexible and agile policy approaches, and emphasise the economic dimension  of  cybersecurity  policy.
Some  create  the  conditions  for  a  multistakeholder  dialogue in the cybersecurity policy making and implementation process.
They  include  more  emphasis  on  cybersecurity  research  and  development  (R&D) and real time monitoring of government infrastructures.
They aim to  develop a more robust cybersecurity industry sector and to take advantage of  economic  drivers  and  incentives  for  cybersecurity.
They  create  partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  and  encourage  cybersecurity  exercises.
They   © OECD 2012   10 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       develop digital identity frameworks and specific policies for the protection of  children on line.
In  addition  to  describing  this  evolution  of  cybersecurity  policy  making,  the  report  highlights  suggestions  by  business,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical community, for example with respect to security-related barriers to  trade  that  could  inhibit  innovation  and  global  deployment  of  cost-effective  security  solutions.
The  report  calls  for  further  analysis  of  the  intersections  between  economic,  social  and  sovereignty  cybersecurity  policies  and  points  out the opportunity for countries to extend their national co-ordination agency  as an international contact point to facilitate co-operation on cybersecurity at  policy and operational levels.
It also makes suggestions in the context of the  review of the 2002 OECD Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems  and Networks: Towards a Culture of Security (“Security Guidelines”).
This new age of cybersecurity policy making is still in its infancy and will  take  time  to  further  develop.
In  the  meantime,  a  key  challenge  for  governments  is  to  be  prepared  to  face  a  possible  serious  cyber  incident,  as  envisaged in nearly all the strategies, in a way that does not undermine the  openness of the Internet which is key to the vitality of the Internet economy.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 11   Synthesis   This report analyses the emergence of a new generation of government  policies,  sometimes  called  “cybersecurity  strategies”,  in  a  total  of  ten  volunteer OECD countries: eight which had adopted such a strategy between  2009  and  the  end  of  2011  (Australia,  Canada,  France,  Germany,  Japan,  Netherlands,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States),  and  two  which  were in the process of developing one (Finland and Spain).
Finally,  the  report  draws  some  conclusions  on  the  role  of  the  OECD  and  the  review  of  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
Several  annexes provide more details, for example with respect to intergovernmental  organisations involved in cybersecurity (Annex I), and developments in the  European Union (Annex II).
Cybersecurity has become a national policy priority   The  analysis  of  this  new  generation  of  national  cybersecurity  strategies  reveals  a  fundamental  evolution  in  government  policy  making  whereby  cybersecurity  is  elevated  among  government  priorities.
The  Internet  and  ICTs  are  essential  for  economic  and  social  development and form a vital infrastructure.
In a general context of  economic downturn, the open Internet and ICTs are a new source of  growth and a driver for innovation, social well-being and individual  expression.
As the Internet economy grows, the whole economy and  society,  including  governments,  become  increasingly  reliant  on  this  digital infrastructure to perform their essential functions.
© OECD 2012   12 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Cyber  threats  are  evolving  and  increasing  at  a  fast  pace.
They  are  still initiated by criminal actors but also come from new sources, such  as foreign states and political groups, and may have other motivations  than money making, such as some types of “hacktivism” (Anonymous),  destabilisation  (Estonia  in  2007),  cyberespionage,  sabotage  (e.g.
As a consequence, the scope of almost all new cybersecurity strategies has  evolved from solely protecting individuals and organisations as distinct actors,  to also protecting society as a whole.
This change results from the evolution of  the  role  of  the  Internet  in  society.
When  the  Internet  was  merely  a  useful  platform  for  individuals  and  organisations,  the  consequences  of  failures  were  manageable at  the  level of each individual and organisation, and government  policy was about helping them to prevent and manage such incidents.
As the  Internet  has  become  essential  for  the  economy  and  the  society,  the  consequences  of  failures  can  directly  impact  society  as  a  whole.
Therefore,  cybersecurity  strategies  aim  at  achieving  interrelated  objectives:  strengthening cybersecurity for the Internet economy to further drive economic  and social prosperity, and protecting cyberspace-reliant societies against cyber- threats.
Managing the complexity of pursuing these two objectives in parallel,  while  preserving  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  fundamental  values,  is  probably the main challenge of cybersecurity policy making today.
two   The  criticality  of  the  Internet  for  the  modern  economy  has  several  consequences on cybersecurity policy making, the main one being the adoption  of strategies that approach cybersecurity in an integrated and comprehensive  manner.
Governments  recognise  the  need  to  address  all  the  facets  of  cybersecurity holistically rather than in a fragmented manner as in the past.
New  cybersecurity  strategies  are  government-wide  and  encompass  the  economic,  social, educational, legal, law-enforcement, technical, diplomatic, military and  intelligence-related  aspects  of  cybersecurity.
This  integrated  approach  is  generally supported by strong leadership, sometimes at head of state or head of  government level, illustrating the significant elevation of cybersecurity amongst  government priorities.
Not  all  strategies  use  the  terms  of  “cyberspace”  and  “cybersecurity”.
Most countries include the concept of critical information  infrastructures  in  the  scope  of  their  strategy,  as  defined  in  the  OECD  Recommendation on the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures.3   © OECD 2012       Some concepts are shared by all strategies      CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 13   Most strategies share the following concepts:  ?
As  cybersecurity  becomes  an  issue  of  national  priority,  responsibility for cybersecurity policy making and implementation is  being  clearly  assigned  within  the  government.
However,  no  single  existing  vertical  agency  can  claim  a  comprehensive  understanding  and a sufficiently wide authority to manage all facets of cybersecurity.
Again, this  evolution  from  a  multi-agency  to  an  inter-agency  approach  requires  strong leadership to enable co-ordination and co-operation across pre- existing government silos.
They acknowledge that policies must  be based on inclusive public-private partnerships, which may include  business, civil society, the Internet technical community, and academia.
Improved  international  co-operation.
International  co-operation  and  the need for better alliances and partnerships with like-minded countries  or  allies,  including  facilitating  capacity  building  of  less  developed  countries  are  shared  as  key  objectives  by  most  strategies.
Most  countries,  however,  provide  little  detail  on  how  to  achieve  enhanced  international co-operation.
Exceptions include the United States which  has developed a specific international strategy for cyberspace, and the  United Kingdom which initiated an international dialogue at the 2011  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace  and  promoted  the  concept  of  international norms of behaviour in cyberspace which can also be found  in the Australian and German strategies.
International and regional organisations such as the Council of Europe,  the  European  Union,  the  G8,  the  Internet  Governance  Forum,  the  OECD,  the  Organisation  for  Security  and  Co-operation  in  Europe   © OECD 2012   14 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       (OSCE)  and  the  United  Nations,  including  the  International  Tele- communications Union (ITU), are mentioned but without much detail  as regards their role, except for the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation  (NATO), mentioned by several countries with respect to cybersecurity  in the military context.4    ?
Respect for fundamental values: all strategies place a strong emphasis  on  the  need  for  cybersecurity  policy  to  respect  fundamental  values,  which generally include privacy, freedom of speech, and the free flow  of  information.
Several  strategies  explicitly  mention  the  need  to  maintain  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  no  strategy  suggests  modifying it in favour of strengthened cybersecurity.
On the contrary,  the openness of the Internet is generally described as a requirement for  the further development of the Internet economy.
Sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  policy  making,  i.e.
national and international security, intelligence, defense and military  aspects   This  evolution  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  consideration  that  cybersecurity addresses the protection of the society as a whole and  requires  a  whole  of  government  integrated  approach.
Sovereignty  considerations emerge at different levels of domestic policy: i) at the  strategic  level,  for  example  with  the  recognition  of  cyber  threats  targeting  the  military,  or  the  risk  of  cyberespionage  from  foreign  states, ii) at the organisational level, as departments and ministries in  charge of diplomacy, intelligence and the military are included in the  intergovernmental co-ordination for policy making, sometimes with a  “national  security”  inter-agency  body  being  assigned  overarching  responsibility  for  cybersecurity  co-ordination,  iii) at  the  operational  level, with, for example, intelligence bodies playing a key role as a  source  of  for  situational  awareness.
Sovereignty  considerations also appear at the international policy level: i) strategies  mention the need for an international dialogue in relation to “rules of  engagement”  in  cyberspace  or  “confidence  building  measures”,  ii)  they highlight the role of some organisations like NATO and OSCE  to address these issues, and iii) they mention operational co-operation  with respect to intelligence-related information sharing between allies.
information   © OECD 2012        ?
Flexible policy approach     CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 15   The Internet economy is a dynamic environment where technologies,  usages and markets constantly evolve in an unpredictable manner for  the benefit of economic growth and innovation, and where threats are  also in permanent evolution.
Several strategies promote flexible and  agile cybersecurity policies which preserve the openness of the Internet  and the free flow of information as well as other factors that enable the  Internet to generate economic and social benefits and accommodate a  fundamentally  dynamic  environment.
Several  strategies  support  policies  that  enable  fast  and  informed  decision-making  processes,  embed  rapid  feedback  mechanisms  and  include  efficient  learning  cycles  and  improvement  to  quickly  and  efficiently  implement  new  measures.
The importance of the economic aspects of cybersecurity    While all strategies aim to address cybersecurity in order to maintain  and  further  develop  economic  and  social  prosperity  through  the  continued development of a vibrant Internet economy, the economic  aspects  of  cybersecurity  are  gaining  increased  visibility  in  several  strategies.
Some countries highlight that a higher level of cybersecurity  will  provide  their  economy  with  a  competitive  advantage.
They  recognise  that  economic  factors  play  a  key  role  in  improving  cybersecurity.
Several strategies encourage flexible policies leveraging  incentives for markets to better take security into account.
Some require  better  understanding  of  the  incentive  structure  of  market  players  in  relation  to  cybersecurity  and  promote  lightweight  measures  such  as  encouraging the use of security labels applied to products and services  to  better  inform  the  market.
Several  countries  set  as  a  key  policy  objective the development of a stronger cybersecurity industry sector,  including  the  development  of  a  larger  cybersecurity  workforce.
They  also  mention  the  possible  development  of  a  cybersecurity  insurance  sector.
Some  strategies  identify  a  higher  degree  of  technological  independence in relation to IT security as an important policy objective.
The benefits of a multistakeholder dialogue    Many  strategies  share  the  view  that  dialogue  with  non-governmental  stakeholders  is  key  to  good  cybersecurity  policy  making  and  imple- mentation.
Some   © OECD 2012   16 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       strategies  establish  a  dedicated  body  including  these  stakeholders  to  provide  information  and  advice  to  the  government.
In  general,  input  from  business  is  widely  recognised  as  essential,  including  for  the  implementation  of  the  strategies,  but  less  information  is  available  as  regards the consultation with the civil society, beyond academia.
Actions plans are reinforced and broadened   Cybersecurity strategies generally include or are followed by the adoption  of action plans aimed to strengthen key priority areas which were identified in  the survey carried out in 2004:5    ?
Government security: action plans include a multiplicity of initiatives,  from  the  development  of  a  situational  awareness  capacity  to  the  rationalisation  of  government  network  infrastructures,  and  the  generalisation of audits in the public sector.
Protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures:  action  plans  generally  include  measures  related  to  the  protection  of  critical  information infrastructures.
Fight  against  cybercrime:  action  plans  include  many  initiatives  to  develop law enforcement capacities, improve the legal framework and  foster  international  co-operation  on  the  basis  of  the  Budapest  Cybercrime Convention.
Awareness  raising:  action  plans  include  many  initiatives  targeting  specific populations such as children, SMEs and decision makers in  government and critical infrastructures.
Education: action plans recognise in particular the need for a stronger  cybersecurity workforce.
The development of cybersecurity skills is  identified as a key priority by several countries.
Response:  strategies  recognise  the  role  played  by  Cyber  Security  Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs), and create a national CSIRT or  strengthen it where it already exists.
Research  and  Development  (R&D),  which  benefited  from  a  relatively  low level of attention in an OECD survey carried out in 2004 is elevated to a  much  higher  level  of  priority  in  new  cybersecurity  strategies,  generally  focusing on better organisation and co-ordination of existing cybersecurity  R&D efforts in partnership with the private sector.
One country, the United  States, adopted a strategic plan for its cybersecurity R&D programme.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 17   Some cybersecurity strategies also introduce new themes in their action   plans such as:   ?
The development of a situational awareness and real time monitoring   capacity, mainly for government infrastructures.
The  development  of  policies  to  support  the  development  of  a  more   robust cybersecurity industry sector.
The  consideration  of  specific  business  players  or  sectors  which,  without  strictly  being  defined  as  critical  information  infrastructures,  could  cause  significant  damage  to  the  economy  if  successfully  targeted.
Partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs)  to  address  the   botnet threat, with the participation of their customers.
Cyber security exercises, including across borders.
The development of digital identity frameworks.
Considerations expressed by non-governmental stakeholders   This section reflects some of the observations and suggestions expressed  by business, civil society and the Internet technical community6, in response  to a questionnaire circulated in January 2012 about the current evolution of  cybersecurity policy making (cf.
Generally, non-governmental stakeholders agree that i) multistakeholder  collaboration  and  co-operation  are  the  best  means  to  develop  effective  cybersecurity policies that respect the fundamentally global, open and inter- operable nature of the Internet; ii) policy options must be flexible enough to  accommodate the dynamic nature of the Internet; iii) more robust evidence- based cybersecurity policy making is needed, an area which is generally not  covered by cybersecurity strategies.
Non-governmental  stakeholders  consider   the  divide  between  sovereignty and economic/social cybersecurity policy making is increasingly  blurred and that this trend could lead to challenging consequences.
For example,  business points out that it could face additional burdens while civil society is  concerned that its consultative role could be reduced, that transparency could  decrease  and  that  warfare  semantics  could  increasingly  shape  the  cyber-  that   © OECD 2012   18 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       security policy debate, with the risk of minimising the economic and social  benefits of the openness of the Internet.
In  addition  to  greater  consultation  with  non-governmental  stakeholders,  civil  society  suggests  several  measures  to  ensure  that  cybersecurity  policy  making  remains  transparent,  proportionate  and  balanced.
For  example,  cybersecurity  strategies  could  include  a  sunset  clause  to  prevent  measures  which were legitimate at the time of their adoption from threatening funda- mental  rights  as  technology  evolves.
Policy  initiatives  could  systematically  include a clear  risk assessment detailing  the specific harm  that  they plan to  address as well as an assessment of their impact on fundamental rights such as  free flow of information, privacy and freedom of speech.
A number of other proposals are put forward by stakeholders to increase   the effectiveness of cybersecurity strategies.
The consistency of cybersecurity measures with other cybersecurity  initiatives  could  be  systematically  assessed  (civil  society).
For  example,  legislation  which  criminalises  hacking  could  take  into  account  that  legitimate  research  contributing  to  enhance  cyber- security may employ the same techniques.
Governments  as  owners  and  operators  of  information  systems  and  networks  could  lead  by  example  by  adopting  best  practices,  technologies  and  even  legislative  requirements.
Appropriate  trust  compliance  programmes  and  procurement  practices  by  government  can provide a clear direction to other economic actors.
Technologies  developed  for  the  government  can  also  benefit  the  market  (civil  society, Internet technical community).
Policy  makers  could  seek  advice  from  the  Internet  technical  community as early as possible in the policy making process to avoid  pursuing  technical  community).
flawed  decisions   technologically   (Internet   ?
Policies could encourage the development of open standards enabling  innovation  for  security  solutions,  relying  on  respected  and  well- established  open  Internet  standardisation  groups  and  avoiding  unilateral  modification  of  Internet  standards  (Internet  technical  community).
The  collection  of  empirical  evidence  could  be  encouraged  to  better  assess the relevance of strategies and policies, as well as to support  the risk-based approach called for in the Security Guidelines.
Various  means  for  increasing  evidence-based  policy  making  have  been  highlighted to counterbalance existing disincentives that many players  face in providing more information regarding cyber incidents.
They   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 19   include  harmonised  breach  notification  mechanisms  and  the  disclosure of metrics related to risks faced by government systems  (civil society, Internet technical community).
Finally,  the  international  dimension  of  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  highlighted by business and the Internet technical community.
They stress that  requirements imposed by some countries on ICT equipment create complex  challenges  for  the  industry.
They  underline  that  security-related  technical  barriers  to  trade,  for  example  in  the  form  of  local  standards  requirements,  redundant security certification schemes or interferences  in the global  value  chain increase cost, limit functionality, constrain innovation, and skew a level  playing field.
They call for government policies to allow for the deployment  of  global  cost-effective  industry  solutions  and  encourage  the  exploration  of  solutions,  for  example  through  international  standards,  cross-compliance  recognition frameworks and awareness raising of less developed countries on  this issue.
The review of the Security Guidelines   The 2002 Recommendation of the OECD Council concerning Guidelines  for the Security of Information Systems and Networks – Towards a Culture of  Security (the 2002 Security Guidelines) established the first international set  of fundamental principles focused on the development of security policies in  an open environment.
They can be used by governments to develop national  policies  as  well  as  by  public  and  private  organisations  to  design  their  own  security policies.
The comparison of national cybersecurity strategies provides  a useful source of information and inspiration in the context of the review of  the Guidelines initiated in 2012.
All  the  strategies  studied  are  consistent  with  the  Guidelines’  principles  and several directly reflect some key concepts such as the need for a culture of  (cyber)security, the shared responsibility of all participants and the need for a  risk-based approach.
Nevertheless, none of these strategies explicitly mentions  the  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
© OECD 2012   20 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Resilience is used in many national strategies, without a clear definition  but generally as the capacity of an information system or network to continue  to  operate  despite  incidents,  or  to  carry  on  normal  operations  smoothly  notwithstanding technical problems.
It is therefore consistent with a security approach based on risk assessment  and  management  as  promoted  by  the  Security  Guidelines  and  relates  to  several principles such as Response (3), Risk Assessment (6), Security Design  and Implementation (7), and Security Management (8).
Real-time capacity appears in most strategies, even if not explicitly, as an  extension of the concept of “timeliness” included in the Guidelines’ Response  principle.
Although  governments  have  established  or  strengthened  national  Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Teams  (CSIRTs),  they  generally  recognise the need for more real-time “situational awareness” at operational  level.
Governments achieve this notably through the establishment of Cyber  Security Operation Centers (CSOCs) for the security of their own networks.
The  need  for  real  time  cybersecurity  management  is  also  reflected  in  the  private  sector  with  increased  demand  for  such  CSOC  solutions.
The  emergence  of  real-time  capacity  in  cybersecurity  is  consistent  with  the  recognition that, in an open and interconnected environment, security controls  will  not  be  robust  enough  to  fully  control  a  perimeter  that  can  potentially  extend to the whole Internet.
This implies that risk management measures take  into account the possibility that unauthorised entities gain access to the system  with malicious intentions, and that measures to detect and control them within  the  perimeter  are  as  essential  as  measures  to  secure  the  perimeter.
In  this  context, cybersecurity no longer just requires timely response to incidents, but  also  real-time  monitoring  of  networks.
And  beyond  technical  security  controls,  the  need  for  real-time  cybersecurity  management  also  raises  challenges with respect to security processes and human decisions.
There  may  therefore  be  scope  to  better  reflect  the  need  for  real-time  cybersecurity  management  in  the  review  of  the  Security  Guidelines.
In so  doing, it would be necessary however to keep in mind challenges raised by  real-time  monitoring  of  networks  for  enhanced  response,  such  as  with  respect to privacy and other fundamental values expressed in the Ethics and  Democracy principles.
Unlike their predecessor adopted in 1992, the 2002 Security Guidelines  do not include a section on how to implement the Guidelines’ principles in  public policy, or in public or private organisations.
The common elements of  current cybersecurity strategies provide several concepts that could inspire  the  development  of  such  guidance  with  respect  to  national  policy  making   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 21   such  as  i)  the  adoption  of  a  strategic  approach,  ii) supported  by  strong  leadership,  iii)  addressing  cybersecurity  in  a  holistic  manner,  including  efficient co-ordination mechanisms adapted to the country’s culture and style  of  government,  iv)  involving  non-governmental  stakeholders,  v) fostering  flexible  policy  solutions,  vi)  encouraging  self-regulation  and  public-private  partnerships,  vii)  respecting  fundamental  values  with  appropriate  safeguards  and checks and balances, viii) and fostering international co-operation such as  through the adoption of common norms of behaviour in cyberspace.
And, last  but  not  least,  adopting  policy  measures  that  encourage  the  production  of  robust and internationally comparable data could be considered.
This would  enable better informed policy making and improve risk assessment at a macro  level.
At a more operational level, the guidance could encourage the adoption of  a toolkit of  measures for governments, to be further refined and developed,  including i) leading by example through the implementation of best practices  for  the  security  of  their  own  systems  and  networks,  ii) developing  or,  if  it  already exists, strengthening a national CSIRT capacity, iii) strengthening the  fight  against  cybercrime,  iv) implementing  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures, v) raising awareness of  all  participants,  vi)  leveraging  the  appropriate  incentives  to  stimulate  the  development of a cybersecurity industry sector and encouraging the develop- ment  of  a  cybersecurity  workforce,  vii) encouraging  cybersecurity  research  and development, viii) establishing a single point of contact for international  co-operation,  ix) encouraging  the  organisation  of  cybersecurity  exercises,  including across borders.
Conclusion   The emergence of sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity strategies is  an evolution that is likely to influence policy making in the longer term.
At  this stage, sovereignty considerations are kept separate from the economic and  social  aspects  of  cybersecurity  but  intersections  are  becoming  visible.
For  example,  in  some  cases,  policy  and/or  operational  co-ordination  is  led  by  agencies whose missions focus on sovereignty considerations; some strategies  call for facilitating technology spillovers from the intelligence community to  the  cybersecurity  industry  sector;  new  industry  suppliers  and  products  benefitting from R&D investments driven by sovereignty considerations are  entering  the  cybersecurity  marketplace;  and  finally,  in  some  countries,  the  military  and  intelligence  communities  are  becoming  important  potential  suppliers of cybersecurity jobs.
Understanding the implications of this cross- fertilisation in the short, medium and longer term might become increasingly  relevant to inform the cybersecurity policy making process.
© OECD 2012   22 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  establishment  by  national  strategies  of  points  of  co-ordination  within  governments  creates  an  opportunity  to  enhance  international  co- operation  at  policy  and  operational  levels.
Each  country  might  consider  extending this co-ordination effort by nominating an international point of  contact  in  its  government,  which  would  be  available,  for  example,  to  facilitate the distribution to the relevant domestic agencies of cybersecurity  related  requests  from  foreign  countries,  whether  at  policy  or  operational  levels, whether for emergency, informational or other purposes.
Although  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  is  generally included in the scope of the strategies, the issue of cross-border  interdependencies  is  rarely  addressed  at  strategic  level.
Further  co- operation on this matter, which is addressed in the OECD Recommendation  on the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructures (2008), would be of  mutual interest.
More generally, cybersecurity policy making seems to be reaching a new  level of maturity as compared to previous policies rooted in the early 2000s,  with  stronger  leadership,  enhanced  visibility  within  governments,  better  co- ordination, and broader involvement of stakeholders.
A  further  challenge  is  the  need  to  preserve  the  openness  of  the  Internet  and  fundamental values, consistent with the 2011 Recommendation of the Council  on Principles for Internet Policy Making.
Finally, the lack of details as regards  the  various  measures  adopted,  the  lack  of  metrics  and  methodologies  for  assessing  their  efficiency,  the  rapid  pace  adopted  by  some  countries  in  the  revision of their new framework, among other factors, suggest that this new  age of cybersecurity policy making is still in its early days.
Refining and implementing these new policy packages will take time.
In  the meantime, a key challenge for governments is to be prepared to face a  possibly serious cyber incident, as envisaged in nearly all the strategies, in a  way that does not undermine the openness of the Internet.
As cybersecurity  policy develops, a key question will be whether and how governments make  the  protection  of  the  openness  of  the  Internet  an  integral  part  of  cyber- security.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 23   What should be the role of the OECD?
As noted above, cybersecurity strategies recognise international organi- sations  as  essential  for  the  improvement  of  international  co-operation  in  general.
They do not however provide much detail on the specific role that  each of these international organisations should play.
More generally, it is  unclear  at  this  stage  how  international  co-operation  on  cybersecurity  will  evolve in the mid to long term.
This includes, for example, the translation at  the international level of the domestic evolution towards holistic approaches  that bring together economic, social and sovereignty aspects.
The OECD started to analyse the impact of ICTs on the economy and  the society and to develop ICT-related policy instruments in the mid-1970s.
In  1980,  the OECD  adopted  the Privacy  Guidelines,  the  first  international  policy  instrument  to  address  ICT  policy  in  relation  to  trust  and  confidence.
Since the early 1990s, the OECD has accumulated a vast amount of expertise  in  security  of  information  systems  and  networks  and  other  related  areas  including electronic authentication, cryptography policy and the protection of  critical information infrastructures.
So far, the OECD’s approach to security in  the digital world has aimed to develop security policy frameworks that enable  ICTs and  the  Internet economy  to capture new sources  of growth, to  foster  innovation  and  to  enhance  social  well-being.
The  OECD’s  main  assets  as  reflected  in  the  2002  Security  Guidelines  (see  below)  are  its  capacity  to  develop  recommendations  based  on  high-level  flexible  policy  principles,  through a consensus-based process involving all stakeholders.
The first one is related to policies fostering the  development of a cybersecurity industry sector which would drive growth and  employment directly, in addition to, indirectly, sustaining trust in the Internet  economy (towards an “industrial cybersecurity policy”).
The second one is the  development  of  more  robust  and  internationally  comparable  cybersecurity  indicators, to better inform the cybersecurity policy making process as well as  the  market place, and would support  the development of cybersecurity as a  more robust economic sector.
© OECD 2012   24 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Detailed comparative analysis   In  2003  and  2004,  the  OECD  carried  out  a  survey  to  examine  how  governments undertook the implementation of the 2002 OECD Guidelines  for the Security of Information Systems and Networks: Towards a Culture  of  Security  (“Security  Guidelines”).
The  results  of  this  survey  highlighted  that almost all governments had finalised their national strategy for fostering  a culture of security (OECD, 2005).
Between 2009 and 2011, several countries  adopted  or  initiated  the  development  of  a  new  generation  of  strategies,  sometimes called “cybersecurity strategies”.
This detailed comparative analysis  explores the contextual elements that are driving the policy changes (rationale  and scope) and analyses key concepts of national cybersecurity strategies.
It  is followed by an analysis of the management structures and key aspects of  concrete plans of action for achieving strategic objectives.
The third section  reflects  some  of  the  considerations  highlighted  by  non-governmental  stake- holders  in  response  to  a  questionnaire  on  national  cybersecurity  strategies.
Rationale and scope   The development and adoption of new national cybersecurity strategies  is an emerging trend characterised by its dynamism.
Eight  of  the  ten  countries  which  volunteered  to  participate  in  this  comparative  exercise  have  adopted  a  new  cybersecurity  strategy.
Two  other  countries have initiated a process for adopting one in the short term (Finland,  Spain7) and a European Internet Security Strategy is planned for autumn 2012.8  Most participating countries which adopted a strategy between 2009 and  2010 are already in the process of reviewing it.
The United Kingdom which  adopted a cybersecurity strategy in 2009 released a new strategy in November  2011.
At the time of writing, the Australian 2009 Cyber Security Strategy was  in  the  course  of  being  updated  by  the  release  of  the  government’s  Cyber  White  Paper,  following  up  on  a  public  consultation  carried  out  in  autumn  2011.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 25   All  strategies  result  from  the  recognition  of  increased  cyber  risks,  i.e.
increased  cyber  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  potential  impact  on  the  economy and the society.
Sources, motivations, nature, organisation and sophistication of threats   are evolving...   States are emerging as new sources of threats in addition to individuals  and  groups  which  can  be  related  to  organised  criminality,  potentially  to  terrorism,  but  also  to  economic  and  commercial  interests.
Some  strategies  highlight  that criminals, terrorists, intelligence services and militaries benefit from the  borderless  nature  of  the  Internet  which  impedes  the  easy  attribution  of  malicious digital activities to specific individuals.
The nature of threats continues to include criminal activities such as theft  (of identity, personal data, secrets of all kind and financial assets), infringe- ment of intellectual property rights, denial of service, defacement and other  sources  of  disruption,  covering  breaches  of  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability.
However,  the  main  emerging  types  of  threats  are  large-scale  denial  of  service  attacks,  leakages  of  private  information,  cyberespionage  against  governments  and  critical  parts  of  business  and  industry,  and  the  disruption  of  critical  infrastructures.
Cyber- espionage, military operations, sabotage and deception operations are included  as  potential  threats  in  many  strategies.
Examples include  the 2007 massive attack on Estonian networks, the 2009 large scale denial of  service attacks against Korea and the United States, numerous sophisticated  cyberespionage  activities  targeting  numerous  governments,  regional  and  international  institutions  and  firms  operating  in  the  security  sector,  data  leakages affecting 77 and 35 million customers of respectively Sony and SK  Comms.
The  alleged  physical  disruption  of  the  Iranian  nuclear  enrichment  programme using the Stuxnet worm is sometimes highlighted as an important   © OECD 2012   26 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       turning  point  in  relation  to  the  protection  of  critical  infrastructures.
Finally,  the  UK  2011  cybersecurity  strategy  mentions  as  potential  threats  the  possibility  for  States  to  spread  disinformation  and  for  terrorists  to  spread  propaganda,  radicalise  potential  supporters,  raise  funds,  communicate and plan (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a).
The level of organisation of the major threat sources, whether individuals,  groups  or  States  has  significantly  increased.
Criminal  groups,  motivated  by  financial gain, export to the virtual world their real world organisational skills  in order to maximise the benefits from digital criminal activities.
Even isolated  individuals  have  developed  “loose  coalitions”  or  “decentralised  online  (e.g.
For  example  organised  criminal  groups  and  State  actors  have  become  capable  of  developing extremely innovative malicious software9 (malware) capable of  evading  advanced  detection  software.
They also recognise the constantly evolving nature  of  the  threat,  sometimes  making  a  parallel  with  bacteria  developing  drug  resistance to antibiotics11.
...  Countries’  vulnerability  and  reliance  on  ICTs  and  cyberspace  have increased to the point where cybersecurity becomes a national  priority.
Over the last ten years, the Internet evolved from a useful communication  tool for individuals and organisations to an essential digital infrastructure for  the economy and society as a whole.
This is illustrated by the dependence of  critical  infrastructures on information systems and networks,12 including for   © OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 27   example  distribution  of  food,  water,  energy,  telecommunications,  transport,  health  service,  the  financial  system  and  the  functioning  of  all  areas  of  government  including  emergency  services  and  the  military.
Strategies  recognise the estimated and potential losses for individuals and organisations  resulting from cyber threats, for example in terms of financial damages (e.g.
According to the United Kingdom, the reliance of the country’s interests  on  cyberspace  is  “far-reaching,  affecting  the  individual  citizen,  almost  all  aspects  of  government,  industry,  our  national  infrastructure,  transportation  and the way our economy operates” (UK Prime Minister, 2009).
For Spain,  much of the country’s stability and economic prosperity will depend on the  security of its cyberspace.
According to France, the current level of attacks  on information systems reveals a high potential for destabilisation of daily  life,  disruption  of  networks  that  are  critical  to  the  life  of  the  nation  and  denial of functioning of military capacity (French Government, 2008).
For  the  Canadian  Minister  of  Public  Safety,  Canada’s  increasing  reliance  on  cyber  technologies  makes  the  country  vulnerable  to  those  who  attack  its  digital infrastructure to undermine its national security, economic prosperity  and way of life (Government of Canada, 2010).
The United States stresses  that cyberspace provides a “platform for innovation and prosperity and the  means  to  improve  general  welfare  around  the  globe”  that  “touches  practically everything and everyone”.
Australia recognises that its national security, economic prosperity  and social wellbeing are critically dependent upon the availability, integrity  and confidentiality of a range of information and communications techno- logies (Australian Government, 2009).
The Netherlands notes  that  the  continuity  and  security  of  supply  are  essential  for  the  private  sector’s survival and for the society as a whole and that a breakdown could  lead to social disruption (Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, 2011).
© OECD 2012   28 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Cybersecurity  strategies  aim  at  two  interrelated  objectives:  protecting  the society against cyber threats as it becomes more reliant on cyber- space and  fostering  cybersecurity  as  essential for  the  further  develop- ment of the Internet economy.
While new strategies often result from a “national security” review...
In contrast with the previous generation of strategies in the early 2000s,  one of the key drivers for the development of new cybersecurity strategies is  related to “national security”.
For  example,  the  French  2010  strategy  on  “Defense  and  security  of  information systems” results from the adoption of a 2008 “White Book on  Defense and National Security” which aimed at developing a new holistic  national  security  strategy  taking  into  account  changes  in  the  global  environment since 1994.
The United Kingdom developed its 2009 strategy  as a result of a change in its approach to national security initiated in 2008.
The main driver for the development of the cybersecurity strategy was the  identification of the increasing importance of cyberspace in the life of the  United Kingdom and as one of the highest priorities for action in relation to  national  security.
After  the  adoption  of  the  strategy  and  the  change  of  government, both the National Security Strategy and the Strategic Defence  and  Security  Review  (SDSR)  addressed  cyber  security  risks  (2010).
The  2009  Australian  cybersecurity  strategy  was  preceded  by  an  “E-Security  National Agenda” announced in 2001 and reviewed in 2006.
As a result, the  strategy  starts  with  the  Australian  Prime  Minister’s  statement  that  cyber  security is now one of the country’s top tier national security priorities.
The  planned Spanish and Finnish cybersecurity strategies will result respectively  from the 2011 Spanish Security Strategy which includes a section on cyber- threats, and the 2010 Finnish National Security Strategy for Society.
In the early 2000s, cybersecurity policy making aimed to foster trust on  line  in  order  to  create  the  conditions  for  the  Internet  to  drive  prosperity,  growth and well being.
A decade later, governments are facing a different  situation: the Internet economy became a significant source of growth in its  own right and a platform for innovation that cuts across all other economic  sectors.
Large segments of the core fabric of the economy and society rely  on  the  Internet  and  related  ICTs.13  However,  the  Internet  did  not  succeed  because the infrastructure became more secure but rather despite its inherent  insecurity.
The  nature  of  technical  vulnerabilities  of  information  systems  interconnected  through  the  Internet  have  not  fundamentally  changed.
The  Internet continues to be “driven more by considerations of interoperability  and efficiency than security” (US White House, 2009).
What has changed is  that the society and the economy now rely on this fundamentally insecure   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 29   environment.
Thus addressing cybersecurity has become a national priority  for governments and requires a strategic approach focusing on the protection  of  the  society  as  a  whole  rather  than  only  on  the  individual  interests  of  specific participants considered separately.
This is the meaning of “national  security”  across  all  these  new  cybersecurity  strategies  and  it  represents  a  major  policy  evolution  from  the  mind-set  that  drove  the  adoption  of  the  2002 Security Guidelines and subsequent implementation frameworks.
... they also address cybersecurity as essential for the development   of the Internet economy.
It  would,  however,  be  misleading  to  conclude  that  these  countries  have  abandoned the economic and social objective of cybersecurity policy making.
Rather,  what  emerges  from  these  recent  strategies  is  the  dual  objective  of  fostering  cybersecurity  for  creating  the  conditions  for  a  prosperous  Internet  economy while protecting the society as a whole from cyber risks stemming  from increased reliance on cyberspace.
Managing the complexity of pursuing  this double objective can be seen as one of the main, if not the main, current  cybersecurity policy making challenges.
For  example,  the  German  strategy  aims  to  maintain  and  promote  economic  and  social  prosperity  and  stresses  that  ensuring  cybersecurity  has  turned into a central challenge for the state, business and society and a vital  question for the 21st century.
The Dutch strategy focuses on strengthening the  security  of  the  digital  society  in  order  to  give  individuals,  businesses  and  public bodies more confidence in the use of ICT while recognising that the  society’s growing dependence on ICT makes it vulnerable to the misuse and  disruption of ICT systems.
According to the Australian 2009 strategy the aim  of  the  government  is  to  maintain  a  secure,  resilient  and  trusted  electronic  operating  environment  that  supports  Australia’s  national  security  and  maxi- mises  the  benefits  of  the  digital  economy.
Confronting  and  managing  risks  “must be balanced against [...] the need to promote efficiency and innovation  to  ensure  that  Australia  realises  the  full  potential  of  the  digital  economy”.
The  2011  UK  Cybersecurity  Strategy  recognises that as the Internet drives economic growth and supports open and  strong  societies,  the  cost  of  cyber  incidents  for  businesses,  the  potential  reduction  in  trust  towards  online  communications  “can  now  cause  serious  economic and social harm to the UK” (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a).
The 2009  US Cyber Policy Review stresses that the country “faces the dual challenge of  maintaining  an  environment  that  promotes  efficiency,  innovation,  economic  prosperity and free trade while also promoting safety, security, civil liberties  and privacy rights.
It is the fundamental responsibility of our government to   © OECD 2012   30 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       address  strategic  vulnerabilities  in  cyberspace  and  ensure  that  the  US  and  the world realise the full potential of the information technology revolution”  (US White House, 2009).
Japan recognises the need to develop a safe and  secure use of  ICT to enable the use of  ICT to solve  the key challenges it  faces  such  as  economic  growth,  ageing  society  and  environmental  issues.
The aim of the strategy is to “guarantee the nation’s safety and security by  improving its ability to respond to all types of ICT threats, including cyber  attacks, to the world’s highest level, [...] as well as to build an environment  where  the  nation  can  actively  utilize  ICT  without  concerns  regarding  information security reliability”.
As a result of this context, the overall issue of cybersecurity is elevated  amongst  government  priorities  and  benefits  from  more  governmental  co- ordination.
The  first  objective  of  most  strategies  is  to  improve  the  organisation  of  the  government  to  address  cybersecurity  by  assigning clear responsibilities to various government bodies.
In some instances, the government carried out a consultation process with  the  private  sector,  for  example  interviews  and  workshops  (Netherlands) or via the Internet (Australia’s Cyber White Paper).
through   The concepts of “cybersecurity” and “cyberspace” are not used by all  countries.
However,  the  scope  of  most  strategies  generally  covers  all  information  systems  and  networks,  including  critical  information  infrastructures that are not connected to the Internet.
While some countries use concepts like “cybersecurity” and “cyberspace”,  others  continue  to  use  “security  of  information  systems”  (France)  and  “information security” (Japan) or a mix of cybersecurity and “safe and reliable  ICT” (Netherlands).
Some countries provide definitions  of cyberspace and  cybersecurity.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 31   The scope of the strategies generally includes all information systems,  both connected to the Internet or not, and in particular information systems  and  networks  that  support  critical  infrastructures.14  As  an  exception,  the  German strategy considers that IT systems in an isolated virtual space are  not part of cyberspace.
Key concepts    While cybersecurity strategies share common concepts...   Strategies generally lay out a narrative which varies across countries and  leads  to  the  introduction  of  various  key  objectives  and  concepts  (see  Annex IV).
Holistic / integrated / comprehensive approach supported by strong   leadership   There is a general agreement on the need for a more holistic approach to  cybersecurity  policy  making.
Comprehensiveness,  in  this  context,  means  in  general  the  inclusion  of  all  facets  of  the  problem,  such  as  for  example  economic, social, educational, legal, law enforcement, technical, diplomatic,  military, and intelligence-related aspects,  as well as all participants inside the  government  (see  below  government  co-ordination)  and  outside,  throughout  the  society  (including  businesses  and  individuals)  and  beyond,  with  foreign  partners.
For  example,  Australia  aims  to  develop  a  “government-led  coherent,  integrated approach” (Australian Government, 2009) and Germany stresses  that  “cybersecurity  must  be  based  on  a  comprehensive  approach”  and  requires a “high level of government commitment” (Federal Ministry of the  Interior, 2011).
The United  Kingdom  supports  a  “coherent  approach  to  cybersecurity  in  which  the  Government,  organisations  across  all  sectors,  the  public  and  international  partners all have a part to play” (United Kingdom).
While themes such as  the  protection  of  the  critical  information  infrastructure,  the  fight  against  cybercrime, the protection of information systems and networks, and others  are  still  relevant  and  can  be  identified  in  the  actions  outlined  in  the  strategies, they are now blended together in a holistic fashion under a single  umbrella  which  is  sometimes  tagged  with  a  specific  term  such  as  “cyber- security”  (Australia,  UK)  or  “cyberdefense”15  (France).
© OECD 2012   32 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Government co-ordination  The need for a holistic approach raises the challenge of government co- ordination  to  enable  many  government  agencies  to  work  together  in  a  coherent  manner,  avoid  duplication,  foster  synergies  and  pool  initiatives.
The  scope  of  government  co-ordination  is  very  broad,  from  the  economic  and  social  sectors  to  the  law  enforcement,  national  security,  intelligence,  military and diplomatic sectors.
To address this challenge, strategies assign  clear  cybersecurity  co-ordination  responsibilities  to  existing  or  new  management  structures  (see  below,  management  structures)  at  policy  and  operational levels.
Public-Private Partnerships  Most strategies recognise that cyberspace is largely owned and operated  by  the  private  sector  and  that  policies  should  be  based  on  public-private  partnerships,  which  may  include  business,  civil  society  and  the  academia.
The  UK  2009  Strategy  recognises that the success of the National Cyber Security Programme (EUR  777 million over 4 years17) depends on the critical role that the private sector  has to play and should be based on “a genuine partnership where policy is  co-designed  so  that  a  credible  national  response  can  be  delivered”  (UK  Prime Minister, 2010a).
Japan highlights that “the role of public and private  sectors  must  be  clearly  identified  in  the  course  of  building  an  alliance  between  the  two  sectors”  (Japanese  Information  Security  Policy  Council,  2010).
The Dutch strategy notes that public-private partnerships should be  based  on  mutual  trust,  considering  both  sides  as  equal  partners,  enabling  gains  for  every  party  and  following  co-operation  models  with  clearly  defined  tasks,  responsibilities,  powers  and  guarantees  (Dutch  Ministry  of  Security and Justice, 2011).
International co-operation    ?
Most strategies also stress the importance of the international dimension  of cybersecurity and the need for better alliances and partnerships with like- minded  countries  or  allies,  including  capacity  building  of  less  developed  countries.
Most  countries  however  provide  little  detail  on  how  to  achieve  international  objectives,  except  for  the  United  States  which  developed  a   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 33   specific international strategy for cyberspace and the United Kingdom which  initiated an international dialogue at the London Conference on Cyberspace in  November 2011.
Australia  promotes  an  “active  international  engagement”  based  on  an  “active,  multilayered  approach  to  international  engagement  on  cyber  security”  (Australian  Government,  2009).
Canada  stresses  international  collaboration  as  essential  to  secure  cyberspace  and  the benefit  from  being  seen  internationally  and  domestically  as  a  trusted  partner  in  making  cyberspace safer.
It supports international efforts to develop and implement  a global cyber governance regime that will enhance security.
The Canadian  government plans  to develop a cybersecurity foreign policy.
The develop- ment  of  international  co-operation  is  one  of  the  main  objectives  of  the  French national strategy.
Japan stresses that international alliances must be  reinforced  as  “unprecedented  borderless  incidents  are  now  more  likely  to  occur”  (Japanese  Information  Security  Policy  Council,  2010).
The  US  International Strategy for Cyberspace in 2011 aims to “unify [its] engage- ment  with  international  partners  on  the  full  range  of  cyber  issues”  and  provides  “the  context  for  [its]  partners  at  home  and  abroad  to  understand  [its] priorities and how [they] can come together to preserve the character of  cyberspace  and  reduce  the  threats  [they]  face”  (US  White  House,  2011a).
The United  Kingdom  took  the  lead  in  a  multilateral  dialogue  with  the  2011  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace  and  promotes  the  adoption  of  international  norms of behaviour in cyberspace (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a; UK Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  2011).
Most strategies also mention the role of international organisations but  they provide little detail as to the role that each organisation plays or should  play and how to ensure consistency across them.
In general, they mention  the Council of Europe, the G8, the Internet Governance Forum, the OECD,  the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and the  United  Nations.
The  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation  (NATO)  is  also  mentioned by several countries with respect to cybersecurity in the military  context (Canada, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Spain, United Kingdom).
Spain  and  Germany indicate a possible extension of the role of the European Network  and Information Security Agency (ENISA).
© OECD 2012   34 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Fundamental values  Finally,  consistent  with  the  Security  Guidelines  (Democracy  principle),  most strategies recognise the respect of fundamental values such as freedom  of expression, privacy protection and the free flow of information as essential.
The Dutch strategy calls for proportionate measures based on risk assessment  taking  into  account  the  balance  between  the  desire  for  security  and  the  protection of fundamental rights.
The UK 2011 strategy stresses that actions to  strengthen  national  security  must  be  consistent  with  obligations  such  as  freedom of expression, the right to seek, receive and impart ideas, the right to  privacy and the commitment to uphold civil liberties.
The international norms  of  behaviour  in  cyberspace  proposed  by  the  UK  Foreign  Secretary  include  fundamental  values.
The planned Australian Cyber White Paper also includes  the  idea  that  issues  in  the  online  world  should  be  dealt  with  in  a  manner  consistent with similar issues off line.
that  behaviour  which   ... some concepts are specific to some countries, such as the economic  aspects  of  cybersecurity,  the  need  for  dynamic  policies  and  the  emergence of “sovereignty” considerations.
Countries place a variable emphasis on economic aspects of cybersecurity  in  their  strategies:  some  countries  make  a  reference  to  information  security  (and  privacy)  in  their  economic  growth  strategy  (Japanese  Cabinet  Office,  2010),18  some  develop  a  specific  strategic  document  dedicated  to  economic  aspects (US Department of Commerce, 2011) and others consider economic  measures as part of the main actions to be taken by the government (Australia,  France, United Kingdom).
Interestingly, the UK 2011 strategy aims to enable  the promotion of the country as a good place to do business in cyberspace,  thus developing a competitive advantage for the country in cyberspace (UK  Cabinet Office, 2011a, UK National Security Review, 2010).
A similar idea  can  be  found  in  the  Spanish  Security  Strategy  according  to  which  the  development  of  a  safe  cyberspace  can  give  Spain  a  competitive  edge  (Gobierno de España, 2011).
In some cases, strategies underline the need to  maintain  or  develop  technological  independence  or  sovereignty  in  core  strategic IT competences (Germany, Spain).
Some  countries  recognise  the  need  for  policies  tailored  to  a  dynamic  environment,  for  more  rapid,  flexible,  and  agile  government  cybersecurity  policy  making  and  implementation  mechanisms.
The  United  Kingdom  promotes a “flexible cyber security response” (UK SDSR).
Japan supports  policies adapted to technical innovation, active rather than passive security   © OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 35   measures, encouraging methodologies such as the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle  approach and other methods that enable to actively implement new measures  (Japanese Information Policy Council, 2010).
The  2002  Security  Guidelines  responded  to  the  challenge  of  generalised  interconnectedness  creating  an  ever  changing  and  instable  IT  environment  by  recognising  the  need  for  dynamic  security  concepts  (risk  assessment, reassessment, shared responsibility, awareness, response, etc.).
However,  they  did  not  address  how  to  develop  and  implement  dynamic  policies to support these concepts.
Further, countries are now faced with the  need to dynamically manage cybersecurity as a problem of national scale.
national  security,  intelligence, defence and the military) in the sphere of information systems  and networks policy  making is probably the  most striking consequence of  countries considering the interests of society as a whole in addition to each  participant  separately.
While  sovereignty  considerations  and  sovereignty  government bodies have never been completely absent from the IT sphere,20  they did not appear specifically in cybersecurity policy making in the past.
For  example, the US DoD strategy is included in the holistic approach adopted  by the US Government to address cybersecurity21 and the US International  Strategy  for  Cyberspace  includes  a  “Defense  objective”  and  a  military  policy priority (US White House, 2011, p. 12 and 20).
The UK 2009 strategy briefly discusses this aspect and “recognises  the need to develop military and civil capabilities, both nationally and with  allies,  to  ensure  we  can  defend  against  attack,  and  take  steps  against  adversaries  where  necessary”.
The  German  strategy  also  includes  the  military  dimension  of  cybersecurity  but  makes  a  clear  distinction  with  civilian  cybersecurity.22  The  emergence  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  related  government  agencies  play  a  role  both  in  the  cybersecurity  policy  making  process as well as at the operational level (see below).
© OECD 2012   36 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  strategies  are  consistent  with  the  principles  of  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines  but  they  do  not  mention  them.
Nevertheless,  they  introduce the concept of business continuity (or resilience) and real time  management which are not as such in the Guidelines ...
The 2002 Security Guidelines provided nine principles to create a general  frame of reference for participants to understand security issues and respect  ethical values in the development and implementation of coherent policies for  the security of information systems and networks.
Although national strategies  never mention the OECD Security Guidelines, they all reflect their principles.
In addition, many strategies highlight “resilience” of information systems  and  networks  as  a  key  strategic  concept  which  is  absent  from  the  Security  Guidelines.
As  such,  it  is  consistent  with  the  Guidelines  which  introduced  risk  management  as  a  fundamental  approach  for  the  security  of  information systems and networks.
Resilience is related to several principles  of  the  Security  Guidelines,  such  as  Response  (3),  Risk  Assessment  (6),  Security  Design  and  Implementation  (7)  and  Security  Management  (8).
Similarly,  while  the  Security  Guidelines  focus  on  timeliness  of  Response,  action  plans  introduced  with  several  strategies  emphasise  the  need  for  real  time operational management based on situational awareness (see below).
Management structures and actions plans   Most  strategies  include  plans  that  identify  organisational  decisions  and  priority actions, generally described at a high level of generality.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 37   All strategies establish stronger government co-ordination mechanisms  and  most  highlight  leadership  as  a  key  factor.
Most strategies aim to improve the public administration’s organisation  and  co-ordination  to  address  cybersecurity.
“Cybersecurity Czar” reporting to the White House), to a specific agency for  cybersecurity attached to a co-ordination body (e.g.
Some countries also created a specific body for public-private co- ordination  and  to  provide  advice  to  the  government  regarding  how  to  balance  cybersecurity,  economic  objectives  and  fundamental  values  (e.g.
Dutch and German National Cyber Security Councils).
In  Australia,  policy  development  is  led  by  the  Cyber  Policy  Coordinator/National  Chief  Information  Officer  within  the  Department of the Prime Minister and Cabine,t24 under the National  Security Advisor.
A guiding principle is that the scale and complexity  of  the  cybersecurity  challenge  requires  strong  national  leadership  from  a  number  of  agencies  including  the  Attorney-General’s  Department,  which  chairs  the  Cyber  Security  Policy  Committee25  on which operational agencies are represented.
At operational level,  the 2009 Cybersecurity strategy established a new government CERT  (CERT Australia) and the Australian Defence White Paper created the  Cyber Security Operation Center (CSOC) to provide the government  with all-source cyber situational awareness and an enhanced ability to  facilitate operational responses to events of national importance.
Public  Safety  Canada  is  responsible  for  the  co-ordination  of  the  implementation  of  the  Canadian  strategy  and  for  designing  an  approach to reporting on this implementation.
It is also in charge of  public  cybersecurity  awareness.
Within  Public  Safety  Canada,  the   © OECD 2012   38 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre monitors the cyber threat  environment,  provides  mitigation  advice  on  cyber  threats  and  co- ordinates the national response to cyber security incidents, focusing on  critical  infrastructures.
Several  other  agencies  are  involved,  including  Industry  Canada  as  regards  the  digital  economy  strategy  to  create  a  safer  and  trusted  online  marketplace,  Treasury  Board  Secretariat  for  government cybersecurity, intelligence and cryptography agencies, the  Department of Justice with respect to cybersecurity legislation, Foreign  Affairs and International Trade Canada in relation to the international  dimension of cybersecurity.
The Department of National Defense and  the Canadian Forces are involved as regards the security of their own  networks, information sharing with other departments and relationships  with foreign military allies.
In Finland, while the government has not yet adopted a comprehensive  cybersecurity strategy, it has nevertheless assigned responsibility to the  Ministry of Finance’s Government Information Security Management  Board (VAHTI) for co-ordination with respect to cybersecurity within  the government.
France  created  a  national  authority  for  the  security  of  information  systems,  the  National  Agency  for  the  Security  of  Information  Systems  (ANSSI),  attached  to  the  Secretary  General  of  Defense  and  National  Security  (SGDSN)  who  reports  to  the  Prime  Minister.26  ANSSI  is  an  interagency  coordinator  of  governmental  action  and  its  missions  include  providing  secure  interagency  means  of  communi- cations, inspecting government systems, acting as a government CERT,  providing certification for systems protecting state secrets, acting as an  international point of contact and providing training.27    ?
The  development  of  the  German  strategy  was  led  by  the  Federal  Ministry of  the  Interior  in co-operation  with other  ministries and in  particular the  Foreign Office and Ministries of Defence, Economics  and Justice.
According to the strategy, the government has established  a  National  Cyber  Response  Centre  to  optimise  operational  co- operation within the government and co-ordination of protection and  response measures to IT incidents.
The Federal Office for Information  Security (BSI) is responsible for the Centre.
Other authorities  like   the  Federal  Office  for  the  Protection  of  the  Constitution  (BfV)  and  Federal Office of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (BKK), the  Federal  Criminal  Police  Office  (BKA),  the  Federal  Police  (BPOL),  the  Customs  Criminological  Office  (ZKA),  the  Federal  Intelligence  Service (BND), the military (Bundeswehr) and authorities supervising  critical  infrastructure  operators  are    co-operating  directly  with  each   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 39   other in this centre within the framework of their statutory tasks and  power.
The  Centre  will  inform  directly  the  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior  in  case  of  a  crisis.
In  addition,  a  National  Cyber  Security  Council  has  been  established  to  strengthen  cooperation  within  the  government and with the private sector and provide recommendations  at high political levels on strategic issues.
The Council is under the  responsibility of the Federal Government Commissioner for Informa- tion  Technology  (BfIT)  and  comprises  representatives  from  the  Federal  Chancellery  and  State  Secretaries  from  the  Foreign  Office,  Ministries  of  the  Interior,  Defence,  Economics  and  Technology,  Justice,  Finance,  Education  and  Research,  and  representatives  from  the  federal  Länder  (regions).
It  also  includes  representatives  from  business as associated members and the academia, as appropriate.
The  National Cyber Response Centre will submit recommendations to the  National Cyber Security Council.
Japan places some focus on the need to “establish an organisational  systems to implement a comprehensive policy under strong leader- ship  through  an  alliance  of  the  concerned  government  agencies  centred around the Cabinet Secretariat”.
The  Dutch  government  assigned  co-ordination  and  coherence  responsibility to the Ministry of Security and Justice and promotes a  network-centred form of collaboration.
It created a National Cyber  Security Center with a strategic and implementation responsibility,  incorporating the current GOVCERT.NL, to provide expertise and  advice,  support  and  execute  response  during  incidents,  enhance  crisis  management.
It  also  includes  the  ICT  Response  Board,  a  public-private  partnership  that  gives  advice  on  how  to  counteract  major  ICT  disruptions  to  decision-making  organisations.
It  also  created  a  National Cyber Security Council with representatives from public  and  private  sectors  as  well  as  the  academia  to  help  improve  the  understanding  of  cyber  security  developments  and  help  parties  deal  with incidents and make decisions in crisis.
The UK established an Office of Cyber Security (OCS) subsequently  renamed  Office  of  Cyber  Security  and  Information  Assurance  (OCSIA)  in  the  Cabinet  Office28  to  provide  strategic  leadership  for  and  coherence  across  the  government.
OCSIA  delivered  the  cyber- security  strategy.
Its  missions  include  providing  strategic  direction,  supporting  education,  awareness  and  training,  working  with  the   © OECD 2012   40 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       private  sector,  working  with  the  Office  of  the  Government  Chief  Information  Office  (OGCIO)  to  ensure  resilience  and  security  of  government infrastructures, engaging with international partners.
The  2009  Cyber  Security  Strategy  also  created  a  Cyber  Security  Operations  Centre  (CSOC)  to  actively  monitor  the  health  of  cyberspace,  provide  collective  situational  awareness,  enable  better  understanding of attacks against UK networks and users, co-ordinate  incident response and provide better advice and information about the  risks to business and the public.
It is a multi-agency body hosted by  Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in Cheltenham,  alongside  GCHQ’s  Information  Assurance  arm,  Communications  Electronics Security Group (CESG).
The US Cyber Policy Review focused on the lack of organisation of  its  administration  and  on  improving  the  distribution  of  responsi- bilities  for  cybersecurity  and  decision  authority  to  direct  action  across the government.
Cybersecurity was designated as one of the  President’s  key  management  priorities.
A  cybersecurity  co- ordinator  was  appointed  and  the  Cybersecurity  Office  was  created  within  the  National  Security  Staff  at  the  White  House,  working  closely with the Federal Chief Information Officer and the National  Economic  Council.
The  Cyber  Policy  review  included  several  organisational actions, such as the designation of a privacy and civil  liberties  official  to  the  National  Security  Council  Cybersecurity  Directorate and the establishment of a formal interagency process.
“Sovereignty  agencies”  play  an  operational  role  for  cybersecurity  in  most countries.
Among  the  various  agencies  involved  in  their  implementation,  most  strategies assign an operational role to agencies with sovereignty responsi- bility  such  as  ministries  of  defence  and  agencies  in  charge  of  intelligence  and other “national security” missions.
These include agencies in charge of  cryptography  expertise  (e.g.
Communications  Security  Establishment  Canada),  civilian  and/or  military  intelligence  services  (e.g.
Canadian  Security  Intelligence  Service,  Dutch  General  Intelligence  and  Security  Service (AIVD) and Military Intelligence and Security Service (MIVD), the  UK  GCHQ.
In the 2011 UK strategy, the overall budget for the four-year National Cyber  Security Programme includes shares for the Signal Intelligence Account and  Ministry of Defence which are recognised, in the strategy, as having a strong  role in improving the understanding of and reducing the vulnerabilities and  threats the country faces in cyberspace.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 41   Cybersecurity strategies strengthen priorities identified in 2003-2004 ...   All  strategies  reinforce  areas  of  priority  that  were  defined  in  the  first  generation of strategies for the security of information systems and networks  (see OECD, 2005).
Enhancing government security and protecting Critical Information   Infrastructures (CII)    These  two  areas  highlighted  in  2004  as  key  drivers  supporting  the  development  of  a  culture  of  security  are  generally  reinforced  in  2012.
All countries  include a large range of new measures for better securing  government  systems,  ranging  from  fostering  the  use  of  cryptography  and  ensuring  autonomy  in  this  area,  to  rationalising  government  networks,  improving  the  resilience  of  government  systems,    developing  labelling  schemes, promoting strong authentication for civil servants, developing attack  detection/prevention  capacity,  multiplying  Chief  Information  Security  Officers,  promoting  standards  and  the  use  of  audit,  requiring  business  continuity plans, establishing procurement requirements, raising awareness of  civil  servants  and  developing  viable  career  paths  for  security  experts,  etc.
The UK stresses the importance of cybersecurity in  the context of its Government Cloud Strategy (UK Cabinet Office, 2011a and  2011b).
In  many  cases,  countries  consider  the  protection  of  government  systems and networks as part of the protection of critical infrastructures.
The  protection  of  CII  is  generally  part  of  the  cybersecurity  strategies  although countries generally have specific policy documents to address this  challenge.
Some  strategies  stress  the  need  to  better  integrate  CII  manage- ment  structures  with  other  cybersecurity  structures  as  an  objective  (Netherlands).
Measures  for  the  protection  of  CII  vary  depending  on  the  level of advancement of each country in that area and are generally based on  public-private  co-operation.
They  include  preparatory  measures  such  as  cybersecurity  incident  response  plans  and  improved  crisis  management  plans,  the  development  of  business  continuity  arrangements,  the  organi- sation  of  exercises,  the  creation  of  a  rapid  response  capacity  with  inter- national  reach,  the  improved  co-ordination  of  and  information  sharing  amongst the various players (e.g.
),  the  development  of  legal  frameworks,  international  alliances, the promotion of standards and the organisation of audits.
© OECD 2012   42 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Enhancing the fight against cybercrime  As  regards  cybercrime,  most  countries  focus  their  efforts  on  the  development of their law enforcement capacity.
Some countries highlight the  need  to  improve  their  legal  framework  (Canada,  France,  Japan,  United  Kingdom),  to  reinforce  international  co-operation  (France,  Germany,  Japan)  and  regionally  harmonise  criminal  law  (Spain).
The  United  Kingdom  developed  a  dedicated  cybercrime  strategy  in  2010  which  describes  the  current cybercrime situation, provides a vision, and details how the govern- ment  will  achieve  its  objectives  (UK  Home  Office,  2010).29  Cybersecurity  strategies include various  measures such as strengthening existing high-tech  crime  units,  training  law  enforcement  staff,  involving  non-law  enforcement  experts in police cyber investigations (e.g.
Canada will establish a centralised   Cyber  Crime  Fusion  Centre  to  respond  to  requests  from  the  Cyber  Incident  Response  Centre  regarding  cyber  attacks  against  Government  or  Canada’s  critical  infrastructure  (Government  of  Canada,  2010).
Germany  will  create  a  joint  institution  with  industry  and  law  enforcement  agencies  to  exchange  know- how  (Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  2011).
Most  countries  support  the  Budapest Convention on Cybercrime and some indicate possible examination  of  the  need  for  further  international  legislation  in  his  area  (Germany,  Netherlands).
Awareness raising  initiatives generally focus on the general population, including specific targets  such as children (Australia, Spain, United Kingdom), and on businesses and  government  bodies,  including  specific  targets  such  as  decision  makers,  and  critical  infrastructures.
Education  efforts  towards  the  general  population  include,  for  example,  cyber  hygiene  education  in  schools  at  all  levels  (Netherlands),  using  social  media  (United  Kingdom),  through  partnerships  with  ISPs  (see  below),  via  the  possible  establishment  of  an  “information  security  support  service”  (Japan).
The  United  Kingdom  supports  the  development  of  market  differentiators,  including  certified  safety  labels  for  products  and  services,  and  industry-led  standards  and  guidance.
The  Netherlands  established  a  cyber  security  education  and  training  centre.
Australia  supports  the  concept  of  responsible  digital  citizenship  based  on  digital literacy and awareness to exploit online opportunities and effectively  mitigate cyber risks.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 43   In contrast with 2004, the lack of a cybersecurity workforce is identified  as a key policy challenge by governments.
The  UK  strategy  recognises  the  need  to  better  understand  the  demand  for  cyber  security  skills  across  the  private  sector.
Several countries promote the development of viable career paths.
The United  Kingdom  aims  to  encourage  the  development  of  a  community  of  “ethical  hackers”.
Measures  include,  for  example,  establishing  programmes  of  certified  specialist  training  (Netherlands,  United  Kingdom),  supporting  a  Cyber  Security  Challenge30,  strengthening  postgraduate  education  and  developing a coherent cross-sector research agenda to strengthen the academic  base (United Kingdom).
Research and Development  Research  and  Development  which  was  identified  as  an  area  of  lower  attention  in  2004  is  featured  prominently  in  current  strategies.
The most significant effort is  the publication by the US White House in December 2011 of its Strategic  Plan  for  Federal  Cybersecurity  Research  and  Development  Program.
The  strategy  aims  to  induce  change  by  understanding  the  root  causes  of  cybersecurity  deficiencies  rather  than  just  addressing  symptoms,  develop  scientific foundations for security by stimulating research in areas such as  biology,  economics  and  other  social  sciences,  maximise  research  impact  through co-ordination and collaboration of agencies across the government  and accelerate transition to practice.
Develop a “situational awareness” capacity: all strategies aim to  enhance  their  ability  to  collect  real-time  information  about  online  threats.
This  aspect  of  the  strategies  is  sometimes  related  to  the  development of a cyber intelligence capability.
Develop  an  industrial  policy  for  cybersecurity  (France,  United  Kingdom,  United  States).
For  example,  France  aims  to  support  innovative SMEs in the security sector.
The US DoD “will promote  opportunities  for  SMEs  and  work  with  entrepreneurs  in  Silicon  Valley  and  other  US  technology  innovation  hubs  [...]”.
Several  strategies  include  leveraging  public  procurement  to  help  cyber  security  SMEs.
The  UK  2011  strategy  calls  for  exploring  how  GCHQ’s expertise can more directly benefit economic growth and   © OECD 2012   44 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       support  the  development  of  the  UK  cyber  security  sector  without  compromising  its  mission.
Initiatives  could  include  commercial  exploitation  of  GCHQ  expertise,  partnerships  with  various  players  to foster cybersecurity innovation, and government-sponsored venture  capital  model  to  unlock  cybersecurity  innovation  in  SMEs.
Spain  highlights  the  need  to  support  the  development  of  private  national  companies  in  this  strategic  sector  “where  reliance  on  foreign  firms  could be dangerous”.
Specifically  address  key  business  players or  sectors:  the  United  Kingdom and the United States call for specific measures to better  protect  businesses  that  are  not  part  of  the  national  critical  infrastructure but which nevertheless represent important economic  assets for the country.
The  United  States  developed  the  concept  of  an  “Internet  and  Information Innovation Sector (I3S)” which includes functions and  services that create or utilise the Internet or networking services and  have large potential for growth, entrepreneurship and vitalization of  the  economy  but  would  fall  outside  of  CI  as  defined  by  the  government  (US  Department  of  Commerce,  2011).
A  nationally  recognised approach would be developed to minimise vulnerabilities  in  this  sector,  including  through  the  development  of  codes  of  conduct,  promotion  of  standards,  of  automation  in  security  and  through improved security assurance.
Incentives would be leveraged  to help I3S combat cyber threats, call for education and research and  international co-operation.
The  United  Kingdom  established  a  “cybersecurity  hub”  gathering  largest companies from all sectors where the threat to revenues and  intellectual  property  is  capable  of  causing  significant  economic  damage  to  the  United  Kingdom.
This  public/private  hub  aims  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  actionable  information  on  threats  and  strengthen  response  to  incidents,  analyse  new  trends,  and  work  to  strengthen collective cybersecurity capabilities (UK Cabinet Office,  2011a, 4.20).
In another initiative, the British government addresses  specifically the retail sector through the creation of a Retail Cyber  Security  Forum  to  establish  effective  reporting  and  information  sharing.31    ?
Germany created a task force to address specifically IT security in  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the Interior, 2011).
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 45   ?
Foster  partnerships  with  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs):  where,  for  example,  ISPs  inform  their  customers  when  their  equipment is identified as taking part in a botnet and take action to  assist them in solving the problem.
Germany,  which  also  adopted  a  similar  initiative,  stresses  the  possibility  for  providers  to  assume  greater  responsibility  including making available to users a basic collection of appropriate  security  products  and  services  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 2011).
Initiatives include the development of market differentiators such as  certified  cyber  security  labels  (see  above)  and  the  possibility  to  develop  a  cyber  insurance  market  (US  Department  of  Commerce,  2011).
The  UK  Department  for  Business,  Innovation  and  Skills  (BIS)  will  hold  a  strategic  summit  with  professional  business  services  providers  including  insurers,  lawyers  and  auditors  to  discuss how they can develop the services they offer to business to  help them manage and reduce risks.32 Several countries support the  mandatory  notification  of  breach  of  personal  data  and  reporting  mechanisms for data leakages in critical sectors (e.g.
Develop  digital   identity  frameworks:  Spain   is  rolling  out  electronic  identification  documents  to  its  population  through  an  ambitious  digital  identity  plan.
The  development  of  a  strategy  to  foster  stronger  digital  identity  is  part  of  the  US  strategic  package  (US  White  House,  2011b.
The  German  strategy  stresses  the  provision  of  basic  security  functions  by  the  state,  such  as  electronic  proof  of  identity  or  certified  e-mail34  (German Federal Ministry of the Interior, 2011).
The UK National  Cyber Security Programme includes funding for the development of  a trusted and resilient approach to identity assurance (UK Cabinet  Office, 2011a, 4.18).
© OECD 2012   46 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Carry  out  cyber  security  exercises  to  enhance  incident  response  co-ordination, including across borders (Japan, Netherlands, Spain,  and United States)   ?
Address concerns related to the security of supply chains (Canada,   Unites States).
Develop  a  cyberdefense  military  capacity:  the  protection  of  military  networks  and  the  development  of  an  offensive  cyber  capacity is mentioned by some cybersecurity strategies but without  much detail (France, United Kingdom, United States).
The German  strategy  makes  a  clear  distinction  between  civilian  and  military  cybersecurity which focus respectively on IT systems in use in the  civilian and military German cyberspace.
All  countries  support  the  establishment  of  stronger  international  mechanisms.
International  co-operation  was  considered  as  important  in  2004  but  limited  to  the  sharing  of  best  practices  and  guidance.
All  countries’  strategies  now  emphasise  the  need  to  reinforce  international  co-operation.
International co-operation results from the inherently transnational nature of  the Internet and some strategies recognise that they rely on partnerships with  third  countries  for  some  aspects  and  express  willingness  to  assist  foreign  partners where possible.
The need for stronger international efforts is highlighted regarding  various aspects:    ?
Participating in discussions carried out in international and regional   organisations (see Annex I).
Developing  internationally  recognised  norms  of  behaviour  for  cyberspace (Australia, United Kingdom) or a code for state conduct  in cyberspace (Germany), including confidence building measures.
Organising/participating in international cybersecurity exercises.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 47   ?
Developing  a  capacity  to  assist  other  countries  in  case  of  crisis  (France) and help them to build the components of a cybersecurity  framework (Japan, United Kingdom, United States).
In several instances, the international dimension of strategies addresses  problems  which  extend  beyond  the  economic  and  social  impact  of  cyberspace such as the prevention of armed conflict, through, for example,  confidence-building measures.
Considerations highlighted by non-governmental stakeholders   This  section  introduces  some  of  the  considerations  and  suggestions  expressed by the business, civil society, and the Internet technical community  in their response to a questionnaire circulated in January 2011 (cf.
While  non-governmental  stakeholders’  responses  reflect  variations  as  regards priority areas of concern, they exhibit the following strong points of  convergence: i) multistakeholder collaboration and co-operation are the best  means  the  fundamentally global, open and interoperable nature of the Internet; ii) policy  options must be flexible enough to accommodate the dynamic nature of the  Internet;  iii)  more  robust  evidence-based  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  needed, an area which is generally not covered by cybersecurity strategies.
to  develop  effective  cybersecurity  policy   that   respects   Non-governmental stakeholders share some concerns with respect to the  emergence  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  and  stress  the  importance  of  enhanced  multistakeholder  dialogue  to  overcome  these  challenges.
Business  recognises  that  the  divide  between  national  security  and  economic  security  is  increasingly  blurred,  in  particular  as  more  critical  infrastructures are owned by the private sector.
It stresses that in exercising  their  sovereignty  competencies,  governments  may  adopt  cybersecurity  policies which impact economic security and private sector systems as well as  create burdens on business.
Greater emphasis on enhanced consultation and  co-operation  with  business  could  help  governments  find  the  appropriate  balance between sovereignty and economic and social cybersecurity.
Civil  society  also  recognises  this  increasingly  blurred  divide  and  is  concerned that the emergence of sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity  reduces its participation in the policy making process.
This could for example  result  from  the  involvement  and  lobbying  of  the  security  industry  and  law  enforcement,  opaque  policy  processes,  strong  military  and  intelligence  interests,  public-private  partnerships  modelled  on  traditional  intelligence   © OECD 2012   48 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       communities rather than Internet governance ones, and finally state-to-state  interactions taking place in closed settings.
Another concern is that the lack of  specificity  of  the  term  “cybersecurity”  in  conjunction  with  the  emergence  of  sovereignty considerations in cybersecurity policy making may lead to re-couch  all  cybersecurity  issues  into  the  language  of  “national  security”  and  warfare,  preventing  balanced  policy  making  and  fostering  the  adoption  of  drastic  solutions such as network monitoring instead of other practical solutions more  respectful  of  citizens’  rights.
Discussions  related  to  the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  might  influence  broader  cybersecurity  debates  towards  national  security  thereby  justifying  sweeping  unaccountable  powers.
Finally,  the  extension  of  state  rivalries  in  cyberspace  is  pointed  out  by  civil  society  as  creating  one  of  the  chief  security  threats  on  line,  for  example  by  increasing the market demand for exploits and threats which can proliferate into  the civilian economy.
To  limit  possible  challenges  raised  by  the  blurred  divide  between  sovereignty and economic and social considerations, the civil society suggests  that  policy  initiatives  target  specific  and  narrowly  defined  tangible  and  demonstrable harms in order to prevent an overarching security blanket which  would  suffocate  the  very  society  it  seeks  to  protect.
This  suggestion  could  enable better informed decision making and balancing of the expected security  benefits with the possible impact on fundamental rights.
It could be viewed as a  proposed “Transparency” principle for cybersecurity policy making, building on  the risk approach called for in the Security Guidelines (see OECD, 2012b).
The  civil  society  also  proposes  that  the  impact  on  fundamental  rights  of  each  cybersecurity initiative be assessed so as to enable more informed discussions.
It  also suggests the adoption of a sunset clause for cybersecurity strategies to avoid  policies proportionate to the risks when initially adopted ultimately threatening  fundamental rights as technology evolves.
Such a measure would also ensure  that strategies are reviewed regularly.
Recognising that the protection of children on line is a very important  shared objective, the Internet technical community stresses that it should not  be misused as a justification for cybersecurity measures that are contrary to  an open Internet.
The civil society highlights that legal provisions to enhance cybersecurity  can in some countries interfere with legitimate cybersecurity research and deter  further R&D and investments in this area.
It proposes that an assessment of the  consistency  of  cybersecurity  measures  would  help  prevent  such  counter- productive  situations.
The  civil  society  also  encourages  fact-based  decision  making as a central element of the cybersecurity discussion, while recognising  that transparency of risk-related data raises real challenges for the private sector,  which faces many disincentives to reveal this type of information, as well as for  national security agencies which do not generally operate in full transparency   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 49   mode.
To cope with  these challenges,  it suggests  that governments disclose  metrics regarding risks faced by their own systems and networks rather than  relying  on  external  sources  of  information  sometimes  linked  to  the  cyber- security  industry.
Breach  notification  requirements  put  forward  by  several  strategies  are  mentioned  as  another  source  of  data.
The  Internet  technical  community  highlights  the  need  to  develop  a  standard,  unified  and  privacy- respecting  method to collect, analyse and report data breaches at the global  level in order to provide industry and governments with a better understanding  of cybersecurity threats.
Data could also result from other measures such as  the guidance adopted by the US Securities and Exchange Commission in 2011  regarding  disclosure  obligations  relating  to  cybersecurity  risks  and  cyber  incidents.
The  need  to  address  the  international  dimension  of  cybersecurity  in  relation to trade and innovation is a key concern for the Internet technical  community and for business.
The Internet technical community expressed the  view  that  approaches  that  increase  technical  barriers  to  trade  in  ICT  infra- structure  equipment  and  end  user  devices  risk  balkanising  the  Internet  into  different markets with different technical regulation.
For businesses, which  often  operate  globally  and  face  a  variety  of  specific  approaches  to  both  economic and sovereignty cybersecurity, coherence of cybersecurity policies  at  international  level  is  essential.
Although  differences  between  national  cybersecurity approaches are inevitable, they should allow for the deployment  of global cost-effective industry solutions.
Thus unilateral requirements to use  local  standards or  technologies, unnecessary  or  redundant documentation or  certifications requirements, as well as interferences in the global value chain  create complex challenges.
The adoption by third countries of specific require- ments may intentionally or inadvertently compromise overall cybersecurity; it  can also severely increase cost, limit functionality and constrain innovation, as  well as impair trade or skew a level playing field by hindering the ability of  companies  and  organisations  to  roll  out  globally  consistent  processes  and  infrastructures.
It  also  encourages  the  exploration  of  cross  compliance  recognition  mechanisms  whereby  a  system  which  has  been  found  compliant  for  one  set  of  requirements  under  one  regulation should be recognised as compliant with similar requirements under  another  regulation.
Finally,  it  calls  for  governments  to  promote  the  use  of  internationally recognised standards to address this challenge and underlines  the role of the OECD to raise the awareness of less developed countries on  this issue as well as to lead by example.
© OECD 2012   50 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The  role  of  international  standards  is  emphasised  by  the  Internet  technical  community  which  highlights  that  governments  should  foster  the  development of open standards and permission-less innovation for security  solutions.
This  community  emphasises  the  need  to  respect  the  well- established  channels  for  Internet  standards  development  (e.g.
IETF  and  W3C) and to avoid unilateral modifications to global Internet standards as  well as overly prescriptive approaches which risk freezing security solutions  and  stifling  innovation  in  technology  and  Internet  use.
The  translation  of  cybersecurity policy priorities into the technological sphere should support  and  promote  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Internet.
This  community  also  highlights  that  the  overall  objective  of  a  more  secure  Internet  is  supported  by  the  development  of  a  variety  of  technical  building  blocks  through an open, collaborative and consensus-based standards development  model.35  Voluntary  security  initiatives  can  also  play  a  role,  such  as  the  Software  Assurance  Forum  for  Excellence  in  Code  (SAFECode)  which  focuses  on  effective  software  assurance  methods,  and  the  Open  Group  Trusted Technology Forum (OTTF)36 which focuses on open standards for a  more trusted global supply chain.
The  Internet  technical  community  underlines  its  role  as  a  source  of  independent advice regarding the potential intended and unintended conse- quences of planned policy decisions on the Internet and the way it functions,  and stresses that policy makers should seek such advice as early as possible  in the policy development process in order to avoid pursuing technologically  flawed decisions.
Finally,  the  Internet  technical  community  stresses  the  critical  role  of  the  government  to  provide  leadership  and  co-ordination  of  cybersecurity  efforts  through  appropriate  legal  reforms  and  public-private  partnerships  to  facilitate  information  sharing  and  voluntary  adoption  of  best  practices  by  the  industry.
Multi-stakeholder co-operation and government leadership should aim to ensure  functionality of infrastructure and services before, during and after attacks, the  development of more robust systems and networks and more secure solutions  that  preserve  the  principles  of  the  open  Internet.
The  Internet  technical  com- munity notes, with the civil society, that governments can play a lead role in the  implementation  of  best  practices,  including  policies,  technologies  and  even  legislative requirements to secure their own information systems and networks.
The  development  of  well-designed,  balanced  and  judiciously  applied  trust  compliance  programmes  and  procurement  practices  by  governments  would  provide a clear direction to other economic and social actors.
Moreover, govern- ment cybersecurity information and experience could in turn benefit the rest of  society if it is shared.
© OECD 2012       Other considerations    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 51   The  introduction  of  sovereignty  considerations  in  cybersecurity  is  a  turning point that is likely to influence cybersecurity policy making in the  longer term and will deserve continued attention and further analysis in the  future.
As reflected in current strategies, however, most of these sovereignty  considerations are generally separated from economic and social aspects of  cybersecurity, and are mentioned mainly as a result of the holistic nature of  these strategies.
In many  cases, the relationship between the economic and social aspects addressed in  the strategies and such sovereignty considerations are only mentioned to make  a  link  between  government  cybersecurity  and  sharing  of  information  with  intelligence agencies.
Nevertheless,  some  intersections  between  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social aspects of cybersecurity appear in some strategies and in current public  cybersecurity policy debates.
For example, in some countries, the co-ordination  of  cybersecurity  policy  making  is  taking  place  in  a  “national  security”  co- ordination  agency  or  body  such  as  a  National  Security  Council,  or  National  Security  Advisor.
Other  potential  intersections  may  result  from  increased  sovereignty cybersecurity spending spilling over into the civilian cybersecurity  market.
For example, the British strategy calls for exploring how the expertise  of one of its intelligence agencies can more directly benefit the development of  a  British  cybersecurity  industry  sector  without  compromising  its  mission.
Cybersecurity  investments  driven  by  defence  contracts  could  change  the  dynamic of the civilian market, new key players from the defence and security  industry37 could gain more weight in a growing civilian cybersecurity market,  introducing  innovative  products  and  services  as  well  as  a  different  ethos;  cybersecurity  personnel  hired  and  trained  in  the  defense  forces  could  several  years  later  enter  the  civilian  cybersecurity  jobs  market.
These  possible  evolutions could partially address the objectives of several strategies to develop  a  stronger  cybersecurity  industry  based  on  enhanced  skills  and  a  larger  workforce.
These  examples  suggest  that  the  breadth  of  the  grey  area  where  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social  cybersecurity  considerations  overlap  varies  across  countries,  raising  new  opportunities  and  challenges.
As  cyber- security  policy  develops,  the  intersections  between  the  sovereignty  and  economic  and  social  facets  of  cybersecurity  would  need  to  be  carefully  analysed, for example to assess their impact on the openness of the Internet, on  the supply and demand of cybersecurity products, services, skills and jobs, on  fundamental  values  such  as  privacy  and  freedom  of  speech  (Democracy  Principle  of  the  Security  Guidelines)  as  well  as  on  the  complexity  of  inter- national co-operation in cybersecurity.
© OECD 2012   52 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       The development of evidence-based policy making through appropriate  indicators,  whether  statistical  or  anecdotal,  quantitative  or  qualitative,  is  generally  absent  from  the  cybersecurity  strategies  compared  in  this  report.
However, it may be considered essential to a risk-based approach at all levels,  for better cybersecurity policies and implementation, and for the development  of a stronger cybersecurity market.
Although the protection of critical information infrastructures is generally  included  in  the  scope  of  cybersecurity  strategies,  the  issue  of  cross-border  interdependencies is rarely addressed at strategic level.
Further co-operation  on this matter which is addressed in the OECD Recommendation on Protec- tion of Critical Information Infrastructures (2008) would be of mutual interest.
Most strategies mention the need to improve international co-operation  at policy and operational levels.
Nevertheless,  the  trend  towards  the  establishment  of  co- ordination mechanisms within governments in order to support more holistic  strategies provides an interesting opportunity for each country to establish an  official  single  point  of  contact  for  international  cybersecurity  co-ordination/  co-operation.
This would follow-up on the OECD 2008 Recommendation on the Protection  of Critical Information Infrastructures which called for governments to “make  available  information  regarding  the  national  agencies  involved  in  the  protection of CII, their roles and responsibilities, to facilitate identification of  counterparts and improve the timeliness of cross border action”.
Finally,  several  strategies  underline  the  importance  of  cyber  security  exercises  but  few  take  into  account  the  need  to  develop  contingency  and  response  plans  in  advance  as  well  as  the  importance  of  regional  and  inter- national exercises.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 53   Intergovernmental organisations and initiatives   Annex I   This annex provides a brief overview of intergovernmental bodies and   initiatives currently addressing cybersecurity at the policy level38.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)   APEC39  is  a  regional  economic  forum  which  groups  21  economies  to  promote free and open trade and investment, regional economic integration,  economic and technical co-operation, human security, and a favourable and  sustainable business environment to support sustainable economic growth and  prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
Its  Telecommunications  and  Information  Working  Group  (APEC  TEL) aims to improve telecommunications and information infrastructure in  the Asia-Pacific region by developing and implementing appropriate telecom- munications  and  information  policies.
APEC  TEL  Security  and  Prosperity  Steering  Group  (SPSG)  carries  out  many  activities  related  to  security,  trust  and  confidence  in  network/infrastructure/services/technologies/applications/  e-commerce.
Since  2005,  OECD  co-operates  closely  with  SPSG  in  various  areas  such  as  security  of  information  systems  and  networks,  awareness  raising,  malware, the protection of children on line and  botnets.
APEC TEL meets twice a year and organises  regularly  APEC  Telecommunications  and  Information  Industry  Ministers’  Meetings (TELMIN).
The  Budapest  Convention  on  Cybercrime  was  adopted  on  8 November  2001  as  the  first  international  treaty  addressing  crimes  committed  using  or  against  network  and  information  systems  (computers).
As of April 2012, 28 OECD   © OECD 2012   54 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       members  had  signed  the  Convention  and  17  had  ratified  it.
The OECD is an observer in the T-CY and the Council of Europe is an  observer in the OECD Working Party on Information Security and Privacy.
The Council of Europe also helps countries to ratify, accede and implement  these treaties through technical co-operation projects.
G8  The involvement of the G8 in the field of cybercrime dates back to the  late  90s,  when  the  G8  created  a  mechanism  to  expedite  contacts  between  countries, the so-called “G8 24/7 network of contact points”.
In May 2003,  the  G8  adopted  the  G8  Principles  for  Protecting  Critical  Information  Infrastructures on the fight against crimes and terrorist acts committed using  or  against  network  and  information  systems  (“cyber-crime”  and  “cyber- terrorism”).
In  May  2004  the  G8  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  Ministers  adopted  the  Best  Practices  for  Network  Security,  Incident  Response  and  Reporting  to  Law  Enforcement  and  in  May  2009  a  significant  part  of  the  Final Declaration was devoted to cybercrime and cybersecurity, focusing on  collaboration  between  service  providers  and  law  enforcement  and  on  the  strengthening  of  international  co-operation.
Internet  was  among  the  key  priorities of the G8 2011 Deauville Summit which was preceded by an “e- G8”  event  held  in  Paris  prior  to  the  Summit.
G8  Leaders  agreed  on  a  “number  of  key  principles,  including  freedom,  respect  for  privacy  and  intellectual  property,  multi-stakeholder  governance,  cyber-security,  and  protection from crime, that underpin a strong and flourishing Internet”.42    Internet Governance Forum (IGF)   ?
The  IGF  was  established  by  the  World  Summit  on  the  Information  Society in 2006 to bring people together from various stakeholder groups in  discussions on public policy issues relating to the Internet.
While there is no  negotiated outcome, the IGF informs and inspires those with policy making  power in both the public and private sectors.
The IGF facilitates a common   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 55   understanding of how to maximise Internet opportunities and address risks  and challenges.
Its mandate includes the discussion of public policy  issues related to key elements of Internet governance in order to foster the  sustainability, robustness, security, stability and development of the Internet.
Themes related to cybersecurity are  regularly discussed in the annual IGF  meeting and in regional IGF type settings.43   ?
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)  NATO has recently acknowledged the need to focus on cyber defence.
In the 2010 Strategic Concept adopted in Lisbon, NATO Allies recognised  the need for NATO to develop further the ability to prevent, detect, defend  against  and  recover  from  cyber-attacks,  including  by  using  the  NATO  planning  process  to  enhance  and  co-ordinate  national  cyber-defence  capabilities, bringing all NATO bodies under centralised cyber protection, and  better integrating NATO cyber awareness, warning and response with member  nations.
The Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD-COE)44  was  created  in  2006  in  Tallinn,  Estonia.
It  is  an  international  military  organisation  whose  mission  is  to  enhance  the  capability,  co-operation  and  information  sharing  among  NATO,  NATO  nations  and  Partners  in  cyber  defence by virtue of education, research and development, lessons learned  and consultation.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)   Within  the  broader  objective  of  the  OECD  to  develop “better  policies  for  better  lives”,  the  OECD  Committee  for  Information,  Computer  and  Communications  Policy  (ICCP)  promotes  Internet  policies  that  unleash  innovation and capture new sources of growth for more inclusive economic  development  and  increased  social  well-being.
Its  Working  Party  on  Information Security and Privacy (WPISP) develops flexible policy recom- mendations and guidance to sustain trust  in the  Internet Economy and the  global networked society.
Its work is based on in-depth policy analysis in  areas such as National Cybersecurity Policies,  Indicators for cybersecurity  and  privacy,  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  (CIIP),  digital  identity  management,  malware,  Radio-Frequency  Identification  (RFID),  privacy protection and the protection of children online.
WPISP Participants  are  delegates  from  34  OECD  member  countries,  observers,  other  inter- national  organisations  as  well  as  representatives  of  business,  civil  society  and the Internet Technical Community.
© OECD 2012   56 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)   The OSCE addresses a wide range of security-related concerns, including  arms  control,  confidence-  and  security-building  measures,  human  rights,  national minorities, democratisation, policing strategies, counter-terrorism and  economic and environmental activities.
Enhancing cyber security has become  a cross-dimensional topic and endeavour in the OSCE.
Organisation of American States (OAS)  The OAS groups 35 independent states of the Americas which adopted in  2004  a  Comprehensive  American  Strategy  to  Combat  Threats  to  Cyber- security.46  The  strategy  involves  three  OAS  groups  which  address  cyber- security from a different perspective: the Inter-American Committee against  Terrorism  (CICTE)  which  supports  member  states  in  their  efforts  to  create  CSIRTs, promotes the creation of a Secure Hemispheric Network of National  CSIRTs  and  fosters  a  culture  of  cybersecurity,  the  Meetings  of  Justice  or  Other  Ministers  or  Attorneys  of  the  Americas  (REMJA)  Cyber  Crime  Working  Group  which  focuses  on  legal  requirements  and  investigation  capabilities,  and  the  Inter-American  Telecommunications  Commission  (CITEL) which addresses technical aspects.
United Nations (UN)  The United Nations has been the host of a number of activities related to  cybersecurity and cybercrime in the past few years.47 In 2003, through the  resolution 58/32, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to  consider threats to information security and possible cooperative measures.
To  this  end  a  Group  of  Governmental  Experts  (GGE)  was  established  in  2004 but consensus was not reached on a final report.
The same theme was  discussed  by  a  “Group  of  Governmental  Experts”,  appointed  in  2009  in  pursuance of UN General Assembly resolution 60/45 of 8 December 2005.
The Group produced a report on 16 July 2010 which recommends, among  other things, “further dialogue among States to discuss norms pertaining to  State use of ICTs, to reduce collective risk and protect critical national and  international  infrastructures”.
In  preparation  of  the  12th  United  Nations  Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice48 (Salvador, Brazil, 12-19  April 2010) the Secretariat of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)  prepared a working paper in which it recommended that “the development of a  global convention against cybercrime should be given careful and favourable  consideration”.
While  some  countries  were  supporting  such  development,  others strongly opposed highlighting the existence of the Budapest Conven- tion and the need to focus on capacity-building rather than on law-making.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 57   Lastly a proposal for a UN General Assembly resolution on an International  code  of  conduct  for  information  security  was  put  forward  by  China,  the  Russian  Federation,  Tajikistan  and  Uzbekistan  in  September  2011.
“The  text,  similar  to  the  one  tabled  in  past  years,  called  on  Member  States  to  promote  further  at  multilateral  levels  the  consideration  of  existing  and  potential  threats  in  the  field  of  information  security,  as  well  as  possible  strategies to address the threats emerging in this field, consistent with the  need to preserve the free flow of information.
New to the draft this year, [...]  was a provision seeking continuation of study by a group of governmental  experts  to  be  established  in  2012  of  existing  and  potential  threats  in  the  sphere  of  international  security  and  possible  cooperation  measures  to  address them, including norms, rules or principles of responsible behaviour  of States and confidence-building measures in information science.”49 The  UN General Assembly has also adopted several resolutions related to cyber- security such as Resolution 57/239 on the “Creation of a global culture of  cybersecurity” which builds on the OECD 2002 Security Guidelines50    The  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU)  is  the  specialised  agency  of  the  United  Nations  which  is  responsible  for  Information  and  Communication Technologies.
Cybersecurity is considered in the “C5” World  Summit  on  Information  Society  (WSIS)  Action  Line  of  the  Geneva  Action  Plan on building confidence and security in the use of ICT.
ITU was proposed  as  moderator/facilitator  in  implementing  concrete  projects  and  initiatives  along this line.
ITU deals also with adopting international standards to ensure  seamless  global  communications  and  interoperability  for  next  generation  networks; building confidence and security in the use of ICTs; emergency  communications to develop early warning systems and to provide access to  communications during and after disasters, etc.
Conferences on Cyberspace  The  London  Conference  on  Cyberspace51  (1-2  November  2011)  was  meant to build on the debate on developing norms of behaviour in cyber- space, as a follow-up to the speech given by UK Foreign Minister Hague at  the Munich Security Conference in February 2011 which set out a number  of  “principles”  that  should  underpin  acceptable  behaviour  on  cyberspace.
© OECD 2012   58 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Meridian Process   The Meridian process aims to provide Governments worldwide with a  means by which they can discuss how to work together at the policy level on  Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP).
An  annual  conference  and  interim  activities  are  held  each  year  to  help  build  trust  and  establish  international  relations  within  the  membership  to  facilitate  sharing  of  experiences and good practices on CIIP from around the world.52        © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 59   Cybersecurity policy in the European Union    Annex II   This  annex  provides  an  overview  of  i)  recent  developments  at  the  European  Union  (EU)  level,  ii)  the  main  EU  institutions  and  departments  involved in cybersecurity and iii) the main EU cybersecurity-related policy  documents.
Recent developments on a cybersecurity strategy at the EU level   The European Commission and the High Representative for Foreign and  Security Policy will jointly present a European Strategy for Cyber-Security  by the second semester of 2012.
This work will be jointly prepared by the  Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology  (DG CONNECT, ex DG INFSO), the Directorate General Home Affairs and  the  European  External  Action  Service.
The  strategy  will  put  forward  both  policy  and  regulatory  measures  to  ensure  a  safe  and  resilient  digital  environment for all EU citizens, businesses and public administrations and  to  effectively  prevent  cybercrime,  in  respect  of  fundamental  rights  and  European values.
Overview of EU institutions and departments    At  the  European  Union  level,  topics  relevant  to  cybersecurity  and  cybercrime  are  dealt  with  by  various  institutions  and  departments.
They  include:   ?
The various aspects of cybersecurity  are discussed in different Council configurations, such as Transport,  Telecommunications  and  Energy  (TTE)  Council,  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  (JHA)  Council,  Council  Working  Party  on  Civil  Protection  (PROCIV),  COTER,54  EU  Military  Committee  (EUMC),  and  the  Political  and  Security  Committee  (PSC)  /  Council  Standing  Committee on Operational Co-operation on Internal Security (COSI),   © OECD 2012   60 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Council Working Party on Transatlantic Relations (COTRA), etc.
Its Directorate  General  Security,  Safety  and  Communication  and  Information  Systems  is  in  charge  of  the  security  of  SGC  communications  and  information systems.
The European Parliament55 debates and passes EU laws with the EU  Council,  scrutinises  other  EU  institutions  to  make  sure  they  are  working democratically, debates and adopts the EU’s budget, with the  EU  Council.
Various  committees  of  the  European  Parliament56  have  an  interest  in  certain  aspects  of  cybersecurity  including  committees on Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE), Civil Liberties,  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  (LIBE),  Internal  Market  and  Consumer  Protection (IMCO), International Trade, Foreign Affairs (AFET), and  Security and Defence (SEDE).
It manages the day-to- day business of implementing EU policies and spending EU funds.
The  main  Directorates  General  involved  in  activities  related  to  cybersecurity include:  ?
Directorate  General  for  Communications  Networks,  Content  and  Technology  (DG  CONNECT,  former  DG  INFSO)  is  in  charge  of  policy activities on Network and Information Security (NIS) and on  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  (CIIP),  electronic  signature directive, eGovernment, the Safer Internet programme, the  ICT trust and security thematic of the 7th Framework for Research  and  Technological  Development  (FP7)  and  the  EU  Regulatory  Framework for Electronic Communications.
Directorate General Enterprise and Industry (ENTR) is in charge of  EU  industrial  policy,  satellite  navigation,  standardisation  and  the  security thematic of FP7.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 61   ?
Directorate  General  Internal  Market  (MARKT)  is  responsible  for  the Electronic Commerce Directive and for European legal frame- works in the areas of regulated professions, services, company law  and  corporate  governance,  public  procurement,  intellectual,  indus- trial property and financial services.
Working in close cooperation with  policy  Directorates-General,  the  JRC  addresses  key  societal  challenges  while  stimulating  innovation  through  developing  new  methods,  tools  and  standards,  and  sharing  its  know-how  with  the  Member States, the scientific community and international partners.
Several  other  Commission  bodies  are  involved  in  cybersecurity  activities focusing on the functioning of the Commission itself:   ?
Secretariat General (SG) leads activities on crisis management.
Directorate  General  Human  Resources  and  Security  (HR)  lays  down  the  European  Commission  policy  on  security  and  hosting  a  Cyber Attack Response Team (CART).
The  European  External  Action  Service58  (EEAS)  assists  the  High  Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy  who chairs the Foreign Affairs Council and conducts the common  foreign  and  security  policy,  also  ensuring  the  consistency  and  co- ordination  of  the  EU’s  external  action.
EEAS  is  involved  in  international aspects related to cyber security and cybercrime.
The European Network and Information Security Agency59 (ENISA)  was  established  in  2004  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  network  and  information security in the EU by giving expert advice on network  and information security to national authorities and EU institutions,  acting  as  a  forum  for  sharing  best  practice,  facilitating  contacts  between  EU  institutions,  national  authorities  and  businesses.
Together with EU institutions and national authorities, ENISA seeks  to develop a culture of network and information security across the  EU.
To assist the EU Member States in the task of developing and  maintaining a successful national cybersecurity strategy, ENISA is  developing a Good Practice Guide.60    © OECD 2012   62 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ?
Its  mission  is  to  improve  the  effectiveness  and  cooperation  between  EU  law  enforcement  authorities in preventing and combating serious international crime  and terrorism, with the aim of achieving a safer Europe for all EU  citizens.
The European Defence Agency (EDA)63 was established in 2004 to  improve  the  EU’s  defence  capabilities  especially  in  the  field  of  crisis  management;  promote  EU  armaments  co-operation;  strengthen  the  EU  defence  industrial  and  technological  base  and  create a competitive European defence equipment market; promote  research,  with  a  view  to  strengthening  Europe’s  industrial  and  technological potential in the defence field.
The EU  Institute  for  Security  Studies  (EUISS)64  is  an  autonomous  agency that is an integral part of the support structures for the EU’s  Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
It provides analyses,  forecasts and recommendations on security issues of relevance for  the  EU.
Main EU policy documents related to cybersecurity   General documents   ?
EC (2001), Communication on “Network and Information Security:   Proposal for A European Policy Approach”, COM(2001)298.
Available at http://eur- lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/com/2001/com2001_0298en01.pdf   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 63   ?
EC (2006), Communication on a “Strategy for a Secure Information  Society - Dialogue, partnership and empowerment”, COM(2006)251.
EC (2009), Directive 2009/140/EC of the European Parliament and   of the Council amending Directive 2002/21/EC on a common  regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and  services (Framework Directive).
This Directive sets new provisions on  security and integrity of networks and services.
See the Trust  and Security chapter which launched several actions addressing  security and resilience.
EC (2010), “Delivering an area of freedom, security and justice for   Europe’s citizens.
Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm  Programme”, COM(2010) 171 final.
EC (2010), “The EU Internal Security Strategy in Action: Five steps  towards a more secure Europe”, COM(2010) 673 final.
The Stockholm Programme/Action Plan and the EU  Internal Security Strategy in action underline the Commission’s  commitment to building a digital environment where every  European can fully express his or her economic and social potential.
EC (2010), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and  of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing  Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517.
© OECD 2012   64 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ENISA   ?
EC (2004), “Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 of the European   Parliament and of the Council of 10 March 2004 establishing the  European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA)”.
EC  (2010),  “Proposal  for  a  regulation  concerning  the  European  Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA)”.
EC (2009), “Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure  protection (CIIP).
Protecting Europe from large scale cyber-attacks  and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience”,  COM(2009) 149 final.
EC (2011), “Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure   Protection.
Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber- security”, COM(2011) 163 final.
This second communication on CIIP takes stock of the  results achieved since the adoption of the CIIP action plan in 2009  and describes the next priorities planned under each action at both  European and international level.
© OECD 2012        Protection of children    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 65   ?
European Parliament and Council (2008), Decision No   1351/2008/EC of 16 December 2008 establishing a multi-annual  Community programme on protecting children using the Internet  and other communication technologies.
© OECD 2012   66 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Annex III   Key policy documents per country67   ?
Cyber Security Strategy.
Canada’s  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  For  a  Stronger  and  More  Prosperous   Canada.
National  Security  Strategy  for  Society.
Government  Resolution  on  Enhancing  Information  Security  in  Central   Government, VAHTI 7/2009.
Defence and Security of Information Systems.
Prime   Minister’s Secretary General for Defence and National Security, 2011.   ?
Main  measures  adopted  by  the  government.
Cyber  Security  Strategy  for  Germany.
Information  Security  Strategy  for  Protecting  the  Nation.
Japanese   Information Security Policy Council, 2010.70   ?
Annual Plan Information Security.
Japanese Information Security Policy   Council, 2010.   ?
Second  Action  Plan  on  Information  Security  Measures  for  Critical   Infrastructures.
Information Security Policy Council, 2009.    ?
Policy  for  Enhancement  of  Information  Security  Measures  for  the  Central  Government  Computer  System.
Japanese  Information  Security  Policy Council, 2005.    ?
Standards for Information Security Measures for the Central Government  Computer System.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council, 2010.   ?
The  National  Cyber  Security  Strategy.
Dutch  Ministry  of  Security  and   Justice, 2011.
© OECD 2012   Australia   Canada   Finland69   France   Germany   Japan   Netherlands    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 67   ?
Spanish  Security  Strategy:  Everyone’s  responsibility.
Royal Decree 3/2010 of 8 January 2010, regulating the National Security  Framework  within  the  scope  of  e-government;  Law  8/2011  of  28  April  2011, establishing measures for the protection of critical infrastructures;  Royal Decree 704/2011 of 20 May 2011, approving secondary legislation  on the protection of critical infrastructure; Law 59/2003 of 19 December  2003, on electronic signature; Royal Decree 1553/2005 of 23 December  2005  regulating  the  issuance  of  the  national  identity  card  and  its  electronic signature certificate.
The UK Cyber Security Strategy.
Cyber  Security  Strategy  of  the  United  Kingdom.
Safety,  Security  and   Resilience in Cyber Space.
Strategic  Defence  and  Security  Review  (SDSR).
A  Strong  Britain  in  an  Age  of  Uncertainty:  The  National  Security   Strategy.
Cyber Crime Strategy.
Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information   and Communications Infrastructure.
International Strategy for Cyberspace.
Prosperity, Security and Openness   in a Networked World.
Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal.
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative.
Cybersecurity,  Innovation  and  the  Internet  Economy.
Enhancing Online   Choice, Efficiency, Security and Privacy.
Trustworthy  Cyberspace:  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Federal  cybersecurity  Research and  Development Program.
Executive  Office of  the President,  National Science and Technology Council, 2011.
Spain71   United  Kingdom   United  States      © OECD 2012   68 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       Key objectives and concepts in cybersecurity strategies   Annex IV   Australia   Canada   Finland72   France   ?
Maintain  a  secure,  resilient  and   trusted  electronic  operating  environment that supports Australia’s national security and maximises  the benefits of the digital economy.
All Australians are aware of cyber risks, secure their computers and   take steps to protect their identities, privacy and finance online   ?
Australian businesses operate secure and resilient ICTs to protect the  integrity of their own operations and the identity and privacy of their  customers   ?
The Australian Government ensures its ICTs are secure and resilient  ?
Securing Government systems  ?
Partnering   to  secure  vital  cyber  systems  outside   the  federal   Government   ?
Helping Canadians to be secure on line.
By  2016,  Finland  is  global  forerunner  in  cyber  threat  preparedness  and in securing vital functions of the society under all circumstances.
international  co-operation  for   is  an  active  player   ?
Finland   in   cybersecurity strategy.
Security and reliable cyberspace is more an enabler than a threat.
Focus  on  vital  functions  for  the  Finnish  society:  government  security,  functions,  functioning  of  the  economy  and  infrastructure,  population’s  income  security and capacity to functions, psychological resilience to crisis.
international  activities,  defense,   internal   ?
“diplomatic,  military,  scientific,  sovereignty  technical and economic information which enables freedom of action  and conditions prosperity of nations”).
information   ?
Reinforce cybersecurity of national critical infrastructures  ?
Ensure security in cyberspace.
© OECD 2012    CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 69   ?
Ensure  cybersecurity  at  a  level  commensurate  with  the  importance  and  protection  required  by  interlinked  information  infrastructures,  without hampering opportunities and the utilisation of cyberspace   ?
Reinforce  policies  taking  account  of  possible  outbreaks  of  cyber  attacks  (reinforce  the  general  mode  of  readiness)  and  establish  counteractive organisation.
Active international co-operation  ?
Measures must be proportionate  ?
Culture of cybersecurity.
Improved national and international co-ordination.
Development  of  a  risk  map  and  catalogue  of experts,  resources  and   ?
Implementation of the National Security Framework.
Recognition  of  a  safe  cyberspace  as  a  competitive  edge  for  the   best practices.
Derive  huge  economic  and  social  value  from  a  vibrant,  resilient  and  secure  cyberspace  where  our  actions,  guided  by  our  core  values  of  liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, enhance prosperity,  national security and a strong society.
Tackle cyber crime and be one of the most secure places in the world   ?
Be  more  resilient  to  cyber  attacks  and  better  able  to  protect  our   to do business in cyberspace   interests in cyberspace   ?
Have  the  cross-cutting  knowledge,  skills  and  capability  it  needs  to   underpin all our cyber objectives.
Germany   Japan   Netherlands   Spain   United  Kingdom   © OECD 2012   70 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT      United States  ?
Establish a national dialogue on cybersecurity, engage in a global race  depending on mathematics and skills (like after the launch of Sputnik  in 1957).
Address  the  cross-border  challenge  by  shaping  the  international   environment, and bringing like-minded nations together.
Develop  a  comprehensive  framework  to  ensure  a  coordinated  response  by  the  Federal,  State,  local  and  tribal  governments,  the  private sector and international allies to significant incidents.
Define  performance  and  security  objectives  for  the  next  generation   infrastructure, with the private sector.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 71   Questionnaire circulated to volunteer countries   Annex V   1.
What is your cybersecurity strategy?
This question aims to gather information on the strategy itself and the  rationale  behind  it.
Please  provide  details,  as  appropriate,  including  for  example on:    ?
The objectives of the strategy, its scope, main components, the main  drivers  and  contextual  changes  that  led  to  its  development,  and  the  meaning or understanding of “cybersecurity” in this particular context.
The international dimension of your strategy, including in relation to   international organisations.
What are you doing to implement the strategy?
This  question  aims  to  help us  understand what  policies  have  been  (or  are expected to be) developed or significantly modified as a consequence of  the adoption of your strategy.
Provide information on the international aspects of the implementa-  tion of your strategy.
© OECD 2012   72 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT      3.
This question aims to gather information on how cybersecurity strategies  and  policies  both  protect  the  economy  and  the  society,  and  actively  foster  economic and social development.
The structures and processes that ensure coherence and consistency  of cybersecurity strategies and policies with strategies and policies  in other areas, i.e.
innovation, growth, competition),  protecting  national  interests  (or  “national  security”),  education,  research  and  development,  e-government,  and  fundamental  values  (e.g.
good governance, privacy, free flow of information, etc.).
What  processes  are  (were  or  plan  to  be)  used  to  develop,  implement  and  review the strategy and policies?
Please describe the processes for the i) development, ii) implementation,  iii) review of your strategy and policies, iv) measurement of their effective- ness and v) involvement of stakeholders in the development, implementation  and review of your strategy and policies.
Where  appropriate,  the  role  of  international  co-operation  (e.g.
regional  or  international  exercises)  and  international  organisations,  as well as your participation in international co-operation.
The main challenges and enablers that your government has faced or  is facing in the process of development, implementation and review  of its strategy and policy, as well as in the process for international  co-operation.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 73   Questionnaire circulated to non-governmental stakeholders   Annex VI   The  questionnaire  below  aimed  to  collect  input  from  business  and  industry,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical  community  to  understand  their perspective on national cybersecurity strategies analysed in the report.
This consultation was channelled through the official representation of these  stakeholder communities to the OECD: the Business and Industry Advisory  Committee  to  the  OECD  (BIAC), Civil  Society  Internet  Society  Advisory  Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC).
What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for the   economy and the society?
What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to public  policy  for  cybersecurity?
How  should  governments  implement  cybersecurity  policy  at  national  and at international levels and how does this compare with current new  strategies?
What  is  the  role  and  responsibility  of  [business  and  industry]  [civil  society] [the Internet technical community] with respect to cybersecurity  public policy?
What is -or what will be- the impact of recent cybersecurity strategies on  technical   [civil  society]   industry]   [business  and  community]?
[the   Internet   6.
How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be evaluated?
What metrics should be applied to measure their efficiency?
© OECD 2012   74 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT            Notes      1.
10.   issues  related   to   the  protection  of  critical   The  material  for  this  analysis  was  collected  between  March  2011  and  March 2012.  Business  and  Industry  Advisory  Committee  (BIAC),  the  Civil  Society  Internet Society Advisory Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical  Advisory Committee (ITAC) to the OECD.
Specific  information  infrastructures  are  not  addressed  in  this  report  although  they  appear  in  some  strategies.
See  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  the  Protection  of  Critical Information Infrastructures (2008).
Annex  III  provides  an  overview  of  intergovernmental  organisations  addressing cybersecurity.
References  to  the  views  of  “business”,  “civil  society”  and  the  “Internet  technical  community”  reflect  input  from,  respectively,  BIAC,  CSISAC  and  ITAC.
The analysis below includes  Finland and Spain taking into account that  they  have  not  yet  adopted  a  cybersecurity  strategy.
Most  of  the  information  related  to  these  two  countries’  approach  is  related  to  their  national security strategy and/or other key policy documents provided by  delegations.
These elements provide an indication of the direction of their  future cybersecurity strategy.
In this paper, the term attack refers to any type of intentional exploitation  of  a  vulnerability  by  a  source  of  threat,  including  for  breach  of  confidentiality.
This  dependence  characterises  the  concept  of  “critical  information  infrastructure”  as  defined  in  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  Critical  Information Infrastructure Protection.
© OECD 2012           CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 75   13.
For Japan, the increasing dependency on ICT in socioeconomic activities  implies  that  “information  security  can  be  seen  as  a  part  of  the  social  infrastructure”.
The Spanish Security Strategy, which addresses all national security risks,  considers  cyberspace  as  a  specific  domain  comparable  to  land,  sea,  air,  space and information, and which includes the Internet as well as cellular  phones, terrestrial television and satellite communications.
The  French  approach  to  “cyberdefense”  includes  all  aspects  of  cyber- security, regardless of their military or civilian nature.
ANSSI, which sits  under  a  Prime  Minister’s  co-ordination  body  for  matters  of  national  security and defense, is the national authority for cybersecurity.
“While securing peace of mind for the nation’s citizens by implementing  measures to protect personal information and improve security, Japan will  make every effort to encourage utilization of information and communi- cations technology, such as through improved training to provide people  with  a  command  of  this  technology.
This  will  make  daily  life  more  convenient  for  the  public,  triple  productivity  in  fields  concerned  with  information and communications technology, enhance international com- petitiveness by lowering production costs, and foster the development of  new industries” (Japanese Cabinet Office, 2010).
For example in relation to export controls or simply because of the use of  IT by the military and the intelligence community, as demonstrated by the  development  of  Internet  technologies  by  the  US  Defense  Advanced  Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
For  example,  its  Strategic  Initiative  3  states  that  “DoD  will  partner  with  other  US  government  departments  and  agencies  and  the  private  sector  to  enable a whole-of-government cybersecurity strategy” (US DoD, 2011, p.  8).
“Civilian  cybersecurity  focuses  on  all  IT  systems  for  civilian  use  in  German cyberspace.
Military cybersecurity focuses on all IT systems for  military  use  in  German  cyberspace.”  (German  Federal  Ministry  of  the  Interior, 2011).
© OECD 2012   76 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT         24.
Décret  n°  2009-834  du  7  juillet  2009  portant  création  d’un  service  à  compétence  nationale  dénommé  « Agence  nationale  de  la  sécurité  des  systèmes d’information ».
See  also  Council  of  Europe,  2011  for  a  discussion  on  the  concepts  of   cybercrime and cybersecurity strategies.
The Cyber Security Challenge is a non-profit public-private initiative that  “runs national online competitions and raises awareness of cyber learning  opportunities and careers.
It is designed to excite, inspire and help  talented people, of any age, to follow a career in cyber security”.
ibid, 4.47.    initiative  which   is  not  part  of  a  government  national  cybersecurity  strategic  plan  but  may  act  as  a  market  incentive  is  the  issuance  by  the  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  of  Guidance regarding disclosure obligations relating to cybersecurity risks  and cyber incidents (US Securities and Exchange Commission, 2011).
This is consistent with the findings of  the OECD comparative analysis of national strategies for digital identity  management.
Examples  provided  by  the  Internet  technical  community  include,  from  IETF, DNSSEC, TLS, IPSec, RPKI, SAML; from W3C, Content Security  Policy, XML Signature, XML encryption; from OASIS, Digital Signature  Services  (DSS),  Security  Assertion  Markup  Language  (SAML);  from  ISO,  security  management  standards  such  as  IS27001  and  IS27002  as  well as the Entity Authentication Assurance Framework, DIS29115.
See www.safecode.org and   http://www3.opengroup.org/getinvolved/forums/trusted   © OECD 2012           CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 77   37.
Some  of  the  largest  defense  and  security  firms  (e.g.
Boeing,  EADS,  Finmeccanica, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Thales, ...) have a  portfolio  of  cybersecurity  products  and  services  which  extends  beyond  government military markets to civilian customers.
A  list  of  organisations  addressing  cybersecurity  standardisation  can  be  found in the ICT Security Standards Roadmap developed by ENISA, ITU  and the Network and Information Security Steering Group (NISSG) of the  ICT Standards Board.
See  an  exhaustive  review  of  the  activities  of  the  UN  regarding  cyber- security  at:  www.un.org/en/ecosoc/cybersecurity/maurer-cyber-norm-dp- 2011-11.pdf    48.  www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime-congress/12th-crime-congress.html.
© OECD 2012   78 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT         55.
Cybersecurity  strategy  is  being  developed.
The  strategy  has  been  updated  in  2011  by  the  “Information  Security  2011”,  available  at  www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/is2011_eng.pdf.
The  “Management  Standards  for  Information  Security Measures for the Central Government Computer Systems” (April  2011),  available  at  www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/K304-101e.pdf,  updates  the  “Standards  the  Central  Government Computer system” of 2010 and the “Policy for Enhancement  of Information Security Measures for the Central Government” of 2005.
Cybersecurity  strategy  is  being  developed.
These  documents  form  the   Information  Security  Measures   current basis on which the strategy will be built.
The  Finnish  cybersecurity  strategy  is  under  development  at  the  time  of   writing.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 79   References   ANSSI (2011), “Défense et sécurité des systèmes d’information.
Australian Government (2009), “Cyber Security Strategy”.
Cyber White Paper.
Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice (2011), The National Cyber Security   Strategy (NCSS).
ENISA (2011a), “Measurement Frameworks and Metrics for Resilient   Networks and Services: Technical report”, p. 12.
Available at   www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/stakeholder-relations/files/country- reports/   ENISA (2011c), “Cyber security: future challenges and opportunities”.
© OECD 2012   80 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       ENISA (2012), “National Cyber Security Strategies.
Setting the course for   national efforts to strengthen security in cyberspace”.
A European Strategy for Internet   Security.
High Level Public-Private Security Roundtable.
Finnish Ministy of Defense (2010), “Security Strategy for Society.
Finnish Ministry of Finance (2009), “Government Resolution on Enhancing  Information Security in Central Government”.
German Federal Ministry of the Interior (2011), “Cyber Security Strategy   for Germany”.
Gobierno de España (2011), “Spanish Security Strategy.
Government of Canada (2010), Canada’s Cyber Security Strategy.
© OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 81   Government of Canada (2009), National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council (2010), “Information Security   Strategy for Protecting the Nation”.
Japanese Information Security Policy Council (2010), Annual Plan   Information Security 2010.
Luiijf, H., Besseling, K., Spoelstra, M., Graaf, P. de (2011), Ten National   Cyber Security Strategies: a comparison.
CRITIS 2011 – 6th  International Conference on Critical information infrastructures Security,  September 2011.
OECD (2002), Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems and   Networks: Towards a Culture of Security, Paris.
OECD (2005), The Promotion of a Culture of Security for Information   Systems and Networks in OECD Countries, Paris.
OECD (2008), Recommendation of the Council on the Protection of Critical   Information Infrastructures, Paris.
OECD (2009), Computer Viruses and Other Malicious Software: A Threat   to the Internet Economy, OECD Publishing.
OECD (2011), National Strategies and Policies for Digital Identity   Management in OECD Countries, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No.
OECD (2012a), “Proactive Policy Measures by Internet Service Providers   against Botnets”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No.
© OECD 2012   82 – CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT       OECD (2012b), “Non-Governmental Perspectives on a New Generation of  National Cybersecurity Strategies”.
UK Cabinet Office (2009), “Cyber Security Strategy of the United   Kingdom.
Safety, Security and Resilience in Cyber Space”.
UK Cabinet Office (2011a), “The UK Cyber Security Strategy.
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (2011), “Security and freedom in   the cyber age - seeking the rules of the road”.
UK Home Office (2010), “Cyber Crime Strategy”.
UK Prime Minister (2010a), “Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty:   The Strategic Defence and Security Review”.
UK Prime Minister (2010b), “A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty:   The National Security Strategy”.
US Department of Commerce (2011), “Cybersecurity, Innovation and the   Internet Economy”.
US Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology   Council (2011), “Trustworthy Cyberspace: Strategic Plan for the Federal  cybersecurity Research and Development Program”.
Available at   © OECD 2012         CYBERSECURITY POLICY MAKING AT A TURNING POINT – 83   www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/fed_cybersecurity _rd_strategic_plan_2011.pdf.
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence  (2011), “Rogers & Ruppersberger Introduce Cybersecurity Bill to Protect  American Businesses from “Economic Predators”.
US Securities and Exchange Commission (2011), CF Disclosure Guidance:   Topic No.
Cybersecurity.
Assuring a Trusted and   Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure.
US White House (2010), The “Comprehensive National Cybersecurity   Initiative”.
US White House (2011a), “International Strategy for Cyberspace.
Prosperity, Security and Openness in a Networked World”.
Enhancing Online Choice, Efficiency, Security and  Privacy”.
US White House (2011c), Fact Sheet: “Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal”.
© OECD 2012                   NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW   GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY   STRATEGIES:    CONTRIBUTIONS FROM BIAC, CSISAC AND ITAC            86 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES            Note by the Secretariat   This document brings together views from business, civil society and the  Internet  technical  on  the  emergence  of  a  new  generation  of  national  cyber- security strategies.
These stakeholder views were solicited in January 2012 by  the  OECD  Secretariat  through  a  questionnaire  to  the  Business  and  Industry  Advisory  Committee  (BIAC),  the  Civil  Society  Internet  Society  Advisory  Council (CSISAC) and the Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC) to  the OECD.
This input was used in developing the report on “Cybersecurity  Policy Making at a Turning Point: Analysing a New Generation of National  Cybersecurity Strategies for the Internet Economy” which was declassified in  November  2012  by  the  OECD  Committee  on  Information,  Computer  and  Communications Policy (ICCP).
These views will also inform the review of  the  2002  OECD  Guidelines  for  the  Security  of  Information  Systems  and  Networks: Towards a Culture of Security undertaken by the Working Party on  Information Security and Privacy (WPISP) in 2012-2013.
About the OECD ICCP non-governmental stakeholder representation   Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) - www.biac.org   Founded in 1962, the Business and Industry Advisory Committee to the  OECD  (BIAC)  is  officially  recognised  by  the  OECD  as  the  representative  body  of  the  OECD  business  community.
As  an  independent  international  business association, BIAC brings a cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary view  to OECD work most relevant to business.
Civil Society Internet Society Advisory Council (CSISAC) – csisac.org  The  Civil  Society  Information  Society  Advisory  Council  (CSISAC)  contributes constructively to the policy work of the OECD ICCP Committee  and promotes the exchange of information between the OECD and the civil  society  participants  most  active  in  the  field  of  information  technology.
Information  from  the  OECD  will  provide  civil  society  participants  with  a  stronger  empirical  basis  to  make  policy  assessments;  inputs  into  research  and policy development from civil society will provide the OECD with the   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 87   essential  perspective  of  stakeholders  “at  the  receiving  end”  of  policy.
Internet Technical Advisory Committee (ITAC) – www.internetac.org   The Internet Technical Advisory Committee to the OECD (ITAC) brings  together  the  counsel  and  technical  expertise  of  technically  focused  organi- sations, in a decentralised networked approach to policy formulation for the  Internet  economy.
The  main  purpose  of  the  ITAC  is  to  contribute  con- structively  to  the  OECD’s  development  of  Internet-related  policies.
ITAC  primarily contributes  to the work of the OECD Committee for Information,  Computer and Communications Policy (ICCP) and its specific working parties  such  as  the  Working  Party  on  Communications  and  Infrastructure  Services  Policy (CISP), the Working Party on Information Economy (WPIE) and the  Working Party on Information Security and Privacy (WPISP).
The ITAC is  open  to  any  Internet  technical  and  research  organisation  that  meets  the  membership criteria listed in the Committee’s Charter.
© OECD 2012   88 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Non-Governmental Perspectives on a New Generation of   National Cybersecurity Strategies: Contributions from BIAC,   CSISAC and ITAC   From your perspective:   1) What are the main cybersecurity challenges, priorities, and goals for  the economy and the society?
This  increasing  complexity  and  interaction  is  essential  to  support  and  incent  many  of  the  economic  and  societal  benefits  that  exist  in  our  digital  economy  and  information  society.
This complexity and interaction is also more difficult to secure.
We  have  also  seen  the  global  nature  of  exploits  increasing with computer and mobile exploits morphing across the globe like  natural  viruses  do  in  epidemics,  except  at  Internet  speed.
Going  forward  we clearly  understand  the  need  to  continue  to  increase  efforts to reduce cybercrime, increase security in products and services, and  advance risk management practices address these issues to assure continued  trust in the infrastructure, the creation of new and innovative products and  services and continued growth in and adoption of new technologies, services  and business models predicated on the open Internet.
Major challenges include:  ?
A  globally  distributed,  sometimes  coordinated,  and  increasingly  professional group of bad actors that use increasingly sophisticated  means to deny service or steal, alter or destroy information.
We  note  that  the  geographic  distribution  of  the  perpetrators  of  cyber-attacks  makes  it  very  difficult  to  pinpoint  one  geographical   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 89   location as the origin of these attacks; the ubiquitous connectivity of  Cyberspace poses a challenge regarding the effectiveness of counter- measures which tend to be short lived since it is sufficient to simply  regroup the malicious resources and start again.
Diminished lead and reaction time to threats including potential zero   day exploits.
Complex systems and interactions among systems that may increase   the challenge and complexity of security.
The increasing national mandates for using local standards or tech-  nologies will hurt security and limit innovation.
The world economy and the security of sovereign states benefits from   international risk-based standards.
The  increased  challenges  of  effectively  and  globally  sharing  information  related  to  threats  or  exploits,  while  assuring  that  such  sharing does not enhance the potential success of threats or exploits.
Assuring that data is properly secured in systems in a holistic and   defense in depth manner across all relevant control parameters.
Fostering  better  security  by  design  across  government  and  industry  and addressing the explosion of new individual application developers  who  may  have  little  formal  training  in  writing  code  or  securing  software.
Training at all levels of the organisation on security appropriate to   their role; focusing on both technical and human factors.
Training of individual users appropriate to their role: updated anti- virus and malware definitions, common sense surfing tips, minimal  steps to protect identity and sensitive information; alerts on phishing  and social engineering.
Information  sharing  related  to  terrorist  or  criminal  acts    between  government  and  industry  that  both  meets  national  security/law  enforcement  requirements  while  respects  the  relevant  privacy  and  civil liberties limitation on information sharing.
The  lack  of  “inter-operability”  between  the  legal  frameworks  adopted by different countries increases the difficulty in defining a  global  solution  to  combat  cybercrime  and  prevent  the  misuse  of  information;  this  results  in  a  “nomadic  cybercrime”  since  cyber- criminals cannot be bound to any territorial jurisdiction.
© OECD 2012   90 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       The above challenges can only successfully be addressed if innovation  in  technology  and  security  are  allowed  to  advance.
Furthermore,  these  challenges should not be addressed through top down proscriptive measure  that  result  in  technology  mandates  or  unnecessarily  interfere  with  the  development  and  deployment  of  systems.
Importantly,  in  tackling  security  challenges  one  of  the  priorities  is  to  promote  the  use  of  appropriate  risk  assessment frameworks to evaluate the potential negative impacts to critical  information  infrastructures  caused  by  security  threats  and  vulnerabilities.
The  most  important  actions  should  be  focused  to  ensure  the  availability,  reliability and security of networks and information systems.
Cybersecurity must have the objective to achieve a distributed and co- ordinated  approach  to  provide  the  level  of  security  and  resilience  that  is  needed in cyberspace.
Efforts to improve cybersecurity should be based on  globally  accepted  standards,  best  practices,  and  international  assurance  programs.
This approach will improve security, because proven and effective  security  measures  must  be  deployed  across  the  entire  global  infrastructure.
Another  goal  of  this  approach  is  to  improve  interoperability  of  the  digital  infrastructure,  to  incentivise  more  private-sector  resources  to  be  used  for  investment and innovation to address future security challenges.
Lastly, organisations must often work globally and across sectors.
This  must be done using globally coherent systems and common practices based  on  international  standards.
Efforts  to  create  national  or  local  implementa- tions  of  security,  not  based  on  internationally  accepted  practices,  could  severely increase cost, limit functionality and constrain innovation.
Response from CSISAC   Our greatest cybersecurity challenge is the overall lack of clear priorities  aimed at addressing specific tangible and demonstrable harms in a targeted  manner.
Reliance  on  general  and  non-contextual  statements  of  increased  cyber insecurity is leading to proposals for broad, open-ended powers that  threaten citizens’ fundamental rights in disproportionate ways.
As noted in  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines,  cybersecurity  initiatives  should  be  implemented in a manner that is consistent with the rights that are essential  to free and democratic societies.
Many current cybersecurity initiatives fall  short  of  this  objective.
Clarifying  governments’  priorities  and  goals,  and  ensuring a fact-based, threat-specific approach is critical to remedying this  tendency and to the development of cybersecurity strategies that are beneficial  to  the  economy  and  society.
This  will  avoid  a  monolithic approach to cybersecurity that conflates many distinct issues and  contexts.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 91   An effective and proportional solution will be narrowly tailored to address  well-defined risks premised on risk assessments.
One great hindrance to effective policy-making in this area is the lack of  publicly available, concrete information from independent sources.
Part of  the  problem  is  that  implementation  of  cybersecurity  measures  will  often  occur  on  private  networks  with  scant  incentive  to  disclose  problems,  and  often  with  many  incentives  not  to  do  so.
Attempts  to  treat  all  potential  cybersecurity  issues  as  “threats  to  national  security”  import  a  culture  of  secrecy  that  further  prevents  public  disclosure  of  adequate  information.
While  there  may  be  legitimate  reasons  for  withholding  some  of  this  information, there must be a serious attempt at overcoming these challenges  to  enable  fact-based  decision-making  as  a  more  central  component  to  the  cybersecurity discussion.
Many  recent  cybersecurity  proposals  envision  open-ended  powers  to  monitor  and  react  to  online  activity.
Such  powers  are  inconsistent  with  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms,  the  rule  of  law,  and  legitimate  interests  that  are  core  to  democratic  societies,  and  therefore  lie  in  conflict  with  Principles 4 and 5 of the OECD’s own security guidelines of 2002.
This, in turn, threatens  the  transparency  and  openness  recognised  in  the  Security  Guidelines  as  essential to cybersecurity strategies in democratic societies.
Beyond  the  threat  to  transparency  and  openness  of  process,  proposals  that  lack  such  specificity  of  purpose  threaten  the  economic  and  societal  value  of  the  Internet.
This  is  already  evident  in  the  implementation  of  previous cybersecurity strategies.
In the United States, for example, cyber- security  provisions  have  been  misused  in  a  myriad  of  ways:  to  hinder  competition and innovation, to prevent users from accessing their own data  by the  mechanism of their  choice, to prevent users from accessing legally  purchased products such as gaming systems, to shut down criticism, to deter  academic  research  and  even,  somewhat  counter-productively,  to  deter  security researchers.1 Instead of engaging in a nuanced assessment of what  activities  are  positive  and  which  warrant  deterrence,  policies  grant  broad  powers to “prevent unauthorised access”.
The  same  flaws  are  already  evident  in  cybersecurity  legislative  proposals  that  aim  to  empower  private  companies  with  ill-defined  “monitoring”  and  “countermeasure”  powers.2    © OECD 2012   92 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       With  respect  to  the  adoption  of  specific  initiatives,  a  “risk  assessment  first”  approach  is  in  accordance  with  the  current  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines,  especially  the  principles  on  security  management,  risk  assess- ments, awareness, and reassessment.
Cybersecurity strategies cannot be set  or  assessed  in  the  abstract.
Acceptable  levels  of  risk  can  only  be  determined  after  factual  assessments  have  been  completed, and with the nature and importance of the information sought to  be protected firmly in mind.
Risk assessments should be an ongoing process  because  appropriate  modifications  to  security  policies  need  to  be  made  to  deal with new and ever-changing threats and vulnerabilities.
Once govern- ments  conduct  these  assessments,  they  must  then  clearly  articulate  the  tangible  cybersecurity  risk  they  are  addressing  in  each  discrete  initiative.
This is why cybersecurity strategies should include, as a prerequisite to the  adoption of any specific cybersecurity initiative, a risk assessment leading to  a  clear  statement  of  the  assets  to  be  protected  and  the  risk  models  that  demonstrate this need for protection.
Yet another way in which cybersecurity policies exhibit a troubling lack  of specificity is in the very definition of them.
“Cybersecurity” has come to  mean a huge spectrum of things.3 Not only does this lead to powers that are  overly  broad  in  scope  and  application,4  but  it  also  risks  generating  a  consensus that is illusory.
For example, the potential of cybersecurity threats  to  impact  critical  infrastructure  does  not  transform  the  cybersecurity  dis- cussion  into  one  focused  primarily  on  threats  to  national  security.
Such  threats, even if demonstrably tangible, will always remain one small part of  the overall cybersecurity issue and should not be used to justify sweeping  unaccountable powers.
Further, without a clear understanding of what cyber- security seeks to protect, it is impossible to develop tangible risk models and,  by  extension,  to  determine  whether  any  resulting  gains  in  security  are  proportional to any resulting impact on the rights of citizens.
Powers that may  be proportional when tailored to address national security concerns might not  be as proportionate when employed in defense of private rights.
Absent specifics on risk assessments, the factual scope of the problem,  and the “cybersecurity” rubric itself, it is difficult to speak of specific goals  and objectives.
There is an unfortunate tendency to re-couch  cybersecurity  issues  in  terms  of  “warfare”  and  “national  security”.
While  some aspects of cybersecurity  might implicate these  more serious concerns,  conflating  all  cybersecurity  issues  in  this  way  is  not  conducive  to  balanced  policy-making.
It  can  lead  to  the  adoption  of  drastic  solutions  such  as   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 93   network monitoring, despite the ready availability of more practical options  that are respectful of citizens” rights.
Defensive  “target  hardening”  is,  generally  speaking,  a  more  effective  solution to these cybersecurity problems.
Target hardening requires addressing  a host of problems, including insufficient access control, lack of encryption,  poor network management, and failure to install security patches, inadequate  audit  procedures,  and  information  security  programs.
Ensuring  proper  incentives  are  in  place  for  vendors,  service  providers, and governments to adopt this type of target hardening may be the  best mechanism for member states to achieve higher levels of security on the  Internet.
Does  it  make  sense  to  expand  ISP–level  monitoring  and  promote  dramatic  countermeasures  as  a  solution  to  botnets  if  the  problem  is  more  directly  related  to security  errors in  software such as Windows,  Safari, or Android?
Better computer-based security solutions installed by default may do far more  to address botnets then ISP policing.
In  conclusion,  the  primary  challenge  to  balanced  cybersecurity  policy- making  and  governance  on  the  basis  of  informed  multi-stakeholder  dis- cussions is the lack of clear priorities premised on a solid evidentiary basis an  aimed  at  addressing  specific  and  tangible  harms.
Current  cybersecurity  strategies lack specificity and grounding in demonstrable risk.
It is critical for  Members to enrich the public record by providing more details on the scope,  nature,  and  dimensions  of  existing  cybersecurity  risks.
Generally  speaking,  defensive  target  hardening  is  preferable  to  dramatic  expansions  of  powers  aimed at implementing monolithic “offensive” strategies.
The latter often fail  to  address  real  security  problems  and  can  actually  make  matters  worse  by  weakening  existing  privacy  safeguards,  disrupting  the  reliable  operation  of  networks  that  are  the  subject  of  protection.
Simpler  practical  measures  that  create real security by encouraging better computer hygiene are not only less  intrusive, but in many instances they will be far more effective.
© OECD 2012   94 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Response from ITAC   Preliminary comments   There is no consensus on what the term “cybersecurity” means.
A lack  of a common shared understanding of this term is the primary obstacle to the  development of internationally compatible solutions.
There also appear to be  different views as to what falls within the scope of “national” vs. “private”  cybersecurity.
National cybersecurity strategies appear to be heavily influenced by one  of  two  starting  point  assumptions,  i.e.
whether  governments  regard  the  Internet  as  a  fundamentally  “trusted  space”  or  an  inherently  “distrusted  space”.
Any discussion on “cybersecurity” needs to clarify and clearly articulate  what is within scope.
Is the objective to secure any or all of the following:  devices  connected  to  the  Internet;  the  Internet  infrastructure;  applications;  communications;  data;  identity;  and/or  “essential  services”  (e.g.
electricity  distribution) dependent on the Internet?
For example, the  development of robust inter-domain policies related to “cybersecurity” will  need to address issues of control and compliance.
Compliance programs have the potential to move  the  discussion  to  a  slightly  broader  base,  which  encompasses  technology,  policy, and operations.
Response to question 1    A  key  priority  for  the  Internet  technical  community  is  developing  technical  security  solutions  that  remain  consistent  with  the  fundamental  properties of the Internet – global, open and interoperable, and communicating  those  solutions  in  ways  that  are  understandable  to  policy  and  commercial  decision-makers.
A key priority for society and the economy is to have confidence in the  network.
To  be  trusted,  the  Internet  must  provide  channels  for  secure,  reliable,  private,  communication  between  entities,  which  can  be  clearly  authenticated  in  a  mutually  understood  manner.
The  mechanisms  that  provide this level of assurance must support both the end-to-end nature of   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 95   Internet architecture and reasonable means for entities to manage and protect  their own identity details.
Priorities (and challenges) include:  ?
Preserving the openness and global nature of the Internet, as well as   its innovative potential, and fundamental human rights   ?
reach- ability) such as security, privacy, reliability, resilience and usability  ?
Finding  the  right  balance  between  security  and  an  enabling   environment for communication, trade, innovation and growth   ?
Recognising that different security solutions are needed for different  types  of  interactions  on  the  Internet  and  that  the  highest  level  of  security  attainable  may  not  be  the  optimal  solution  in  all  circum- stances   ?
Developing  new  solutions,  critically  assessing  existing  approaches  and discarding old security paradigms that are not well suited to the  Internet    ?
Realising  that  the  implementation  of  security  solutions  is  a  long- term  investment  in  the  Internet  ecosystem  that  everyone  benefits  from,  and  that  stakeholders  have  a  shared  interest  in  the  manage- ment of these resources   Cyber  threats  change  rapidly  making  a  mandatory,  compliance-driven  regulatory model ineffective and counterproductive by limiting needed flexi- bility to adjust to new threats.
The global nature of the Internet, communications networks and the ICT  industry requires a global approach to address cybersecurity concerns.
Any approaches to cybersecurity that increase technical barriers to trade  in  ICT  infrastructure  equipment  and  end  user  devices  risk  balkanising  the  global  Internet  into  different  markets  with  different  technical  regulations.
© OECD 2012   96 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES      2) What is the role and responsibility of governments with respect to  public policy for cybersecurity?
Response from BIAC   In  general,  governments  should  recognise  cyber-security  as  a  growing  challenge and should consider cyber threats as a matter of national security.
More  economic  funds  should  be  allocated  in  order  to  promote  the  collaboration of industries in realising national security infrastructure, aimed  to identify and mitigate security threats.
Governments should also create more awareness on security  topics by  introducing for example security requirements into their call announcements  for public sector services.
Governments of course have competence in making decisions of national  security.
Issues of civil liberties and how to implement policies appropriately  and with as  limited a burden as possible are  topics  that benefit from  multi- stakeholder  consultation.
That  being  said,  the  divide  between  national  security and economic security, where many more shared interests are at play,  is ever more blurred.
Furthermore, greater amounts of critical infrastructure  are under the control of the private sector.
Governments must thus find the  appropriate balance between exercising their competence in national security  and  addressing  issues  that  impact  economic  security  and  private  sector  systems.
Increased cooperation and collaboration is developing in these areas,  but more needs to be done.
The  cooperation  between  security  agencies  is  essential  because  the  jurisdictions  have  territorial  boundaries  that  cyberspace  has  not.
It  is  difficult  to  attribute  responsibility,  both  for  the  difficulty  to  trace  cyber  events  and  for  the  lack  of  reference  paradigms for a clear assignment of liability.
Cooperation  between  the  private  sector  (such  as  universities,  industries,  associations,  ISP,  etc.)
and  government  institutions  is  important  to  raise  awareness to the cyber security issue and to ensure the resilience of critical  infrastructure and the availability of the services.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 97   In this way it is possible to implement an effective IT governance policy  in terms of tools and resources necessary for the operation of networks and  their resilience, and in terms of coordination mechanisms in case of security  attacks on a large scale.
This co-operation can be more effective if it involves also international   partners.
The OECD played an important role in related issues of cryptography  years  back  where  it  was  finally  decided  that  security  would  be  enhanced  overall if companies were more broadly allowed to use cryptography which  had  been  previously  controlled  in  the  manner  of  a  munitions.
While OECD member countries can do more  in this area, the issue is especially relevant in many developing countries that  have not had the same experience curve.
With  global  interference  among  systems  and  value  chains  governments  can  no  longer  just  address  security  within  their  borders.
Third  countries  may  develop  one  off  require- ments  that  may  intentionally  or  inadvertently  compromise  overall  security.
Only  through  the  reinforcement  of  the  need  to  rely  on  internally  accepted  standards  can  such  outlier  action  be  addressed.
As was noted above, issues of security are global and multisectoral, thus  one improvement noted in the OECD paper which should be further enhanced  is  the  interdisciplinary  work  on  security  both  across  agencies  within  governments and across local as well as national governments.
In considering enhanced working relationships with the private sector,   two areas of consultation should be prioritised:   ?
Governments  can  promote  the  institution  of  CERTs  and  encourage  the  involvements  of  University  and  other  corporations  for  information  sharing  and  education strategies.
In many cases the level of specificity  or proscription may not benefit security and may create significant  and unintended burdens and consequences.
© OECD 2012   98 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Response from CSISAC   Governments  must  recognise   that  rivalries  among  nation-states  constitute one of the chief security threats on the Internet.
Taking advantage of zero-day exploits  and  the  use  of  malware  is  highly  questionable  on  practical  and  ethical  grounds, and such activities do not lose their ethical murkiness when wielded  by  Governments.5  Their  geopolitical  rivalries  and  development  of  offensive  cyberwar capabilities can threaten the cooperative basis of international digital  communications.
Also,  governments  need  to  formally  recognise  that  their  own  massive  data  collection  and  surveillance efforts can, when breached, pose a threat to civilians and even to  the very security concerns such surveillance seek to alleviate.
Domestic efforts  to  survey  citizens  can  like-wise  lead  to  weakened  security.6  Governments  should  avoid  imposing  design  obligations  that  undermine  security  in  the  name of their own surveillance efforts.
Governments  must  be  cautious  of  knee-jerk  reactions  to  perceived  cybersecurity threats.
not relying solely  upon  evidence  from  the  cybersecurity  industry)  and  should  develop  the  capacity  to  generate  their  own  measurements  and  to  conduct  their  own  assessments.
A  core  element  of  this  information-generating  imperative is the need to implement breach notification obligations.
Absent  such  obligations,  it  becomes  difficult  to  begin  to  assess  the  scope  of  the  problem,  as  many  cybersecurity  breaches  will  simply  go  unreported.
We  note further that breach notification obligations have also been recognised as  a strong mechanism for instilling target hardening incentives.7 An effective  breach  notification  obligation  will  be  two-tiered,  with  one  lower  standard  controlling disclosure to a government authority for recording and oversight  purposes,  and  a  second,  higher  standard  controlling  disclosure  to  directly  affected individuals.8    Governments have an obligation to ensure that any cybersecurity policies  or strategies adopted are demonstrably necessary, fact-based, consistent with  fundamental rights of citizens and proportionate to a legitimate aim.
Defensive  target  hardening  can  address  many  of  the  most  comprehensive  and  widespread  cybersecurity  issues.
Such security problems are shared by governments, the private   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 99   sector,  NGOs,  and  individuals,  and  thus  present  similar  problems  and  solutions.
We  all  use  the  same  computers,  networking  hardware,  Internet  protocols  and  software  packages,  which  have  the  same  vulnerabilities  and  problems.
Governments can take the lead by implementing rigorous policies,  technical tools and even legislative obligations to secure information systems  and  software  for  everyone  as  soon  as  vulnerabilities  are  discovered,  while  securing government operated infrastructure that relies on those systems.
Only  with  such  a  defensively  oriented  security  culture  will  governments  maximise  safety  for  everyone.
By taking the lead, Governments will not only take great steps towards  securing  information  of  citizens  and  Government  services,  but  will  also  generate  policies  and  tools  that  others  can  use  to  similarly  secure  their  systems.
Government initiatives to secure internal networks can also provide  a valuable source of information on what works and does not work, which  can  in  turn  form  the  basis  of  future  policy  discussions  as  well  as  government-led education campaigns.
Such initiatives can also result in the  identification and dissemination of information regarding threat metrics and  dimensions  –  another  area  where  Governments  should  be  taking  the  lead.
Governments are often the largest single domestic users of IT services, and  have access to immense stores of valuable information that can be used to  better assess cybersecurity issues.
Mechanisms should be explored to make  this information available on a regular basis.
Response from ITAC   A  very  significant  evolution  in  government  strategies  has  been  the   adoption of the multistakeholder model for policy development.
The role and responsibility of governments is to foster the open, trans- parent and collaborative development and deployment of security solutions,  and to develop policies in an actively engaged multistakeholder process.
It is important that governments do not adopt strategies that are reactive,  but rather, develop an approach to cybersecurity that embraces technology  and innovation, while protecting end-users and critical infrastructure.
Further,  in  forming  public  policies  for  cybersecurity,  governments  should be mindful that in some countries much of the critical infrastructure  for  telecommunications  and  the  Internet  is  operated  by  non-governmental   © OECD 2012   100 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       entities,  i.e.
private  entities,  which  bear  the  primary  responsibility  for  securing their own networks and facilities.
As a mandatory regulatory model is unlikely be effective in addressing  evolving cyber threats, government has a critical role to play in the leader- ship  and  coordination  of  cybersecurity  efforts  through  legal  reforms  and  public-private  partnerships  to  facilitate  information  sharing  and  voluntary  industry adoption of best practices.
Governments can also show leadership  through  their  own  well-designed,  balanced  and  judiciously  applied  trust  compliance programs and procurement practices.
Finally,  multi-stakeholder  cooperation  and  leadership  by  governments   should include:   ?
Cooperation and mutual assistance to build more robust systems and   networks;    ?
Governments encouraging the deployment of more secure solutions   that preserve the fundamental principles of the open Internet.
3) How should governments implement cybersecurity policy at  national and at international levels and how does this compare with  current new strategies?
Response from BIAC   Governments  should  implement  cybersecurity  policy  at  national  level  having in mind the evolving and sophisticated security threats scenario and  also taking into account the nature of the cybercrime which is not confined  inside a single nation.
At international level it’s necessary to share and coordinate with other  countries  on  the  development  of  global  policies,  addressing  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  and  sharing  technical  mechanisms  and  best  practices  to  improve  also  interoperability.
Strategies  should  promote  cooperation  at  international  level,  reinforcing  alliances  and  promoting  incident response coordination.
Companies that create and  deliver  technology and services, as well as  those that rely on technology and services to deliver critical infrastructure  functions address security at the system and process level.
Companies are   © OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 101   increasingly  global  and,  as  a  result,  they  embrace  international  standards.
We recognise that government may have national priorities  that differ and may emphasise different aspects of security as more or less  critical.
These variances in approach should still allow for the deployment  of global, coherent and cost-effective industry solutions.
As we consider the recent economic upheavals, we must be able to be as  efficient as possible in the use of resources and deployment of technology.
The system used by the Common Criteria where evaluations done  to  a  common  set  of  standards  by  certified  labs  are  globally  accepted  by  participating countries optimises the use of costly resources.
Further  exploration should also be undertaken to cross recognise compliance; systems  that are found to be compliant with one set of regulatory requirements should  be  recognised  as  being  found  compliant  with  similar  requirements  for  a  different  regulation.
Response from CSISAC   As a starting point, it should be recognised that positive cybersecurity  outcomes  might  not  require  dramatic  legal  changes.
Rather,  technical  and  governance  solutions  may  go  far  to  address  many  potential  cybersecurity  issues.
As noted above, there has been a tendency to enact overly aggressive  legislative  measures  where  practical,  technical  solutions  could  yield  much  more effective results.
As  also  noted  above,  Governments  must  be  more  accountable  and  transparent about current and planned cybersecurity strategies, especially in  approach to disclosing security vulnerabilities.
This is crucial to democratic  governance, trust, and good security.
The culture of secrecy that permeates  intelligence  agencies  fits  poorly  with  best  practices  for  private-sector  civilian security and more generally, principles of multi-stakeholder Internet  governance.
More  creative  solutions  to  information  sharing  must  be  explored  and,  as  a  starting  point,  a  strong  presumption  of  maximum  disclosure (rebuttable on a concrete basis) should be adopted as a guiding  principle.
Where a concrete basis for hiding information exists, it should not  be withheld longer than is necessary.
© OECD 2012   102 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Governments should ensure the implementation of cybersecurity policies  at  the  national  and  international  level  in  accordance  with  the  2002  OECD  Security  Guidelines.
This  means  that  measures  taken  to  secure  information  systems  and  networks  should  be  respectful  of  fundamental  rights  and  democratic  values,  and  premised  on  risk  assessments.
Similarly, Governments need to ensure that their own infrastructure is  secure.
They  should  do  so  holding  particular  regard  to  the  protection  of  citizens’ personal data and in keeping with OECD Privacy guidelines.9    Governments should be wary of large, monolithic cybersecurity projects  that  fail  to  address  specific  problems  in  a  concrete  and  targeted  manner.
Governments  should  ensure  that  cybersecurity  strategies  are  not  implemented in a manner that is in fact detrimental to its stated objective.
A  key example is the deterrent effect many security-based provisions have had  on  security  researchers,  who  often  face  legal  threats  from  organisations  wielding cybersecurity powers in order to avoid the potential embarrassment  of a publicly disclosed breach in safeguards.10 Governments should ensure  such legal protections, if adopted, do not interfere with legitimate security  research and should audit existing protections to ensure legitimate research  of this type is unhindered.
Response from ITAC   At  the  national  level,  cybersecurity  policies  should  be  developed  and  implemented in close collaboration with all interested and potentially affected  parties in a truly open, transparent and inclusive multistakeholder approach.
Such  policies  should  be  based  on  reliable  evidence,  a  solid  technological  foundation  and  a  proper  understanding  as  to  how  the  Internet  works.
Such  policies should foster the development of open standards and permission-less  innovation for security solutions.
They should avoid unilateral modifications  to  the  global  Internet  standards  and  technologies  –  any  changes  should  be  done using the appropriate channels (e.g.
Technology  will  continue  to  evolve  –  this  is  consistent  with  a  vibrant  and  dynamic  global  Internet  economy.
Cybersecurity  policies  should  be  flexible enough to allow technology to evolve and to be responsive enough  to  address  new  threats  as  they  arise.
Solutions  need  to  be  workable,  implementable and scalable.
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 103   Governments have a role to play in encouraging the development of new  business models as technology advances.
Efforts should be placed on cybersecurity strategies that target the source,  rather  than  the  user  or  the  intermediary.
Governments  should  be  careful  to  avoid  overly  prescriptive  approaches,  which  risk  freezing  security  solutions  and stifling innovations in technology and Internet use.
National  cybersecurity  strategies  will  need  to  be  mindful  of  national  cultures and values, yet compatible with international strategies and the global  nature of the Internet.
However,  it  is  also  important  that  that  objective  not  be  misused  as  a  justification for cybersecurity measures that are contrary to an open Internet.
Given the transborder nature of the Internet, international cooperation is  crucial for effective cybersecurity.
At the international level, policies should  stimulate the creation and use of common terminology/definitions, encourage  sharing  of  best  practices  and  facilitate  the  information  exchange  that  is  essential  to  combating  cybercrime.
It  is  also  important  for  cybersecurity  priorities  to  be  translated  into  technical  solutions  that  work  with  the  fundamental principles of the Internet and not against them.
As  in  policy  development,  the  Internet  technical  community  should  be  viewed as an essential partner in the implementation of cybersecurity policies.
4) What is the role and responsibility of business and industry/civil  society/Internet technical community with respect to cybersecurity  public policy?
Response from BIAC   Business, as innovator and developer of hardware, software and services,  the owner and operator of many critical infrastructure systems and developer  or  provider  of  many  government  owned  and  operated  systems  has  a  very  significant role to play.
Business plays this role directly  in their  technology  development  and  operational  policies,  cooperatively  in  collaborative  policy  development with governments and in appropriate multi-stakeholder settings  and in a directed fashion when implementing solutions for governments.
© OECD 2012   104 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       A number of strategies have consultation mechanisms, but again we raise  concerns on how to best differentiate across areas of economic and national  security.
The ability of governments to consult effectively with business in  the  context  of  national  and  economic  security  to  assure  that  there  is  appropriate cooperation in attaining mutual and important public policy goals  while assuring that undue burdens are not placed on business is an objective of  many of the strategies that needs greater emphasis.
Industry  can  actively  cooperate  and  collaborate  in  the  formulation  of  government policies related to cybercrime: monitoring, investment, counter- measures,  harmonisation  of  terminology,  laws  etc.
Defining security measures for emerging threats; in this contest the IT  industry should continually innovate and invest in the development of  its  products  and  services.
Being  an  innovative  and  dynamic  sector  with  rapidly  changing  and  evolving  technologies,  the  industry  can  give an important  value  to  the cybersecurity in addressing new and  evolving threats.
Continue to lead or collaborate as appropriate in developing globally  accepted  cybersecurity  standards,  best  practices,  and  international  assurance programs.
Developing and utilising comprehensive risk  management strategies  and  best  practices  to  achieve  and  maintain  trust  in  the  cyber  infra- structure.
In conclusion, the responsibility of industry is to lead and contribute to a  range of significant public-private partnerships and government initiatives,  including  information  sharing,  analysis,  training  and  emergency  response  with governments and industry peers.
Response from CSISAC   When it comes to cybersecurity, civil society is often excluded from the   process of policy making.
First,  the  involvement  and  lobbying  of  security  industries  and  law  enforcement  in  the  political  decision-making  process,  with  the  increasing  exclusion  of  the  citizenry,  is  concerning  and  leads  to  opaque  policy  processes and the marginalisation of the democratic process.
© OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 105   What also concerns civil society is the growing tendency towards public- private  partnerships  on  cybersecurity  strategies,  which  seem  modelled  on  traditional  intelligence  community  policy-making  approaches  and  not  on  Internet governance.
Although  international  cooperation  on  cybersecurity  may  be  necessary,  state-to-state interaction on these matters often exclude civil society with the  result that civil society concerns are ignored.
In regards to participation and openness, Governments should ensure the  proper participation of civil society in the cybersecurity policy development  process  so  that  civil  society  can  effectively  play  its  role  in  the  governance  process  —  namely,  to  ensure  values  such  as  openness,  concerns  of  individuals,  and  the  protection  of  privacy,  free  expression,  association,  and  access  to  information  are  taken  into  account  in  policy  outcomes.11  Civil  society  can  also  actively  engage  in  facilitating  cooperation  among  existing  security networks, while making the network’s actions more transparent and  accountable.
Response from ITAC   The  private  sector,  civil  society  and  the  Internet  technical  community  are important stakeholders and should be involved in the development and  implementation  of  cybersecurity  policies.
Only  a  truly  multistakeholder  approach will allow local, national and international communities to find the  right  balance  between  policy  requirements,  technical  soundness,  and  civil  rights of citizens, while ensuring the innovative potential of the Internet.
The  Internet  technical  community  is  in  the  best  position  to  provide  independent advice to policymakers on the potential intended and unintended  consequences  of  policy  decisions  to  the  Internet  and  the  way  that  it  works.
Policymakers  should  seek  this  advice  as  early  as  possible  in  their  policy  development process to avoid pursuing technologically flawed decisions.
The Internet technical community is also in a unique position to develop  building block security solutions (e.g.
SSL) that can be deployed by others  to  provide  Internet  users  with  various  options  and  varying  degrees  of  security in their Internet experience.
Such building blocks can also be used  to achieve national cybersecurity objectives (e.g.
using DNSSEC to secure  government email communications).
© OECD 2012   106 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       It should also be noted that the Internet technical community’s work to  improve  the  security  of  Internet  infrastructure  (occurring  independently  of  national  or  international  cybersecurity  policies)  is  quietly  supporting  the  overall policy objective of a more secure and trusted Internet.
Fundamental  to this is the Internet model of developing standards openly, collaboratively,  and by consensus.
Examples of technical standards developed by the Internet Engineering  Task Force (IETF) to improve the security of Internet infrastructure include:   ?
Secure BGP (Border Gateway Protocol)  ?
DNSSEC  (Domain  Name  System  Security  Extensions)  –  securing   integrity and authenticity of DNS responses   ?
RPKI  (Resource  Public  Key  Infrastructure)  –  an  infrastructure  to  support  certification  of  the  Internet  Number  Resources  and  the  foundation for the solutions of security of the global routing system  ?
Kerberos  Network  Authentication  System  –  provides  a  means  of  verifying the identities of entities on an open (unprotected) network   ?
TLS (Transport Layer security) – provides communications security   over the Internet  IPsec (Internet Protocol Security) – provides the end-to-end security  at the Internet layer   ?
Examples  of   technical  standards  work  under  development  and  consideration  at  the  World  Wide  Web  Consortium  (W3C)  to  improve  the  security of the Web and the Internet include:   ?
Content Security Policy  ?
cryptographic APIs for JavaScript   Examples of OASIS data security standards include:  ?
Digital  Signature  Services  (DSS)  –  digital  signature  services   standards for XML   ?
Key  Management  Interoperability  Protocol  (KMIP)  –  provides   extended functionality to asymmetric encrypted key technologies   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 107   ?
Security  Assertion  Markup  Language  (SAML)  –  XML-based  framework for creating and exchanging security information between  online partners   ?
eXtensible  Access  Control  Markup  Language   representing and evaluating access control policies   (XACML)  –   Example  of  requirements  and  frameworks  specifications  from  the   ISO/IEC include:   IS27001 – Information Security Management Systems – Requirements  IS27002 – Code of Practice for Information Security Management   ?
Identity Assurance Framework – Service Assessment Criteria (IAF- SAC)  –  provides  criteria  for  assessment  of  a  Credential  Service  Provider  (organisational,  credential  management  and  identity  proofing)   the  Communications  Sector  Coordinating  Council,   The ICT industry  is also working collaboratively  through public-private  partnerships to secure communications infrastructure.
The  industry is also developing voluntary security measures such as Safecode and  OTTF.
The telecommunications industry has incorporated security measures  into technology-specific standards, such as 3GPP and 3GPP2.
The  industry  should  work  together  with  all  stakeholders  to  further  develop standard, unified privacy-respecting methods to collect, analyse and  report  data  breaches  at  a  global  level  to  provide  industry  and  government  with a better understanding of, and ability to combat, cybersecurity threats.
5) What is -or what will be- the impact of recent cybersecurity  strategies on business and industry/civil society/the Internet technical  community?
Response from BIAC   Increased certainty and assurance will accrue to business and industry in  the form of greater trust in the infrastructure and services and government  adoption of new technologies helps demonstrate the capacity of and faith in  technology.
© OECD 2012   108 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       That  being  said,  technology  mandates,  prescriptive  rules  and  detailed  requirements are not usually appropriate vehicles for achieving government  objectives.
Government should work with non-government stakeholders to  build better risk-based strategies that are agile enough to respond to rapid  changes in the global threat environment.
Issues  related  to  corporate  and  organisational  policies  dealing  with  security  and  supply/value  chains  need  to  address  corporate  realities  and  business needs.
The desire to help assure security by government mandated  specific or detailed requirements related to operations and supply chain may  often  constrain  innovation,  create  burdens  and  increase  costs  without  improving  overall  security.
Similarly  in  some  non-OECD  countries,  procurement or domestic preferences in the guise of security requirements or  requirements related to security may either impair trade or otherwise skew a  level  playing  field  to  the  disadvantage  of  overall  security  by  precluding  or  significantly hindering the ability of companies and organisations to roll out  globally consistent processes and infrastructures.
Response from CSISAC   More mass surveillance policies, less accountability, and  transparency   As mentioned above, there is a morally hazardous problem with current  cybersecurity approaches that focus on “offensive” security measures (e.g.
These  open-ended  immunity  regimes  are  also  indicative  of  the  monolithic  approach to cybersecurity warned against above.
Furthermore,  it  rarely  seems  that  citizens  and  their  needs  are  at  the  center of cybersecurity policies.
Some context-specific problems include:   Identity Management Schemes    One  set  of  strategies  being  touted  as  a  solution  to  the  cyber  security  problem is to promote widespread identity management schemes, in which a  user  potentially  has  to  authenticate  to  some  system  before  a  network  (or  some aspects of a network) is accessible to her.
Even her low-level actions   © OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 109   such  as  the  sending  of  packets  may  be  attributable  to  her  authenticated  identity  under  some  proposals.
In  addition  to  being  a  disruptive  departure  from  the  way  the  Internet  works  now,  we  should  not  assume  that  such  authentication or identity management schemes would lead to good security.
For  one,  implementation  challenges  would  create  a  whole  host  of  new  vulnerabilities  and  security  issues.
Moreover,  even  setting  these  security  issues  aside,  it  is  not  certain  that  attribution  would  be  all  that  useful.
Chilling People’s Freedom of Expression Rights   Specific  tactics  such  as  the “Internet  kill  switch”  and  communications  shutdowns  are  particularly  powerful  in  restraining  speech  and  association.
This kind of measure does not only operate in authoritarian regimes; indeed  the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, in the midst of civil unrest last  year,  proposed  shutting  down  social  networking  sites  and  the  Blackberry  messaging service.
Similar proposals have been voiced in the United States,  only to be dismissed as impractical on a network level.
Sometimes  the  supposed  harm  that  results from an act of hacktivism — such as the temporary defacement of a  website13  —  has  a  de  minimis  quality  that  belies  its  characterisation  as  a  “cybersecurity  threat”.
In  other  instances,  acts  of  hacktivism  have  the  potential  to  cause  more  serious  harm  if  for  example  these  were  turned  to  denial  or  delay  of  access  to  essential  services.
Whistleblowing  and  releases  of  classified  information  that  expose  govern- mental abuses also blur the line between legal and illegal activity.
This kind  of  hacktivism,  therefore,  must  always  be  assessed  through  the  lens  of   © OECD 2012   110 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       traditional  civil  and  political  rights  and  not  conflated  with  “national  security” threats or “cyberwarfare”.
Specifically,  cybersecurity  strategies  should  not  unduly  and disproportionately interfere with important democratic activities such as  collaboration,  participation,  coalition  building,  advocacy,  fundraising,  and  the dissemination of information by individuals and groups.
Extra-Territorial Impact of Cybersecurity Policies   The  cybersecurity  strategies  of  one  government  can  affect  citizens  of  another country due to the cross-border nature of communications.
An example is the recent distribution of pro-government malware  in  Syria,  which  was  released  from  within  the  country  first  onto  satellite  networks and set up in the absence of access to national infrastructure.
The  malware—targeted  at  Syrian  opposition  activists—later  spread  to  users’  computers  outside  of  Syria,  capturing  webcam  activity,  disabling  notifica- tion settings for certain antivirus programs, recording key strokes, stealing  passwords, and sending this sensitive information to a Syrian IP address.15  Thus,  the  extra-territorial  effects  of  cybersecurity  policies  should  also  be  taken into account by governments when they are formulating these policies,  especially the impact on civil society activism work in other countries.
Response from ITAC   Cybersecurity  policies,  developed   through  open,  consensus-based  processes, could be a key element to the continued growth and robustness of  the Internet.
They could help facilitate online commerce, secure government  networks, and enhance the online user experience.
However, poorly crafted  cybersecurity  strategies  could  have  the  opposite  impact.
For  example,  cybersecurity approaches that emphasise hardening of networks or extensive  government controls could result in network fragmentation, higher costs for  providers  and  users  of  online  services  and  applications,  and  stifle  free  expression.
Cybersecurity  approaches  require  a  delicate  balance  of  many  interests,  roles  and  responsibilities  within  the  Internet  ecosystem  –  we  all  have  a  role  to  play.
Tilting  the  balance  in  one  direction  or  the  other  will  inevitably have broad impacts at the local, national and international level.
© OECD 2012    NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 111       6) How should national cybersecurity strategies and policies be  evaluated?
What metrics should be applied to measure their  efficiency?
Response from BIAC   To be efficient national cybersecurity strategies and policies should be  periodically  evaluated  and  updated  so  that  improvements  can  be  imple- mented to face new security threats.
Producing  periodic  country  reports  to  share  information  about   security incidents and the level of damages created.
Planning  recurrent  cybersecurity  risk  assessments  to  verify  the  efficacy of the security measures applied.
This output could be used to  review the cybersecurity strategies and policies.
While  it  would  be  nice  to  be  able  to  comparatively  evaluate  cyber- security strategies, the paper indicates that each national strategy has its own  definitions,  priorities  and  implementation  methods  suited  to  the  legal  and  cultural context of the nation.
It would thus be best to measure the effective- ness of such strategies within the national deployment and then separately  measure how well the strategies enabled cooperative work across jurisdic- tions.
While the topics and implementation methodologies vary, there could be  some uniformity in the measurement criteria that could further enable some  levels of comparison or at least create some referencable bench marks.
It  should  be  noted  that  cost-effectiveness,  useful  information  sharing,  com- plaints, positive or negatives impacts on the level of security as measured by  breach  or  other  malicious  behaviour,  costs  to  business  and  attributable  growth  in  the  usage  of  the  internet  and  the  economy  could  all  be  useful  metrics.
Response from CSISAC   National  cybersecurity  policies  must  be  evaluated  by  their  impact  on  fundamental  rights  and  legitimate  considerations  of  citizens  as  set  out  in  Principles  4  and  5  of  the  2002  Security  Guidelines.
A  successful  cyber- security strategy will ensure that, prior to its adoption, each specific cyber- security initiative it envisions is designed in a manner consistent with core   © OECD 2012   112 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       values recognised by democratic societies, such as freedom of expression,  privacy,  due  process,  and  transparency.
The  effectiveness  of  each  cyber- security proposal should be measured by these metrics and consistent with  fundamental human rights.
A human rights compliance checklist or Impact  Assessment  should  be  a  mandatory  element  of  the  assessment  process  for  each  cybersecurity  initiative.
Further,  any  impact  on  fundamental  rights  must be narrowly tailored to address a specific, well-defined cybersecurity  threat that presents a demonstrable risk of tangible harm.
In recognition of  the  ever-shifting  technological  landscape  that  characterises  the  Internet,  there  is  a  risk  that  cybersecurity  initiatives,  even  if  proportionate  when  initially adopted, may grow to impact significantly on fundamental rights as  technology evolves.
Cybersecurity strategies should therefore build in 5 year  sunset  clauses  or  mandatory  rights  impact  assessment  reviews  to  ensure  adopted policies do not grow over time in a manner that is inconsistent with  fundamental rights.
This is an area where opacity is produced not only by withholding information  from  the  public  (on  grounds  that  it  would  compromise  company  secrets  or  alert  criminals  to  vulnerabilities)  but  also  through  the  prevalence  of  discus- sions and legislative proposals so broad and vague it becomes impossible to  know what powers are actually being granted and the purposes for which they  will  be  used.16  Monolithic  solutions  of  this  nature  are  not  only  problematic  because they tend to be broader than the issues they are designed to address,  but also in that they effectively immunise the use of such powers from proper  assessment of their effectiveness, proportionality, and impact on fundamental  rights.
It  is  difficult  to  gauge  the  scope,  intended  use  and  effectiveness  of  cybersecurity  powers  premised  on  a  vague  need  to  produce  “a  general  increase in cyber insecurity” or, alternatively, of powers aimed at enhancing  national  security,  but  which  are  open-ended  in  the  conditions  under  which  they might be used.
Response from ITAC   No cybersecurity policy will be able to address 100% of all online risks.
Is  the  policy  developed  with  an  open,  inclusive  and  transparent  process?
© OECD 2012         NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 113   ?
Does the cybersecurity strategy protect basic human rights such as  freedom of expression and provide adequate privacy protection for  end-users?
Does the policy create an environment of information sharing?
Does  the  policy  support  appropriate  voluntary  adoption  of  globally  developed  standards  and  best  practices  to  address  cybersecurity  threats?
One metric for the effectiveness of policies would be to measure the level  of  international  participation  pre-  and  post-  policy  implementation.
A  successful set of policies should increase Internet users willingness to access  Internet services and systems, and would increase their overall willingness to  participate in the ecosystem.
Internet users may never understand many of the  issues  surrounding  cybersecurity  policies,  however  many  users  have  the  ability to “vote with their feet” regarding the use of services and participation  in Internet communities at the local, national and international levels.
© OECD 2012   114 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES       Notes      1.
See  “Dangerously  Vague  Cybersecurity  Legislation  Threatens  Civil  Liberties”,  Dan  Auerbach  and  Lee  Tien,  EFF,  2012.
Various  proposed  U.S.   legislative   initiatives,  for  example,  adopt  extremely  vague  or  broad  definitions  of  cybersecurity  threats  that  can  include,  in  some  instances,  ‘theft  or  misappropriation  of  private  or  government  information,  intellectual  property,  or  personally  identifiable  information’.
This provision will allow ISPs to monitor communications  of  subscribers  for  potential  intellectual  property  infringements;  block  accounts believed to be used in infringing; block access to websites such  as The Pirate Bay believed to be carrying infringing content; or take other  measures  provided  ISPs  claim  it  was  motivated  by  cybersecurity  concerns.
Also, of concern is the language of “theft or misappropriation  of private or government information” in some bills, which might be used  to block sites such as WikiLeaks and the New  York Times  which have  published information deemed classified.
See  “Dangerously  Vague  Cybersecurity  Legislation  Threatens  Civil  Liberties”,  Dan  Auerbach  and  Lee  Tien,  EFF,  2012.
www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/03/rogers-’cybersecurity’-bill-broad-     4.
© OECD 2012           NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES – 115   5.
Paragraph 4 of the Guidelines requires that Exceptions to the Principles  contained  therein,  “including  those  relating  to  national  sovereignty,  national security and public policy (“public order”)” should be as few as  possible.
There  are  many  examples  in  the  US  of  instances  where  security  researches have faced legal threats under anti-hacking provisions found in  the  CFAA  as  well  as  under  analogous  anti-circumvention  protection  measures found in the US DMCA.
“Towards a cyber security strategy for global civil society?”, Ron Deibert,   Global Information Society Watch.
Bruce Schneier compares the “harm” caused by some DDoS attacks to the  service  delays  caused  by  a  crowd  of  protestors  standing  in  front  of  a  service  outlet:  Schneier  compared  the  pro-WikiLeaks  attacks  on  MasterCard  and  Visa  to  a  bunch  of  protesters  standing  in  front  of  an        © OECD 2012   116 – NON-GOVERNMENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON A NEW GENERATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGIES         office building, refusing to let workers in.
“Is Wikileaks Engaged in  ‘Cyber  war”,  J.D.
See  for  example  this  case  study  in  zero  day  voter  suppression  and  electronic  miss-information  campaigns  in  “E-Deceptive  Campaign  Practices  Report  2010:  Internet  Technology  &  Democracy  2.0”,  EPIC,  2010.
Examples can be found in recent U.S. cybersecurity legislative initiatives.
See  “House  Committee  Rushing  to  Approve  Dangerous  “Information  Sharing”  Bill”.
CEROW AGENCY, INC.    CYBERSECURITY   POLICY                DATE UPDATED   07/26/17                               V                                                     Template provided by our association:      DOCUMENT DEFINITIONS   ”Policy” refers to the Information Security Policy.
”Information System” means a discrete set of electronic information resources organized for the collection,  processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination or disposition of electronic information, as well as any  specialized system such as industrial/process controls systems, telephone switching and private branch  exchange systems, and environmental control systems.
”Nonpublic Information” shall mean all electronic information that is not Publicly Available Information and  is:    1.  Business related information of a Covered Entity the tampering with which, or unauthorized disclosure,   access or use of which, would cause a material adverse impact to the business, operations or security of  the Covered Entity;    2.
Any information concerning an individual which because of name, number, personal mark, or other   identifier can be used to identify such individual, in combination with any one or more of the following data  elements: (i) social security number, (ii) drivers' license number or non-driver identification card number,  (iii) account number, credit or debit card number, (iv) any security code, access code or password that  would permit access to an individual's financial account, or (v) biometric records;    3.
Any information or data, except age or gender, in any form or medium created by or derived from a health   care provider or an individual and that relates to (i) the past, present or future physical, mental or  behavioral health or condition of any individual or a member of the individual's family, (ii) the provision of  health care to any individual, or (iii) payment for the provision of health care to any individual.
”Person” means any individual or non-governmental entity, including but not limited to any non-governmental  partnership, corporation, branch, agency or association.
”Third Party Servicer Providers” refers to a person that is not an affiliate of the Agency that provides  services to the Agency and maintains, processes or is otherwise permitted access to Nonpublic Information  through its provision of services to the Agency.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   2     INFORMATION SECURITY   This Policy for Cerow Agency, Inc. (herein after referred to as “Agency”) is intended to create effective  administrative, technical, electronic and physical protections to safeguard the personal information of the  Agency’s Clients and employees, the Agency’s proprietary and confidential information, the physical security of  our premises, and the integrity of our electronic systems so that they are best positioned to function smoothly  without interruption.
This Policy sets forth the Agency’s procedures for electronic and physical methods of accessing, collecting,  storing, using, transmitting, destroying, and protecting Nonpublic Information of Clients, the Agency and/or  Agency employees and also the use of the Agency’s Systems by Agency employees and any authorized third  parties, as deemed appropriate and/or required by applicable laws and regulations.
In formulating and implementing this Policy, we have:    1.
Identified reasonably foreseeable internal and external risks to Agency’s security, confidentiality and/or  integrity of electronic, paper or other records containing Private Information   2.
Assessed the likelihood and potential danger of these threats, taking into consideration the sensitivity of   the Nonpublic Information   3.
Designed and implemented an approach that puts safeguards in place to minimize those risks, consistent   with the requirements of applicable laws/regulations   Included regular monitoring of the effectiveness of those safeguards   5.
All security measures contained in this Policy shall be reviewed and re-evaluated annually or when there is a  change in applicable laws or regulations or in the business activities of Agency.
Each employee with access to Nonpublic Information shall receive training as necessary on this Policy.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   3     INFORMATION SECURITY COORDINATOR   The Agency has designated Catherine Hungerford as the “Information Security Coordinator” to oversee  implementation of this Policy.
The Information Security Coordinator will be responsible for:   Initial implementation and maintaining responsibility for implementation of this Policy;   1.
Reviewing the security measures in this Policy annually or when there is a change in applicable laws or   regulations or in business activities of Agency; and   4.
Conducting training as necessary for all Agency employees with access to Nonpublic Information.
Implementing policies and procedures to ensure the security of Information Systems and Nonpublic  Information that are accessible to, or held by, Third Party Service Providers        DATA GOVERNANCE & CLASSIFICATION   SPECIAL PROTECTION FOR NONPUBLIC INFORMATION   Nonpublic Information is to be accorded the highest level of confidentiality by the Agency and employees.
Examples of Nonpublic Information include, but are not limited to - first name and last name, or first initial and last  name, and any one or more of the following:   1.
Social Security number  2.
Financial account number, or credit or debit card number, with or without any required security code,   access code, personal identification number or password   4.
Personal or protected health information  5.
Biometric records   The information listed in 1-4 above, even if it is not connected with a name, should each be treated as Nonpublic  Information.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   4   WHERE NONPUBLIC INFORMATION IS STORED   The Agency and its employees recognize that the Agency possesses Nonpublic Information in the following  places, whether in the Agency’s premises or off site, and whether created or maintained by Agency or third  parties on behalf of Agency:   1.
Personnel files, Form I-9s, benefits information, payroll information, and direct deposit information for   employees wherever located, including but not limited to hard copies at desks, in file drawers and other  storage areas, and in electronic form on the Agency’s Systems   3.
Third Party Service Providers entrusted with Nonpublic Information from the Agency   This Policy is intended to protect Nonpublic Information possessed by the Agency from unauthorized access,  dissemination and/or use.
Nonpublic Information may not be disseminated, communicated or stored on or through any social media  websites or services, at any time or for any reason.
Employees will adhere to the Agency document retention schedule and requirements.
When it is appropriate to  destroy Agency records, paper and electronic records containing Nonpublic Information must be destroyed in a  manner in which they cannot be read or reconstructed.
Unless otherwise directed by the Information Security Coordinator, a commercial shredding company will be used  to destroy paper documents.
When computers, digital copiers, scanners and/or printers with electronic storage  capacity, or portable electronic devices and media are discarded, such disposal should be coordinated with the  Information Security Coordinator, and care needs to be taken to ensure that the hard drives or other storage  media are destroyed in a manner that all data becomes unreadable.
ASSET INVENTORY & DEVICE MANAGEMENT   1.
Employees should keep mobile electronic communications devices (such as PDAs, smart phones, etc.)
with access to Nonpublic Information in their possession or in a secured location at all times, and  Employees will not share passwords or other access information with others.
Employees will not put any Agency data on thumb drives, laptops or other portable media, drives and   devices unless authorized by the Agency.
If so authorized, the thumb drives, laptops or other portable  media, drives and devices should be password-protected and encrypted, and the portable mobile  electronic communications devices and laptops should be password-protected and encrypted.
Employees that no longer work for the Agency must:  (1) return to Agency all Agency information   (including, but not limited to, any Nonpublic Information) in any form, whether stored on computers,  laptops, portable devices, electronic media, or in files, records, work papers, cloud- or web-based storage,  etc.
; (2) return all keys, IDs, access codes and/or badges; and (3) not access Nonpublic Agency  information (including, but not limited to, any Private Information).
In accordance with the Agency’s human resources manual, access by the former employee to Agency  email and voice mail accounts can be immediately disabled and access transferred to other Agency staff  to assure a continuity of work, and inactivated when determined appropriate by Agency.
Employees are required to report all actual or potential unauthorized access to, use of or disclosure of   Nonpublic Information to the Information Security Coordinator.
ACCESS CONTROLS & IDENTITY MANAGEMENT   INTERNAL CONTROLS   1.
Agency computers will require a user ID and password and Agency mobile devices should require a   password (and be encrypted, if reasonably feasible).
Employee log-ins and passwords should be  appropriately strong (with the minimum number of characters and other elements required by the  Agency’s Systems).
Electronic files containing Nonpublic Information will not be left accessible to others, such as on   computers or portable storage devices accessible (e.g., computer screens must be locked when an  employee using such files leaves his or her computer, even briefly).
Paper and electronic files must not  be removed from the Agency premises or accessed remotely unless specific authorization has been  provided in advance, and then, the security of that Nonpublic Information must be maintained.
The Agency will implement controls to  terminate computer sessions and/or lock computers after a predetermined time of inactivity (e.g., 10  minutes).
Employees should not open any email attachment, link, or application where the employee does not   reasonably believe the information expected to be accessed is from a trustworthy source.
Employees will  not use Agency equipment to access any application or software not approved by the Agency.
To combat internal risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic   Information, the following measures will be taken:   6.
The Agency will retain only the last four digits of credit card numbers and will not retain bank routing   numbers, personal bank account numbers and checks, and all credit- and banking-related information not  retained will be destroyed in accordance with applicable law and Agency-designated business practices.
EXTERNAL CONTROLS   In addition to the measures taken to combat internal risks, the following measures will be taken to minimize  external risks to the security, confidentiality and/or integrity of records containing Nonpublic Information:   1.
Visitors to the Agency will be escorted within the office and will not have access to Agency computers or  property that may contain Nonpublic Information.
Guests’ wireless access should be fire-walled off from  the Agency’s Systems.
The Agency will maintain security measures so that its wireless networks cannot be accessed remotely by   the public.
Servers and other equipment at the Agency’s premises containing Nonpublic Information will be   maintained in a secure location.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   6     SYSTEMS & NETWORK SECURITY,              OPERATIONS & AVAILABILITY    1.
The Agency will employ an email filter (hardware, software, or third-party provided) that works to restrict   and eliminate viruses, spyware and other malware before getting to Agency desktop and portable  computers.
The Agency will maintain up-to-date network and firewall protection and operating system security   patches on its Systems, servers and desktop and laptop computers, as well as other security measures  deemed appropriate.
The Agency will maintain security software, which includes malware protection with up-to-date patches   and virus definitions, on its Systems and its servers, desktop and laptop computers, and all mobile  devices, which is updated as frequently as possible, but at least daily.
All back-ups will be password-protected and encrypted and kept in a secured location off site.
Agency employees should use care in communications (e.g., outgoing email and attachments) to ensure:  first, that the Nonpublic Information needs to be sent by email and, if so, that it is transmitted using secure  email in accordance with Agency policy.
The Agency will create a secure SSL tunnel between its website and the consumer before allowing the   consumer to enter any Nonpublic Information or to enter a password.
When an employee accesses Agency Systems and/or Nonpublic Information from a remote location, the   Agency’s secure SSL connection must be used (such as Virtual Private Network (VPN), GoToMyPC,  LogMeIn).
Employees should not access Agency Systems or Nonpublic Information using non-Agency equipment   (e.g., a home computer) unless authorized by the Agency and provided with appropriate firewalls and  virus protection, and done through the Agency’s secure SSL connection.
Employees will not store any  Nonpublic Information on any non-Agency equipment.
SYSTEMS & NETWORK MONITORING   1.
The Agency will monitor its Systems and equipment for any act or attempt, successful or unsuccessful, to   gain unauthorized access to, disrupt or misuse an Information System or information stored on such  Information System, including but not limited to implementing hardware, software and/or procedural  mechanisms to record and report activity for the Systems and equipment.
The Agency will exercise due diligence in making sure third-party service providers that are provided   Nonpublic Information have the requisite security controls and written policy in place, provide the Agency  a written commitment to safeguard and store Nonpublic Information with at least the same level of  security controls as the Agency maintains (as outlined in this Policy), and advise the Agency as to any  actual, suspected or potential breaches of Private Information.
Copyright © 2017 Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of New York, Inc.   |   7     BUSINESS CONTINUITY & DISASTER RECOVERY   IF A BREACH OF NONPUBLIC INFORMATION (CYBERSECURITY EVENT) OCCURS OR IS SUSPECTED   A security breach occurs when there is an unauthorized acquisition, dissemination, use or loss of Nonpublic  Information.
Each employee shall be responsible for notifying the Information Security Coordinator whenever he  or she learns that there has been or may have been a security breach that may have compromised Nonpublic  Information or other Agency information about Clients, employees or Agency business.
The Agency will take the following actions in the event of a security breach:   a.  assess the security breach  b.  consult counsel  c.  d.  notify the carriers whose policyholders insured through the Agency may have been affected by   review the requirements of the applicable state laws and regulations    the event   e.  notify the carrier for the Agency’s cybersecurity coverage  f.  notify individuals, regulatory and law enforcement authorities (if and as required and further as   deemed appropriate by Agency management)  take and document corrective actions to contain and control the problem    identify who will address any media inquiries    g.  h.  i.  draft the content of all communications regarding the event for potentially affected individuals and,   if appropriate, the public          Information  Technology  Cyber  Security  Policy   (Insert Name of  Organization)   (Insert Date)             SAMPLE   TEMPLATE   Organizations are encouraged to  develop  their  own  policy  and  procedures  from  the  information  enclosed.
The  information  provided  is  just  one  example  and  should  not  preclude  any  organization  from  other sources.
(NAME OF ORGANIZATION HERE)   POLICY MANUAL   CYBER SECURITY POLICY   (Signature Line)      Effective Date: (Insert Date)     Subject:    Approved:      1  DEFINITION  The use of the term “company” is in reverence to the following organization: (Insert  Organization Name).
INTRODUCTION   2  This Cyber Security Policy is a formal set of rules by which those people who are given access to  company technology and information assets must abide.
The Cyber Security Policy serves several purposes.
The main purpose is to inform company  users: employees, contractors and other authorized users of their obligatory requirements for  protecting the technology and information assets of the company.
The Cyber Security Policy  describes the technology and information assets that we must protect and identifies many of  the threats to those assets.
The Cyber Security Policy also describes the user’s responsibilities and privileges.
What are the rules regarding Internet access?
The policy answers  these questions, describes user limitations and informs users there will be penalties for  violation of the policy.
This document also contains procedures for responding to incidents that  threaten the security of the company computer systems and network.
3  WHAT ARE WE PROTECTING  It is the obligation of all users of the company systems to protect the technology and  information assets of the company.
This information must be protected from unauthorized  access, theft and destruction.
The technology and information assets of the company are made  up of the following components:     ?
System Software including: operating systems, database management systems, and   backup and restore software, communications protocols, and so forth.
This   includes custom written software applications, and commercial off the shelf software  packages.
Communications Network hardware and software including: routers, routing tables,   hubs, modems, multiplexers, switches, firewalls, private lines, and associated network  management software and tools.
3.1  Classification of Information  User information found in computer system files and databases shall be classified as either  confidential or non-confidential.
The company shall classify the information controlled by them.
The (company designee) is required to review and approve the classification of the information  and determine the appropriate level of security to best protect it.
Furthermore, the (company  designee) shall classify information controlled by units not administered by a (company  designee).
3.2  Classification of Computer Systems    Security Level  RED   Description  This system contains confidential  information – information that  cannot be revealed to personnel  outside of the company.
Even  within the company, access to this  information is provided on a “need  to know” basis.
Example  Server containing confidential data  and other department information  on databases.
Network routers and  firewalls containing confidential  routing tables and security  information.
This system does not contain  confidential information or perform  critical services, but it provides the  ability to access RED systems  through the network.
This system is not externally  accessible.
It is on an isolated LAN  segment, unable to access RED or  GREEN systems.
It does not contain  sensitive information or perform  critical services.
This system is externally accessible.
While it  performs important services, it does  not contain confidential  information.
User department PCs used to access  Server and application(s).
Management workstations used by  systems and network  administrators.
A test system used by system  designers and programmers to  develop new computer systems.
A public Web server with non- sensitive information.
Page 2   GREEN   WHITE   BLACK        Version Date     3.3  Local Area Network (LAN) Classifications  A LAN will be classified by the systems directly connected to it.
For example, if a LAN contains  just one RED system and all network users will be subject to the same restrictions as RED  systems users.
A LAN will assume the Security Classification of the highest level systems  attached to it.
4  DEFINITIONS    Externally accessible to public.
The system may be accessed via the Internet by persons  outside of the company without a logon id or password.
The system may be accessed via dial- up connection without providing a logon id or password.
It is possible to “ping” the system from  the Internet.
Non-Public, Externally accessible.
The system must have at least one level of firewall protection between its network  and the Internet.
The system may be accessed via the Internet or the private Intranet.
Internally accessible only.
The  system must have at least two levels of firewall protection between its network and the  Internet.
The system is not visible to Internet users.
It may have a private Internet (non- translated) address and it does not respond to a “ping” from the Internet.
Chief Information Officer.
The Director of the Department of Information Technology (IT) shall  serve as the Chief Information Officer.
Security Administrator.
An employee of IT shall be designated as the Security Administrator for  the company.
5  Threats to Security    5.1  Employees  One of the biggest security threats is employees.
You have to layer your security to compensate for that  as well.
Limit access to only business hours.
Don’t share accounts to access systems.
Never share your login information with co-  workers.
When employees are separated or disciplined, you remove or limit access to systems.
Physically secure computer assets, so that only staff with appropriate need can access.
These people are the most common type of attackers on the Internet.
These amateur hackers are scanning the Internet and looking for well  known security holes that have not been plugged.
The probability of this type of attack is low, but not entirely unlikely given the amount of  sensitive information contained in databases.
The attacks are well planned  and are based on any weaknesses discovered that will allow a foothold into the network.
6  User Responsibilities  This section establishes usage policy for the computer systems, networks and information  resources of the office.
It pertains to all employees and contractors who use the computer  systems, networks, and information resources as business partners, and individuals who are  granted access to the network for the business purposes of the company.
Users are personally responsible for protecting all confidential information used and/or stored  on their accounts.
This includes their logon IDs and passwords.
Furthermore they are  prohibited from making unauthorized copies of such confidential information and/or  distributing it to unauthorized persons outside of the company.
Users shall not purposely engage in activity with the intent to: harass other users; degrade the  performance of the system; divert system resources to their own use; or gain access to  company systems for which they do not have authorization.
Users shall not attach unauthorized devices on their PCs or workstations, unless they have  received specific authorization from the employees’ manager and/or the company IT designee.
Users shall not download unauthorized software from the Internet onto their PCs or  workstations.
Users are required to report any weaknesses in the company computer security, any incidents  of misuse or violation of this policy to their immediate supervisor.
Version Date     Page 4   6.2  Use of the Internet  The company will provide Internet access to employees and contractors who are connected to  the internal network and who has a business need for this access.
Employees and contractors  must obtain permission from their supervisor and file a request with the Security Administrator.
The Internet is a business tool for the company.
It is to be used for business-related purposes  such as: communicating via electronic mail with suppliers and business partners, obtaining  useful business information and relevant technical and business topics.
The Internet service may not be used for transmitting, retrieving or storing any communications  of a discriminatory or harassing nature or which are derogatory to any individual or group,  obscene or pornographic, or defamatory or threatening in nature for “chain letters” or any  other purpose which is illegal or for personal gain.
6.3  User Classification  All users are expected to have knowledge of these security policies and are required to report  violations to the Security Administrator.
The company has established the following  user groups and defined the access privileges and responsibilities:      User Category  Department Users (Employees)   System Administrators   Security Administrator   Systems Analyst/Programmer   Contractors/Consultants   Privileges & Responsibilities  Access to application and databases as  required for job function.
(RED and/or GREEN  cleared)  Access to computer systems, routers, hubs,  and other infrastructure technology required  for job function.
Access to confidential  information on a “need to know” basis only.
Highest level of security clearance.
Allowed  access to all computer systems, databases,  firewalls, and network devices as required for  job function.
Access to applications and databases as  required for specific job function.
Not  authorized to access routers, firewalls, or  other network devices.
Access to applications and databases as  required for specific job functions.
Access to  routers and firewall only if required for job  function.
Knowledge of security policies.
Access to company information and systems  must be approved in writing by the company  director/CEO.
Version Date     Page 5   Other Agencies and Business Partners   General Public   Access allowed to selected applications only  when contract or inter-agency access  agreement is in place or required by  applicable laws.
Access is limited to applications running on  public Web servers.
The general public will not  be allowed to access confidential information.
6.4  Monitoring Use of Computer Systems  The company has the right and capability to monitor electronic information created and/or  communicated by persons using company computer systems and networks, including e-mail  messages and usage of the Internet.
It is not the company policy or intent to continuously  monitor all computer usage by employees or other users of the company computer systems  and network.
However, users of the systems should be aware that the company may monitor  usage, including, but not limited to, patterns of usage of the Internet (e.g.
site accessed, on-line  length, time of day access), and employees’ electronic files and messages to the extent  necessary to ensure that the Internet and other electronic communications are being used in  compliance with the law and with company policy.
7  Access Control  A fundamental component of our Cyber Security Policy is controlling access to the critical  information resources that require protection from unauthorized disclosure or modification.
The fundamental meaning of access control is that permissions are assigned to individuals or  systems that are authorized to access specific resources.
Access controls exist at various layers  of the system, including the network.
Access control is implemented by logon ID and password.
At the application and database level, other access control methods can be implemented to  further restrict access.
The application and database systems can limit the number of  applications and databases available to users based on their job requirements.
7.1  User System and Network Access – Normal User Identification  All users will be required to have a unique logon ID and password for access to systems.
The  user’s password should be kept confidential and MUST NOT be shared with management &  supervisory personnel and/or any other employee whatsoever.
These can be easily cracked using  standard “hacker tools”.
Passwords should not be posted on or near computer terminals or otherwise be readily   accessible in the area of the terminal.
Version Date     Page 6   Users are not allowed to access password files on any network infrastructure component.
Password files on servers will be monitored for access by unauthorized users.
Users who need this level of  access to production systems must request a Special Access account as outlined elsewhere in  this document.
Supervisors / Managers shall immediately and directly contact the company IT Manager to  report change in employee status that requires terminating or modifying employee logon  access privileges.
Employees shall not logon to a computer and then  allow another individual to use the computer or otherwise share access to the computer  systems.
7.2  System Administrator Access  System Administrators, network administrators, and security administrators will have (type of  access) access to host systems, routers, hubs, and firewalls as required to fulfill the duties of  their job.
All system administrator passwords will be DELETED immediately after any employee who has  access to such passwords is terminated, fired, or otherwise leaves the employment of the  company.
7.3  Special Access  Special access accounts are provided to individuals requiring temporary system administrator  privileges in order to perform their job.
These accounts are monitored by the company and  require the permission of the user’s company IT Manager.
Monitoring of the special access  accounts is done by entering the users into a specific area and periodically generating reports  to management.
The reports will show who currently has a special access account, for what  reason, and when it will expire.
Version Date     Page 7   7.4  Connecting to Third-Party Networks  This policy is established to ensure a secure method of connectivity provided between the  company and all third-part companies and other entities required to electronically exchange  information with company.
“Third-party” refers to vendors, consultants and business partners doing business with  company, and other partners that have a need to exchange information with the company.
Third-party network connections are to be used only by the employees of the third-party, only  for the business purposes of the company.
The third-party company will ensure that only  authorized users will be allowed to access information on the company network.
The third- party will not allow Internet traffic or other private network traffic to flow into the network.
A  third-party network connection is defined as one of the following connectivity options:     ?
A network connection will terminate on a (to be specified) and the third-party will be   subject to standard company authentication rules.
In cases where the existing third-party network connections do not meet the  requirements outlined in this document, they will be re-designed as needed.
7.5  Connecting Devices to the Network  Only authorized devices may be connected to the company network(s).
Authorized devices  include PCs and workstations owned by company that comply with the configuration guidelines  of the company.
Other authorized devices include network infrastructure devices used for  network management and monitoring.
Users shall not attach to the network: non-company computers that are not authorized, owned  and/or controlled by company.
Users are specifically prohibited from attaching (specify) to the  company network.
NOTE: Users are not authorized to attach any device that would alter the topology  characteristics of the Network or any unauthorized storage devices, e.g.
7.6  Remote Access  Only authorized persons may remotely access the company network.
Remote access is provided  to those employees, contractors and business partners of the company that have a legitimate  business need to exchange information, copy files or programs, or access computer  applications.
Authorized connection can be remote PC to the network or a remote network to  company network connection.
The only acceptable method of remotely connecting into the  internal network is using a secure ID.
Version Date     Page 8   7.7  Unauthorized Remote Access  The attachment of (e.g.
Additionally, users may not  install personal software designed to provide remote control of the PC or workstation.
This type  of remote access bypasses the authorized highly secure methods of remote access and poses a  threat to the security of the entire network.
8  Penalty for Security Violation  The company takes the issue of security seriously.
Those people who use the technology and  information resources of company must be aware that they can be disciplined if they violate  this policy.
Upon violation of this policy, an employee of company may be subject to  discipline up to and including discharge.
The specific discipline imposed will be determined by  a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the nature and severity of the violation of the  Cyber Security Policy, prior violations of the policy committed by the individual, state and  federal laws and all other relevant information.
The (company designee) may refer the information to  law enforcement agencies and/or prosecutors for consideration as to whether criminal charges  should be filed against the alleged violator(s).
9  Security Incident Handling Procedures  This section provides some policy guidelines and procedures for handling security incidents.
The term “security incident” is defined as any irregular or adverse event that threatens the  security, integrity, or availability of the information resources on any part of the company  network.
Some examples of security incidents are:   ?
Illegal access of a company computer system.
Damage to a company computer system or network caused by illegal access.
Malicious use of system resources to launch an attack against other computer outside of   the company network.
For example, the system administrator notices a connection to  an unknown network and a strange process accumulating a lot of server time.
Employees, who believe their terminal or computer systems have been subjected to a security  incident, or has otherwise been improperly accessed or used, should report the situation to  their (company designee) immediately.
Leaving the computer in the condition it was in when the security incident was  discovered will assist in identifying the source of the problem and in determining the steps that  should be taken to remedy the problem.